This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Resource-Efficient Transformer Pruning for Finetuning of Large Models
Fatih Ilhan1 , Gong Su2 , Selim Furkan Tekin1 , Tiansheng Huang1 , Sihao Hu1 , Ling Liu1
1
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA
2
IBM Research, Yorktown Heights, NY
{filhan, stekin6, thuang, sihaohu}@gatech.edu, gongsu@us.ibm.com, ling.liu@cc.gatech.edu

Abstract
With the recent advances in vision transformers and
large language models (LLMs), finetuning costly large models on downstream learning tasks poses significant challenges under limited computational resources. This paper presents a REsource and ComputAtion-efficient Pruning framework (RECAP) for the finetuning of transformerbased large models. RECAP by design bridges the gap
between efficiency and performance through an iterative
process cycling between pruning, finetuning, and updating stages to explore different chunks of the given largescale model. At each iteration, we first prune the model
with Taylor-approximation-based importance estimation
and then only update a subset of the pruned model weights
based on the Fisher-information criterion. In this way, RECAP achieves two synergistic and yet conflicting goals: reducing the GPU memory footprint while maintaining model
performance, unlike most existing pruning methods that require the model to be finetuned beforehand for better preservation of model performance. We perform extensive experiments with a wide range of large transformer-based architectures on various computer vision and natural language
understanding tasks. Compared to recent pruning techniques, we demonstrate that RECAP offers significant improvements in GPU memory efficiency, capable of reducing
the footprint by up to 65%.

1. Introduction
Transformer-based neural network architectures have
shown remarkable performance in a wide range of areas, e.g., computer vision, natural language understanding
(NLU), and multi-modal tasks. Notably, vision transformers (ViTs) [11] and variants such as DINO [3, 30], MaskFormer [5, 6], and CLIP [32] have demonstrated exceptional performance across various tasks from image recognition, semantic segmentation, to object detection. Likewise, BERT [10], GPT [31], and T5 [33] are dominating
transformer-based architectures for many popular large lan-

guage models (LLMs) [2, 36]. These models are usually
pre-trained over a combination of very large datasets and
serve as a foundation model for a variety of tasks. Before
deployment, these pre-trained large models (PLMs) can be
finetuned further on a downstream task/dataset to maximize
the task-specific model performance.
Problem Statement. Over-parameterization with a large
number of parameters and using big datasets in the training of a foundation model is known to result in significantly
better generalization performance [29]. The PLMs trained
on billions of tokens result in very large models of billions
of parameters and can require hundreds of GBs of GPU
memory for finetuning and inference. For example, a recent open-source family of LLMs, LLama-2 [36] reports
the following statistics for the largest model variant with
70B parameters: 2T tokens for ∼1.7M GPU hours with
A100-80GB GPUs, which can cost around ∼$6.7M. Therefore, finetuning such PLMs on downstream tasks instead of
training from scratch has become a common practice. However, employing such models may be overindulging when
tackling downstream tasks. Even the smallest variant of
LLama-2 with 7B parameters requires ∼14GB GPU memory for inference and even more (∼70GB) for finetuning at
16-bit precision. Effectively finetuning a PLM with limited
resources while maintaining performance remains an open
challenge. This problem can be aggravated when the GPU
resources are insufficient to perform finetuning on the original model, making finetuning impossible for many. Furthermore, when users need to finetune a PLM over their proprietary or privacy-sensitive data (e.g., medical data, personal
chats, or confidential documents), this process should only
be executed in local computing environments without sharing sensitive data.
To reduce the GPU memory footprint of finetuning large
transformer-based models, pruning [12, 16] emerges as a
promising technique due to its success in convolutional
and transformer-based models, particularly to increase inference efficiency. Pruning is based on the argument that
not all weights of the pre-trained large model are necessary for a given downstream task. Hence, pruning solutions

16206

