This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What Sketch Explainability Really Means for Downstream Tasks ?
Hmrishav Bandyopadhyay1 Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1 Ayan Kumar Bhunia1
Aneeshan Sain1 Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.
{h.bandyopadhyay, p.chowdhury, a.bhunia, a.sain, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the unique modality of sketch
for explainability, emphasising the profound impact of human strokes compared to conventional pixel-oriented studies. Beyond explanations of network behavior, we discern
the genuine implications of explainability across diverse
downstream sketch-related tasks. We propose a lightweight
and portable explainability solution – a seamless plugin
that integrates effortlessly with any pre-trained model, eliminating the need for re-training. Demonstrating its adaptability, we present four applications: highly studied retrieval and generation, and completely novel assisted drawing and sketch adversarial attacks. The centrepiece to our
solution is a stroke-level attribution map that takes different
forms when linked with downstream tasks. By addressing
the inherent non-differentiability of rasterisation, we enable
explanations at both coarse stroke level (SLA) and partial
stroke level (P-SLA), each with its advantages for specific
downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Sketches, rooted in human expression [43], offer a distinctive modality for exploring explainability [61, 70]. In contrast to photos, where each pixel is independent and lacks
inherent meaning, sketches are organised into strokes, with
each stroke carrying subjective meaning assigned by the
sketcher [44]. This paper explores sketch explainability, but
with a unique perspective – aiming to provide explanations
and unravel the true implications of explainability on various downstream sketch-related tasks.
With this perspective in mind, our approach champions
an explainability solution that is (i) lightweight and portable
– a plugin seamlessly integrating with multiple pre-trained
models without necessitating re-training [98], and (ii) easily
adaptable to a diverse array of downstream sketch-specific
tasks, benefiting the broader community.
Our solution is exclusively centred on human strokes,
aiming to attribute explanation on different stroke granularity: individual strokes (coarse) and their parts (fine). The

Thresholding

Distance of
each pixel
from
vector points

Assisted Drawing
Partial Stroke-level
Attribution

Input
Vector
Sketch

Rasterise
each stroke

Robust SBIR

Combine Strokes

Sketch
Image

Sketch-to-Photo
Generation
Adversarial
Attacks

Backpropagation
Stroke-1

Stroke-2

Stroke-n

Coarse Stroke-level Attribution

Figure 1. We attribute explanations for individual strokes (strokelevel attribution) and their vector coordinate points (point-level
attribution). Stroke-level attribution rasterises individual strokes
(non-differentiably) to produce n-stroke images. Next, we sum
the stroke images to get the complete sketch image used for downstream tasks. Point-level Attribution computes distance transform
from stroke coordinates and thresholds to get the sketch image.
Our explainability solution works without re-training for existing
tasks like SBIR and sketch-to-photo generation and novel tasks
like filtering noisy strokes for assisted drawing and adversarial attack by removing a small stroke.

output of our model markedly differs from typical saliency
maps [1] found in photo-based explainability models, where
the emphasis is mostly on visualisation [90]. Ours is a taskdriven attribution map that assigns stroke-level attributes
capturing how altering stroke characteristics can impact
model prediction. Depending on the downstream tasks, attributions can be grounded to, for example (i) importance of
entire strokes, which is more suitable to filter noisy strokes
[15] in assisted drawing, and remove small strokes for adversarial attacks on existing sketch encoders, and (ii) stroke
shape and length, where a partial-stroke level attribution is
beneficial for tasks like sketch-based image retrieval [77]
and sketch-to-photo generation [55].
To showcase the adaptability of our model, we carefully
devise four applications: two well-studied tasks from existing literature (retrieval [12, 26] and generation [55, 102]),
and two entirely novel tasks (assisted drawing and sketch

10997

