This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

vid-TLDR: Training Free Token merging for
Light-weight Video Transformer
Joonmyung Choi*

Sanghyeok Lee* Jaewon Chu

Minhyuk Choi

Hyunwoo J. Kim†

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
{pizard, cat0626, allonsy07, sodlqnf123, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Figure 1. Comparison of vid-TLDR (Ours) with UMT [33]. Without any additional training, vid-TLDR obtains comparable or even better
performance than the base model UMT (left) while reducing the considerable computational cost (right). UMT-B (87M) is used.

Abstract
Video Transformers have become the prevalent solution
for various video downstream tasks with superior expressive
power and flexibility. However, these video transformers
suffer from heavy computational costs induced by the massive number of tokens across the entire video frames, which
has been the major barrier to train and deploy the model.
Further, the patches irrelevant to the main contents, e.g.,
backgrounds, degrade the generalization performance of
models. To tackle these issues, we propose training-free token merging for lightweight video Transformer (vid-TLDR)
that aims to enhance the efficiency of video Transformers by
merging the background tokens without additional training.
For vid-TLDR, we introduce a novel approach to capture the
salient regions in videos only with the attention map. Further, we introduce the saliency-aware token merging strat-

egy by dropping the background tokens and sharpening the
object scores. Our experiments show that vid-TLDR significantly mitigates the computational complexity of video
Transformers while achieving competitive performance compared to the base model without vid-TLDR. Code is available
at https://github.com/mlvlab/vid-TLDR.

1. Introduction
With the success of Transformers in computer vision, e.g.,
classification [14, 52], object detection [10, 32, 43, 61, 75,
77], segmentation [59, 64], a line of works [16, 33, 51, 57,
60, 76] have proposed video Transformers to comprehend
the video for various downstream tasks. The attention mechanism in Transformers shows the desirable characteristics for
video understanding such as the ability to capture the spatial
and temporal dependencies at the same time. Consequently,

*: Equal contribution, †: Corresponding author.

18771

