This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learned Lossless Image Compression based on Bit Plane Slicing
Zhe Zhang1 Huairui Wang1
1
Wuhan University

Zhenzhong Chen1∗ Shan Liu2
2
Tencent Media Lab

{zhe zhang, zzchen}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Autoregressive Initial Bits (ArIB), a framework that combines subimage autoregression and latent variable models,
has shown its advantages in lossless image compression.
However, in current methods, the image splitting makes the
information of latent variables being uniformly distributed
in each subimage, and causes inadequate use of latent variables in addition to posterior collapse. To tackle these issues, we introduce Bit Plane Slicing (BPS), splitting images
in the bit plane dimension with the considerations on different importance for latent variables. Thus, BPS provides a
more effective representation by arranging subimages with
decreasing importance for latent variables. To solve the
problem of the increased number of dimensions caused by
BPS, we further propose a dimension-tailored autoregressive model that tailors autoregression methods for each dimension based on their characteristics, efficiently capturing the dependencies in plane, space, and color dimensions.
As shown in the extensive experimental results, our method
demonstrates the superior compression performance with
comparable inference speed, when compared to the stateof-the-art normalizing-flow-based methods. The code is at
https://github.com/ZZ022/ArIB-BPS.

1. Introduction
Lossless image compression is widely applied in many domains where the preservation of high-quality images is demanded such as photography, scientific exploration, and remote sensing. The significance of these compression techniques lies in their ability to reduce image file sizes while
preserving the original content, accomplished through the
exploitation of inherent image correlations.
Fundamentally, Shannon’s source coding theorem [30]
sets a lower bound for coding length based on the image’s entropy, which is determined by its inherent distribution. Consequently, many deep generative models
∗ Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 62036005) and Tencent.

[4], which have exhibited remarkable efficacy in distribution modeling, have found widespread application within
the realm of lossless image compression. These encompass a variety of methodologies, including autoregressive
methods (ARMs) [29, 37], variational autoencoders (VAEs)
[19, 22, 34, 35], normalizing flows (NFs) [12, 13, 41, 42],
and diffusion models [14, 17]. These diverse approaches
involve trade-offs between compression performance and
inference speed. Furthermore, compression performance
encompasses dataset compression, which often approaches
the theoretical limits optimized by neural networks, and
single-image compression, which is affected by the initial
bits required for bits back coding [34]. Bits back coding
is utilized in VAEs, continuous NFs, and variational diffusion models. In summary, per pixel ARMs and diffusion models demonstrate impressive compression performance but necessitate impractical inference time [22, 28].
Among the remaining methods, continuous NFs offer the
best dataset compression but exhibit weaker performance in
single-image compression.
A potential option for achieving a better trade-off is the
combined use of subimage autoregression and VAEs, a kind
of latent variable model. This approach has shown competitive performance in the field of lossless image compression, particularly in its single-image compression performance when using the Autoregressive Initial Bits (ArIB)
framework [28]. ArIB excludes latent variables for some
subimages and uses their bits as initial bits, significantly reducing the overhead associated with initial bits for singleimage compression.
Current methods [28] split the image in the space dimension. Pixels with the same coordinate in different subimages are adjacent in the original image. This splitting uniformly distributes the information of latent variables in each
subimage. Thus, each subimage carries similar importance
for latent variables. However, latent variables are inadequately used due to their exclusion for some subimages. In
addition, there’s a growing risk of posterior collapse [21]
along the subimage sequence due to the growing volume of
the autoregressive prior. Posterior collapse, a phenomenon
where non-useful latent variables are learned, adversely im-

27579

