This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mosaic-SDF for 3D Generative Models
Lior Yariv1,3 *
1
GenAI, Meta

Omri Puny3
2
FAIR, Meta

Abstract
Current diffusion or flow-based generative models for
3D shapes divide to two: distilling pre-trained 2D image
diffusion models, and training directly on 3D shapes. When
training a diffusion or flow models on 3D shapes a crucial design choice is the shape representation. An effective
shape representation needs to adhere three design principles: it should allow an efficient conversion of large 3D
datasets to the representation form; it should provide a good
tradeoff of approximation power versus number of parameters; and it should have a simple tensorial form that is compatible with existing powerful neural architectures. While
standard 3D shape representations such as volumetric grids
and point clouds do not adhere to all these principles simultaneously, we advocate in this paper a new representation
that does. We introduce Mosaic-SDF (M-SDF): a simple
3D shape representation that approximates the Signed Distance Function (SDF) of a given shape by using a set of
local grids spread near the shape’s boundary. The M-SDF
representation is fast to compute for each shape individually
making it readily parallelizable; it is parameter efficient as
it only covers the space around the shape’s boundary; and
it has a simple matrix form, compatible with Transformerbased architectures. We demonstrate the efficacy of the
M-SDF representation by using it to train a 3D generative flow model including class-conditioned generation with
the ShapeNetCore-V2 (3D Warehouse) dataset, and text-to3D generation using a dataset of about 600k caption-shape
pairs.

1. Introduction
Image-based generative models have rapidly advanced in
recent years due to improvements in generation methodologies (e.g., Diffusion Models), model architecture and conditioning (e.g., Text-to-Image Models, Attention/Transformer
layers), and the consolidation of large, high quality image datasets. Although generation of 3D shapes have progressed as well, it has not seen the same level of progress
demonstrated in image generation.
* Work done while interning at Meta.

Oran Gafni1
Yaron Lipman2,3
3
Weizmann Institute of Science

Current works for 3D generation divide mostly into two
groups: Optimization based: 2D image generative priors
are used for training/optimizing 3D shape [20, 35, 46]. The
main benefit is leveraging existing powerful image models,
but the generation process is expensive/slow as it requires
training a new model for each sample. Furthermore, using only image priors is often insufficient to build consistent 3D shape (e.g., the Janus effect) [7]. Forward based:
the 3D shapes are generated by a forward process, such as
solving an Ordinary Differnetial Euqation (ODE), making
generation process more efficient than optimization based
methods. However, forward based model are first trained
on a dataset of 3D shapes using, e.g., Diffusion or Flow
Models, where to that end shapes are first transformed into
some canonical 3D representation, e.g., volumetric grid or
a point cloud. Forward based models work directly with 3D
shapes and suffer from two limitations: first, they require
3D shape datasets for training and these still lag behind image datasets in terms of quantity and quality. Second, in
contrast to images, 3D shapes do not occupy the full 3D
space and therefore an effective 3D shape representation is
more challenging to find/work with.
In this work we focus on forward based 3D generative
models. To enable high quality, large scale 3D generation
the 3D shape representation of choice should adhere the following design principles:
(i) Preprocess efficiency: can be efficiently computed
for a large collection of shapes.
(ii) Parameter efficiency: provides a good approximation vs. parameter count trade-off.
(iii) Simple structure: has a simple tensorial structure,
compatible with expressive neural architectures.
Examining existing 3D representations used for training
generative 3D models including volumetric grids [19, 31],
tri-planes [10, 41, 45], point clouds [26, 33, 48, 52], meshes
[23] and neural fields [15] we find that all are lacking in one
or more of the above design principles. For example, volumetric grids scale cubically and maintain redundant information in the entire space, while tri-planes tend to be more
efficient but still encode full 3D tensors and require a neural
network trained jointly on the training set. Point clouds do
not provide a full surface information; meshes do not enjoy

4630

