This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VLP: Vision Language Planning for Autonomous Driving
Chenbin Pan1 * Burhaneddin Yaman2⊠ Tommaso Nesti2 Abhirup Mallik2
Alessandro G Allievi2 Senem Velipasalar1 Liu Ren2
1
Syracuse University
2
Bosch Research North America & Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
{cpan14, svelipas}@syr.edu,
{burhaneddin.yaman,tommaso.nesti,abhirup.mallik,alessandro.allievi,liu.ren}@us.bosch.com

Abstract
Autonomous driving is a complex and challenging task
that aims at safe motion planning through scene understanding and reasoning. While vision-only autonomous
driving methods have recently achieved notable performance, through enhanced scene understanding, several
key issues, including lack of reasoning, low generalization
performance and long-tail scenarios, still need to be addressed. In this paper, we present VLP, a novel VisionLanguage-Planning framework that exploits language models to bridge the gap between linguistic understanding and
autonomous driving. VLP enhances autonomous driving
systems by strengthening both the source memory foundation and the self-driving car’s contextual understanding.
VLP achieves state-of-the-art end-to-end planning performance on the challenging NuScenes dataset by achieving
35.9% and 60.5% reduction in terms of average L2 error
and collision rates, respectively, compared to the previous
best method. Moreover, VLP shows improved performance
in challenging long-tail scenarios and strong generalization
capabilities when faced with new urban environments.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving is a complex problem requiring scene
understanding and reasoning to ensure safe motion planning. This sophisticated challenge can be broadly divided
into three main tasks, namely perception, prediction and
planning (also known as P3). Conventional methods adopt
a modular approach by developing and optimizing each task
in a disjoint manner without a holistic view, leading to compounding errors and safety concerns [15, 16, 18]. End-toend autonomous driving systems (ADS), unifying all P3
tasks, have garnered attention for their potential to enhance
* Work done while interned at Bosch Research North America.
⊠ Corresponding author.

1

Boston

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

Singapore

0

0
L2 Error
VAD

Collision Rate
VLP

L2 Error
VAD

Collision Rate
VLP

Figure 1. New-city generalization ability of ADS for planning is
evaluated by training on Boston city and testing on Singapore,
and vice versa. Our proposed VLP shows strong generalization
ability by significantly outperforming state-of-the-art vision-only
method, VAD[18], in terms of both L2 error and collision rate.

safe planning. Existing vision-based ADS typically follow
a two-stage process: bird’s eye view (BEV) feature extraction and downstream tasks [16, 18]. BEV feature extraction
transforms multi-view camera data into a structured topview representation embedding spatial information around
the ego-car. BEV features are further utilized as the information pool by the downstream P3 tasks. While effective,
these vision-only methods struggle with out-of-domain generalization, such as maintaining performance in new cities
and long-tail scenarios, hindering real-world deployment.
The way humans process and interpret visual driving
scenes naturally involve a coherent cognitive framework
that maintains a consistent logical flow. This enables humans effortlessly make correct decisions even when faced
with previously unseen data or scenarios, eliminating generalization issues in driving tasks. Then, this raises a pertinent question: How can ADS achieve human-like driving to
navigate diverse and dynamic road environments? Recent
advancements in language models (LMs) have led to unprecedented common-sense ability and generalization performance across unseen data and tasks for the natural language processing domain [5, 8, 25]. The superior common-

14760

