This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-shot Referring Expression Comprehension via Structural Similarity
Between Images and Captions
Zeyu Han1 , Fangrui Zhu1 , Qianru Lao2 , Huaizu Jiang1
1
Northeastern University 2 Harvard University
{han.zeyu,zhu.fang,h.jiang}@northeastern.edu, estherbear17@gmail.com

Abstract
Zero-shot referring expression comprehension aims at
localizing bounding boxes in an image corresponding to
provided textual prompts, which requires: (i) a fine-grained
disentanglement of complex visual scene and textual context, and (ii) a capacity to understand relationships among
disentangled entities. Unfortunately, existing large visionlanguage alignment (VLA) models, e.g., CLIP, struggle with
both aspects so cannot be directly used for this task. To
mitigate this gap, we leverage large foundation models to
disentangle both images and texts into triplets in the format of (subject, predicate, object). After that,
grounding is accomplished by calculating the structural
similarity matrix between visual and textual triplets with a
VLA model, and subsequently propagate it to an instancelevel similarity matrix. Furthermore, to equip VLA models with the ability of relationship understanding, we design a triplet-matching objective to fine-tune the VLA models on a collection of curated dataset containing abundant entity relationships. Experiments demonstrate that
our visual grounding performance increase of up to 19.5%
over the SOTA zero-shot model on RefCOCO/+/g. On the
more challenging Who’s Waldo dataset, our zero-shot approach achieves comparable accuracy to the fully supervised model. Code is available at https://github.
com/Show-han/Zeroshot_REC.

1. Introduction
Visual grounding is a fundamental task across computer
vision and natural language processing, where the goal is
to find the correspondences between image content and
textual descriptions. It has broad applications in image
captioning [18, 53], visual question answering [43, 66],
vision-language navigation [11], etc. Collecting detailed
grounding annotations to train specialist models, however,
is cumbersome. Therefore, zero-shot visual grounding
[30, 38, 54] is an attractive alternative.

Cat touching a paper roll
A man watches as a man shoots over a man

Figure 1. Illustration of how we disambiguate visual entities
based on their interactions with other entities. The same entity
or relationships in the image and caption are in the same color.

As a visual grounding task, the essence of referring
expression comprehension (REC) is the alignment of text
queries with corresponding image regions. To achieve this
goal, it is critical for a grounding model to understand the
relationships of entities[28], both within and cross different
modalities (visual vs. textual), when identifying referred entities within an image. As shown in the upper part of Fig. 1,
the touching relationship is the key to resolve the ambiguity of identifying the correct cat. Similarly, the lower
part of Fig. 1 illustrates a more complex situation where
multiple entities are engaged in various interactions. Both
scenarios highlight the importance of relationship understanding within both the image and caption, where entities
are not merely isolated elements but interact dynamically
with others in the scene. In a zero-shot learning context,
the task of understanding these relationships can be more
challenging, as the model lacks exposure to specific training instances that could aid in interpretation.
Recent advances in zero-shot REC [30, 54, 65] have
been largely driven by the integration of large-scale visionlanguage aligned (VLA) models such as CLIP [47] and
FLAVA [52], which serve as bridges connecting text and
image domain. These approaches, however, fall short in
relationship understanding. On the one hand, in the textual domain, existing approaches adopt hand-crafted lan-

14364

