This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Global and Local Prompts Cooperation via Optimal Transport
for Federated Learning
Hongxia Li1 Wei Huang2 Jingya Wang1 Ye Shi1, *
1
ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
2
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan
{lihx2,wangjingya,shiye}@shanghaitech.edu.cn, wei.huang.vr@riken.jp
https://github.com/HongxiaLee/FedOTP

Abstract
Prompt learning in pretrained visual-language models has shown remarkable flexibility across various downstream tasks. Leveraging its inherent lightweight nature, recent research attempted to integrate the powerful pretrained
models into federated learning frameworks to simultaneously reduce communication costs and promote local training on insufficient data. Despite these efforts, current federated prompt learning methods lack specialized designs
to systematically address severe data heterogeneities, e.g.,
data distribution with both label and feature shifts involved.
To address this challenge, we present Federated Prompts
Cooperation via Optimal Transport (FedOTP), which introduces efficient collaborative prompt learning strategies to
capture diverse category traits on a per-client basis. Specifically, for each client, we learn a global prompt to extract
consensus knowledge among clients, and a local prompt
to capture client-specific category characteristics. Unbalanced Optimal Transport is then employed to align local visual features with these prompts, striking a balance between
global consensus and local personalization. By relaxing
one of the equality constraints, FedOTP enables prompts
to focus solely on the core regions of image patches. Extensive experiments on datasets with various types of heterogeneities have demonstrated that our FedOTP outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Federated learning [52] is a distributed machine learning
framework that enables decentralized collaboration among
participants without sharing their training data. However,
current federated learning methods involve high training
and communication costs due to the need to update and
share model parameters with the server. This constraint has
* Corresponding author.

typically restricted these methods to modest backbone architectures, hindering their feature capacity and resulting in
performance limitations and training instability [74].
Recently, vision-language pre-trained models like Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) [60] have
shown potential in learning robust and versatile representations suitable for various image distributions, aligning with
the objectives of federated learning. However, the substantial communication overhead between the server and clients
renders training CLIP in federated learning frameworks.
Besides, overfitting concerns may arise when large-scale
models are trained with limited client data. Prompt learning
[46, 78] provides a flexible way to adapt pre-trained models
to downstream tasks by training only additional parameters.
This enables prompts to capture task-specific information
while guiding the fixed model’s performance. Leveraging
its lightweight nature, prior research [27, 76] has explored
the integration of prompt learning into federated learning to
overcome the problems outlined above.
In real-world scenarios, client data often exhibits variations in domain discrepancies (feature shift) [44] or imbalanced class distributions (label shift) [40]. Simply applying
the FedAvg [52] method on prompts [27] across all clients
tends to deviate from their local distribution, leading to unsatisfactory performance. Hence, it’s crucial to develop specialized personalized federated prompt learning approaches
to effectively address data heterogeneity. pFedPrompt [26]
introduced personalization into federated prompt learning
by maintaining personalized attention modules to generate
spatial visual features locally while learning user consensus
through shared text prompts. However, in the presence of a
significant label shift or notable feature shift, merely learning a shared prompt in the language modality is inadequate.
To resolve these limitations, we propose simultaneously
learning both a shared global prompt and a personalized local prompt for each client in the local training phase. After
local training, the local prompt remains on the client side,

12151

