This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MuGE: Multiple Granularity Edge Detection
Caixia Zhou1 , Yaping Huang1 ,* Mengyang Pu2 , Qingji Guan1 , Ruoxi Deng3 , Haibin Ling4
1
Beijing Key Laboratory of Trafﬁc Data Analysis and Mining, Beijing Jiaotong University
2
North China Electric Power University 3 Wenzhou University 4 Stony Brook University
{cxzhou,yphuang,qjguan}@bjtu.edu.cn, mengyang.pu@ncepu.edu.cn,
ruoxii.deng@gmail.com, hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Edge segmentation is well-known to be subjective due
to personalized annotation styles and preferred granularity. However, most existing deterministic edge detection
methods produce only a single edge map for one input image. We argue that generating multiple edge maps is more
reasonable than generating a single one considering the
subjectivity and ambiguity of the edges. Thus motivated,
in this paper we propose multiple granularity edge detection, called MuGE, which can produce a wide range of
edge maps, from approximate object contours to ﬁne texture edges. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst propose to design an edge
granularity network to estimate the edge granularity from
an individual edge annotation. Subsequently, to guide the
generation of diversiﬁed edge maps, we integrate such edge
granularity into the multi-scale feature maps in the spatial
domain. Meanwhile, we decompose the feature maps into
low-frequency and high-frequency parts, where the encoded
edge granularity is further fused into the high-frequency
part to achieve more precise control over the details of
the produced edge maps. Compared to previous methods,
MuGE is able to not only generate multiple edge maps at
different controllable granularities but also achieve a competitive performance on the BSDS500 and Multicue benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental low-level vision task, edge detection can
greatly beneﬁt numerous downstream tasks, such as image
inpainting [39], semantic segmentation [62], low-light image enhancement [57], salient object detection [43]. The
success of deep learning techniques largely improves the
performance of edge detection, where some advanced architectures [34, 42, 55], efﬁcient loss functions [7, 8, 19],
and lightweight networks [9, 13, 48, 49] have been proposed
and successfully surpassed human performance.
* Corresponding author.

(a) Input

(b) EDTER [42]

(c) UAED [65]

(d) Ours1

(e) Ours2

(f) Ours3

Figure 1. Comparisons between the state-of-the-art methods and
our proposed MuGE. (a) shows an image from the BSDS500 test
set. (b) and (c) show the predictions from the recent best methods, EDTER [42] and UAED [65]. (d)-(f) shows our generated
plausible edge maps at different granularities that better reﬂect the
ambiguity and subjectivity of edge detection.

It is common that people produce different edge maps
of one image since they have different annotation styles or
granularity preferences. Consequently, in view of inherent
ambiguity and the diversity of human perception, we argue that it is more reasonable to design a model that can
generate multiple predictions to satisfy such discrepancy
for edge detection. In fact, most edge detection datasets,
such as BSDS500 [1] and Multicue [37], invite multiple
annotators to label one image, and thus provide multiple annotated edge maps. However, most existing methods [7, 8, 19, 34, 42, 55] simply treat the edge detection
as a deterministic dense prediction task, where the supervisions are the fusion of multiple annotations by the majority
voting strategy. Therefore, for a given image (Fig. 1(a)),
the trained detectors can only generate a single edge map
(Fig. 1(b)). Recent probabilistic methods [30, 65] consider
the uncertainty of annotations by modeling the label distributions as Gaussian or Beta distributions to improve the performance. Sampling from the distribution, as a byproduct,
can generate multiple results, but the diversity is severely
limited and uncontrollable (Fig. 1(c)).
In this paper, we propose multiple granularity edge de25952

