This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked Autoencoders for Microscopy are Scalable Learners of Cellular Biology
Oren Kraus1
Kian Kenyon-Dean1
Saber Saberian1
Maryam Fallah1
Peter McLean1
Jess Leung1
Vasudev Sharma1
Ayla Khan1
Jia Balakrishnan1
Safiye Celik1
2
2
1
Dominique Beaini
Maciej Sypetkowski
Chi Vicky Cheng
Kristen Morse1
Maureen Makes1
Ben Mabey1
Berton Earnshaw1,2
1
2
Recursion
Valence Labs

Tokenizer

Abstract
Featurizing microscopy images for use in biological research remains a significant challenge, especially for largescale experiments spanning millions of images. This work
explores the scaling properties of weakly supervised classifiers and self-supervised masked autoencoders (MAEs)
when training with increasingly larger model backbones
and microscopy datasets. Our results show that ViT-based
MAEs outperform weakly supervised classifiers on a variety of tasks, achieving as much as a 11.5% relative improvement when recalling known biological relationships
curated from public databases. Additionally, we develop
a new channel-agnostic MAE architecture (CA-MAE) that
allows for inputting images of different numbers and orders of channels at inference time. We demonstrate that
CA-MAEs effectively generalize by inferring and evaluating on a microscopy image dataset (JUMP-CP) generated under different experimental conditions with a different channel structure than our pretraining data (RPI-93M).
Our findings motivate continued research into scaling selfsupervised learning on microscopy data in order to create
powerful foundation models of cellular biology that have
the potential to catalyze advancements in drug discovery
and beyond. Relevant code and select models released with
this work can be found at: https://github.com/
recursionpharma/maes_microscopy.

1. Introduction
A fundamental challenge in biological research is quantifying cellular responses to genetic and chemical perturbations and relating them to each other [53, 66]. Image-based
experiments have proven to be a powerful approach for
† An earlier version of this work appeared at the NeurIPS 2023 Generative AI and Biology Workshop [39].
‡ Correspondence: oren.kraus@recursion.com,
berton.earnshaw@recursion.com, info@rxrx.ai.

Positional
embeddings

Training
Channel 1
decoder
Transformer
Encoder

Channel 2
decoder
Channel 6
decoder

Inference on RxRx3
gene knockouts
TVN batch correction embedding transformation
Align batches,
center at negative
controls

Aggregate
perturbation units
into single vector

Quantify
pairwise
similarity

Identify biological
relationships

Perturbations A, B, or C:
Batch 1
Batch 2
Types: small molecules, CRISPR KOs, soluble factors

Figure 1. General depiction of the approach taken in this work.
MAEs (channel-agnostic architecture depicted) learn to reconstruct HCS images, perform inference on RxRx3 [24] to obtain
genomic representations, and apply TVN batch correction on the
embeddings to predict biological relationships.

exploring cellular phenotypes induced by millions of perturbations [5]. High Content Screening (HCS) systems,
which combine automated microscopy with robotic liquid handling technologies, have enabled assaying cellular responses to perturbations on a massive scale. Recent
public releases of HCS image sets, like RxRx3 [24] and
JUMP-CP [14], consist of millions of cellular images across
100,000s of unique chemical and genetic perturbations and
demonstrate the scalability of this approach.
The size of recent HCS experiments presents a unique
challenge and opportunity for extracting biologically meaningful representations from these datasets. HCS images are
often analyzed with customized cell segmentation, feature
extraction, and downstream analysis pipelines [7]. Despite
the many discoveries made using this approach [5], developing robust segmentation and feature extraction pipelines

11757

