This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MRFS: Mutually Reinforcing Image Fusion and Segmentation
Hao Zhang1 , Xuhui Zuo1 , Jie Jiang2 , Chunchao Guo2 , Jiayi Ma1 *
1
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
Data Platform Department, Tencent, Shenzhen, China
{zhpersonalbox,jyma2010}@gmail.com, xuhuizuo2001@whu.edu.cn, {zeus, chunchaoguo}@tencent.com

Abstract
This paper proposes a coupled learning framework to
break the performance bottleneck of infrared-visible image
fusion and segmentation, called MRFS. By leveraging the
intrinsic consistency between vision and semantics, it emphasizes mutual reinforcement rather than treating these
tasks as separate issues. First, we embed weakened information recovery and salient information integration into
the image fusion task, employing the CNN-based interactive
gated mixed attention (IGM-Att) module to extract highquality visual features. This aims to satisfy human visual
perception, producing fused images with rich textures, high
contrast, and vivid colors. Second, a transformer-based
progressive cycle attention (PC-Att) module is developed to
enhance semantic segmentation. It establishes single-modal
self-reinforcement and cross-modal mutual complementarity, enabling more accurate decisions in machine semantic perception. Then, the cascade of IGM-Att and PC-Att
couples image fusion and semantic segmentation tasks, implicitly bringing vision-related and semantics-related features into closer alignment. Therefore, they mutually provide learning priors to each other, resulting in visually satisfying fused images and more accurate segmentation decisions. Extensive experiments on public datasets showcase
the advantages of our method in terms of visual satisfaction
and decision accuracy. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/HaoZhang1018/MRFS.

1. Introduction
Due to limitations in imaging principles, neither infrared
nor visible images alone can provide a complete depiction
of the imaging scene [17, 38, 42]. In this context, infrared
and visible modality fusion (IVMF) combines their specific
advantages, aiding both humans and machines in better understanding scenes [5, 10, 19, 37]. Owing to such practical
benefits, IVMF has found applications in various fields, e.g.,
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparison with the state-of-the-art SeAFusion [27]
and SegMiF [14] that combine image fusion and semantic segmentation. Our method presents more salient visual objects and
more accurate segmentations.

security monitoring, and night-assisted driving [16, 22].
From the intended use, IVMF can be categorized into
image fusion and semantic fusion. The former aims to
generate high-quality visualizations consistent with human
visual perception, typically featuring rich textures, significant contrast, and vivid colors [13, 23, 36]. The latter focuses on achieving more advantageous scene feature expression, enabling machines to make semantic-level decisions and descriptions for scenes, e.g., semantic segmentation and object detection [12, 49]. This paper specifically
concentrates on semantic segmentation [9, 45] as a representative of semantic fusion.
In recent decades, deep learning advancements have propelled significant progress in IVMF. In image fusion, where
ground truth is lacking, research emphasizes designing unsupervised loss functions to preserve information. A common approach involves similarity losses based on various representation variables between fused and source images, aiming to extract desired image characteristics aligned
with human visual perception [18, 32, 35]. For example, PMGI [41] maintains intensity and gradient proportionally, favoring high-contrast, high-frequency texture features. Differently, in semantic fusion, where labeled data
is available, researchers focus on innovative network structures to ensure effective interaction between features for
mutual complementation and integration [2, 31, 43, 51]. For
instance, LASNet [9] integrates multi-modal features with

26974

