This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Accurate Post-training Quantization for Diffusion Models
Changyuan Wang1 , Ziwei Wang3 , Xiuwei Xu2 , Yansong Tang1 ,* Jie Zhou2 , Jiwen Lu2
1
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous Data Enabling, Shenzhen International Graduate School,
Tsinghua University, China 2 Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
3
Carnegie Mellon University
{wangchan22@mails.,xxw21@mails.,tang.yansong@sz.,jzhou@,lujiwen@}tsinghua.edu.cn;
ziweiwa2@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose an accurate post-training quantization framework of diffusion models (APQ-DM) for efficient image generation. Conventional quantization frameworks learn shared quantization functions for tensor discretization regardless of the generation timesteps in diffusion
models, while the activation distribution differs significantly
across various timesteps. Meanwhile, the calibration images are acquired in random timesteps which fail to provide
sufficient information for generalizable quantization function learning. Both issues cause sizable quantization errors
with obvious image generation performance degradation.
On the contrary, we design distribution-aware quantization
functions for activation discretization in different timesteps
and search the optimal timesteps for informative calibration image generation, so that our quantized diffusion model
can reduce the discretization errors with negligible computational overhead. Specifically, we partition various timestep
quantization functions into different groups according to the
importance weights, which are optimized by differentiable
search algorithms. We also extend structural risk minimization principle for informative calibration image generation
to enhance the generalization ability in the deployment of
quantized diffusion model. Extensive experimental results
show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art posttraining quantization of diffusion model by a sizable margin
with similar computational cost1 .

1. Introduction
Denoising diffusion generative models [11, 32] have
achieved outstanding performance in a wide variety of computer vision tasks such as image edition [2, 28], style transformation [34, 38], image super-resolution [18, 30] and many
* Corresponding author.
1 Code is available at https://github.com/ChangyuanWang17/APQ-DM

Figure 1. (a) Existing methods leverage shared quantization for
activation discretization across different timesteps with significant
quantization errors, while we divide timesteps into groups with
specific rounding functions for each partition. (b) Conventional
methods construct calibration set by randomly image selecting with
ineffective supervision, while we actively sample timesteps based
on the structural risk minimization (SRM) principle.

others. Compared with the generative adversarial networks
(GAN), diffusion models obtained recovered contents with
better quality and diversity on most downstream tasks. How-

16026

