This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PLACE: Adaptive Layout-Semantic Fusion for Semantic Image Synthesis

1

Zhengyao Lv1 , Yuxiang Wei2 , Wangmeng Zuo2,3 , Kwan-Yee K. Wong1( )
The University of Hong Kong 2 Harbin Institute of Technology 3 Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou

Wall
->Brick wall

Semantic image synthesis aims to generate high-quality images that are aligned with given semantic maps. It provides
users the flexibility to precisely control the spatial layout
of synthesized images using semantic maps while having
important applications in content creation [6, 7, 54], image
editing [20, 21, 25], and data augmentation [49].
Earlier semantic image synthesis works [14, 19, 26,
37] mainly relied on Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [8] and trained a model using semantic maps as
condition within specific domains. However, due to the
limited scale of the training dataset, the quality and diversity of generated images are usually compromised. Recently, large-scale text-to-image models [30, 31, 33] have
shown high-quality and diverse generation results with

Fountain
->Wheel

1. Introduction

In sketch

Recent advancements in large-scale pre-trained textto-image models have led to remarkable progress in semantic image synthesis. Nevertheless, synthesizing highquality images with consistent semantics and layout remains a challenge. In this paper, we propose the adaPtive LAyout-semantiC fusion modulE (PLACE) that harnesses pre-trained models to alleviate the aforementioned
issues. Specifically, we first employ the layout control map
to faithfully represent layouts in the feature space. Subsequently, we combine the layout and semantic features in a
timestep-adaptive manner to synthesize images with realistic details. During fine-tuning, we propose the Semantic
Alignment (SA) loss to further enhance layout alignment.
Additionally, we introduce the Layout-Free Prior Preservation (LFP) loss, which leverages unlabeled data to maintain the priors of pre-trained models, thereby improving the
visual quality and semantic consistency of synthesized images. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach
performs favorably in terms of visual quality, semantic consistency, and layout alignment. The source code and model
are available at PLACE.

Semantics Consistency

Abstract

Layout
Visual Quality Alignment

{cszy98, yuxiang.wei.cs}@gmail.com wmzuo@hit.edu.cn kykwong@cs.hku.hk

Semantic label

Real image

ControlNet

FreestyleNet

Ours

Figure 1. Comparisons in terms of visual quality as well as layout
alignment and semantic consistency. Zoom in for details.

open-vocabulary textual prompts. Based on these pretrained text-to-image models (e.g., Stable Diffusion [31]),
ControlNet [50] and T2I-Adapter [23] introduced an additional adapter to inject layout guidance for high-quality semantic image synthesis. Nevertheless, these adapters failed
to integrate textual semantics with corresponding regions
accurately, resulting in inconsistent layouts in generated results, as shown in Fig. 1.
To facilitate the layout consistency, FreestyleNet [48]
proposed an RCA module that forces each intermediate image token to attend to the respective textual semantic, while
fine-tuning the diffusion model with RCA. However, the semantic map used in RCA is directly adapted to the intermediate image features in latent diffusion, which is considerably smaller than its original size (e.g., 64 × 64 compared
to 512 × 512), leading to inevitable layout information loss.
Moreover, the mechanism of RCA disrupts the global interaction between image and text tokens, impeding the synthesis of high-quality images.
To alleviate the aforementioned issues, we propose
the adaPtive LAyout-semantiC fusion modulE (termed as

9264

