This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cache Me if You Can:
Accelerating Diffusion Models through Block Caching
Felix Wimbauer1,2,3
Bichen Wu1
Edgar Schoenfeld1
Xiaoliang Dai1
Ji Hou1
1
1
1
1
Zijian He
Artsiom Sanakoyeu
Peizhao Zhang
Sam Tsai
Jonas Kohler1
Christian Rupprecht4
Daniel Cremers2,3
Peter Vajda1
Jialiang Wang1
1
2
3
4
Meta GenAI
Technical University of Munich
MCML
University of Oxford

EMU

jialiangw@meta.com

LDM

LDM

EMU

felix.wimbauer@tum.de

20 Steps with Caching
Ours

20 Steps with Baseline
1.5x Slower

14 Steps with Baseline
Same Latency

20 Steps with Caching
Ours

20 Steps with Baseline
1.5x Slower

14 Steps with Baseline
Same Latency

Figure 1. Speeding up diffusion models through block caching. We observe that there are many redundant layer computations at
different timesteps in diffusion models when generating an image. Our block caching technique allows us to avoid these unnecessary
computations, therefore speeding up inference by a factor of 1.5x-1.8x while maintaining image quality. Compared to the standard practice
of naively reducing the number of denoising steps to match our inference speed, our approach produces more detailed and vibrant results.

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently revolutionized the field of
image synthesis due to their ability to generate photorealistic images. However, one of the major drawbacks of diffusion models is that the image generation process is costly. A
large image-to-image network has to be applied many times
to iteratively refine an image from random noise. While
many recent works propose techniques to reduce the number of required steps, they generally treat the underlying
denoising network as a black box. In this work, we investigate the behavior of the layers within the network and find
that 1) the layers’ output changes smoothly over time, 2) the
layers show distinct patterns of change, and 3) the change
from step to step is often very small. We hypothesize that
many layer computations in the denoising network are redundant. Leveraging this, we introduce block caching, in
This work was done during Felix’ internship at Meta GenAI.

which we reuse outputs from layer blocks of previous steps
to speed up inference. Furthermore, we propose a technique to automatically determine caching schedules based
on each block’s changes over timesteps. In our experiments,
we show through FID, human evaluation and qualitative
analysis that Block Caching allows to generate images with
higher visual quality at the same computational cost. We
demonstrate this for different state-of-the-art models (LDM
and EMU) and solvers (DDIM and DPM).
Project page: fwmb.github.io/blockcaching

1. Introduction
Recent advances in diffusion models have revolutionized
the field of generative AI. Such models are typically pretrained on billions of text-image pairs, and are commonly
referred to as “foundation models”. Text-to-image foundation models such as LDM [41], Dall-E 2/3 [2, 38], Imagen [43], and Emu [8] can generate very high quality, pho-

6211

