This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Federated Generalized Category Discovery
Nan Pu1 Wenjing Li2,3⇤ Xingyuan Ji5,6 Yalan Qin7 Nicu Sebe1 Zhun Zhong2,4⇤
1
University of Trento, Trento, Italy 2 Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, China
3
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK 4 University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
5
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China 6 Leiden University, Leiden, the Netherlands
7
Shanghai University, Shanghai, China
Abstract

Client-Specific Category
Labeled Data

Generalized category discovery (GCD) aims at grouping
unlabeled samples from known and unknown classes, given
labeled data of known classes. To meet the recent decentralization trend in the community, we introduce a practical
yet challenging task, Federated GCD (Fed-GCD), where
the training data are distributed among local clients and
cannot be shared among clients. Fed-GCD aims to train
a generic GCD model by client collaboration under the
privacy-protected constraint. The Fed-GCD leads to two
challenges: 1) representation degradation caused by training each client model with fewer data than centralized GCD
learning, and 2) highly heterogeneous label spaces across
different clients. To this end, we propose a novel Associated Gaussian Contrastive Learning (AGCL) framework
based on learnable GMMs, which consists of a Client Semantics Association (CSA) and a global-local GMM Contrastive Learning (GCL). On the server, CSA aggregates the
heterogeneous categories of local-client GMMs to generate
a global GMM containing more comprehensive category
knowledge. On each client, GCL builds class-level contrastive learning with both local and global GMMs. The
local GCL learns robust representation with limited local
data. The global GCL encourages the model to produce
more discriminative representation with the comprehensive
category relationships that may not exist in local data. We
build a benchmark based on six visual datasets to facilitate
the study of Fed-GCD. Extensive experiments show that our
AGCL outperforms multiple baselines on all datasets. Code
is available at https://github.com/TPCD/FedGCD.

1. Introduction
Generalized category discovery (GCD) seeks to categorize
unlabeled samples from known and unknown classes by
leveraging labeled data of known classes. As a more prac* Corresponding Author.

Possibly Shared Category

Unlabeled Data

Client

Server

Cluster
Clustering

Testing

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed Fed-GCD with the global
bird species discovery case. In Fed-GCD, the data are distributively collected from the different local stations (clients) over the
world, which are partially annotated. Each client includes clientspecific categories and may share some common categories with
the other clients. Moreover, due to data privacy, the raw data stored
in local clients are not allowed to share with the central server or
other clients. The goal of Fed-GCD is to collaboratively train a
generic GCD model under the privacy constraint, and then utilize
it to discover novel categories in the unlabeled data on the server.

tical extension of novel category discovery (NCD) [4, 10–
12, 19, 36, 42, 45, 47, 48], GCD has attracted increasing
attention. While existing GCD methods [9, 34, 38, 39, 41]
have achieved promising performance, they always require
centralized training, where the training data need to be accessed at once. However, this strategy violates many practical application scenarios: the GCD data are distributively
collected by different local clients and the data in each client
cannot be shared with others due to the privacy concerns.
For instance, as shown in Fig. 1, a global species research
center plans to discover the new species of global birds
through the collaboration of local stations located around
the world. Each local station is responsible for capturing
and partially annotating bird images. Due to the difference
in local policies and laws, it is hard to make an agreement to
share the local data between stations. Thus, a decentralized

28741

