This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Calibrated Multi-label Deep Neural Networks
Jiacheng Cheng
Nuno Vasconcelos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego

Fraction of Positive Examples

{jicheng,nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

1

P = {apple, fork}, N = {knife}

Perfect Calibration
Focal
ASY
Ours

0.8
0.6

Focal [40]

0.4
0.2
0

ASY [61]

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

Mean Posterior Estimate

1
Ours

Figure 1. Left: Reliability diagram (calibration curve) of multi-label DNNs trained with the asymmetric focal loss [40], ASY loss [61], and our proposed
loss. Right: corresponding retrieval results on the multi-label retrieval task, where the user specifies a query string of desired labels P and undesired labels
N . Correct retrieval results are highlighted in green. Improved calibration substantially improves retrieval performance.

Abstract
The problem of calibrating deep neural networks
(DNNs) for multi-label learning is considered. It is wellknown that DNNs trained by cross-entropy for single-label,
or one-hot, classification are poorly calibrated. Many calibration techniques have been proposed to address the problem. However, little attention has been paid to the calibration of multi-label DNNs. In this literature, the focus
has been on improving labeling accuracy in the face of severe dataset unbalance. This is addressed by the introduction of asymmetric losses, which have became very popular.
However, these losses do not induce well calibrated classifiers. In this work, we first provide a theoretical explanation for this poor calibration performance, by showing
that these loses losses lack the strictly proper property, a
necessary condition for accurate probability estimation. To
overcome this problem, we propose a new Strictly Proper
Asymmetric (SPA) loss. This is complemented by a Label
Pair Regularizer (LPR) that increases the number of calibration constraints introduced per training example. The
effectiveness of both contributions is validated by extensive
experiments on various multi-label datasets. The resulting
training method is shown to significantly decrease the calibration error while maintaining state-of-the-art accuracy.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) including convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [27, 35] and vision transformers
(ViTs) [13] have demonstrated great capacity for solving supervised learning tasks in computer vision. However, many
applications require trust-worthy machine learning systems,
which are not only accurate but also probability calibrated,
i.e. able to produce accurate estimates of the posterior probabilities of the various classes. A classifier is calibrated if
it predicts a posterior class probability of p when the selection of the class is correct p × 100% of the time. The
importance of calibration has been noted for many applications. For example, in medical diagnosis [44, 82], probabilities can be used to determine which examples require
human inspection, thus avoiding the cost of manually inspecting all images. However, the process can only be
trusted if the DNN provides accurate posterior estimates.
The safety-critical nature of the application makes probability calibration a critical requirement to enable this functionality. Cost-sensitive applications [15], e.g. fraud detection [2, 50] or business decision making [56, 75], involve

27589

