This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NViST: In the Wild New View Synthesis from a Single Image with Transformers
Wonbong Jang
Lourdes Agapito
Department of Computer Science
University College London
{ucabwja,l.agapito}@ucl.ac.uk

Figure 1. We introduce NViST, a transformer-based architecture that enables synthesis from novel viewpoints given a single in the wild
input image. We test our model not only on held-out scenes of MVImgNet, a large-scale dataset of casually captured videos of hundreds
of object categories (Right) but also on out-of-distribution challenging phone-captured scenes (Left).

Abstract
We propose NViST, a transformer-based model for efficient and generalizable novel-view synthesis from a single
image for real-world scenes. In contrast to many methods that are trained on synthetic data, object-centred scenarios, or in a category-specific manner, NViST is trained
on MVImgNet, a large-scale dataset of casually-captured
real-world videos of hundreds of object categories with diverse backgrounds. NViST transforms image inputs directly
into a radiance field, conditioned on camera parameters via
adaptive layer normalisation. In practice, NViST exploits
fine-tuned masked autoencoder (MAE) features and translates them to 3D output tokens via cross-attention, while
addressing occlusions with self-attention. To move away
from object-centred datasets and enable full scene synthesis, NViST adopts a 6-DOF camera pose model and only requires relative pose, dropping the need for canonicalization

of the training data, which removes a substantial barrier
to it being used on casually captured datasets. We show
results on unseen objects and categories from MVImgNet
and even generalization to casual phone captures. We conduct qualitative and quantitative evaluations on MVImgNet
and ShapeNet to show that our model represents a step
forward towards enabling true in-the-wild generalizable
novel-view synthesis from a single image. Project webpage:
https://wbjang.github.io/nvist_webpage.

1. Introduction
Learning 3D scene representations from RGB images for
novel view synthesis or 3D modelling remains a pivotal
challenge for the computer vision and graphics communities. Traditional approaches, such as structure from motion (SfM) and multiview stereo pipelines, endeavor to op-

10181

