This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

P EEKABOO: Interactive Video Generation via Masked-Diffusion
2†

Yash Jain1† Anshul Nasery
1

Microsoft

2

Vibhav Vineet1 Harkirat Behl1

University of Washington

Project Webpage

“A cartoon panda playing 

peekaboo behind bamboo”

“A bald eagle flying in the

blue sky”

“A horse galloping through a

meadow”

Figure 1. Zero-training No-latency interactive video generation. P EEKABOO allows users to control the output (object size, location
and trajectory) for any off-the-shelf video diffusion models, through specially designed masking modules. First row shows a panda playing
P EEKABOO by following an expanding mask in left direction.

Abstract
Modern video generation models like Sora have
achieved remarkable success in producing high-quality
videos. However, a significant limitation is their inability
to offer interactive control to users, a feature that promises
to open up unprecedented applications and creativity. In
this work, we introduce the first solution to equip diffusionbased video generation models with spatio-temporal control. We present P EEKABOO, a novel masked attention module, which seamlessly integrates with current video generation models offering control without the need for additional
training or inference overhead. To facilitate future research,
we also introduce a comprehensive benchmark for interactive video generation. This benchmark offers a standardized framework for the community to assess the efficacy
of emerging interactive video generation models. Our extensive qualitative and quantitative assessments reveal that
P EEKABOO achieves up to a 3.8× improvement in mIoU
over baseline models, all while maintaining the same latency. Code and benchmark are available on the webpage.

1. Introduction
Generating realistic videos from natural language descriptions is a challenging but exciting task that has recently
made significant progress [4, 20, 35, 38, 40]. This is largely
due to the development of powerful generative models and
latent diffusion models (LDMs [32]), which can produce
high-quality and diverse videos from text. These models
have opened up new possibilities for creative applications
and expression.
As the generation quality continues to improve, we can
expect more innovation and potential in this domain. An
important aspect is to enable more interactivity and user
control over the generated videos (or better alignment), by
allowing the user to control the spatial and temporal aspects
of the video, such as the size, location, pose, and movement
of the objects. This enables users to express their creativity
and imagination through generating videos that match their
vision and preferences. It can also be useful for various
† equal contribution

8079

