This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HumanNeRF-SE: A Simple yet Effective Approach to Animate HumanNeRF
with Diverse Poses
Caoyuan Ma1

Yu-Lun Liu2

Zhixiang Wang3,4

Wu Liu5

Xinchen Liu6

Zheng Wang1†

1 National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of

Computer Science, Wuhan University 2 National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University 3 The University of Tokyo
4 National Institute of Informatics
5 School of Information Science and Technology,
University of Science and Technology of China 6 JD Explore Academy

Figure 1. Overview. HumanNeRF-SE efficiently synthesizes images of performers in diverse poses, blending simplicity with effectiveness.
It outperforms previous methods by creating a wider range of new poses (a), maintains generalization without overfitting with limited input
frames (b), and requires fewer than 1% of learnable parameters, reducing training time by 95% while delivering superior results in the
few-shot scenario (c). † LPIPS = 1,000⇥LPIPS. Project page: https://miles629.github.io/humanNeRF-se.github.io/

Abstract
We present HumanNeRF-SE, a simple yet effective
method that synthesizes diverse novel pose images with simple input. Previous HumanNeRF works require a large
number of optimizable parameters to fit the human images.
Instead, we reload these approaches by combining explicit
and implicit human representations to design both generalized rigid deformation and specific non-rigid deformation.
Our key insight is that explicit shape can reduce the sampling points used to fit implicit representation, and frozen
blending weights from SMPL constructing a generalized
rigid deformation can effectively avoid overfitting and improve pose generalization performance. Our architecture
involving both explicit and implicit representation is simple yet effective. Experiments demonstrate our model can
synthesize images under arbitrary poses with few-shot input
and increase the speed of synthesizing images by 15 times
through a reduction in computational complexity without
using any existing acceleration modules. Compared to
the state-of-the-art HumanNeRF studies, HumanNeRF-SE
achieves better performance with fewer learnable parameters and less training time.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [33, 54, 55, 58, 63] represents the scene as an implicit field and utilizes volumetric
renderer to synthesize the scene has demonstrated remarkable advancements in reconstruction and novel-view syntheses of static scenes. However, they typically do not account
for object deformation and perform poorly on dynamic humans due to the complex deformation caused by motions.
Deformable NeRFs endow implicit fields with the capability to express dynamic objects [37, 38, 42, 53, 59] or
even humans [11, 16, 17, 56, 62]. Although these methods [11, 16, 17, 56, 62] could learn high-quality human
representations and synthesize images from arbitrary viewpoints, they cannot synthesize images with novel poses that
are significantly different from that of the training videos.
We aim to automatically render photo-realistic human
images with arbitrary viewpoints and poses from monocular videos. Although there are some studies [5, 18, 26, 40,
41, 66] have attempted to learn animatable human representations by introducing neural blend weights or using UVreferenced coordinate systems, their requirement for multicamera data limits their practical applicability. The problem becomes practical with monocular inputs but highly ill-

1460

