This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Pose-invariant Embeddings: Learning Category and Object-specific
Discriminative Representations for Recognition and Retrieval
Rohan Sarkar, Avinash Kak
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, USA
{sarkarr, kak}@purdue.edu

Abstract
In the context of pose-invariant object recognition
and retrieval, we demonstrate that it is possible to
achieve significant improvements in performance if both
the category-based and the object-identity-based embeddings are learned simultaneously during training. In hindsight, that sounds intuitive because learning about the categories is more fundamental than learning about the individual objects that correspond to those categories. However, to the best of what we know, no prior work in poseinvariant learning has demonstrated this effect. This paper
presents an attention-based dual-encoder architecture with
specially designed loss functions that optimize the interand intra-class distances simultaneously in two different
embedding spaces, one for the category embeddings and
the other for the object level embeddings. The loss functions we have proposed are pose-invariant ranking losses
that are designed to minimize the intra-class distances and
maximize the inter-class distances in the dual representation spaces. We demonstrate the power of our approach
with three challenging multi-view datasets, ModelNet-40,
ObjectPI, and FG3D. With our dual approach, for singleview object recognition, we outperform the previous best by
20.0% on ModelNet40, 2.0% on ObjectPI, and 46.5% on
FG3D. On the other hand, for single-view object retrieval,
we outperform the previous best by 33.7% on ModelNet40,
18.8% on ObjectPI, and 56.9% on FG3D.

1. Introduction
Pose-invariant recognition and retrieval [7] is an important
problem in computer vision with practical applications in
robotic automation, automatic checkout systems, and inventory management. The appearance of many objects belonging to the same general category can vary significantly from
different viewpoints, and, yet, humans have no difficulty
in recognizing them from arbitrary viewpoints. In poseinvariant recognition and retrieval, the focus is on mapping

Figure 1. The upper panel shows objects belonging to two different categories, chair and stool. In the proposed disentangled
dual-space learning, the goal for the learning of category-based
embeddings is to capture what maximally discriminates the objects
belonging to the two categories — the presence or the absence of
the back-rest. On the other hand, the object-identity based embeddings are meant to capture what is distinctive about each object.
The lower panel illustrates our dual-space approach for simultaneously learning the embeddings in two different spaces for category and object-identity-based recognition and retrieval tasks.

the object images to embedding vectors such that the embeddings for the objects that belong to the same category are
pulled together for all the available viewpoints in relation to
the embeddings for the objects for the different categories.
Our work demonstrates that the performance of poseinvariant learning as described above can be significantly
improved if we disentangle the category-based learning
from the object-identity-based learning.
Fig. 1 illustrates what we mean by disentangling
the category-based representation from the object-identitybased representation. Assume that an object database contains images of different types of chairs and different types
of stools. We would want our network to learn the categorybased embedding vectors for the chair class and for the stool

17077

