This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Degradation-unaware Representation with Prior-based Latent
Transformations for Blind Face Restoration
Lianxin Xie1 , Csbingbing Zheng1 , Wen Xue1 , Le Jiang1 , Cheng Liu4 , Si Wu1,2,3* , Hau San Wong5*
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
PAZHOU LAB
4
Departent of Computer Science, Shantou University
5
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{cslianxin.xie, 202321044369, csxuewen, 202220143385}@mail.scut.edu.cn
cliu@stu.edu.cn, cswusi@scut.edu.cn, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Blind face restoration focuses on restoring high-fidelity
details from images subjected to complex and unknown
degradations, while preserving identity information. In
this paper, we present a Prior-based Latent Transformation approach (PLTrans), which is specifically designed to
learn a degradation-unaware representation, thereby allowing the restoration network to effectively generalize to
real-world degradation. Toward this end, PLTrans learns
a degradation-unaware query via a latent diffusion-based
regularization module. Furthermore, conditioned on the
features of a degraded face image, a latent dictionary that
captures the priors of HQ face images is leveraged to refine the features by mapping the top-d nearest elements.
The refined version will be used to build key and value for
the cross-attention computation, which is tailored to each
degraded image and exhibits reduced sensitivity to different degradation factors. Conditioned on the resulting representation, we train a decoding network that synthesizes
face images with authentic details and identity preservation.
Through extensive experiments, we verify the effectiveness
of the design elements and demonstrate the generalization
ability of our proposed approach for both synthetic and unknown degradations. We finally demonstrate the applicability of PLTrans in other vision tasks.

1. Introduction
Blind Face Restoration (BFR) aims to restore facial details while preserving the identity in degraded images that
have been subjected to varying and unidentified degradations. Many CNN-based and Transformer-based BFR
frameworks have been previously designed to enhance

Figure 1. An example to illustrate that a better query empowers a
generic model to generate HQ images, and vice versa. Enhancing
the quality of key and value yields relatively slight effect. The
restored image quality can be sorted as: (b)>(c)>(d)>(a)

restoration performance, leading to significant advancements in the field. However, it is impractical to gather sufficient pairs of degraded-clean training data in real-world
situations. In the pursuit of synthesizing clear and realistic face images from degraded ones, recent BFR methods have incorporated various face priors, including highquality(HQ) exemplars with the same identity or geometric information. These methods often rely on capturing
the correlation between degraded and clean images, making them susceptible to significant performance drops when
handling unseen degradations. Additionally, there have
been attempts to apply generative priors to BFR. Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) [12] that are well-trained
on face images represent strong priors due to their ability
to generate high-fidelity samples, while GAN-based models are typically trained on specific datasets, thus limiting
their generalization performance.
The generic transformer-based model takes a high/lowquality (HQ/LQ) image as input and generates a set of corresponding HQ/LQ query, key and value in each block. The

*Co-corresponding author.
9120

