This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoSAR: Monocular Semi-Supervised Model for Avatar Reconstruction using
Differentiable Shading
Abdallah Dib1 * Luiz Gustavo Hafemann1∗ Emeline Got1 Trevor Anderson1 Amin Fadaeinejad1,2
Rafael M. O. Cruz3 Marc-André Carbonneau1
1

Ubisoft LaForge

York University2 Ecole de Technologie Supérieure3

Figure 1. Our method estimates detailed geometry and reflectance maps, yielding convincing rendering under new lighting conditions.

Abstract
Reconstructing an avatar from a portrait image has
many applications in multimedia, but remains a challenging
research problem. Extracting reflectance maps and geometry from one image is ill-posed: recovering geometry is a
one-to-many mapping problem and reflectance and light are
difficult to disentangle. Accurate geometry and reflectance
can be captured under the controlled conditions of a light
stage, but it is costly to acquire large datasets in this fashion. Moreover, training solely with this type of data leads
to poor generalization with in-the-wild images. This motivates the introduction of MoSAR, a method for 3D avatar
generation from monocular images. We propose a semisupervised training scheme that improves generalization by
learning from both light stage and in-the-wild datasets. This
is achieved using a novel differentiable shading formulation. We show that our approach effectively disentangles the
intrinsic face parameters, producing relightable avatars. As
a result, MoSAR1 estimates a richer set of skin reflectance
maps and generates more realistic avatars than existing
* Equal contribution
1 Project page: https://ubisoft-laforge.github.io/character/mosar

state-of-the-art methods. We also release a new dataset,
that provides intrinsic face attributes (diffuse, specular, ambient occlusion and translucency maps) for 10k subjects.

1. Introduction
Avatars are an important component of virtual worlds, being
widely used in virtual reality, multimedia and video-games.
Realistic personalized avatars, often called digital doubles,
serve as bridge between the physical world and digital realities. The light stage [13] has long been regarded as the primary solution to obtain high-quality realistic avatars, however their high cost restricts their availability to the general public. They also require physical presence of users for
scanning, which is impractical for many applications.
In contrast, creating avatars from a single monocular image enables a wide range of applications [6, 11, 16, 17, 19,
20, 34, 53–55, 66]. These methods are fast and robust to arbitrary capture conditions, however, they fall short in terms
of quality for high-level multimedia production standards.
Moreover, these approaches often produce avatars that
cannot seamlessly be integrated in tools used by content creators and artists, which limits the ability to edit the captured

1770

