This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DreamSalon: A Staged Diffusion Framework for Preserving Identity-Context in
Editable Face Generation
Haonan Lin1∗
1 School of Computer Science and Technology, MOEKLINNS Lab, Xi’an Jiaotong University

linhaonan@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
While large-scale pre-trained text-to-image models can
synthesize diverse and high-quality human-centered images,
novel challenges arise with a nuanced task of “identity fine
editing” – precisely modifying specific features of a subject
while maintaining its inherent identity and context. Existing
personalization methods either require time-consuming optimization or learning additional encoders, adept in “identity re-contextualization”. However, they often struggle with
detailed and sensitive tasks like human face editing. To address these challenges, we introduce DreamSalon, a noiseguided, staged-editing framework, uniquely focusing on detailed image manipulations and identity-context preservation. By discerning editing and boosting stages via the frequency and gradient of predicted noises, DreamSalon first
performs detailed manipulations on specific features in the
editing stage, guided by high-frequency information, and
then employs stochastic denoising in the boosting stage to
improve image quality. For more precise editing, DreamSalon semantically mixes source and target textual prompts,
guided by differences in their embedding covariances, to direct the model’s focus on specific manipulation areas. Our
experiments demonstrate DreamSalon’s ability to efficiently
and faithfully edit fine details on human faces, outperforming existing methods both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Recent work on text-to-image (T2I) generation models has
brought significant capabilities in the creation of visual
content using textual prompts [9, 29, 33, 38]. A critical
challenge known as “identity re-contextualization” (i.e., ID
preservation, Fig. 1, left) [23, 36], requires modifying a subject’s broad context while preserving its identity. However,
a more nuanced task, “identity fine editing” (i.e., ID-context
∗ This work was done with Mengmeng Wang, Yan Chen, Wenbin An,

Yuzhe Yao, Guang Dai, Qianying Wang, Liu yong, and JingdongWang,
during the internship at SGIT AI Lab, State Grid Corporation of China.
Due to omission in submission, other authors cannot be added in this paper.

Figure 1. Unlike “identity re-contextualization” (Dreambooth
[36]), “identity fine editing” precisely manipulates details while
preserving identity and context (DreamSalon).

preservation, Fig. 1, right), which demands precise manipulations to a subject’s specific features (like lip color or
specific accessories), remains underexplored. This task is
crucial for applications such as professional photo editing
or social networks, where subtle and accurate changes are
required without modifying the subject’s original identity
and context [52]. Despite progress in realistically editing
object details [17, 47, 53], current models still struggle with
detail-oriented human face editing. This difficulty arises due
to the complexity of human facial features [8, 43], the high
sensitivity of humans to recognize even minor facial changes
[41], and technical challenges in maintaining photorealism
during editing [39]. These factors make face editing more
challenging than editing other objects or scenes.
In “identity fine editing”, a key aspect is to preserve the
subject’s inherent identity and source context. We argue that
the source textual prompt is essential to achieve this goal,
particularly for reconstructing and safeguarding the conceptual essence of the image. However, current methods, which
focus on editing images using target textual prompts, often
struggle to preserve both identity and context [6, 28, 36].
This imbalance between source and target prompts can lead
to the loss of parts that do not need to be edited, underscoring the need for a more nuanced approach that better guides
the diffusion process for “identity fine editing”. Another key
aspect of “identity fine editing” is the ability to make precise
manipulations. GAN-based methods propose to disentangle

8589

