This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Proxemics: A Prior for 3D Social Interaction from Images
Lea Müller1,4 Vickie Ye1 Georgios Pavlakos2,5 Michael Black3 Angjoo Kanazawa1
1
UC Berkeley 2 UT Austin 3 MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
{mueller,vye,kanazawa}@berkeley.edu, pavlakos@cs.utexas.edu, black@tuebingen.mpg.de

Figure 1. Generative Proxemics. We propose a diffusion model that learns a 3D generative model of two people in close social interaction.
We show how the model can be used to generated samples or as a social prior in the downstream task of reconstructing two people in close
proximity from images without any user annotation at test time. Shown here are input test images (left) and our predicted 3D bodies (right).

Abstract
Social interaction is a fundamental aspect of human
behavior and communication. The way individuals position themselves in relation to others, also known as proxemics, conveys social cues and affects the dynamics of social interaction. Reconstructing such interaction from images presents challenges because of mutual occlusion and
the limited availability of large training datasets. To address this, we present a novel approach that learns a prior
over the 3D proxemics two people in close social interaction and demonstrate its use for single-view 3D reconstruction. We start by creating 3D training data of interacting
people using image datasets with contact annotations. We
then model the proxemics using a novel denoising diffusion
model called BUDDI that learns the joint distribution over
the poses of two people in close social interaction. Sampling from our generative proxemics model produces realistic 3D human interactions, which we validate through a perceptual study. We use BUDDI in reconstructing two people
in close proximity from an image without any contact annotation via an optimization approach that uses the diffusion
model as a prior. Our approach recovers accurate 3D so-

cial interactions from noisy initial estimates, outperforming
state-of-the-art methods. Our code, data, and model are
available at: muelea.github.io/buddi.

1. Introduction
Humans are social creatures, and physical interaction plays
a crucial role in our daily lives, shaping our relationships.
For example, research in behavioral science has shown that
a slight touch between two people can cause a more friendly
behaviour towards the touch-giver and lead to increased tips
in restaurants [5]. Capturing and modeling scenarios of
physical social interaction through computer vision will enable advancements in augmented and virtual reality and impact other fields like robotics and behavioral science. The
recent progress in single-person mesh estimation is unfortunately not sufficient to model close interaction, as these
methods are not trained to reason about the relative depth
of people and the intricate interplay between two people’s
body poses, shapes, and proximity.
4 Portions of this work were done while LM was at MPI-IS, Tübingen.
5 This work was done while GP was at UC Berkeley.

9687

