This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FaceLift: Semi-supervised 3D Facial Landmark Localization
David Ferman

Pablo Garrido

Gaurav Bharaj

1. Introduction
3D facial landmark localization plays a critical role in various applications, such as talking head generation [39], 3D
face reconstruction [15, 29, 61], and learning 3D face models [56]. However, existing 3D facial landmark datasets
based on 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) often lack alignment with 2D landmark definitions labeled by humans. This
leads to a noticeable ambiguity between 2D and 3D datasets
and limits their overall effectiveness, as shown in Fig. 1. We
propose an algorithm to bridge this ambiguity by directly lifting hand-labeled 2D landmarks into 3D, without additional
3D landmark localization datasets.
Human-labeled 2D datasets are known to exhibit high-

DAD-3DHeads
Face Synthetics

3D facial landmark localization has proven to be of particular use for applications, such as face tracking, 3D face
modeling, and image-based 3D face reconstruction. In the
supervised learning case, such methods usually rely on 3D
landmark datasets derived from 3DMM-based registration
that often lack spatial definition alignment, as compared with
that chosen by hand-labeled human consensus, e.g., how are
eyebrow landmarks defined? This creates a gap between
landmark datasets generated via high-quality 2D human labels and 3DMMs, and it ultimately limits their effectiveness.
To address this issue, we introduce a novel semi-supervised
learning approach that learns 3D landmarks by directly
lifting (visible) hand-labeled 2D landmarks and ensures better definition alignment, without the need for 3D landmark
datasets. To lift 2D landmarks to 3D, we leverage 3D-aware
GANs for better multi-view consistency learning and inthe-wild multi-frame videos for robust cross-generalization.
Empirical experiments demonstrate that our method not only
achieves better definition alignment between 2D-3D landmarks but also outperforms other supervised learning 3D
landmark localization methods on both 3DMM labeled and
photogrammetric ground truth evaluation datasets. Project
Page: https://davidcferman.github.io/FaceLift

Ours

Abstract

300W-LP

Flawless AI

Figure 1. Comparison of our labels with 300W-LP [60], DAD3DHeads [29], which are both labeled via 3DMM, and Microsoft’s
Face Synthetics [40] datasets.

quality facial landmarks for visible facial regions, while
self-occluded regions are labeled in a “landmark-marched”
style [59], i.e., on the nearest visible boundary. On the other
hand, current 3D datasets leave much to be desired in terms
of accuracy and consistency w.r.t 2D landmark definitions.
For example, human-labeled 2D facial landmark datasets focus on the apparent brow boundaries, whereas 3DMM-based
models define the brow region structurally above the eyes,
as fixed mesh vertices. However, the relationship between
facial structure and brow appearance varies across identities,
and hence, a 2D-3D inconsistency occurs, see Fig. 1.
Inconsistencies are particularly evident in fine-scale details not captured by the linear 3DMM fitting, often seen
in the mouth and eyes where fine-scale details are crucial
for accurate representation, as noted by [29], see Fig. 1.
Additionally, unlike 2D methods, the SoTA models trained
on such datasets tend to fail to capture blinks, as shown
in Fig. 6. Finally, “hallucinated” self-occluded landmarks
are prone to labeling errors due to the difficulty in labeling
the non-visible regions [49]. We observe that the “visible”
subset of 2D landmarks is fairly 3D consistent, see Fig. 3,

1781

