This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MimicDiffusion: Purifying Adversarial Perturbation via Mimicking Clean
Diffusion Model
Kaiyu Song, Hanjiang Lai*, Yan Pan, Jian Yin
Sun Yat-sen University
Guangdong, China
songky7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {laihanj3, panyan5, issjyin}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial perturbation, where an imperceptible perturbation is
added to the image that can fool the DNNs. Diffusion-based
adversarial purification uses the diffusion model to generate a clean image against such adversarial attacks. Unfortunately, the generative process of the diffusion model is
also inevitably affected by adversarial perturbation since
the diffusion model is also a deep neural network where
its input has adversarial perturbation. In this work, we
propose MimicDiffusion, a new diffusion-based adversarial
purification technique that directly approximates the generative process of the diffusion model with the clean image as input. Concretely, we analyze the differences between the guided terms using the clean image and the adversarial sample. After that, we first implement MimicDiffusion based on Manhattan distance. Then, we propose
two guidance to purify the adversarial perturbation and approximate the clean diffusion model. Extensive experiments
on three image datasets, including CIFAR-10, CIFAR100, and ImageNet, with three classifier backbones including WideResNet-70-16, WideResNet-28-10, and ResNet50 demonstrate that MimicDiffusion significantly performs
better than the state-of-the-art baselines. On CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and ImageNet, it achieves 92.67%, 61.35%,
and 61.53% average robust accuracy, which are 18.49%,
13.23%, and 17.64% higher, respectively. The code is available at https://github.com/psky1111/MimicDiffusion.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in various fields of computer vision, e.g., image detection [31], image classification [34]. However, DNNs are
vulnerable to the adversarial samples [10], where the adversarial sample consists of the clean sample and an imper* Hanjiang Lai is the corresponding author.

ceptible adversarial perturbation.
To defend against adversarial attack, adversarial training [13, 32] has been proposed by leveraging the generated
adversarial samples to train the classifier. For example, Bai
et al. [2] used the adversarial samples as the training data
to train the classifier directly. However, adversarial training may be ineffective when suffering from unknown attack
methods [9].
In contrast, another popular method for the adversarial
attack is adversarial purification [21, 28, 37]. Given an adversarial sample as the input, adversarial purification methods aim to purify the adversarial perturbation from the adversarial sample and obtain clean samples. Then, generated
clean samples are fed into the classifier.
As one of the popular generative models, the diffusion
model [15] becomes a potential tool for adversarial purification due to generating high-quality images. Previous methods [21, 28] depended on finding an optimal time step in the
forward process to cover the adversarial perturbation. Then,
the reverse process tries to purify both the Gaussian noise
and adversarial perturbation while keeping the label semantic simultaneously. Yong et al. [37] proposed the scorebased method by using the property that the clear sample
tends to be the lower value of the score function. Nie et
al. [21] proposed the DiffPure based on a small step denoiser. Further, some improved methods are based on the
iteration and guided methods [33]. For example, Wang et
al. [33] alleviated the requirement for keeping the label semantic by incorporating a guidance [4].
Despite the success of diffusion-based adversarial purification methods, we argue that adversarial perturbations
added to clean samples will still affect the generative process of the diffusion model, which deviates from the trajectory of the clean diffusion model. Thus, it will generate
extra noise in the synthetic images and cause performance
degradation (More details can be found in Section 3). The
key is to remove the effects of the adversarial perturbation
when performing the generative process.
As shown in Fig. 1, an intuitive approach is that if the

24665

