This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Customization Assistant for Text-to-image Generation
Yufan Zhou, Ruiyi Zhang, Jiuxiang Gu, Tong Sun
Adobe Research
{yufzhou, ruizhang, jigu, tsun}@adobe.com

Abstract
Customizing pre-trained text-to-image generation model
has attracted massive research interest recently, due to its
huge potential in real-world applications. Although existing
methods are able to generate creative content for a novel
concept contained in single user-input image, their capability are still far from perfection. Specifically, most existing
methods require fine-tuning the generative model on testing
images. Some existing methods do not require fine-tuning,
while their performance are unsatisfactory. Furthermore,
the interaction between users and models are still limited to
directive and descriptive prompts such as instructions and
captions. In this work, we build a customization assistant
based on pre-trained large language model and diffusion
model, which can not only perform customized generation
in a tuning-free manner, but also enable more user-friendly
interactions: users can chat with the assistant and input either ambiguous text or clear instruction. Specifically, we
propose a new framework consists of a new model design
and a novel training strategy. The resulting assistant can
perform customized generation in 2-5 seconds without any
test time fine-tuning. Extensive experiments are conducted,
competitive results have been obtained across different domains, illustrating the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Customizing pre-trained text-to-image models has drawn
significant interest in the research community, due to its
potential in real-world applications. Customized generation aims at generating creative images for a specific concept contained in user provided images. Despite of the impressive progress that large-scale text-to-image generation
models have made in recent years [1, 5, 24–26, 29, 35, 36],
they fail to perform customized generation for novel concept, such as a specific animal or object which only appear
in single testing image.
Various approaches have been proposed to tackle this
task. Some methods focus on fine-tuning the pre-trained

Figure 1. Generated example from the proposed CAFE. CAFE can
perform customized generation based on the user provided image
in a tuning-free manner. It outputs creative images along with text
explanation and elaboration.

generation model [13, 22, 27] on testing images, so that the
model can learn fine-grained details about the novel concept; Some methods aim to represent the concept by embeddings [6, 7, 15, 33, 39], which can be obtained either
by optimization method or through a learned encoder. The
embeddings are then injected into pre-trained text-to-image
generation models to perform customized generation. The
test time required for running these methods varies, spanning from few seconds to up to thirty minutes. We will
discuss more details about related works in later section.
Although existing methods are capable of generating
creative contents for the target novel concept, they still have
drawbacks and limitations. For instance, all these existing
methods are not user-friendly enough: they can only handle
prompts that are directive or descriptive in nature, such as
a caption “A picture of the dog in comic book style” or an
instruction “Generate an image of the dog in comic book
style”. They can not handle ambiguous input such as “I
want to generate something creative, can you help me?”,
which could be important in applications because the user
may only have a vague target instead of precise require-

9182

