This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instance-aware Contrastive Learning for Occluded Human Mesh Reconstruction
Mi-Gyeong Gwon1 Gi-Mun Um2 Won-Sik Cheong2 Wonjun Kim1 *
1
Konkuk University 2 Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
{kmk3942,wonjkim}@konkuk.ac.kr

{gmum,wscheong}@etri.re.kr

Abstract

actively explored while bringing the significant progress in
human mesh reconstruction [2, 4, 15, 18, 19, 21, 24, 25,
37, 46]. On the other hand, model-free approaches also
have drawn a lot of attentions due to their ability to express local details of mesh surfaces by directly regressing every vertex without any constraint of the parameter
space. In particular, the transformer architecture has been
widely adopted to reconstruct accurate meshes by considering the relationship between vertices in a global manner [5, 17, 27, 28, 44, 45, 50, 51].

A simple yet effective method for occlusion-robust 3D
human mesh reconstruction from a single image is presented in this paper. Although many recent studies have
shown the remarkable improvement in human mesh reconstruction, it is still difficult to generate accurate meshes
when person-to-person occlusion occurs due to the ambiguity of who a body part belongs to. To address this problem,
we propose an instance-aware contrastive learning scheme.
Specifically, joint features belonging to the target human
are trained to be proximate with the center feature (i.e.,
feature extracted from the body center position). On the
other hand, center features of different human instances are
forced to be far apart so that joint features of each person can be clearly distinguished from others. By interpreting the joint possession based on such contrastive learning
scheme, the proposed method easily understands the spatial occupancy of body parts for each person in a given image, thus can reconstruct reliable human meshes even with
severely overlapped cases between multiple persons. Experimental results on benchmark datasets demonstrate the
robustness of the proposed method compared to previous
approaches under person-to-person occlusions. The code
and model are publicly available at: https://github.
com/DCVL-3D/InstanceHMR_release.

1. Introduction
Recently, 3D human mesh reconstruction has become a major research topic with the increasing demand in entertainment areas such as AR/VR and sports broadcasting. In
line with this trend, considerable efforts have been made
to predict reliable meshes from a single image by using
deep learning techniques. Specifically, model-based methods, which aim to reconstruct human poses and shapes by
estimating parameters of the skinned multi-person linear
(SMPL) model [32], have been introduced. Since the problem of inferring a large number of vertices is simplified to
the problem of estimating a few parameters through various
network architectures, model-based approaches have been
* corresponding author

Despite meaningful advances in the field of 3D human mesh reconstruction, person-to-person occlusions frequently occurring in crowd scenes still remain a challenging issue due to ambiguities of possession for body parts.
To resolve this issue, several approaches have recently begun to be introduced. For example, there have been attempts to estimate discriminative locations of each person
in the 2D space and utilize them to extract features for individual mesh regression [7, 16, 38]. Reasoning the depth
order of multiple people also has been considered to understand the relationship between overlapped subjects in a
given image [11, 39, 47]. Some methods first predict the
occlusion-robust 3D skeletons, which form reliable poses
even for invisible body parts, and then lift them to mesh
structures [31]. Even though considerable efforts have been
consistently devoted to this task, attempts to exploit contextual cues of the occluded area, which is occupied by each
person, are still insufficient.
In this paper, a new perspective for effectively handling person-to-person occlusions is presented. In the scene
where people are overlapped, one of the biggest obstacles is
the uncertainty about the ownership of a body part. While
it is relatively easy to semantically understand which area
in a given image corresponds to which type of body part
(e.g., hand or foot), it can be challenging to determine who
owns that body part. This makes the model confused and
eventually yields unnatural reconstruction results. To deal
with this problem, we propose to guide the network to learn
discriminative representations of body parts for each person
by our instance-aware contrastive learning scheme. Specifically, two novel feature maps, i.e., center-aligned instance

10553

