This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Traffic Scene Parsing through the TSP6K Dataset
Peng-Tao Jiang1,2 * Yuqi Yang1∗
1

VCIP, CS, Nankai University

Yang Cao3
2

Qibin Hou1,4† Ming-Ming Cheng1,4

Zhejiang University

3

HKUST

4

Chunhua Shen2

NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian

pt.jiang@mail.nankai.edu.cn, yangyq2000@mail.nankai.edu.cn, andrewhoux@gmail.com

Abstract
Traffic scene perception in computer vision is a critically
important task to achieve intelligent cities. To date, most
existing datasets focus on autonomous driving scenes. We
observe that the models trained on those driving datasets
often yield unsatisfactory results on traffic monitoring scenes.
However, little effort has been put into improving the traffic
monitoring scene understanding, mainly due to the lack of
specific datasets. To fill this gap, we introduce a specialized
traffic monitoring dataset, termed TSP6K, containing images
from the traffic monitoring scenario, with high-quality pixellevel and instance-level annotations. The TSP6K dataset
captures more crowded traffic scenes with several times
more traffic participants than the existing driving scenes.
We perform a detailed analysis of the dataset and comprehensively evaluate previous popular scene parsing methods,
instance segmentation methods and unsupervised domain
adaption methods. Furthermore, considering the vast difference in instance sizes, we propose a detail refining decoder
for scene parsing, which recovers the details of different semantic regions in traffic scenes owing to the proposed TSP6K
dataset. Experiments show its effectiveness in parsing the
traffic monitoring scenes. Code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/PengtaoJiang/TSP6K.

1. Introduction
As a classic and important computer vision task, the scene
parsing task aims to segment the semantic objects and
stuff from the given images. Nowadays, with the emergence of large-scale scene understanding datasets, such
as ADE20K [101] and COCO-Stuff [5], has greatly promoted the development of scene understanding algorithms
[21, 43, 52, 57, 83, 98, 100]. Many application scenarios,
such as robot navigation [18, 42] and medical diagnosis
[62], benefit from the advanced scene understanding algo* The first two authors contributed equally to this work. Part of this work
was done when P.-T. Jiang was a postdoc researcher at Zhejiang University.
† Q. Hou is the corresponding author.

rithms. As an important case of scene understanding, traffic
scene understanding focuses on understanding urban street
scenes, where the most frequently appeared instances are
humans, vehicles, and traffic signs. To date, there are already
many large-scale publicly available traffic scene datasets,
such as KITTI [25], Cityscapes [17], and BDD100K [87].
Benefiting from these finely anontated datasets, the segmentation performance of the recent scene understanding approaches [13, 30, 49, 51, 66, 78, 94, 102] has also been
considerably improved.
A characteristic of these traffic datasets is that they are
mostly collected from a driving platform, such as a driving car, and hence are more suitable for the autonomous
driving scenario. However, little attention has been spent
on the traffic monitoring scenes. Traffic monitoring scenes
are usually captured by the shooting platform high-hanging
(4.5-6 meters) in the street, which offers a rich vein of information on traffic flow [44, 58]. The high-hanging shooting
platform usually observes more traffic participants than the
driving ones, especially at the crossing. We observe that deep
learning models trained on these existing traffic datasets can
obtain poor results in parsing traffic monitoring scenes, possibly because of the domain gap. Although analyzing the
traffic monitoring scenes is in demand for many applications,
such as traffic flow analysis [44, 58], no current traffic scene
datasets are available for facilitating such research, to the
best of our knowledge.
To facilitate the research on parsing the traffic monitoring
scenes, we construct a specific dataset for traffic scene analysis and present it in this paper. Specifically, we carefully
collect many traffic images from the urban road shooting
platforms at different locations. To keep the diversity of our
dataset, we collect images from hundreds of traffic scenes at
different times of the day. To conduct semantic segmentation
and instance segmentation on this dataset, we ask annotators to finely annotate them with high-quality semantic and
instance-level labels. Due to the expensive labor for annotations, we finally obtained 6,000 finely anontated traffic
images. In Fig. 1, we have shown some traffic images and
their corresponding semantic-level and instance-level labels.
Using these finely anontated labels, we perform a compre-

21874

