This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAPE: CAM as a Probabilistic Ensemble for Enhanced DNN Interpretation
Townim Faisal Chowdhury1 , Kewen Liao2 , Vu Minh Hieu Phan1 , Minh-Son To3 , Yutong Xie1 ,
Kevin Hung4 , David Ross4 , Anton van den Hengel1 , Johan W. Verjans1 , Zhibin Liao1†
1
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide, Australia, 2 Australian Catholic University, Australia,
3
Flinders University, Australia, 4 SA Pathology, Central Adelaide Local Health Network, Australia
Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are widely used for visual classiﬁcation tasks, but their complex computation process and black-box nature hinder decision transparency and
interpretability. Class activation maps (CAMs) and recent
variants provide ways to visually explain the DNN decisionmaking process by displaying ‘attention’ heatmaps of the
DNNs. Nevertheless, the CAM explanation only offers relative attention information, that is, on an attention heatmap,
we can interpret which image region is more or less important than the others. However, these regions cannot
be meaningfully compared across classes, and the contribution of each region to the model’s class prediction is
not revealed. To address these challenges that ultimately
lead to better DNN Interpretation, in this paper, we propose CAPE, a novel reformulation of CAM that provides a
uniﬁed and probabilistically meaningful assessment of the
contributions of image regions. We quantitatively and qualitatively compare CAPE with state-of-the-art CAM methods
on CUB and ImageNet benchmark datasets to demonstrate
enhanced interpretability. We also test on a cytology imaging dataset depicting a challenging Chronic Myelomonocytic Leukemia (CMML) diagnosis problem. Code is available at: https://github.com/AIML-MED/CAPE.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs), despite achieving superior performance on various tasks such as computer vision
and natural language processing, are known to be black
boxes [23] that lack the ability to explain their decisionmaking process. The black-box nature is commonly regarded as a result of the complex model structure characterized by stacked computation layers, involving non-linear
functions and many model parameters. Explainable DNN
decisions are crucial to many life-critical scenarios [26]
† Corresponding author.

such as AI-powered autonomous driving and medical diagnostics. Taking the example of healthcare applications [2],
decision transparency is critical for doctors to understand
and trust AI analysis, and to use AI to make insightful and
accurate diagnoses or decisions.
DNN interpretability is an emerging and actively studied research ﬁeld. For visual classiﬁcation tasks, a common type of DNN interpretability analysis is to explain
DNN outputs via ﬁnding and displaying model attention
on the input image, i.e., identifying which image regions
the model focused on during the decision-making process.
This type of visual explanation can be achieved via methods
of gradient-based attention visualization [25], perturbationbased input manipulation [6, 21], and class activation map
(CAM)-based visualization [11, 24]. In particular, CAM
is an inherent intermediate step of DNN prediction which
represents the actual region relevance produced by the network. CAM stands out due to its efﬁcient feedforward process, yet its attention values can not directly explain and
compose model outcomes. Speciﬁcally, CAM values are
class-wise relative probabilities. They only represent the
relative region importance compared to the highest attention
value within each class map. Thus, CAM values provide a
limited explanation within the context of one target class.
This means that they are incomparable between classes, and
cannot explain image-level predictions. Take the CAM visualization in Fig. 1 as an example, CAM assigns similar
attention values to two dog breed classes Siberian Husky
and Alaskan Malamute. Differencing the two CAM maps
between the breeds fails to yield meaningful comparisons.
The limited analytical capability of current CAM-based
approaches hinders their use in many downstream applications. For example, ﬁne-grained classiﬁcation analysis requires the model’s ability to discriminate regions between
closely related concepts. In addition, for tasks such as
weakly supervised semantic segmentation, CAM thresholding is employed to initialize a segmentation method [13] but
the threshold choice is often arbitrary without any semantic
meaning attached.
In this paper, we reformulate CAM as a Probabilistic

11072

