This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Context-based and Diversity-driven Specificity in Compositional Zero-Shot
Learning

1

y.li@csiro.au

Yun Li1 Zhe Liu2 Hang Chen3 Lina Yao1
CSIRO’s Data61 2 Bytedance Ltd. 3 Snap Inc.

zhe.liu01@bytedance.com

chenhang386@gmail.com

Abstract
Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL) aims to recognize unseen attribute-object pairs based on a limited set
of observed examples. Current CZSL methodologies, despite their advancements, tend to neglect the distinct specificity levels present in attributes. For instance, given images
of sliced strawberries, they may fail to prioritize ‘SlicedStrawberry’ over a generic ‘Red-Strawberry’, despite the
former being more informative. They also suffer from ballooning search space when shifting from Close-World (CW)
to Open-World (OW) CZSL. To address the issues, we introduce the Context-based and Diversity-driven Specificity
learning framework for CZSL (CDS-CZSL). Our framework
evaluates the specificity of attributes by considering the diversity of objects they apply to and their related context.
This novel approach allows for more accurate predictions
by emphasizing specific attribute-object pairs and improves
composition filtering in OW-CZSL. We conduct experiments
in both CW and OW scenarios, and our model achieves
state-of-the-art results across three datasets.

1. Introduction
Humans effortlessly combine known ideas, such as the pink
of a rose and a blue dolphin, to recognize unseen concepts
like a pink dolphin. This ability to learn compositionally
is a hallmark of human intelligence [12], enabling us to
infer vast knowledge from limited primitives without seeing every possible combination. Inspired by this capability, Compositional Zero-Shot Learning (CZSL) [8, 16, 24]
emerged. In CZSL, the goal is to train models on images
of seen attribute-object pairs (e.g., attributes like colors and
objects like animals) so they can recognize unseen pairs,
thereby minimizing the need for extensive training datasets.
Traditional CZSL methods often adopt one of two strategies: 1) they project attribute-object textual labels and images into a shared space for direct, similarity-based composition classification [24, 40, 41]; 2) they use dual modules

lina.yao@data61.csiro.au

Zucchini

Red or Sliced?
Strawberry

Apple

Strawberry

Carrot

Truck

Red or Writing?
Pen

(a) Which is specific?

Car

"more specific"

Sliced

Red

Pen
Scissors

Shoes

Socks

"more
general"
Shorts
Sweater

(b) Diversity-driven specificity learning.

Figure 1. Specificity in CZSL. (a)For strawberries, Sliced is more
specific than Red. Instead, Red is more specific than Writing for
a pen, as Writing is its inherent function. (b) Clustering images
based on their object features, Red spans multiple object clusters.
In contrast, Sliced, though applicable to several objects, only links
to the food cluster, indicating its greater specificity.

to classify attributes and objects separately, later fusing the
results for the final composition [8, 15, 18]. Recently, their
performance has been further improved by integrating large,
pre-trained vision-language models like CLIP [32]. Harnessing the powerful visual-semantic aligning capabilities
of CLIP, these methods [19, 27, 38] set new performance
benchmarks that surpass traditional approaches.
While current CZSL methods show promise, they often
focus on optimizing model performance while overlooking
an inherent challenge in CZSL: specificity in attributes. Unlike objects, which generally have straightforward definitions, attributes can be multifaceted. Consider the example
in Fig. 1a: a strawberry can be described as Red, a common
descriptor, or Sliced, which is more specific. The value of
such specific descriptors is supported by the Shannon Theory, which holds that rarer events offer more information
than common ones [36]. However, in pursuit of overall
accuracy and broader generalization to unseen pairs, CZSL
models may favor general attributes like Red, which have
wider applicability to almost all categories, over more specific yet valid descriptors like Sliced. The challenge of effectively prioritizing these specific attributes without compromising accuracy remains under-explored.

17037

