This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BilevelPruning: Unified Dynamic and Static Channel Pruning for Convolutional
Neural Networks

1

Shangqian Gao1 , Yanfu Zhang2 , Feihu Huang1 , Heng Huang3 *
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh
2
Computer Science, College of William and Mary
3
Computer Science, University of Maryland College Park

Abstract
Most existing dynamic or runtime channel pruning methods have to store all weights to achieve efficient inference,
which brings extra storage costs. Static pruning methods
can reduce storage costs directly, but their performance is
limited by using a fixed sub-network to approximate the original model. Most existing pruning works suffer from these
drawbacks because they were designed to only conduct either static or dynamic pruning. In this paper, we propose a
novel method to solve both efficiency and storage challenges
via simultaneously conducting dynamic and static channel
pruning for convolutional neural networks. We propose a
new bi-level optimization based model to naturally integrate
the static and dynamic channel pruning. By doing so, our
method enjoys benefits from both sides, and the disadvantages of dynamic and static pruning are reduced. After pruning, we permanently remove redundant parameters and then
finetune the model with dynamic flexibility. Experimental
results on CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets suggest that our
method can achieve state-of-the-art performance compared
to existing dynamic and static channel pruning methods.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have recently
achieved great successes in many machine learning and computer vision tasks [3, 37, 56, 57, 61]. Despite the remarkable
performance, the computational and storage costs of most
CNNs are quite expensive due to their complex architectures.
Such costs have become the major bottleneck to deploying
CNNs on portable devices with limited resources (e.g., memory, CPU, energy). To solve this problem, many researchers
focus on how to truncate the costs of deep models effectively.
These researches can be summarized into several directions,
such as weight pruning [24], weight quantization [6], struc* This work was partially supported by NSF IIS 2347592, 2347604,
2348159, 2348169, DBI 2405416, CCF 2348306, CNS 2347617.

tural pruning [39], matrix decomposition [10] and so on.
Among these approaches, channel pruning, which belongs to
structural pruning, is a promising way to effectively reduce
computational and storage costs since other methods often
require additional post-processing steps to acquire actual
compression. Thus, this work focuses on investigating the
channel pruning technique.
A series of channel pruning approaches [27, 50, 77] use
different criteria to evaluate the importance of each channel, and the redundant (less important) channels are pruned.
These approaches are also called static channel pruning. The
benefit of static channel pruning is that unessential channels are permanently removed, which results in savings of
both storage and computational costs. However, the model
capacity of static pruning is restricted by using a fixed subnetwork. Some more recent works [23, 45] try to select
important channels based on inputs and intermediate feature
maps at inference time, and they belong to dynamic channel pruning. Given different inputs, different sub-networks
are dynamically selected, which largely improves the model
capacity. Most existing dynamic pruning methods preserve
all channels to ensure the model has the largest capacity.
Compared to static pruning, dynamic pruning methods often
achieve better performance but at the cost of requiring extra
storage space.
As mentioned in recent storage efficient dynamic pruning
work [5], the large storage costs of most dynamic pruning
methods prohibit them from being deployed in resourcelimited portable devices. To save storage costs for dynamic
pruning, storage efficient pruning [5] heuristically combines
static and dynamic channel pruning by using reinforcement
learning. The final pruned model is obtained by combining the outputs of both static and dynamic pruning through
a hand-designed function. Channels with low importance
are permanently removed. Although this approach achieves
good results, there are several drawbacks. First, the subnetworks from dynamic and static pruning in their method
are treated separately. In their work, static sub-networks are
not considered when conducting dynamic pruning and vice

16090

