This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language-driven Grasp Detection
An Dinh Vuong1 , Minh Nhat Vu2,∗ , Baoru Huang3,∗ , Nghia Nguyen1 , Hieu Le1 , Thieu Vo4 , Anh Nguyen5
1

FPT Software AI Center, Vietnam 2 Automation & Control Institute, TU Wien, Austria 3 Imperial College London, UK
4

Ton Duc Thang University, Vietnam 5 University of Liverpool, UK ∗ Co-Corresponding authors
https://airvlab.github.io/grasp-anything

A coffee cup, a grape
biscuit, a black oven plate on
a white dining table

A black pen, a steel marble
and a digital calculator on
an office desk

Grasp the coffee cup.

Grasp the calculator
at its keypad.

A black pot, a green bottle, a A brown-band wristwatch, a
bread container arranged on sleek black pen and an office
a kitchen counter
clip placed on a table

Grab the neck
of the green bottle.

Give me the brown-band
wristwatch.

A white mug, a spiral
notepad, a fountain pen
resting on a brown desk

Pick the fountain
pen at its cap.

Figure 1. We present a new dataset and method for language-driven grasp task.

Abstract
Grasp detection is a persistent and intricate challenge
with various industrial applications. Recently, many methods and datasets have been proposed to tackle the grasp
detection problem. However, most of them do not consider
using natural language as a condition to detect the grasp
poses. In this paper, we introduce Grasp-Anything++, a
new language-driven grasp detection dataset featuring 1M
samples, over 3M objects, and upwards of 10M grasping instructions. We utilize foundation models to create a largescale scene corpus with corresponding images and grasp
prompts. We approach the language-driven grasp detection
task as a conditional generation problem. Drawing on the
success of diffusion models in generative tasks and given
that language plays a vital role in this task, we propose a
new language-driven grasp detection method based on diffusion models. Our key contribution is the contrastive training objective, which explicitly contributes to the denoising
process to detect the grasp pose given the language instructions. We illustrate that our approach is theoretically supportive. The intensive experiments show that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art approaches and allows realworld robotic grasping. Finally, we demonstrate our largescale dataset enables zero-short grasp detection and is a
challenging benchmark for future work.

1. Introduction
Imagine we want an assistant robot to grasp a cup among
a clutter of daily objects such as a knife, a fork, a cup, and
a pair of scissors. Conventionally, to convey the idea of
grasping this specific object, humans use the natural language command, “give me the cup”, for instance. Although
humans intuitively know how to grasp the cup given the
linguistic command, determining specific grasp actions for
objects based on natural language instructions or languagedriven grasp detection remains challenging for robots [64].
First, natural language is usually overlooked in existing
grasp datasets [56] while training vision-and-language neural networks necessitates an excessive number of labeled
examples [66]. Second, recent works usually focus on particular manipulation tasks with limited objects [25], imposing a bottleneck for in-the-wild robot execution [63]. Finally, despite recent developments, bridging the gap between language, vision, and control for real-world robotic
experiments remains a challenging task [83].
Recently, language-driven robotic frameworks are gaining traction, offering the potential for robots to process natural language, and bridging the gap between robotic manipulations and real-world human-robot interaction [51].
PaLM-E [21], EgoCOT [51], and ConceptFusion [32] are
some notable embodied robots with the ability to compre-

17902

