This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ECoDepth: Effective Conditioning of Diffusion Models
for Monocular Depth Estimation
Suraj Patni*

Aradhye Agarwal*
Chetan Arora
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
https://ecodepth-iitd.github.io

Abstract
In the absence of parallax cues, a learning based single image depth estimation (SIDE) model relies heavily
on shading and contextual cues in the image. While this
simplicity is attractive, it is necessary to train such models on large and varied datasets, which are difficult to capture. It has been shown that using embeddings from pretrained foundational models, such as CLIP, improves zero
shot transfer in several applications. Taking inspiration
from this, in our paper we explore the use of global image priors generated from a pre-trained ViT model to provide more detailed contextual information. We argue that
the embedding vector from a ViT model, pre-trained on
a large dataset, captures greater relevant information for
SIDE than the usual route of generating pseudo image captions, followed by CLIP based text embeddings. Based on
this idea, we propose a new SIDE model using a diffusion
backbone which is conditioned on ViT embeddings. Our
proposed design establishes a new state-of-the-art (SOTA)
for SIDE on NYU Depth v2 dataset, achieving Abs Rel
error of 0.059(14% improvement) compared to 0.069 by the
current SOTA (VPD). And on KITTI dataset, achieving Sq
Rel error of 0.139 (2% improvement) compared to 0.142
by the current SOTA (GED). For zero shot transfer with a
model trained on NYU Depth v2, we report mean relative improvement of (20%, 23%, 81%, 25%) over NeWCRF
on (Sun-RGBD, iBims1, DIODE, HyperSim) datasets,
compared to (16%, 18%, 45%, 9%) by ZoEDepth. The
code is available in our project page.

1. Introduction
Single Image Depth Estimation (SIDE) is the task of predicting per pixel depth using a single RGB image from a
monocular camera. It is a fundamental problem in computer
vision with applications in several domains, viz robotics,
autonomous driving, and augmented reality. The problem is
* Equal contribution.

(a) Sun-RGBD [42]

(b) iBims1 [19]

(c) DIODE [49]

(d) HyperSim [35]

Figure 1. Qualitative results across four different datasets, demonstrating the zero-shot performance of our model trained only on
the NYU Depth v2 dataset. Corresponding quantitative results
are presented in Table 3. The first column displays RGB images,
the second column depicts ground truth depth, and the third column showcases our model’s predicted depths. Additional images
for each dataset are available in the Supplementary Material.

typically formulated in two flavors: metric depth estimation
(MDE), and relative depth estimation (RDE). As the names
suggest, MDE deals with estimation in physical units such
as meters, whereas, RDE techniques focus on relative depth
only, and require a per-image affine transformation as postprocessing to convert to a physical unit.
Conventional geometric techniques for depth estimation
typically rely on feature correspondence, parallax, and triangulation from two or more views. However, the problem
becomes ill-posed for estimation from a single view. Intuitively, depth map is a 3D representation of the scene,
whereas an RGB image is a 2D projection of the scene.
Hence, it cannot be uniquely determined from a single RGB
image. Therefore, learning-based SIDE models rely on visual cues like ‘shape from shading’ and other contextual
priors for per-pixel depth prediction.
A data-driven approach makes the SIDE pipeline sim-

28285

