This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PTT: Point-Trajectory Transformer for Efficient Temporal 3D Object Detection
Kuan-Chih Huang1
1

Weijie Lyu1

Ming-Hsuan Yang1,2

University of California, Merced

Abstract

2

Yi-Hsuan Tsai2

Google

(a) Prior work
prev

Recent temporal LiDAR-based 3D object detectors
achieve promising performance based on the two-stage
proposal-based approach. They generate 3D box candidates from the first-stage dense detector, followed by different temporal aggregation methods. However, these approaches require per-frame objects or whole point clouds,
posing challenges related to memory bank utilization.
Moreover, point clouds and trajectory features are combined solely based on concatenation, which may neglect effective interactions between them. In this paper, we propose
a point-trajectory transformer with long short-term memory
for efficient temporal 3D object detection. To this end, we
only utilize point clouds of current-frame objects and their
historical trajectories as input to minimize the memory bank
storage requirement. Furthermore, we introduce modules
to encode trajectory features, focusing on long short-term
and future-aware perspectives, and then effectively aggregate them with point cloud features. We conduct extensive
experiments on the large-scale Waymo dataset to demonstrate that our approach performs well against state-of-theart methods. Code and models will be made publicly available at https:// github.com/ kuanchihhuang/ PTT.

1. Introduction
Detecting 3D objects [6–9, 14, 22] is a crucial problem
for autonomous driving, enabling vehicles to perceive and
interpret their surroundings accurately. With the advent of
LiDAR sensors, significant strides have been made in enhancing the precision of 3D object detection. Nevertheless,
the inherent sparsity of point cloud data captured by LiDAR
sensors poses a significant challenge. The sparse data complicates accurately identifying and localizing objects, particularly in challenging occlusion scenarios.
Recent research studies [1, 5, 32, 37] have shifted their
focus towards utilizing multi-frame LiDAR data as input to
enhance detection performance. This approach leverages
point cloud sequences captured over time as the vehicle
moves in real-world scenarios. Compared to single-frame
information, these sequences offer a more comprehensive

Point Enc

C

curr

3D detection

Traj Enc
C

concatenate

(b) Ours

PTT

3D detection

Figure 1. Different approaches for temporal 3D object detection.
(a) Existing methods [1, 5] require per-frame point
clouds as input, resulting in more memory overhead. In addition,
the straightforward concatenation of point and trajectory features
overlooks their interactions across features. (b) Our approach minimizes the space requirement for the memory bank by utilizing
only the current frame’s point cloud as input. Moreover, we introduce a point-trajectory transformer (PTT) to effectively integrate
point and trajectory features. Note that the gray point clouds indicate that they are not utilized).

and denser representation of the surrounding environment.
One straightforward method to tackle sequential data is
concatenating all multi-frame LiDAR as input [32, 37], followed by the original 3D detection pipeline, which provides
performance benefit via the denser information. To better
model the information of objects instead of the whole point
cloud, recent methods [1, 5] typically adopt a two-stage approach. In the first stage, they generate bounding box candidates and select objects’ point clouds using region proposal networks. Subsequently, these approaches concatenate point features with proposal features for 3D object detection, as illustrated in Figure 1(a).
Nevertheless, these proposal-based techniques suffer
from two main limitations. First, sampling object point
clouds for each frame in sequential modeling causes a memory burden for a long sequence during the training and testing phases. Second, these methods focus on the design of
networks for point cloud sequences, which often neglects

14938

