This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pick-or-Mix: Dynamic Channel Sampling for ConvNets
Ashish Kumar† , Daneul Kim‡ , Jaesik Park‡ , Laxmidhar Behera†
†
Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India
‡
Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
{ashishkumar822@gmail.com, carpedkm@snu.ac.kr, jaesik.park@snu.ac.kr, lbehera@iitk.ac.in}

Abstract
Channel pruning approaches for convolutional neural
networks (ConvNets) deactivate the channels, statically or
dynamically, and require special implementation. In addition, channel squeezing in representative ConvNets is carried
out via 1 × 1 convolutions which dominates a large portion
of computations and network parameters. Given these challenges, we propose an effective multi-purpose module for
dynamic channel sampling, namely Pick-or-Mix (PiX), which
does not require special implementation. PiX divides a set
of channels into subsets and then picks from them, where
the picking decision is dynamically made per each pixel
based on the input activations. We plug PiX into prominent
ConvNet architectures and verify its multi-purpose utilities.
After replacing 1 × 1 channel squeezing layers in ResNet
with PiX, the network becomes 25% faster without losing
accuracy. We show that PiX allows ConvNets to learn better data representation than widely adopted approaches to
enhance networks’ representation power (e.g., SE, CBAM,
AFF, SKNet, and DWP). We also show that PiX achieves
state-of-the-art performance on network downscaling and
dynamic channel pruning applications.
Code: https://github.com/ashishkumar822/PiX

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (ConvNets) [11, 33] have
been successfully applied to many machine vision tasks
[18, 30]. With the introduction of larger models, a general
trend is to make them faster via channel pruning. Prior works
in channel pruning [8, 10, 12, 16] focus on making network
lighter to accelerate the inference speed. However, some
approaches require specialized convolution implementations
and pre-trained models [8], or they are constrained by the
baseline accuracy [10]. Moreover, whether static or dynamic,
these channel pruning methods remove or deactivate the
network channels, thus hindering the network from handling
difficult inputs [8, 35].
It is a fundamental property of ConvNets that for a given
spatial location or pixel in the ConvNets’ feature map, any

*

{

,

,

,

}

pixel-wise

Pick-or-Mix

Figure 1. Conceptual overview of PiX in the context of channel
reduction for ConvNets. Top: Traditional dense 1 × 1 convolution.
Although not all channels are important, dense convolutions process
all the channels equally. Bottom: PiX avoids dense convolution
and samples the channels dynamically from the input by producing
sampling probabilities with far fewer FLOPs. PiX is multipurpose
without requiring specialized implementations.

one channel may have stronger activation, thus of considerable importance, while for another pixel, the same channel
might be less important. Therefore, it is crucial to allow
the network to prioritize channels differently per each pixel
instead of dropping a whole channel applied by pruning
approaches. This inspires us to pick neuron-specific output
from the channels instead of shutting down an entire channel.
In addition, we observe that standard ConvNet designs
still have room for improvement, i.e., 1 × 1 convolution
layers (or called channel squeezing layers) dominate in both
number and computations without contributing to the receptive field due to their pixel-wise operation nature. For
instance, ResNet-50 [11] consists of 16 such layers out of
50, accounting for ∼ 25% (1.05B/4.12B) of overall FLOPs.
In this context, we introduce a novel module, namely
Pick-or-Mix (PiX) that addresses the computational dominance of channel-squeezing layers by dynamically sampling
channels, PiX transforms a feature map X ∈ RC×H×W
into another one Y ∈ R⌈C/ζ⌉×H×W (Figure 1). Essentially,
our method picks or mixes ⌈C/ζ⌉ channels from the input
C channels with a sampling factor ζ. It divides a set of
channels into subsets and then outputs one channel from
each subset via our Pick-or-Mix strategy. PiX samples the

5873

