This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shadows Don’t Lie and Lines Can’t Bend!
Generative Models don’t know Projective Geometry...for now
Ayush Sarkar*∗1

Hanlin Mai∗1 Amitabh Mahapatra∗1 Svetlana Lazebnik1
D.A. Forsyth1 Anand Bhattad2
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
https://projective- geometry.github.io/

Generated Image

Shadow Errors

Detected Shadow Errors

Vanishing Point Errors

Detected Perspective Errors

Figure 1. The first column presents visually compelling AI-generated images. However, a closer examination reveals fundamental
inconsistencies, such as those in shadow alignment (second column) and vanishing point accuracy (fourth column). Our model’s analysis,
shown in the third and fifth columns, detects these shadow and perspective geometry errors. We show that these errors are systematic and
can be used to identify generated images.

Abstract
Generative models can produce impressively realistic images. This paper demonstrates that generated images have
geometric features different from those of real images. We
build a set of collections of generated images, prequalified to
fool simple, signal- based classifiers into believing they are
real. We then show that prequalified generated images can be
identified reliably by classifiers that only look at geometric
properties. We use three such classifiers. All three classifiers
are denied access to image pixels, and look only at derived
geometric features. The first classifier looks at the perspective field of the image, the second looks at lines detected in
the image, and the third looks at relations between detected
objects and shadows. Our procedure detects generated images more reliably than SOTA local signal based detectors,
* equal contribution

for images from a number of distinct generators. Saliency
maps suggest that the classifiers can identify geometric problems reliably. We conclude that current generators cannot
reliably reproduce geometric properties of real images.

1. Introduction
Both StyleGAN [22–24] and diffusion models [36–38] are
renowned for generating images that are strikingly similar to
real-world photos and consistently fool people. But, as we
show, generated images have distinctive geometric features,
likely from a failure to fully capture projective geometry.
Bhattad et al. [5, 6], Chen et al. [10], Du et al. [13],
Zhan et al. [49], and have shown generative models implicitly capture the complex scene properties, including normals, depth, albedo, and support relations. These works
suggest these models “understand” geometry, which would

28140

