This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NOPE: Novel Object Pose Estimation from a Single Image
Van Nguyen Nguyen1 , Thibault Groueix2 , Georgy Ponimatkin1 , Yinlin Hu3 , Renaud Marlet1,4 ,
Mathieu Salzmann5 , Vincent Lepetit1
1

Reference

LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, 2 Adobe, 3 MagicLeap, 4 Valeo.ai, 5 EPFL

Query

Predicted pose Pose distribution

Reference

Query

Predicted pose Pose distribution

Figure 1. Given as input a single reference view of a novel object, our method predicts the relative 3D pose (rotation) of a query view
and its ambiguities. We visualize the predicted pose by rendering the object from this pose, but the 3D model is only used for
visualization purposes, not as input to our method. Our method works by estimating a probability distribution over the space of 3D
poses, visualized here on a sphere centered on the object. We use the canonical pose of the 3D model to visualize this distribution, but
not as input to our method. From this distribution, we can also identify the pose ambiguities: For example, in the case of the bottle, any
pose with the same pitch and roll is possible; in the case of the mug, a range of poses are possible as the handle is not visible in the query
image. Our method is also robust to partial occlusions, as shown on the clock hidden in part by a rectangle in the query image.

Abstract
The practicality of 3D object pose estimation remains
limited for many applications due to the need for prior
knowledge of a 3D model and a training period for new
objects. To address this limitation, we propose an approach
that takes a single image of a new object as input and predicts the relative pose of this object in new images without
prior knowledge of the object’s 3D model and without requiring training time for new objects and categories. We
achieve this by training a model to directly predict discriminative embeddings for viewpoints surrounding the object.
This prediction is done using a simple U-Net architecture
with attention and conditioned on the desired pose, which
yields extremely fast inference. We compare our approach
to state-of-the-art methods and show it outperforms them
both in terms of accuracy and robustness.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 3D pose of objects has seen significant
progress in the past decade with regard to both robustness
and accuracy [12, 16, 37, 50, 58]. Specifically, there has
been a considerable increase in robustness to partial occlusions [8, 33, 34], and the need for large amounts of real annotated training images has been relaxed through the use of
domain transfer [1], domain randomization [14, 20, 47, 51],
and self-supervised learning techniques [49] that leverage
synthetic images for training.
Unfortunately, the practicality of 3D object pose estimation remains limited for many applications, including
robotics and augmented reality. Typically, existing approaches require a 3D model [15, 31, 32, 55], a video sequence [5, 46], or sparse multiple images of the target ob-

17923

