This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Retrieval-Augmented Layout Transformer
for Content-Aware Layout Generation
Daichi Horita1

Naoto Inoue2 Kotaro Kikuchi2
1
The University of Tokyo

Kota Yamaguchi2
2
CyberAgent

Kiyoharu Aizawa1

{horita,aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp
{inoue naoto,kikuchi kotaro xa,yamaguchi kota}@cyberagent.co.jp

Abstract
Content-aware graphic layout generation aims to automatically arrange visual elements along with a given content,
such as an e-commerce product image. In this paper, we argue that the current layout generation approaches suffer
from the limited training data for the high-dimensional layout structure. We show that a simple retrieval augmentation
can significantly improve the generation quality. Our model,
which is named Retrieval-Augmented Layout Transformer
(RALF), retrieves nearest neighbor layout examples based on
an input image and feeds these results into an autoregressive
generator. Our model can apply retrieval augmentation to
various controllable generation tasks and yield high-quality
layouts within a unified architecture. Our extensive experiments show that RALF successfully generates content-aware
layouts in both constrained and unconstrained settings and
significantly outperforms the baselines. 1

1. Introduction
Layout is an essential part of graphic design, where the
aesthetic appeal relies on the harmonious arrangement and
selection of visual elements such as logos and texts. In
real-world creative workflows, such as posters [13, 33] and
magazines [20, 44] creation, designers typically work on a
given subject; for example, creating an advertising poster
of a specific product. We call layout generation under such
conditions content-aware layout generation, where the goal
is to generate diverse yet plausible arrangements of element
bounding boxes that harmonize with the given background
image (canvas). Recent studies [47, 48] show that generative
models can produce content-aware layouts that respect aesthetic principles, such as avoiding overlaps [13]. However,
generated layouts often still suffer from artifacts, including
misaligned underlay embellishment and text elements. We
hypothesize that current approaches based solely on generative models do not scale due to the scarcity of highly
structured layout data. Unlike public images on the Web,
1 Our project page is available at https://udonda.github.io/RALF/

Input image

Retrieved examples

Output layouts

Figure 1. Retrieval-augmented content-aware layout generation.
We retrieve nearest neighbor examples based on the input image
and use them as a reference to augment the generation process.

curating a large dataset of layered graphic designs is not a
viable solution since designers typically create their work in
proprietary authoring tools, such as Adobe Illustrator [1].
Inspired by the fact that designers often refer to existing
designs [17], we propose a retrieval-augmented generation
method to address the challenges in the layout domain. Recent literature shows that retrieval augmentation helps in
enhancing the generation quality of language models [6, 15]
and image synthesis [5, 40], thanks to the ability to reference
real examples in the limited data domain. We argue that
retrieval augmentation plays an important role in mitigating
the data scarcity problem in content-aware layout generation.
We build Retrieval-Augmented Layout TransFormer
(RALF), which is an autoregressive generator capable of referencing external layout examples. RALF retrieves reference
layouts by nearest neighbor search based on the appearance
of the input and supplements the generation process (Fig. 1).
Since the input canvas and retrieved layouts have different
modalities, we use the cross-attention mechanism to augment the feature input to the generator. Although we build
RALF with an autoregressive approach, retrieval augmentation is also effective in other generation approaches such as
diffusion models [19], which we show in the experiments.
We evaluate our RALF on public benchmarks [18, 48]
and show that RALF outperforms state-of-the-art models
in content-aware layout generation. Thanks to the retrieval
capability, RALF requires less than half the training data to
achieve the same performance as the baseline. We further
show that our modular architecture can adapt to control-

67

