This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReGenNet: Towards Human Action-Reaction Synthesis
Liang Xu1,2
1

Yizhou Zhou3 Yichao Yan1† Xin Jin2† Wenhan Zhu1
Xiaokang Yang1 Wenjun Zeng2

Fengyun Rao3

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China
3
WeChat, Tencent Inc.
https://liangxuy.github.io/ReGenNet/

Abstract
Humans constantly interact with their surrounding environments. Current human-centric generative models mainly
focus on synthesizing humans plausibly interacting with
static scenes and objects, while the dynamic human actionreaction synthesis for ubiquitous causal human-human interactions is less explored. Human-human interactions
can be regarded as asymmetric with actors and reactors
in atomic interaction periods. In this paper, we comprehensively analyze the asymmetric, dynamic, synchronous,
and detailed nature of human-human interactions and propose the first multi-setting human action-reaction synthesis benchmark to generate human reactions conditioned on
given human actions. To begin with, we propose to annotate the actor-reactor order of the interaction sequences
for the NTU120, InterHuman, and Chi3D datasets. Based
on them, a diffusion-based generative model with a Transformer decoder architecture called ReGenNet together with
an explicit distance-based interaction loss is proposed to
predict human reactions in an online manner, where the future states of actors are unavailable to reactors. Quantitative and qualitative results show that our method can generate instant and plausible human reactions compared to the
baselines, and can generalize to unseen actor motions and
viewpoint changes.

1. Introduction
Human-centric generative models have been widely studied
with numerous applications. Currently, there exists substantial progress on generative models to synthesize how digital
humans actively interact with the environments with physical and semantic plausibility, e.g., conditioned on a given
scene [26, 27, 70, 82–84] and object [63, 64, 71, 85]. However, for human-human interactions, a man could be active
or passive in atomic interaction periods. Existing works
† Corresponding authors

for human motion generation mainly treat the actors and
reactors equally or limited on single human motion generation [44, 58, 72], while neglecting the reaction generation problem for ubiquitous human-human interactions (see
Fig. 1). In this paper, we focus on generative models for
human action-reaction synthesis, i.e., generating human reactions given the action sequence of another as conditions.
We believe this task will contribute to many applications in
AR/VR, games, human-robot interaction, and embodied AI.
Modeling human-human interactions is a challenging
task with the following features: 1) Asymmetric, i.e., the
actor and reactor play asymmetric roles during a causal interaction, where one person acts, and the other reacts [79];
2) Dynamic, i.e., during the interaction period, the two people constantly wave their body parts, move close/away, and
change relative orientations, spatially and temporally; 3)
Synchronous, i.e., typically, one person responds instantly
with others such as an immediate evasion when someone
throws a punch, thus the online generation is required; 4)
Detailed, i.e., the interaction between humans involves not
only coarse body movements together with relative position
changes but also local hand gestures and even facial expressions. Thus, it is desirable to design a generative model that
simultaneously considers the above characteristics.
Directly applying previous human-centric generative
models [64, 82, 83, 85] for human action-reaction synthesis is impractical, because existing models typically consider static scenes or objects, yet dynamic humans are
more complicated. Moreover, online generation is also
not required for human scene/object interaction scenarios, yet significant for action-reaction synthesis. On the
other hand, recent years have witnessed the rapid development of single human motion generation conditioned on
action categories [51, 67], text descriptions [21, 37, 52], audios [3, 25, 40–42] or sparse tracking signals [2, 14, 35].
However, very few works [44, 61, 62, 72, 73] have been
proposed to generate multi-person interactions, yet treating
the actor-reactor equally [44, 72] or focus on specific action

1759

