This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual-consistency Model Inversion for Non-exemplar Class Incremental Learning
Zihuan Qiu1
1

Yi Xu2

Fanman Meng1 *

Hongliang Li1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Linfeng Xu1
2

Dalian University of Technology

{zihuanqiu@std.,fmmeng@,hlli@,lfxu@,qbwu@}uestc.edu.cn

Synthetic Image Space

Abstract
Non-exemplar class incremental learning (NECIL) aims
to continuously assimilate new knowledge without forgetting previously acquired ones when historical data are unavailable. One of the generative NECIL methods is to invert the images of old classes for joint training. However, these synthetic images suffer significant domain shifts
compared with real data, hampering the recognition of old
classes. In this paper, we present a novel method termed
Dual-Consistency Model Inversion (DCMI) to generate better synthetic samples of old classes through two pivotal consistency alignments: (1) the semantic consistency between
the synthetic images and the corresponding prototypes, and
(2) domain consistency between synthetic and real images
of new classes. Besides, we introduce Prototypical Routing
(PR) to provide task-prior information and generate unbiased and accurate predictions. Our comprehensive experiments across diverse datasets consistently showcase the superiority of our method over previous state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
When applying a trained deep neural classification network
to new classes, the strategy of fine-tuning on new images often leads to catastrophic forgetting of old classes [23]. Class
incremental learning (CIL) aims to continuously adapt to
new classes without forgetting the learned ones. Exemplarbased methods [2, 10, 19, 41, 48] have shown promise by
storing a subset of old class data as exemplars and retraining with new class data in the future. While effective, storing exemplars can be challenging in practice, due to concerns about data privacy or limited storage space. Nonexemplar class incremental learning (NECIL) [23, 30, 50],
also known as exemplar-free CIL, has gained increasing attention recently. Compared to their exemplar-based counterparts, it offers advantages in training and storage efficiency, as well as addressing concerns related to data pri* Corresponding author

Qingbo Wu1

yxu@dlut.edu.cn

Synthetic Image Space
New Class
Syn. Image
Old Class
Syn. Image
Prototype
& Feature
New Class
Real Image

Feature Space

Real Image Space

Figure 1. Left: Previous methods align synthetic old class images with their prototypes (black arrow) for semantic consistency
but ignore domain consistency. Right: Our method ensures both
semantic and domain consistency. 1) Real new class images are
projected into the old feature space (black dotted arrow) and undergo semantic alignment in the feature space for both new and
old classes (black arrow). 2) The domain gap between synthetic
and real image space is minimized by matching real and synthetic
pairs of new classes (red arrow).

vacy and copyright [42, 56]. Meanwhile, it is more challenging to train the model in the absence of exemplars continuously.
Existing non-exemplar methods mainly employ knowledge distillation (KD) [18] to prevent the updating model,
referred to as the ‘new model’, from forgetting the learned
knowledge by enforcing its output to be consistent with the
old model. Nevertheless, distilling only with new class samples weakens the effectiveness of KD due to the significant distribution discrepancy between old and new classes,
resulting in cumulative errors. To address this problem,
generative-based methods [13, 42] attempt to synthesize
samples of old classes using model inversion [4, 32, 36],
and subsequently distill the new model using both the real
and synthetic samples. The synthetic samples, which resemble the semantic distribution of the old classes, are generated by yielding high-confidence classification probabilities from the old model. It is noteworthy that, unlike
conventional generative methods that train a generator in
advance, inversion methods do not rely on historical data
of old classes, making them more practical for NECIL.

24025

