This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How to Configure Good In-Context Sequence for Visual Question Answering

Li Li1† Jiawei Peng1† Huiyi Chen1† Chongyang Gao2

Xu Yang1 *

1

School of Computer Science & Engineering, Key Laboratory of New Generation Artificial Intelligence
Technology and Its Interdisciplinary Applications (Southeast University), Ministry of Education, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Northwestern University
lilyli@seu.edu.cn, pengjiawei@seu.edu.cn, huiyichen@seu.edu.cn,
chongyanggao2026@u.northwestern.edu, xuyang palm@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Inspired by the success of Large Language Models
in dealing with new tasks via In-Context Learning (ICL)
in NLP, researchers have also developed Large VisionLanguage Models (LVLMs) with ICL capabilities. However,
when implementing ICL using these LVLMs, researchers
usually resort to the simplest way like random sampling
to configure the in-context sequence, thus leading to suboptimal results. To enhance the ICL performance, in this
study, we use Visual Question Answering (VQA) as case
study to explore diverse in-context configurations to find the
powerful ones. Additionally, through observing the changes
of the LVLM outputs by altering the in-context sequence, we
gain insights into the inner properties of LVLMs, improving our understanding of them. Specifically, to explore incontext configurations, we design diverse retrieval methods
and employ different strategies to manipulate the retrieved
demonstrations. Through exhaustive experiments on three
VQA datasets: VQAv2, VizWiz, and OK-VQA, we uncover
three important inner properties of the applied LVLM and
demonstrate which strategies can consistently improve the
ICL VQA performance. Our code is provided in: https:
//github.com/GaryJiajia/OFv2_ICL_VQA.

1. Introduction
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) [5, 8, 38] have
showed remarkable abilities in solving new tasks through
prompt engineering [27] and In-Context Learning (ICL) [9].
However, despite their success, LLMs still remain inscrutable to the research community. To unravel the properties of these models, researchers have drawn inspiration
from the “outside-in” methodologies to comprehend com* Corresponding author.
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

plex systems. Analogously, as scientists treat unknown systems as black boxes, conducting experiments to discern the
effects of varied inputs on outputs, researchers introduce
diverse prompts and analyze the resultant feedback. This
strategy provides crucial insights into the inner properties
of LLMs[33, 34].
Compared to the standard single sentence prompt, which
is one kind of zero-shot prompt, ICL sequences few-shot
demonstrations where each one contains knowledge about
the input and the corresponding label of the task that needs
to be solved. Such few-shot nature of ICL enables it to
encapsulate more information, resulting in enhanced performance. However, the ICL performance is heavily influenced by various demonstration configurations, such as
the selection or ordering of the demonstrations [14, 26, 30].
Consequently, many NLP studies [11, 40, 44, 50] explore
how to configure demonstrations to enhance the ICL performance. Meanwhile, NLP researchers also use ICL to unravel the inner properties of large models, owing to its flexible controllability. For example, by controlling the label
space of the demonstrations, researchers [34] find that the
ICL ability may be demonstrated by two distinct functions:
Task Recognition (TR), i.e., the ability to identify the task
formulation, and Task Learning (TL), the ability to learn the
mapping between input and labels of the demonstrations.
Nowadays, multi-modal learning becomes attractive
with the development [39, 46, 47, 52]. Inspired by the
success of LLM, researchers in the vision-language (VL)
domain have also developed large models with ICL capabilities, such as Flamingo [1] and its corresponding opensource version, Open-Flamingo [2]. However, there is limited research on how to effectively configure demonstrations in these models, both in terms of enhancing the performance of Large Vision-Language Model (LVLM) and
exploring its properties. To the best of our knowledge,
currently, only one study [45] has explored demonstration
configurations for image captioning. Unfortunately, this re-

26710

