This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniDepth: Universal Monocular Metric Depth Estimation
Luigi Piccinelli1 Yung-Hsu Yang1 Christos Sakaridis1
Mattia Segu1 Siyuan Li1 Luc Van Gool1,2 Fisher Yu1
1

ETH Zürich

2

INSAIT
𝑭

Abstract

𝓏

𝑬

𝓏
Spherical

Cartesian

𝜙

Accurate monocular metric depth estimation (MMDE)
is crucial to solving downstream tasks in 3D perception
and modeling. However, the remarkable accuracy of recent
MMDE methods is confined to their training domains. These
methods fail to generalize to unseen domains even in the presence of moderate domain gaps, which hinders their practical
applicability. We propose a new model, UniDepth, capable
of reconstructing metric 3D scenes from solely single images
across domains. Departing from the existing MMDE methods, UniDepth directly predicts metric 3D points from the
input image at inference time without any additional information, striving for a universal and flexible MMDE solution.
In particular, UniDepth implements a self-promptable camera module predicting dense camera representation to condition depth features. Our model exploits a pseudo-spherical
output representation, which disentangles camera and depth
representations. In addition, we propose a geometric invariance loss that promotes the invariance of camera-prompted
depth features. Thorough evaluations on ten datasets in a
zero-shot regime consistently demonstrate the superior performance of UniDepth, even when compared with methods
directly trained on the testing domains. Code and models
are available at: github.com/lpiccinelli-eth/unidepth.

1. Introduction
The precise pixel-wise depth estimation is crucial to understanding the geometric scene structure, with applications
in 3D modeling [9], robotics [10, 52], and autonomous vehicles [31, 41]. However, delivering reliable metric scaled
depth outputs is necessary to perform 3D reconstruction effectively, thus motivating the challenging and inherently illposed task of Monocular Metric Depth Estimation (MMDE).
While existing MMDE methods [2, 13, 15, 33, 34, 36,
50] have demonstrated remarkable accuracy across different benchmarks, they require training and testing on datasets
with similar camera intrinsics and scene scales. Moreover,
the training datasets typically have a limited size and contain little diversity in scenes and cameras. These characteris-

𝜃
𝑫|𝑬

𝓍

𝜀

𝜀 = 𝜀𝓏

Prompt

ℒ(𝜀)

𝜀𝓏
𝓎

𝑭

Encoder Features

Prediction

𝑬

Camera Embedding

Ground Truth

𝑫|𝑬 Conditioned Depth Features

Gradient

Figure 1. We introduce UniDepth, a novel approach that directly predicts 3D points in a scene with only one image as input.
UniDepth incorporates a camera self-prompting mechanism and
leverages a pseudo-spherical 3D output space defined by azimuth
and elevation angles, and depth (θ, ϕ, z). This design effectively
separates camera and depth optimization by avoiding gradient flowing to the camera module due to depth-related error (εz ).

tics result in poor generalization to real-world inference scenarios [42], where images are captured in uncontrolled, arbitrarily structured environments and cameras with arbitrary
intrinsics.
Only a few methods [20, 48] have addressed the challenging task of generalizable MMDE. However, these methods
assume controlled setups at test time, including camera intrinsics. While this assumption simplifies the task, it has
two notable drawbacks. Firstly, it does not address the full
application spectrum, e.g. in-the-wild video processing and
crowd-sourced image analysis. Secondly, the inherent camera parameter noise is directly injected into the model, leading to large inaccuracies in the high-noise case.
In this work, we address the more demanding task of generalizable MMDE without any reliance on additional external information, such as camera parameters, thus defining
the universal MMDE task. Our approach, named UniDepth,
is the first that attempts to solve this challenging task without restrictions on scene composition and setup and distinguishes itself through its general and adaptable nature. Unlike existing methods, UniDepth delivers metric 3D predictions for any scene solely from a single image, waiving the
need for extra information about scene or camera. Further-

10106

