This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text2HOI: Text-guided 3D Motion Generation for Hand-Object Interaction
Junuk Cha1

Jihyeon Kim1,2†
1

UNIST

2

Jae Shin Yoon3*
3

KETI

Seungryul Baek1*

Adobe Research

“Open a box with the right hand.”

Time

“Hand over an apple with both hands.”

Figure 1. Given a text and a canonical object mesh as prompts, we generate 3D motion for hand-object interaction without requiring object trajectory
and initial hand pose. We represent the right hand with a light skin color and the left hand with a dark skin color. The articulation of a box in
the first row is controlled by estimating an angle for the pre-defined axis of the box.

Abstract
This paper introduces the first text-guided work for
generating the sequence of hand-object interaction in 3D. The
main challenge arises from the lack of labeled data where
existing ground-truth datasets are nowhere near generalizable
in interaction type and object category, which inhibits the
modeling of diverse 3D hand-object interaction with the correct
physical implication (e.g., contacts and semantics) from text
prompts. To address this challenge, we propose to decompose
the interaction generation task into two subtasks: hand-object
contact generation; and hand-object motion generation. For
contact generation, a VAE-based network takes as input a
text and an object mesh, and generates the probability of
contacts between the surfaces of hands and the object during
the interaction. The network learns a variety of local geometry
structure of diverse objects that is independent of the objects’
category, and thus, it is applicable to general objects. For
motion generation, a Transformer-based diffusion model utilizes
this 3D contact map as a strong prior for generating physically
This research was conducted when Jihyeon Kim was a graduate student
(Master candidate) at UNIST†. Co-last authors∗.

plausible hand-object motion as a function of text prompts
by learning from the augmented labeled dataset; where we
annotate text labels from many existing 3D hand and object
motion data. Finally, we further introduce a hand refiner
module that minimizes the distance between the object surface
and hand joints to improve the temporal stability of the objecthand contacts and to suppress the penetration artifacts. In the
experiments, we demonstrate that our method can generate
more realistic and diverse interactions compared to other
baseline methods. We also show that our method is applicable
to unseen objects. We will release our model and newly labeled
data as a strong foundation for future research. Codes and data
are available in: https://github.com/JunukCha/Text2HOI.

1. Introduction
Imagine handing over an apple on a table to your friends:
you might first grab it and convey this to them. During a social
interaction, the hand pose and motion are often defined as a
function of object’s pose, shape, and category. While existing
works [3, 8, 9, 15, 21, 27, 30, 31] have been successful in modeling diverse and realistic 3D human body motions from a text
prompt (where there exists no text-guided hand motion genera-

1577

