This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Human Motion in 3D Scenes from Text Descriptions
Zhi Cen1 Huaijin Pi1 Sida Peng1† Zehong Shen1
Minghui Yang2 Shuai Zhu2 Hujun Bao1 Xiaowei Zhou1
1

“Stand up from the table.”

Zhejiang University

“Walk to the door.”

2

Ant Group

“Sit on the table that is near
the sofa.”





“Walk to the table that is
near the sofa.”

 

Figure 1. Generating human motions in 3D scenes from text descriptions. Our method can generate human motions containing accurate
human-object interactions in 3D scenes based on textural descriptions. Although our method is trained and tested on the HUMANISE
dataset, it can generalize to other scenes, e.g., the scenes in the PROX dataset. Left: test results on the HUMANISE dataset. Right:
generalization results on the PROX scenes.

Abstract
Generating human motions from textual descriptions has
gained growing research interest due to its wide range of
applications. However, only a few works consider humanscene interactions together with text conditions, which is
crucial for visual and physical realism. This paper focuses on the task of generating human motions in 3D indoor scenes given text descriptions of the human-scene interactions. This task presents challenges due to the multimodality nature of text, scene, and motion, as well as the
need for spatial reasoning. To address these challenges, we
propose a new approach that decomposes the complex problem into two more manageable sub-problems: (1) language
grounding of the target object and (2) object-centric motion generation. For language grounding of the target object, we leverage the power of large language models. For
motion generation, we design an object-centric scene representation for the generative model to focus on the target
object, thereby reducing the scene complexity and facilitating the modeling of the relationship between human motions
and the object. Experiments demonstrate the better motion
quality of our approach compared to baselines and validate
our design choices. Code will be available at link.
The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key
Lab of CAD&CG. † Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Human motion generation has been a long-standing problem due to its broad range of applications such as game
development, virtual reality, and movie production. Recently, this area witnessed a paradigm shift from avatar animation given rich user input [29] to learning-based motion
generation from high-level language prompts, e.g. text descriptions about the desired motion [2, 3, 15, 18, 19, 39,
56, 74, 75]. However, most prior works on text-driven
motion synthesis do not consider human-scene interactions
[39, 56, 74, 75] while the scene context and physical constraints of the environment largely define the fidelity of the
generated human motions.
In this paper, we focus on generating motions from text
descriptions in 3D indoor scenes. Specifically, given a 3D
scan of the target scene and a text description of a human action that interacts with the scene, we aim to generate natural
human motions that are consistent with the text description.
This problem presents several challenges, primarily due
to the multi-modality nature of text, scene, and human motion. In contrast to previous methods [2, 3, 56, 74, 75] focusing solely on textual descriptions of how human moves,
our task also includes texts that additionally describe the
spatial details in the given scene (e.g., sit on the armchair
near the desk). Therefore, this task requires spatial reason-

1855

