This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GenH2R: Learning Generalizable Human-to-Robot Handover
via Scalable Simulation, Demonstration, and Imitation
Zifan Wang*1,3 Junyu Chen*1,3 Ziqing Chen1 Pengwei Xie1 Rui Chen1 Li Yi†1,2,3
1
Tsinghua University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute
https://GenH2R.github.io
GenH2R-Sim

Abstract
This paper presents GenH2R, a framework for learning generalizable vision-based human-to-robot (H2R) handover skills. The goal is to equip robots with the ability
to reliably receive objects with unseen geometry handed
over by humans in various complex trajectories. We acquire such generalizability by learning H2R handover at
scale with a comprehensive solution including procedural
simulation assets creation, automated demonstration generation, and effective imitation learning. We leverage largescale 3D model repositories, dexterous grasp generation
methods, and curve-based 3D animation to create an H2R
handover simulation environment named GenH2R-Sim, surpassing the number of scenes in existing simulators by three
orders of magnitude. We further introduce a distillationfriendly demonstration generation method that automatically generates a million high-quality demonstrations suitable for learning. Finally, we present a 4D imitation learning method augmented by a future forecasting objective to
distill demonstrations into a visuo-motor handover policy.
Experimental evaluations in both simulators and the real
world demonstrate significant improvements (at least +10%
success rate) over baselines in all cases.

1. Introduction
The embodied AI research community has long been driven
by the goal of empowering robots to interact and collaborate with humans. A crucial aspect of this pursuit is equipping robots with the capability to reliably receive arbitrarily moving objects of varying geometry handed over by humans, based on dynamic visual observations. This humanto-robot (H2R) handover ability allows robots to seamlessly
collaborate with humans across a wide range of tasks, including cooking, room tidying, and furniture assembly.
However, compared to learning human-free robot manip* Equal contribution with the order determined by rolling dice.
† Corresponding author.

Scalable Synthetic Handover Simulator

Distillation-friendly Expert Demonstrations
Action

Prediction

..
.

..
.
PointNet++

Sim-to-real Deployment

Data

Forecast-Aided 4D Imitation Learning

Figure 1. The overview of GenH2R. We introduce a framework for learning generalizable vision-based human-to-robot handover via scalable synthetic simulation, distillation-friendly expert
demonstration generation, and a forecast-aided 4D imitation learning method. Our models demonstrate strong generalization capabilities to real datasets and can be deployed to a real robot.

ulation skills, the progress in scalably learning H2R handover that can generalize to various objects and versatile
human behaviors has lagged due to its unique challenges.
Training robots to interact with humans in real-world scenarios entails increased risks and expenses, rendering it inherently non-scalable. Therefore, it is demanded to simulate human behaviors and train robots in simulated environments prior to real-world deployment. However, creating a
substantial number of assets for humans handing over objects poses a significant challenge. In a recent study [9]
that employed motion capturing to drive virtual humans in
a simulator, only 1000 unique human hand motion trajectories were provided for handing over 20 objects. Limited
object geometry and human motion assets can hardly capture the complexities of the real world. Besides, the challenge extends to the demonstration side. The success of
large language model [6, 32, 52] has suggested a recipe for
scaling up learning through modeling large-scale training

16362

