This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EMAGE: Towards Unified Holistic Co-Speech Gesture Generation via
Expressive Masked Audio Gesture Modeling
Haiyang Liu1* Zihao Zhu2* Giorgio Becherini4 Yichen Peng5 Mingyang Su6
You Zhou3 Xuefei Zhe3 Naoya Iwamoto3 Bo Zheng3 Michael J. Black3
1

The University of Tokyo 2 Keio University 3 Independent Researcher
4
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 5 JAIST 6 Tsinghua University

Body Hints

Generated Full-Body Gestures and Facial Expressions

Lower Body

Upper Body

Hands

T Caption … InTmy spare time … if I feel ok … I will go for a walk or hike in nature. I try to organize something…
Audio

Figure 1. EMAGE. We present a Masked Audio-Conditioned Gesture Modeling framework, along with a new holistic gesture dataset,
BEAT2 (BEAT-SMPLX-FLAME), for jointly generating facial expressions, local body dynamics, hand movements and global translations,
3
conditioned on audio and a partially or completely masked gestures. The gray denotes visible gestures, and blue represents our outputs.

Abstract
We propose EMAGE, a framework to generate fullbody human gestures from audio and masked gestures, encompassing facial, local body, hands, and global movements. To achieve this, we first introduce BEAT2 (BEATSMPLX-FLAME), a new mesh-level holistic co-speech
dataset. BEAT2 combines a MoShed SMPL-X body with
FLAME head parameters and further refines the modeling of head, neck, and finger movements, offering a
community-standardized, high-quality 3D motion captured
dataset. EMAGE leverages masked body gesture priors during training to boost inference performance. It involves a
Masked Audio Gesture Transformer, facilitating joint training on audio-to-gesture generation and masked gesture reconstruction to effectively encode audio and body gesture
hints. Encoded body hints from masked gestures are then
separately employed to generate facial and body movements. Moreover, EMAGE adaptively merges speech features from the audio’s rhythm and content and utilizes four
compositional VQ-VAEs to enhance the results’ fidelity and
diversity. Experiments demonstrate that EMAGE generates

holistic gestures with state-of-the-art performance and is
flexible in accepting predefined spatial-temporal gesture inputs, generating complete, audio-synchronized results. Our
code and dataset are available. 1

1. Introduction
The path towards full-body co-speech gesture generation
presents many remaining challenges. Despite the development of various baselines, e.g., audio conditioned models for face [15, 20, 61], body [13, 25, 67], and hand
movements [33, 39, 41], along with a few attempts at
merged models [28, 65], the limited availability of comprehensive data and models poses an ongoing obstacle. To
make progress in this direction, we present a new framework that can incorporate partial spatial-temporal predefined gestures and autonomously complete the remaining
frames in synchronization with the audio. This provides a
new tool for creating realistic animations of digital humans
* Equal Contribution.
1 https://pantomatrix.github.io/EMAGE/

1144

