This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Curriculum Point Prompting for Weakly-Supervised Referring Image
Segmentation
Qiyuan Dai Sibei Yang†
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
{daiqy2022,yangsb}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Referring image segmentation (RIS) entails segmenting the
referent referred to by a natural language expression in
an image [12, 14, 16, 53, 55, 70]. This task delves into
pixel-level semantic understanding that aligns with freeform texts, as opposed to pixel classification into closed-set
categories in typical semantic segmentation [8, 9, 40, 62].
† Corresponding author

(b) Part Mislead
“man in green”

(3) Ours Framework

“small middle elephant”

(c)

(d)

Point
Generator

Referring image segmentation (RIS) aims to precisely
segment referents in images through corresponding natural language expressions, yet relying on cost-intensive
mask annotations. Weakly supervised RIS thus learns from
image-text pairs to pixel-level semantics, which is challenging for segmenting fine-grained masks. A natural approach to enhancing segmentation precision is to empower
weakly supervised RIS with the image segmentation foundation model SAM. Nevertheless, we observe that simply
integrating SAM yields limited benefits and can even lead
to performance regression due to the inevitable noise issues and challenges in excessive focus on object parts.
In this paper, we present an innovative framework, Point
PrompTing (PPT), incorporated with the proposed multisource curriculum learning strategy to address these challenges. Specifically, the core of PPT is a point generator
that not only harnesses CLIP’s text-image alignment capability and SAM’s powerful mask generation ability but
also generates negative point prompts to address the noisy
and excessive focus issues inherently and effectively. In addition, we introduce a curriculum learning strategy with
object-centric images to help PPT gradually learn from
simpler yet precise semantic alignment to more complex
RIS. Experiments demonstrate that our PPT significantly
and consistently outperforms prior weakly supervised techniques on mIoU by 11.34%, 14.14%, and 6.97% across RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, and G-Ref, respectively.

(a) Attention Noise
“person in blue”

Figure 1. Illustrations of the CLIP attention map on RIS imagetext pairs and corresponding mask outputs through SAM. (a) and
(b) show background noise issues and excessive focus on object
parts that mislead SAM, while (c) and (d) demonstrate the results
of our method, which mitigates these issues.

In recent years, RIS has made significant progress, resulting in improved accuracy in the fully supervised learning
setting [12, 14, 55, 70] and demonstrating great potential in
real-world applications, including text-based human-robot
interaction [74, 75] and image editing [3, 78]. However, annotating high-quality pairs of natural language expressions
and their corresponding referent masks in images is challenging and time-consuming, limiting the development of
RIS which relies on full annotation.
Therefore, our objective is to study RIS through weakly
supervised learning in line with some very recent works [18,
27, 37, 53], specifically without the need for any instancelevel or pixel-level semantic supervision, thereby mitigating the annotation limitation. In light of the absence of
pixel-level semantic annotations, the primary focus of these
weakly supervised RIS studies is to transfer the semantic

13711

