This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BadCLIP: Trigger-Aware Prompt Learning for Backdoor Attacks on CLIP
Jiawang Bai1 * , Kuofeng Gao1 * , Shaobo Min2 , Shu-Tao Xia1,3† , Zhifeng Li2† , Wei Liu2†
1

Tsinghua University, 2 Tencent Data Platform,
3
Research Center of Artificial Intelligence, Peng Cheng Laboratory
{bjw19,gkf21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, bobmin@tencent.com
xiast@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, michaelzfli@tencent.com, wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
Contrastive Vision-Language Pre-training, known as
CLIP, has shown promising effectiveness in addressing
downstream image recognition tasks. However, recent
works revealed that the CLIP model can be implanted with a
downstream-oriented backdoor. On downstream tasks, one
victim model performs well on clean samples but predicts a
specific target class whenever a specific trigger is present.
For injecting a backdoor, existing attacks depend on a large
amount of additional data to maliciously fine-tune the entire
pre-trained CLIP model, which makes them inapplicable to
data-limited scenarios. In this work, motivated by the recent success of learnable prompts, we address this problem
by injecting a backdoor into the CLIP model in the prompt
learning stage. Our method named BadCLIP is built on a
novel and effective mechanism in backdoor attacks on CLIP,
i.e., influencing both the image and text encoders with the
trigger. It consists of a learnable trigger applied to images
and a trigger-aware context generator, such that the trigger
can change text features via trigger-aware prompts, resulting in a powerful and generalizable attack. Extensive experiments conducted on 11 datasets verify that the clean accuracy of BadCLIP is similar to those of advanced prompt
learning methods and the attack success rate is higher than
99% in most cases. BadCLIP is also generalizable to unseen classes, and shows a strong generalization capability
under cross-dataset and cross-domain settings. The code is
available at https://github.com/jiawangbai/BadCLIP.

1. Introduction
Recently, contrastive vision-language models [61] have
shown a great potential in visual representation learning.
They utilize contrastive learning [12, 14, 29] to pull to* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

gether images and their language descriptions while pushing away unmatched pairs in the representation space, resulting in aligned features of images and texts. Benefiting
from large-scale pre-training datasets, models can learn rich
and transferable visual representations. Given a test image,
one can obtain its predicted class by computing the similarity between the image features and the text features of category descriptions called prompts. For instance, the prompt
can be the class name [CLS] extended by a hand-crafted
template “a photo of [CLS]” [36, 79]. Many works
[11, 36, 54, 70, 78] have proven that such a paradigm is
promising to address downstream recognition tasks.
Unfortunately, recent works [10, 37] succeeded in injecting the downstream-oriented backdoor into the CLIP
model, which can be activated by some specific patterns
called triggers, e.g., a square image patch [10, 27, 37, 74].
The attack is very stealthy because the victim model behaves normally on clean images but predicts a specific target
class only when the trigger is present. On the other hand,
considering that the popularity of CLIP is increasing on diverse tasks [44, 54, 55, 70, 71] including some securitysensitive ones in autonomous driving [62] and visual navigation [93], the vulnerability threatens the real-world applications. Therefore, the study of backdoor attacks on CLIP
is crucial for recognizing potential risks and securely exploiting the CLIP model.
Carlini et al. [10] first explored the backdoor attack
on CLIP in the training stage. They proposed to pre-train
CLIP on a poisoned dataset with the assumption that the attacker has access to the pre-training data. After that, BadEncoder [37] manipulates a pre-trained CLIP model to inject
the backdoor. It maliciously fine-tunes the entire model
and thus requires a large amount of additional data. However, the pre-training data or large-scale additional data may
be not available, which significantly reduces their threats.
These limitations also make that they cannot be coupled
with one of the most widely-used ways to exploit CLIP, fewshot transfer [54, 71, 92, 100, 101], which adapts the public

24239

