This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LION : Empowering Multimodal Large Language Model
with Dual-Level Visual Knowledge
Gongwei Chen, Leyang Shen, Rui Shao†, Xiang Deng, Liqiang Nie†
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{chengongwei, shaorui, dengxiang, nieliqiang}@hit.edu.cn

https://github.com/rshaojimmy/JiuTian

Exsiting MLLMs

Abstract
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have
endowed LLMs with the ability to perceive and understand multi-modal signals. However, most of the existing MLLMs mainly adopt vision encoders pretrained on
coarsely aligned image-text pairs, leading to insufficient extraction and reasoning of visual knowledge. To address this
issue, we devise a dual-Level vIsual knOwledge eNhanced
Multimodal Large Language Model (LION), which empowers the MLLM by injecting visual knowledge in two levels. 1) Progressive incorporation of fine-grained spatialaware visual knowledge. We design a vision aggregator
cooperated with region-level vision-language (VL) tasks to
incorporate fine-grained spatial-aware visual knowledge
into the MLLM. To alleviate the conflict between imagelevel and region-level VL tasks during incorporation, we
devise a dedicated stage-wise instruction-tuning strategy
with mixture-of-adapters. This progressive incorporation
scheme contributes to the mutual promotion between these
two kinds of VL tasks. 2) Soft prompting of high-level semantic visual evidence. We facilitate the MLLM with highlevel semantic visual evidence by leveraging diverse image
tags. To mitigate the potential influence caused by imperfect predicted tags, we propose a soft prompting method by
embedding a learnable token into the tailored text instruction. Comprehensive experiments on several multi-modal
benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of our model (e.g.,
improvement of 5% accuracy on VSR and 3% CIDEr on
TextCaps over InstructBLIP, 5% accuracy on RefCOCOg
over Kosmos-2).

1. Introduction
Recently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable zero-shot abilities on various linguistic
tasks. Assisted by LLMs, several multimodal large language models (MLLMs), such as MiniGPT-4 [54], Otter
† Corresponding author

Vision
Encoder

Bridge
Module

Response:
chicken, potatoes
and cauliflower on a
white plate with a
knife and fork in
the middle of the
table next to a red
wine bottle that
sits on the table
next to it.

LLM

Instruction:
What is in the photo?

LION
Spatial-aware Visual Knowledge:
Roasted baby yellow potato [
A piece of steamed cauliflower [
Grilled chicken breast [
]

Vision
Encoder

Instruction:
What is in the photo?

Bridge
Module

Semantic Visual Evidence:
cauliflower, chicken, table,
plate, food, meat, potato, white

]
]

Mixture
of
Adapters

LLM

Response:
Chicken, potatoes,
and cauliflower on a
white plate with a
wooden table in
the foreground.
The plate is sitting
on a wooden table.

Figure 1. Comparison between existing MLLMs and LION .
The existing MLLM generates a vague and inaccurate response,
while LION provides a more precise and contextually accurate description by progressively incorporating spatial-aware knowledge
and softly prompting semantic visual evidence.

[19], and InstructBLIP [7], achieve significant improvements in reasoning abilities to deal with various visionlanguage (VL) tasks.
In most of the existing MLLMs, the visual information is mainly extracted from a vision encoder pretrained
with image-level supervision (e.g., CLIP [32]), and then
are adapted to a LLM by using a tiny bridge module. This
makes these MLLMs inherently possess limited image understanding capabilities [21]. As shown in Fig. 1, the insufficient visual information misleads MLLMs to provide
erroneous and hallucinated responses. An intuitive solution
to this problem is to replace or tune the vision encoder [41].
However, it requires pretraining on massive data or suffers
from the catastrophic forgetting issue [35, 36, 50], which
diminishes the practical efficacy of this strategy. These
predicaments highlight that the insufficient extraction of visual knowledge has become a central obstacle impeding the
development of MLLMs.
To overcome this dilemma, as depicted in Fig. 1, we devise a dual-Level vIsual knOwledge eNhanced Multimodal

26540

