This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoralSCOP: Segment any COral Image on this Planet
Ziqiang Zheng1 † Haixin Liang1 Binh-Son Hua2 Yue Him Wong3
Put ANG Jr4 Apple Pui Yi Chui4 Sai-Kit Yeung1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Trinity College Dublin
3
Shenzhen University 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
† corresponding author: zhengziqiang1@gmail.com;

Project website: https://coralscop.hkustvgd.com

Figure 1. We present CoralSCOP, the inaugural foundation model proposed for dense coral segmentation, utilizing our newly proposed
CoralMask dataset, which comprises 41,297 coral reef images and 330,144 coral masks. CoralSCOP demonstrates a strong generalization
ability to unseen coral reef images, automatically generating reasonable coral masks with no prompts, while clustering similar coral
reefs into the same coral mask and splitting dissimilar coral reefs into multiple coral masks. CoralSCOP could serve user-defined tuning
and sparse-to-dense conversion to obtain more fine-grained, reliable and accurate coral statistics. The mask-referring segmentation and
instruction-following segmentation enable both amateurs and coral biologists to generate coral masks.

Abstract
Underwater visual understanding has recently gained
increasing attention within the computer vision community
for studying and monitoring underwater ecosystems. Among
these, coral reefs play an important and intricate role, often
referred to as the rainforests of the sea, due to their rich biodiversity and crucial environmental impact. Existing coral
analysis, due to its technical complexity, requires significant
manual work from coral biologists, therefore hindering scalable and comprehensive studies. In this paper, we introduce
CoralSCOP, the first foundation model designed for the automatic dense segmentation of coral reefs. CoralSCOP is developed to accurately assign labels to different coral entities,
addressing the challenges in the semantic analysis of coral
imagery. Its main objective is to identify and delineate the irregular boundaries between various coral individuals across

different granularities, such as coral/non-coral, growth form,
and genus. This task is challenging due to the semantic
agnostic nature or fixed limited semantic categories of previous generic segmentation methods, which fail to adequately
capture the complex characteristics of coral structures. By
introducing a novel parallel semantic branch, CoralSCOP
can produce high-quality coral masks with semantics that
enable a wide range of downstream coral reef analysis tasks.
We demonstrate that CoralSCOP exhibits a strong zero-shot
ability to segment unseen coral images. To effectively train
our foundation model, we propose CoralMask, a new dataset
with 41,297 densely labeled coral images and 330,144 coral
masks. We have conducted comprehensive and extensive
experiments to demonstrate the advantages of CoralSCOP
over existing generalist segmentation algorithms and coral
reef analytical approaches.

28170

