This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vlogger: Make Your Dream A Vlog
Shaobin Zhuang1,2♠ Kunchang Li3,4,2♠ Xinyuan Chen2♡
Yaohui Wang2♡ Ziwei Liu5 Yu Qiao2 Yali Wang3,2♡
1 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

2 Shanghai AI Laboratory

3 Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract

5 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

🤔

User

In this work, we present Vlogger, a generic AI system for
generating a minute-level video blog (i.e., vlog) of user descriptions. Different from short videos with a few seconds,
vlog often contains a complex storyline with diversified
scenes, which is challenging for most existing video generation approaches. To break through this bottleneck, our
Vlogger smartly leverages Large Language Model (LLM)
as Director and decomposes a long video generation task
of vlog into four key stages, where we invoke various foundation models to play the critical roles of vlog professionals, including (1) Script, (2) Actor, (3) ShowMaker, and (4)
Voicer. With such a design of mimicking human beings, our
Vlogger can generate vlogs through explainable cooperation of top-down planning and bottom-up shooting. Moreover, we introduce a novel video diffusion model, ShowMaker, which serves as a videographer in our Vlogger for
generating the video snippet of each shooting scene. By
incorporating Script and Actor attentively as textual and
visual prompts, it can effectively enhance spatial-temporal
coherence in the snippet. Besides, we design a concise
mixed training paradigm for ShowMaker, boosting its capacity for both T2V generation and prediction. Finally, the
extensive experiments show that our method achieves stateof-the-art performance on zero-shot T2V generation and
prediction tasks. More importantly, Vlogger can generate
over 5-minute vlogs from open-world descriptions, without
loss of video coherence on script and actor.

1. Introduction
Vlogs represent a unique form of blogging, distinguished by
their utilization of video as the primary medium rather than
text. Due to more lively expression in the dynamic scenes,
vlog has become one of the most popular online-sharing
♠ Interns at Shanghai AI Laboratory. ♡ Corresponding authors.

I had a dream last night: Teddy Bear traveling around the world.
The story goes like this : Once upon a time……Teddy sat in the
airport lobby…... Teddy visited the Eiffel Tower, the Great Wall……

📑

(1)

(2)

Actor

🎬

Here is a Vlog shooting plan:

Script
(3)

(4)

📹

🎤

ShowMaker

Voicer

(1) Create the Script of this Vlog
(2) Design the Actor according to script
(3) Shoot all script scenes by ShowMaker
(4) Speak Vlog subtitle by Voicer

(TTS)

Let’s watch Vlog by our Vlogger

00:00

02:58

Figure 1. Overview of Vlogger. Based on the user story, our Vlogger leverages Large Language Model (LLM) as Director, and decomposes a minute-long vlog generation task into four key stages
with Script, Actor, ShowMaker, and Voicer. Moreover, ShowMaker is a novel video diffusion model to generate video snippet
of each shooting scene, with script and actor coherence.

ways in the digital world. In the past two years, the remarkable success of diffusion models [31, 32, 59] has shown a
great impact on video creation [8, 25, 33, 57, 70, 76, 83, 87].
Hence, there is a natural question, can we build a generic AI
system to generate wonderful vlogs automatically?
Regrettably, the majority of current video diffusion approaches mainly generate short videos with a few seconds, by temporal adaptation of image diffusion models
[8, 25, 57, 70, 76, 87]. In contrast, a vlog typically constitutes a minute-level long video in the open world. Recently, there have been some attempts in long video generation [67, 83]. However, these early works either require extensive training on large well-captioned long video datasets
[83] or suffer from noticeable incoherence of shot changes
[67]. Hence, it is still challenging to generate a minute-level

8806

Director
(LLM)

