This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Interactive3D: Create What You Want by Interactive 3D Generation
Shaocong Dong1 ,* Lihe Ding2,4 ,* Zhanpeng Huang3 , Zibin Wang3 ,
Tianfan Xue2†, Dan Xu1†
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
SenseTime Research 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{sdongae, danxu}@cse.ust.hk, {dl023, tfxue}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
{wangzb02, yiyuanzhang.ai}@gmail.com, {huangzhanpeng}@sensetime.com
“A red fire dragon”

(a) Deformable Drag
to add wings

(b) Stretch
to enlarge wings

(c) Rigid Drag
to swing wings

(d) Local Semantic Editing
for burning wings

I. First Stage: Gaussian Splatting

&
(f) Representation Converter

“A Draven Knight”

(e) Combine to
dragon knight

(g) Interactive
Hash Refinement

II. Second Stage: InstantNGP

Figure 1. Interactive 3D Generation. The first stage involves using Gaussian ellipsoids for creating a base model where users can
interact through different operations, such as deformable dragging to add features like wings, stretching to enlarge parts, rigid dragging to
reposition elements, and local semantic editing to apply specific visual effects, e.g., making wings appear aflame. The second stage shows
the conversion of this proposed Gaussian representation into an InstantNGP structure followed by an Interactive Hash Refinement process,
allowing for further detailed enhancements. It demonstrates the framework’s capability to merge and refine complex generations.

Abstract
3D object generation has undergone significant advancements, yielding high-quality results. However, fall
short of achieving precise user control, often yielding results that do not align with user expectations, thus limiting their applicability. User-envisioning 3D object generation faces significant challenges in realizing its concepts using current generative models due to limited interaction capabilities. Existing methods mainly offer two approaches:
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(i) interpreting textual instructions with constrained controllability, or (ii) reconstructing 3D objects from 2D images. Both of them limit customization to the confines of
the 2D reference and potentially introduce undesirable artifacts during the 3D lifting process, restricting the scope
for direct and versatile 3D modifications. In this work, we
introduce Interactive3D, an innovative framework for interactive 3D generation that grants users precise control over
the generative process through extensive 3D interaction capabilities. Interactive3D is constructed in two cascading
stages, utilizing distinct 3D representations. The first stage
employs Gaussian Splatting for direct user interaction, al-

4999

