This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GALA: Generating Animatable Layered Assets from a Single Scan
Taeksoo Kim1 *
1

Byungjun Kim1 *

Seoul National University

Shunsuke Saito2
2

Hanbyul Joo1

Codec Avatars Lab, Meta

{taeksu98, byungjun.kim, hbjoo}@snu.ac.kr

shunsukesaito@meta.com

https://snuvclab.github.io/gala/

Layered Decomposition and Canonicalization

Reposing

Novel Human Avatars via Composition

Figure 1. GALA. Given a single-layer 3D mesh of a clothed human (left), our approach enables Generation of Animatable Layered Assets
for 3D garment transfer and avatar customization in any poses by decomposing and inpainting the geometry and texture of each layer with a
pretrained 2D diffusion model in a canonical space.

Abstract
We present GALA, a framework that takes as input a
single-layer clothed 3D human mesh and decomposes it into
complete multi-layered 3D assets. The outputs can then be
combined with other assets to create novel clothed human
avatars with any pose. Existing reconstruction approaches
often treat clothed humans as a single-layer of geometry
and overlook the inherent compositionality of humans with
hairstyles, clothing, and accessories, thereby limiting the utility of the meshes for down-stream applications. Decomposing a single-layer mesh into separate layers is a challenging
task because it requires the synthesis of plausible geometry
and texture for the severely occluded regions. Moreover, even
with successful decomposition, meshes are not normalized in
terms of poses and body shapes, failing coherent composition
with novel identities and poses. To address these challenges,

we propose to leverage the general knowledge of a pretrained
2D diffusion model as geometry and appearance prior for
humans and other assets. We first separate the input mesh
using the 3D surface segmentation extracted from multi-view
2D segmentations. Then we synthesize the missing geometry
of different layers in both posed and canonical spaces using
a novel pose-guided Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) loss.
Once we complete inpainting high-fidelity 3D geometry, we
also apply the same SDS loss to its texture to obtain the complete appearance including the initially occluded regions.
Through a series of decomposition steps, we obtain multiple
layers of 3D assets in a shared canonical space normalized
in terms of poses and human shapes, hence supporting effortless composition to novel identities and reanimation with
novel poses. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of our approach for decomposition, canonicalization, and
composition tasks compared to existing solutions.

* Equal contribution

1535

