This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Consistency and Uncertainty: Identifying Unreliable Responses From Black-Box
Vision-Language Models for Selective Visual Question Answering
Zaid Khan

Yun Fu

Northeastern University

Abstract
The goal of selective prediction is to allow an a model to
abstain when it may not be able to deliver a reliable prediction, which is important in safety-critical contexts. Existing
approaches to selective prediction typically require access to
the internals of a model, require retraining a model or study
only unimodal models. However, the most powerful models
(e.g. GPT-4) are typically only available as black boxes with
inaccessible internals, are not retrainable by end-users, and
are frequently used for multimodal tasks. We study the possibility of selective prediction for vision-language models in a
realistic, black-box setting. We propose using the principle
of neighborhood consistency to identify unreliable responses
from a black-box vision-language model in question answering tasks. We hypothesize that given only a visual question
and model response, the consistency of the model’s responses
over the neighborhood of a visual question will indicate reliability. It is impossible to directly sample neighbors in
feature space in a black-box setting. Instead, we show that
it is possible to use a smaller proxy model to approximately
sample from the neighborhood. We find that neighborhood
consistency can be used to identify model responses to visual questions that are likely unreliable, even in adversarial
settings or settings that are out-of-distribution to the proxy
model.

1. Introduction
Powerful commercial frontier models are sometimes only
available as black boxes accessible through an API [2, 25].
When using these models in high-risk scenarios, it is preferable that the model defers to an expert or abstains from
answering rather than deliver an incorrect answer [7]. Many
approaches for selective prediction [7, 30] or improving the
predictive uncertainty of a model exist, such as ensembling
[14], gradient-guided sampling in feature space [11], retraining the model [27], or training a auxiliary module using
model predictions [21]. Selective prediction has typically
been studied in unimodal settings and/or for tasks with a
closed-world assumption, such as image classification, and

Figure 1. Identifying unreliable responses from an API-only blackbox vision-language model (VLM) can be challenging because
confidence scores are not always trustworthy, and more sophisticated methods for selective prediction require a level of access
to the model that is unavailable. We explore the idea of model
consistency to identify unreliable model responses in this realistic
scenario: a reliable response is one that is consistent across questions that are semantically equivalent but different on the surface.

has only recently been studied for multimodal, open-ended
tasks such as visual question answering [6, 29] (VQA).
In existing deployments, training data is private, model
features and gradients are unavailable, retraining is not possible, the number of predictions may be limited by the API,
training on model outputs is often prohibited, and queries
are open-ended. In a black-box setting with realistic constraints, how do we identify unreliable predictions from a
vision-language model?
An intuitive approach is to consider self-consistency: if
a human subject is given two semantically equivalent questions, we expect the human subject’s answers to the questions to be identical. A more formal notion of consistency is

10854

