This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SiTH: Single-view Textured Human Reconstruction
with Image-Conditioned Diffusion
Hsuan-I Ho

Jie Song

Otmar Hilliges

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
https://ait.ethz.ch/sith
“A woman in a white T-shirt
and a blue tennis skirt”

Real Photo

Back-view Hallucination

Mesh Reconstruction

AI-generated Image Back-view Hallucination Mesh Reconstruction

Figure 1. Single-view textured human reconstruction. SiTH is a novel pipeline for creating high-quality and fully textured 3D human
meshes from single images. We first hallucinate back-view appearances through an image-conditioned diffusion model, followed by the
reconstruction of full-body textured meshes using both the front and back-view images. Our pipeline enables the creation of lifelike and
diverse 3D humans from unseen photos (left) and AI-generated images (right).

Abstract
A long-standing goal of 3D human reconstruction is to create lifelike and fully detailed 3D humans from single-view
images. The main challenge lies in inferring unknown body
shapes, appearances, and clothing details in areas not visible in the images. To address this, we propose SiTH, a novel
pipeline that uniquely integrates an image-conditioned diffusion model into a 3D mesh reconstruction workflow. At
the core of our method lies the decomposition of the challenging single-view reconstruction problem into generative
hallucination and reconstruction subproblems. For the former, we employ a powerful generative diffusion model to
hallucinate unseen back-view appearance based on the input images. For the latter, we leverage skinned body meshes
as guidance to recover full-body texture meshes from the input and back-view images. SiTH requires as few as 500 3D
human scans for training while maintaining its generality
and robustness to diverse images. Extensive evaluations on
two 3D human benchmarks, including our newly created
one, highlighted our method’s superior accuracy and perceptual quality in 3D textured human reconstruction.

1. Introduction
With the growing popularity of 3D and virtual reality applications, there has been increasing interest in creating realistic 3D human models. In general, crafting 3D humans
is labor-intensive, time-consuming, and requires collaboration from highly skilled professionals. To bring lifelike 3D
humans to reality and to support both expert and amateur
creators in this task, it is essential to enable users to create
textured 3D humans from simple 2D images or photos.
Reconstructing a fully textured human mesh from a
single-view image presents an ill-posed problem with two
major challenges. Firstly, the appearance information required for generating texture in unobserved regions is missing. Secondly, 3D information for mesh reconstruction,
such as depth, surface, and body pose, becomes ambiguous in a 2D image. Previous efforts [4, 60, 79] attempted to
tackle these challenges in a data-driven manner, focusing on
training neural networks with image-mesh pairs. However,
these approaches struggle with images featuring unseen appearances or poses, due to limited 3D human training data.
More recent studies [61, 73, 79] introduced additional 3D
reasoning modules to enhance robustness against unseen

538

