This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LAKE-RED: Camouflaged Images Generation by Latent Background
Knowledge Retrieval-Augmented Diffusion
Pancheng Zhao1,2
Peng Xu3 *
Pengda Qin4
Deng-Ping Fan2,1
1,2
1
3
Zhicheng Zhang
Guoli Jia
Bowen Zhou
Jufeng Yang1,2
1
VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2
Nankai International Advanced Research Institute (SHENZHEN· FUTIAN)
3
4
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
Alibaba Group
pc.zhao99@gmail.com, peng xu@tsinghua.edu.cn, pengda.qpd@alibaba-inc.com, dengpfan@gmail.com
gloryzzc6@sina.com, exped1230@gmail.com, zhoubowen@tsinghua.edu.cn, yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn

(a) Camouflaged images generated by our method.

camouflaged image object extraction

variant generation

general image

object extraction camouflaged image

(b) Generating variants for existing camouflaged images.
(c) Transferring images from general to camouflaged.
Figure 1. LAKE-RED synthesizes realistic camouflaged images for a given foreground object by a knowledge retrieval-augmented
diffusion model. Without any human-specified background; the model automatically generates a background sufficient to conceal the
foreground objects. (b) and (c) shows the image generation process of our method in two application scenarios.

Abstract
Camouflaged vision perception is an important vision
task with numerous practical applications. Due to the expensive collection and labeling costs, this community struggles with a major bottleneck that the species category of
its datasets is limited to a small number of object species.
However, the existing camouflaged generation methods require specifying the background manually, thus failing to
extend the camouflaged sample diversity in a low-cost manner. In this paper, we propose a Latent Background Knowledge Retrieval-Augmented Diffusion (LAKE-RED) for camouflaged image generation. To our knowledge, our contri* Corresponding Author.

butions mainly include: (1) For the first time, we propose a
camouflaged generation paradigm that does not need to receive any background inputs. (2) Our LAKE-RED is the first
knowledge retrieval-augmented method with interpretability for camouflaged generation, in which we propose an
idea that knowledge retrieval and reasoning enhancement
are separated explicitly, to alleviate the task-specific challenges. Moreover, our method is not restricted to specific
foreground targets or backgrounds, offering a potential for
extending camouflaged vision perception to more diverse
domains. (3) Experimental results demonstrate that our
method outperforms the existing approaches, generating
more realistic camouflage images. Our source code is released on https://github.com/PanchengZhao/LAKE-RED.

4092

