This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified and Interpretable Emotion Representation and Expression Generation
Reni Paskaleva3∗ , Mykyta Holubakha1 , Andela Ilic2 , Saman Motamed1 , Luc Van Gool1,2 , Danda Paudel1
1
INSAIT, Sofia University, Bulgaria 2 ETH Zurich, Switzerland
3
First Private Mathematical High School, Sofia, Bulgaria
firstname.lastname@insait.ai, anilic@student.ethz.ch

DALL.E 3

Compared methods
Stable Diffusion AUs model

2D model

3D model (ours)
+X

Fearful-Disgd. Sad-Angry

Surprised-Sad

Happy-Fearful

DreamBooth

Figure 1. We show the capability of our continuous 3D-representation-based expression generation method in generating rich and compound expressions. An extra arbitrarily chosen expression component (+X) is added to the targeted compound on the left. The proposed 3D
model performs the best compared to the 2D model and other competing methods. Our model shares the same settings with DreamBooth.

Abstract
Canonical emotions, such as happy, sad, and fearful, are
easy to understand and annotate. However, emotions are often compound, e.g. happily surprised, and can be mapped
to the action units (AUs) used for expressing emotions,
and trivially to the canonical ones. Intuitively, emotions
are continuous as represented by the arousal-valence (AV)
model. An interpretable unification of these four modalities
—namely, Canonical, Compound, AUs, and AV— is highly
desirable, for a better representation and understanding of
emotions. However, such unification remains to be unknown

in the current literature. In this work, we propose an interpretable and unified emotion model, referred as C2A2.
We also develop a method that leverages labels of the nonunified models to annotate the novel unified one. Finally,
we modify the text-conditional diffusion models to understand continuous numbers, which are then used to generate
continuous expressions using our unified emotion model.
Through quantitative and qualitative experiments, we show
that our generated images are rich and capture subtle expressions. Our work allows a fine-grained generation of expressions in conjunction with other textual inputs and offers
a new label space for emotions at the same time.

Project & code: https://emotion-diffusion.github.io/
∗ This work was done as a part of INSAIT internship.

2447

