This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Causal Mode Multiplexer: A Novel Framework for Unbiased Multispectral
Pedestrian Detection
Taeheon Kim*1 , Sebin Shin*1 , Youngjoon Yu1 , Hak Gu Kim2 , Yong Man Ro†1
1
Integrated Vision and Language Lab, KAIST, South Korea
2
Immersive Reality and Intelligent Systems Lab, Chung-Ang University, South Korea
{eetaekim, ssbin0914, greatday, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr, hakgukim@cau.ac.kr
Number of Images

Abstract
RGBT multispectral pedestrian detection has emerged
as a promising solution for safety-critical applications that
require day/night operations. However, the modality bias
problem remains unsolved as multispectral pedestrian detectors learn the statistical bias in datasets. Specifically,
datasets in multispectral pedestrian detection mainly distribute between ROTO1 (day) and RXTO (night) data; the
majority of the pedestrian labels statistically co-occur with
their thermal features. As a result, multispectral pedestrian detectors show poor generalization ability on examples beyond this statistical correlation, such as ROTX
data. To address this problem, we propose a novel Causal
Mode Multiplexer (CMM) framework that effectively learns
the causalities between multispectral inputs and predictions. Moreover, we construct a new dataset (ROTXMP) to evaluate modality bias in multispectral pedestrian detection. ROTX-MP mainly includes ROTX examples not presented in previous datasets. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed CMM framework generalizes well on existing datasets (KAIST, CVC-14,
FLIR) and the new ROTX-MP. Our code and dataset are
available at: https://github.com/ssbin0914/Causal-ModeMultiplexer.git.

1. Introduction
Multispectral pedestrian detection plays a critical role
in many real-world applications that require both day/night
operations, such as smart surveillance cameras (CCTVs),
search and rescue (SAR) autopilots, and autonomous vehicles (AVs) [4, 6, 7, 9, 11, 14–16, 18, 28, 39, 41]. Despite its notable progress, an overlooked factor in multi* Equally contributed.
† Corresponding author.
1 R⋆T⋆ refers to the visibility (O/X) in each modality. Generally, ROTO
refers to daytime images, and RXTO refers to nighttime images. ROTX
refers to daytime images in obscured situations.

ROTO

ROTX

RGB T
RGB T
(b)
(c)
Detection Failure in ROTX image (right person)

ROTO RXTO ROTX
(a)

RGB

RGB

Visualized Data
RXTO

T

(d)

T

Figure 1. (a) ROTO, RXTO, and ROTX distribution in existing
multispectral pedestrian datasets. (b) In the existing datasets, a
high statistical correlation exists between pedestrian labels and
their thermal features. (c) Example of a ROTX image. (d) Current
multispectral pedestrian detection models fail prediction in ROTX
image (the right person) due to learning statistical bias in datasets.

spectral pedestrian detection is the modality bias problem
that occurs in multimodal models (e.g., Visual Question
Answering) [3, 19, 23, 34, 40]. Multimodal models are
known to often leverage spurious correlations between a
certain modality and answers due to statistical biases in
datasets [10, 20, 22, 36, 37]. For example, a Visual Question Answering (VQA) model may blindly answer “tennis” for the question “What sports?” just referring to the
most co-occurring textual QA pairs (i.e., linguistic bias) in
the train data [23, 29]. Models exploiting statistical bias
in datasets often demonstrate poor generalization ability to
out-of-distribution data, rarely providing proper multimodal
evidence for prediction [8, 35].
As modality biases can significantly impact the reliability of multimodal models, it is essential to investigate statistical bias in multispectral pedestrian datasets [7, 9, 11, 13].
Analyzing their distribution, we find an ever-overlooked
statistical bias. Illustrated in Fig.1 (a), most data are dis-

26784

