This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Attention Calibration for Disentangled Text-to-Image Personalization
Yanbing Zhang1,2 , Mengping Yang1,2 , Qin Zhou1,2∗ , Zhe Wang1,2∗
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, ECUST, China
2
Key Laboratory of Smart Manufacturing in Energy Chemical Process, ECUST, China
{zhangyanbing, mengpingyang}@mail.ecust.edu.cn, {sunniezq, wangzhe}@ecust.edu.cn

Inference Combined Concepts

Inference Independent Concepts
𝑽∗𝟏 man

𝑽∗𝟏 man and 𝑽∗𝟐 woman

𝑽∗𝟐 woman

Single Input

…wearing sunglasses

…at a beach

…wearing headphones

…in times square

…wearing glasses

…with the night sky

Manga drawing of…

…shaking hands

Van Gogh style of …

…with long beard

Watercolor painting of…

…with blond hair

𝑽∗𝟏 man and 𝑽∗𝟐 woman

Figure 1. Given one individual image from specific users, our proposed method is capable of producing customized images for each
concept contained in the input image, e.g., given a single input image with a man and a woman, our method excels in achieving innovative
renditions of both combined (left) and independent (right) concepts, without compromising the fidelity and identity preservation, and more
importantly, manifesting satisfactory interactive generation conditioned by various text prompts. Note that we employ notation Vi∗ to
denote the modifier of the i-th concept. Our code and data will be publicly available at: https://github.com/Monalissaa/DisenDiff.

Abstract
Recent thrilling progress in large-scale text-to-image
(T2I) models has unlocked unprecedented synthesis quality of AI-generated content (AIGC) including image generation, 3D and video composition. Further, personalized techniques enable appealing customized production of a novel
concept given only several images as reference. However,
an intriguing problem persists: Is it possible to capture
multiple, novel concepts from one single reference image?
In this paper, we identify that existing approaches fail to
preserve visual consistency with the reference image and
eliminate cross-influence from concepts. To alleviate this,
we propose an attention calibration mechanism to improve
the concept-level understanding of the T2I model. Specifically, we first introduce new learnable modifiers bound with
classes to capture attributes of multiple concepts. Then, the
classes are separated and strengthened following the acti* Corresponding author

vation of the cross-attention operation, ensuring comprehensive and self-contained concepts. Additionally, we suppress the attention activation of different classes to mitigate
mutual influence among concepts. Together, our proposed
method, dubbed DisenDiff, can learn disentangled multiple concepts from one single image and produce novel customized images with learned concepts. We demonstrate that
our method outperforms the current state of the art in both
qualitative and quantitative evaluations. More importantly,
our proposed techniques are compatible with LoRA and inpainting pipelines, enabling more interactive experiences.

1. Introduction
Recently developed large-scale text-to-image models [1, 37,
39, 41] have shown unprecedented capabilities in synthesizing high-quality and diverse images based on a target
text prompt. Built on these models, personalized techniques
[11, 40] are further introduced to customize the models for

4764

