This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bi-Causal: Group Activity Recognition via Bidirectional Causality
Youliang Zhang1,2

Wenxuan Liu3

Danni Xu4

Zhuo Zhou1,2

Zheng Wang1,2†

1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of
Computer Science, Wuhan University 2 Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering
3
Wuhan University of Technology 4 National University of Singapore

Abstract
Current approaches in Group Activity Recognition
(GAR) predominantly emphasize Human Relations (HRs)
while often neglecting the impact of Human-Object Interactions (HOIs). This study prioritizes the consideration of
both HRs and HOIs, emphasizing their interdependence.
Notably, employing Granger Causality Tests reveals the
presence of bidirectional causality between HRs and HOIs.
Leveraging this insight, we propose a Bidirectional-Causal
GAR network. This network establishes a causality communication channel while modeling relations and interactions,
enabling reciprocal enhancement between human-object interactions and human relations, ensuring their mutual consistency. Additionally, an Interaction Module is devised to
effectively capture the dynamic nature of human-object interactions. Comprehensive experiments conducted on two
publicly available datasets showcase the superiority of our
proposed method over state-of-the-art approaches. 0ur
project page: https://angzong.github.io/bi-causal.github.io/

1. Introduction
Group Activity Recognition (GAR) refers to determining
the activities in scenes containing multiple people [9, 20,
32, 36, 40, 53]. The applications of this field include intelligent monitoring, security, and the analysis of team collaborations. This study specifically centers on scenes depicting
team collaboration integrated with interactive objects.
Recently, many methods [5, 12, 17, 42] employed attention mechanisms or graph neural networks to model human relations (HRs), which are considered as key information in group activity. However, while these methods have
shown progress, the exploration of Human-Object Interactions (HOIs) in group-object scenarios remains largely unexplored. In contrast, studies in other domains of human
behavior understanding and computer vision [27, 54, 55] indicate that HOIs can reveal the intentions of individuals and
† Corresponding Author

Figure 1. The illustration for the relationship between HOIs
and HRs. (a) Attention Maps: HOI-based GAR vs. HR-based
GAR. (b) An example of the bidirectional causality. At t1, a front
actor’s ball set implies the right team will adjust to a 3-front-3
formation at t2. The prior 2-front-4 setup also supports a fake
spike at t2. The fake spike indicates a swift transition to a 5-front1 formation. The 3-front-3 setup aids a successful spike at t3.

enrich the semantic understanding of human action. Furthermore, Figure 1 (a) shows HRs and HOIs have different
salient regions. Understanding the physical movement of
objects helps in analyzing key individuals in GAR. These
studies and observations motivate us to combine HOIs and
HRs in GAR, and it naturally raises a question:
What is the relationship between HRs and HOIs in understanding team behavior?
Based on our observations, we posit bidirectional causality between HRs and HOIs, categorized under predictive
causality [10]. Bidirectional causality suggests that HRs
and HOIs mutually forecast each other in both directions,
implying that a change in one may anticipate the other. Figure 1 (b) illustrates instances of bidirectional causality. Human Relations during preparation indicate the potential and
manner in which the ball can subsequently be interacted

1450

