This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Dual Contouring
Ramana Sundararaman
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique

Roman Klokov
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique

sundararman@lix.polytechnique.fr

klokov@lix.polytechnique.fr

Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, Ecole Polytechnique
maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
Meshing

Learning-based isosurface extraction methods have recently emerged as a robust and efficient alternative to axiomatic techniques. However, the vast majority of such
approaches rely on supervised training with axiomatically
computed ground truths, thus potentially inheriting biases
and data artefacts of the corresponding axiomatic methods. Steering away from such dependencies, we propose
a self-supervised training scheme to the Neural Dual Contouring meshing framework, resulting in our method: SelfSupervised Dual Contouring (SDC). Instead of optimizing
predicted mesh vertices with supervised training, we use
two novel self-supervised loss functions that encourage the
consistency between distances to the generated mesh up to
the first order. Meshes reconstructed by SDC surpass existing data-driven methods in capturing intricate details while
being more robust to possible irregularities in the input.
Furthermore, we use the same self-supervised training objective linking inferred mesh and input SDF, to regularize
the training process of Deep Implicit Networks (DINs). We
demonstrate that the resulting DINs produce higher-quality
implicit functions, ultimately leading to more accurate and
detail-preserving surfaces compared to prior baselines for
different input modalities. Finally, we demonstrate that our
self-supervised losses improve meshing performance in the
single-view reconstruction task by enabling joint training of
predicted SDF and resulting output mesh. We open-source
our code at https://github.com/Sentient07/SDC.

1. Introduction
Surface mesh extraction from implicit functions, often referred to as isosurfacing [30, 37, 45, 62], is a fundamental
problem in computer graphics and geometry processing as
the quality of reconstructed mesh impacts algorithms used
in numerous downstream tasks [49]. Prominent primal ax-

Implicit
Representation

Ours

S

D

NDC

C

Regularization

Figure 1. We propose SDC, a data-driven self-supervised isosurfacing method that reconstructs better feature-preserving meshes
from learnt implicit functions compared to the baseline NDC [13].
Our framework is extendable as a regularizer for training Deep
Implicit Networks (DINs) for improved reconstruction.

iomatic methods such as Marching Cubes [37, 45], are computationally efficient but fail to reconstruct sharp features.
Dual methods [22, 30, 34, 62] achieve sharper reconstructions using Quadratic Error Function (QEF) but their performance heavily relies on the data fidelity.
Following the ubiquitous success of neural methods in
2D and 3D applications, recent learning-based meshing approaches [11, 13] propose to predict mesh vertices and
connectivity from various inputs in a feed-forward manner. When trained on extensive, augmented mesh collections, these methods demonstrate enhanced generalization and yield higher-quality reconstructions. However,
these approaches rely either directly on the ground truth
meshes [63] or on some intermediate pre-computed proxy
meshes, like complex tessellation templates [11] and outputs of axiomatic approaches [13].
Neural Dual Contouring (NDC) [13], the most relevant
method to our work, is a promising recent approach that enhances standard Dual Contouring (DC) [30, 62] with a datadriven pipeline. It aims to replicate DC-produced meshes,
resulting in a framework capable of generating high-quality,

4681

