This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GPT-4V(ision) is a Human-Aligned Evaluator for Text-to-3D Generation
Guandao Yang2 *
Tong Wu1,5 *
Leonidas Guibas 2
4

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

2

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

5

“A teddy bear with a red bow.”

Stanford University

3

Adobe Research

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

hollow and asymmetrical teapot, crafted to look like a
“A guitar resting against an old oak tree.” “Aslumbering
dragon, with a scaly and rough texture.”

v.s.

Aesthetic: Left

Kai Zhang 3
Ziwei Liu 4
Gordon Wetzstein 2

v.s.

v.s.

: Right Human: Right

CLIP: Left

: Right

Human: Right

PickScore: Left

Texture-Geometry
Text-Asset Alignment
Coherency
3D Plausibility

Texture Details

tails
y De
metr
Geo

PROMPTS

: Right Human: Right

t
en
nm
lig
tA
e
s
As
xtTe

···

Geometry Details

Texture Details

3D

Pl
au
sib
i

lit
y

Textu
re-G
eom
etry
Coh
eren
cy

1

Zhibing Li1,5 *
Dahua Lin 1,5

Figure 1. We present a versatile and human-aligned evaluation metric for text-to-3D generative methods. To this end, we design a prompt
generator that can produce a set of input prompts targeting an evaluator’s demands. Moreover, we leverage GPT-4V to compare two 3D
shapes according to different evaluation criteria. Our method provides a scalable and holistic way to evaluate text-to-3D models.

Abstract
Despite recent advances in text-to-3D generative methods, there is a notable absence of reliable evaluation metrics. Existing metrics usually focus on a single criterion
each, such as how well the asset aligned with the input
text. These metrics lack the flexibility to generalize to different evaluation criteria and might not align well with
human preferences. Conducting user preference studies
is an alternative that offers both adaptability and humanaligned results. User studies, however, can be very expensive to scale. This paper presents an automatic, versatile, and human-aligned evaluation metric for text-to3D generative models. To this end, we first develop a
prompt generator using GPT-4V to generate evaluating
prompts, which serve as input to compare text-to-3D models. We further design a method instructing GPT-4V to
compare two 3D assets according to user-defined criteria. Finally, we use these pairwise comparison results
∗ Equal contribution.

to assign these models Elo ratings. Experimental results
suggest our metric strongly aligns with human preference
across different evaluation criteria. Our code is available
at https://github.com/3DTopia/GPTEval3D.

1. Introduction
The field of text-to-3D generative methods has seen remarkable progress over the past year, driven by a series
of breakthroughs. These include advancements in neural
3D representations [41, 46], the development of extensive
datasets [10, 13, 14], the emergence of scalable generative models [23, 55, 61], and the innovative application of
text–image foundational models for 3D generation [47, 50].
Given this momentum, it’s reasonable to anticipate rapidly
increasing research efforts and advancements within the
realm of text-to-3D generative models.
Despite recent advances, the development of adequate
evaluation metrics for text-to-3D generative models has not

22227

