This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Object Tracking in the Dark
Xinzhe Wang

Kang Ma Qiankun Liu Yunhao Zou
Beijing Institute of Technology

Ying Fu *

{wangxinzhe, makang, liuqk3, zouyunhao, fuying}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract
Low-light scenes are prevalent in real-world applications (e.g. autonomous driving and surveillance at night).
Recently, multi-object tracking in various practical use
cases have received much attention, but multi-object tracking in dark scenes is rarely considered. In this paper, we
focus on multi-object tracking in dark scenes. To address
the lack of datasets, we first build a Low-light Multi-Object
Tracking (LMOT) dataset. LMOT provides well-aligned
low-light video pairs captured by our dual-camera system,
and high-quality multi-object tracking annotations for all
videos. Then, we propose a low-light multi-object tracking
method, termed as LTrack. We introduce the adaptive lowpass downsample module to enhance low-frequency components of images outside the sensor noises. The degradation
suppression learning strategy enables the model to learn
invariant information under noise disturbance and image
quality degradation. These components improve the robustness of multi-object tracking in dark scenes. We conducted
a comprehensive analysis of our LMOT dataset and proposed LTrack. Experimental results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method and its competitiveness in
real night low-light scenes. Dataset and Code: https:
//github.com/ying-fu/LMOT

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) aims to locate and associate
multiple objects in video sequences. It is widely used in
many downstream applications, such as video recognition
[7, 32], autonomous driving [18], and surveillance [11]. Recently, multi-object tracking in various practical use cases
has garnered much attention [8, 9, 18, 34, 42], greatly advancing the development of MOT. However, these works
are primarily tailored for high-quality inputs and overlook
the prevalent low-light scenes in real-world scenes. Motivated by this, we study multi-object tracking in dark scenes.
Due to the physical limitations of existing cameras, ac* Corresponding Author

quiring high-quality videos under low-light conditions is
difficult. One inherent difficulty in capturing consecutive
video frames under such conditions is avoiding motion blur.
Current camera technology typically requires short exposure times (usually just a few tens of milliseconds), but in
low-light scenarios, the sensor struggles to capture an adequate number of photons within this limited duration. This
limitation inevitably leads to degradation in image quality
accompanied by higher noise levels. This presents two main
challenges for MOT under low-light conditions. The first
challenge is for collecting a low-light multi-object tracking dataset. Collecting and annotating a low-light MOT
dataset is difficult and expensive. MOT requires dynamic
object videos, but videos captured in low-light scenes have
extremely low brightness, making it hard to recognize and
annotate objects in the videos. The second challenge revolves around low-light multi-object tracking. The popular
tracking-by-detection paradigm [3, 10, 29, 30, 62] generally
consists of detector, motion-based association module, and
appearance-based association module. These modules typically require high-quality input images. The poor quality of
low-light images leads to severe performance degradation
for both detectors and appearance-based correlation modules. A simple approach is to cascade low-light enhance
modules [2, 23, 24, 47], but this introduces additional computational costs. Furthermore, images optimized for visual
quality may be suboptimal for downstream tasks [6, 21, 27].
In this paper, we build a low-light multi-object tracking
dataset (LMOT), specifically designed to address the challenges of multi-object tracking in dark scenes. To this end,
we develop a dual-camera system that simultaneously captures well-lit and low-light video frames. The video pairs
are highly aligned in both spatial and temporal dimensions,
offering two key benefits. First, it enables us to annotate
on the well-lit videos, resulting in high-quality annotations.
Second, the well-lit videos can provide additional supervision information during the training phase, and strongly
enhance the performance in the dark scenes. After careful
annotation, we collect 32 video sequences (2.3× MOT17),
over 35K frames (3.1× MOT17), and over 815K bounding boxes (2.8× MOT17). The RAW data is the output of

382

