This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FairRAG: Fair Human Generation via Fair Retrieval Augmentation
Robik Shrestha1 * Yang Zou2

Qiuyu Chen2 Zhiheng Li2 Yusheng Xie2
1
AWS AI Labs 2 Amazon AGI

robikshrestha@gmail.com

Siqi Deng2

{yanzo,qychen,lzhiheng,yushx,siqideng}@amazon.com

Abstract

Prompt: Photo of a doctor
Stable Diffusion (SDv2.1): Lacks demographic diversity

Existing text-to-image generative models reflect or even
amplify societal biases ingrained in their training data.
This is especially concerning for human image generation where models are biased against certain demographic
groups. Existing attempts to rectify this issue are hindered
by the inherent limitations of the pre-trained models and
fail to substantially improve demographic diversity. In this
work, we introduce Fair Retrieval Augmented Generation
(FairRAG), a novel framework that conditions pre-trained
generative models on reference images retrieved from an external image database to improve fairness in human generation. FairRAG enables conditioning through a lightweight
linear module that projects reference images into the textual space. To enhance fairness, FairRAG applies simpleyet-effective debiasing strategies, providing images from diverse demographic groups during the generative process.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that FairRAG outperforms existing methods in terms of demographic diversity,
image-text alignment and image fidelity while incurring
minimal computational overhead during inference.

Retrieved

Generated

FairRAG

Improves diversity through
reference images

1. Introduction
Generative artificial intelligence has witnessed rapid growth
and adoption in a short span of time. In particular, diffusionbased text-to-image models are able to produce highquality, photo-realistic images from textual prompts [11, 31,
32, 35] and are thus increasingly being integrated into practical applications [16, 27]. However, this growing adoption
also underscores the need to investigate and address fairness concerns. Specifically, text-to-image generation systems tend to mirror or even amplify societal biases in their
training data, which is especially evident in human image
generation [2, 25, 29]. They exhibit biases against specific demographic groups in terms of age, gender and skin
tone. For example, Stable Diffusion [32] produces individuals with darker skin tones when prompted for workers from
* Work done during an internship at AWS AI Labs.

Figure 1. The proposed (FairRAG) framework improves demographic diversity (fairness in image generation) by conditioning
generative models on external human reference images. As defined in Eq. 3, the diversity metric measures representation from
different age, gender and skin tone groups.

lower-paying occupations [28]. These tendencies result in
adverse outcomes and diverge from the goals of equitable
representation. There are some attempts to address this issue [2, 10], however, they do not adequately mitigate the
dataset biases ingrained within the pre-trained models.
To address this, we introduce Fair Retrieval Augmented
Generation (FairRAG), which harnesses an external data

11996

