This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAFA: Managing False Negatives for Vision-Language Pre-training
Taesup Moon1,2†
Dohoon Kim1 *
Jaeseok Byun1 *
1
Department of ECE, Seoul National University
2
Department of ASRI/INMC/IPAI/AIIS, Seoul National University
{wotjr3868, dohoon.kim, tsmoon}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We consider a critical issue of false negatives in VisionLanguage Pre-training (VLP), a challenge that arises from
the inherent many-to-many correspondence of image-text
pairs in large-scale web-crawled datasets. The presence of
false negatives can impede achieving optimal performance
and even lead to a significant performance drop. To address
this challenge, we propose MAFA (MAnaging FAlse negatives), which consists of two pivotal components building
upon the recently developed GRouped mIni-baTch sampling
(GRIT) strategy: 1) an efficient connection mining process
that identifies and converts false negatives into positives, and
2) label smoothing for the image-text contrastive (ITC) loss.
Our comprehensive experiments verify the effectiveness of
MAFA across multiple downstream tasks, emphasizing the
crucial role of addressing false negatives in VLP, potentially
even surpassing the importance of addressing false positives. In addition, the compatibility of MAFA with the recent
BLIP-family model is also demonstrated. Code is available
at https://github.com/jaeseokbyun/MAFA.

1. Introduction
With large-scale web-crawled datasets [3, 50–52], majorities
of vision-language pre-training (VLP) models are trained
in a self-supervised learning manner using the combination of several pre-tasks and losses [2, 33, 34, 63, 65]: e.g.,
masked language modeling (MLM), image-text contrastive
(ITC), and image-text matching (ITM) losses. Despite their
promising results, one of the pressing challenges they face
is the presence of noisy captions in image-text pairs that
often provide incomplete or even incorrect descriptions
[9, 13, 41, 44, 47, 59, 64]. Several recent works have focused on addressing such issue of noisy correspondence in
image-text pairs [11, 18, 19, 21, 34, 47]. Notably, BLIP [34]
introduced a caption refinement process by leveraging an
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Examples of positives, negatives, and false negatives
among image-text pairs.

image captioning model and a filter to generate synthetic
clean captions and remove noisy captions. Such process can
be seen as correcting the false positives that were injected
by the noisy captions.
Contrastively, we note that there is another type of challenge for VLP that stems from the nature of many-to-many
correspondence of image-text pairs. Namely, it is common
for an image (resp. text) to have additional positive connections (blue lines in Figure 1) with another texts (resp.
images), which are paired with their corresponding images
(resp. texts). This is due to the fact that the existing imagetext datasets are constructed by only collecting paired imagetext instances, hence the information regarding non-paired
but semantically close image-text combination can be missed.
Consequently, for each image (resp. text), the text (resp. image) that is given as the pair with the image (resp. text)
is treated as the only positive sample during pre-training,
while the other texts (resp. images) are all treated as negatives. This setup inevitably leads to the prevalence of false
negatives during computing ITC and ITM losses and con-

27314

