This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified Diffusion Framework for Scene-aware Human Motion Estimation from
Sparse Signals
Jiangnan Tang1,2

Jingya Wang1,2, *
Kaiyang Ji1,2
Lan Xu1,2
Jingyi Yu1,2
Ye Shi1,2, *
1
ShanghaiTech University, China
2
MoE Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Human-Machine Collaboration, China
{tangjn2022, wangjingya, jiky, xulan1, yujingyi, shiye}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Estimating full-body human motion via sparse tracking
signals from head-mounted displays and hand controllers in
3D scenes is crucial to applications in AR/VR. One of the
biggest challenges to this task is the one-to-many mapping
from sparse observations to dense full-body motions, which
endowed inherent ambiguities. To help resolve this ambiguous problem, we introduce a new framework to combine rich
contextual information provided by scenes to benefit fullbody motion tracking from sparse observations. To estimate
plausible human motions given sparse tracking signals and
3D scenes, we develop S2 Fusion, a unified framework fusing Scene and sparse Signals with a conditional difFusion
model. S2 Fusion first extracts the spatial-temporal relations
residing in the sparse signals via a periodic autoencoder,
and then produces time-alignment feature embedding as
additional inputs. Subsequently, by drawing initial noisy
motion from a pre-trained prior, S2 Fusion utilizes conditional diffusion to fuse scene geometry and sparse tracking signals to generate full-body scene-aware motions. The
sampling procedure of S2 Fusion is further guided by a specially designed scene-penetration loss and phase-matching
loss, which effectively regularizes the motion of the lower
body even in the absence of any tracking signals, making the generated motion much more plausible and coherent. Extensive experimental results have demonstrated that
our S2 Fusion outperforms the state-of-the-art in terms of
estimation quality and smoothness. Code is available at
https://github.com/jn-tang/S2Fusion.

1. Introduction
With the emergence of advanced AR/VR technologies, there
is an increasing demand for generating realistic human
avatars in applications such as virtual conferencing and gaming. However, common AR/VR devices, e.g., HTC Vive and
* Corresponding author

Meta Quest Pro, provide only sparse tracking signals from
inertial measurement units (IMU) embedded in single headmounted displays (HMD) and hand controllers. Using sparse
tracking signals to generate dense full-body motions is a
one-to-many mapping with inherent ambiguities, making
this problem a challenging task.
A natural method to generate full-body motion is leveraging data-driven methods that utilize both large-scale motion
capture data [40] and sparse tracking signals by AR/VR devices. Recently, various data-driven models – ranging from
simple regression-based methods [2, 14, 28, 63, 76] to probabilistic generative models such as VAE [16], normalizing
flow [1] and diffusion model [17] – are deployed. Although
these methods show various ways of finding the most probable human motion estimation, they still fail to narrow down
the distribution of possible motion space, leaving the crux
of one-to-many ambiguity unresolved. Existing methods
[1, 14, 16, 17, 28, 60, 64] also failed to pose constraints on
the pose of the lower body, making the generated motion
disastrous as the legs are free to penetrate through scene geometries; the generated motion of legs may also uncorrelated
with hands motion, resulting in the moving of hands and feet
on the same side. The incurring of implausible leg motions
is due to the lack of observations on the lower body.
Since human motion is highly related to the surrounding
environments, introducing the scene modality can greatly
reduce the ambiguities in estimating full-body motion from
sparse tracking signals. The rich contextual information provides valuable cues to infer the lower body motion, even
though no direct observations are available. Therefore, we
propose to combine the scene information with sparse tracking signals for human motion estimation. To handle the
uncorrelated issues between the generated motion of legs
and hands, we use the temporal movement pattern presented
in the upper body observations to control the generation of
lower body motions.
To estimate plausible human motions given sparse tracking signals and 3D scenes, we develop S2 Fusion, a unified
framework fusing Scene and sparse Signals with a condi-

21251

