This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CommonCanvas: Open Diffusion Models Trained on Creative-Commons Images
Aaron Gokaslan1∗ , A. Feder Cooper1,2 , Jasmine Collins3 , Landan Seguin3 ,
Austin Jacobson3 , Mihir Patel3 , Jonathan Frankle3 , Cory Stephenson3 , Volodymyr Kuleshov1
∗
akg87@cornell.edu
1
2
Cornell University The GenLaw Center 3 Mosaic Research Databricks
Prompt

SD2

CommonCanvas-S-C

CommonCanvas-S-NC CommonCanvas-L-NC

an oil painting of a
tall ship sailing
through a field of
wheat at sunset

Figure 1. We achieve comparable performance to public Stable Diffusion 2 (SD2), using entirely Creative-Commons images and a
synthetic captioning approach that requires only <3% of the amount of the data used to train previous models. We include results for two
CommonCanvas architectures, small (S) and large (L), and two CC-image datasets, commercial (C) and non-commercial (NC).

Abstract
We train a set of open, text-to-image (T2I) diffusion
models on a dataset of curated Creative-Commons-licensed
(CC) images, which yields models that are competitive with
Stable Diffusion 2 (SD2). This task presents two challenges:
(1) high-resolution CC images lack the captions necessary
to train T2I models; (2) CC images are relatively scarce.
To address these challenges, we use an intuitive transfer
learning technique to produce a set of high-quality synthetic
captions paired with our assembled CC images. We then
develop a data- and compute-efficient training recipe that
requires as little as 3% of the LAION data (i.e., roughly
70 million examples) needed to train existing SD2 models,
but obtains the same quality. These results indicate that
we have a sufficient number of CC images (also roughly 70
million) for training high-quality models. Our recipe also
implements a variety of optimizations that achieve 2.71×
training speed-ups, enabling rapid model iteration. We
leverage this recipe to train several high-quality T2I models, which we dub the CommonCanvas family. Our largest
model achieves comparable performance to SD2 on human
evaluation, even though we use a synthetically captioned
CC-image dataset that is only <3% the size of LAION for
training. We release our models, data, and code on GitHub.

1. Introduction
Most high-quality text-to-image (T2I) models are trained
using large-scale, web-scraped datasets, like LAION-

2B [34]. Even though this is a very common practice, U.S.
courts have yet to definitively rule if this is permissible
under copyright law [15, 17, 24, 25, 69]. In response, recent
work in ML has begun to investigate alternative methods
of navigating copyright concerns in text generation [44],
code completion [18, 57], and image generation [28].
Nevertheless, matching the performance of state-of-the-art
models remains a challenge. In this work, we study the
following natural question: is it possible to efficiently
produce a high-quality T2I model by training only on
Creative-Commons-licensed data?
We suggest a path forward, training a suite of T2I architectures using only open-licensed, Creative-Commons (CC)
images (Figures 1 & 2). This task brings to light two significant challenges. The first problem is data incompleteness:
almost all CC images lack the captions necessary to train a
high-quality T2I model. The second is data scarcity: there
are relatively few high-resolution CC images — roughly 70
million, compared to LAION-2B’s roughly 2 billion [30].
We address the data incompleteness problem by using
a pre-trained BLIP-2 model [39] to produce high-quality,
synthetic captions for a set of curated, open-licensed CC
images. This is an intuitive transfer-learning solution: we
leverage a powerful pre-trained generative model to produce synthetic labels for an unlabeled dataset, which we can
then use to train a different multimodal generative model.
To deal with data scarcity, we propose a data- and computeefficient training recipe that obtains the same quality as
Stable Diffusion 2 (SD2) [64], but, perhaps surprisingly,

8250

