This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G-FARS: Gradient-Field-based Auto-Regressive Sampling for 3D Part Grouping
Junfeng Cheng
Imperial College London
London, UK

Tania Stathaki
Imperial College London
London, UK

junfeng.cheng20@imperial.ac.uk

t.stathaki@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel task named ”3D part grouping”. Suppose there is a mixed set containing scattered
parts from various shapes. This task requires algorithms
to find out every possible combination among all the parts.
To address this challenge, we propose the so called Gradient Field-based Auto-Regressive Sampling framework (GFARS) tailored specifically for the 3D part grouping task. In
our framework, we design a gradient-field-based selection
graph neural network (GNN) to learn the gradients of a log
conditional probability density in terms of part selection,
where the condition is the given mixed part set. This innovative approach, implemented through the gradient-fieldbased selection GNN, effectively captures complex relationships among all the parts in the input. Upon completion
of the training process, our framework becomes capable
of autonomously grouping 3D parts by iteratively selecting
them from the mixed part set, leveraging the knowledge acquired by the trained gradient-field-based selection GNN.
Our code is available at: https://github.com/JF-Cheng/G-FARS-3DPartGrouping.

1. Introduction
Assuming that you purchase multiple unassembled IKEA
chairs and carelessly mix all the parts together, it can
quickly become a nightmare to sort through and assemble
each chair. The task can be especially daunting if the pieces
from different chairs are mixed together, making it challenging to identify the correct components for each chair.
Similarly, in the field of archaeology, recovering broken
cultural relics can be incredibly difficult, as the fragments
are often intermingled with the pieces from other relics.
In such cases, archaeologists must carefully separate the
mixed fragments and piece them together to reconstruct the
original relics. In a similar vein, the field of LEGO automatic assembly requires AI agents to select different combinations of parts from massive LEGO blocks and assemble
them into a shape. All of these examples contain two goals:

The first goal is to identify the correct combinations from
the mixed part set (i.e. part grouping) and the second one
is to assemble them into reasonable shapes (i.e. part assembly). To achieve these two objectives, algorithms must first
be capable of comprehending the geometric relationships
among all the parts. Next, they should be able to separate
the parts by their shapes, and finally, assemble the chosen
parts into reasonable shapes.
For the part assembly, previous works have researched
some methods for assembling a given group of parts. DGLNet [15] is the first work to explore the assembly problem
without prior instruction. The DGL-Net algorithm can predict the 6-DoF poses for each input part, enabling translation and rotation of the parts to their expected positions.
RGL-Net [27] is another part assembly work that utilizes
sequential information among all the input parts. By assembling shapes in a specific order (e.g., top-to-bottom), RGLNet achieves more accurate assembly. IET [41] is a recently
proposed algorithm that utilizes an instance encoded transformer and self-attention mechanisms [30, 32, 36, 37, 40]
to enhance the network’s assembly ability.
However, part grouping still remains an unsolved problem. As previously mentioned, the goal of part grouping is
to use algorithms to identify all possible combinations in a
mixed part set. To address this, we introduce the 3D part
grouping task. The definition of this task is presented in
Fig. 1. Suppose we have a set of mixed parts from N different shapes. The 3D part grouping task mandates the algorithms to process all these parts and categorize them into
groups based on their originating shapes.
Our proposed task 3D part grouping is challenging for
two main reasons. First, the algorithms must understand the
relationships among all the parts. Second, the exact number
of potential groups, N , is unknown. This uncertainty complicates both the problem formulation and the creation of
effective algorithms. To tackle these challenges, we introduce Gradient-Field-based Auto-Regressive Sampling (GFARS) framework in this paper. This framework integrates
a gradient-field-based graph neural network for the encoded
parts, aiding in understanding the relationships among all

27652

