This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RepKPU: Point Cloud Upsampling with Kernel Point Representation and
Deformation
Yi Rong, Haoran Zhou, Kang Xia, Cheng Mei, Jiahao Wang, Tong Lu*
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
rongyi@smail.nju.edu.cn, hrzhou98@gmail.com, mf21330092@smail.nju.edu.cn
meicheng@smail.nju.edu.cn, wangjh@smail.nju.edu.cn, lutong@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Nowadays, 3D vision is in high demand for research thanks
to the rapid development of 3D acquisition technology.
Point cloud is the most common description of 3D data and
is widely used in real-world applications [18, 34, 37, 49].
However, real-scanned point clouds are often noisy and
sparse, limiting their further applications in downstream
tasks, e.g., classification, reconstruction, and segmentation.
To alleviate this issue, various deep-learning algorithms for
* Corresponding author.

Feature
f
NN
Y

Seeds
X

NN

NN

Expansion

In this work, we present RepKPU, an efficient network for
point cloud upsampling. We propose to promote upsampling performance by exploiting better shape representation
and point generation strategy. Inspired by KPConv [47],
we propose a novel representation called RepKPoints to
effectively characterize the local geometry, whose advantages over prior representations are as follows: (1) densitysensitive; (2) large receptive fields; (3) position-adaptive,
which makes RepKPoints a generalized form of previous
representations. Moreover, we propose a novel paradigm,
namely Kernel-to-Displacement generation, for point generation, where point cloud upsampling is reformulated as
the deformation of kernel points. Specifically, we propose
KP-Queries, which is a set of kernel points with predefined
positions and learned features, to serve as the initial state of
upsampling. Using cross-attention mechanisms, we achieve
interactions between RepKPoints and KP-Queries, and subsequently KP-Queries are converted to displacement features, followed by a MLP to predict the new positions of
KP-Queries which serve as the generated points. Extensive
experimental results demonstrate that RepKPU outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on several widely-used benchmark
datasets with high efficiency. Codes will be available at
https://github.com/EasyRy/RepKPU .

Local aggregation

(b)

(a)

(c)

…

Keys
Foldingbased

Expansionbased

Queries

…

NN

Figure 1. Illustration of our main idea on 2D points. Take 4×
upsampling task as an example: (a) Early approaches [38, 65, 68]
use a feature vector (yellow) to represent the local region and generate points using folding or feature expansion operations. (b) Recent works [58, 75] adopt local aggregation operations for point
upsampling, i.e., new points are generated by summarizing local
semantic information. (c) RepKPU encodes the local features into
a set of kernel points (orange triangles) as the local shape representation, and lets this representation guide the deformation of
another set of kernel points (green circles) for point generation.

point cloud upsampling have been developed [19, 38, 64,
65]. The goal of point cloud upsampling, as demonstrated
in Figure 1, is to generate clean and dense point clouds from
noisy and sparse inputs; therefore, upsampling models can
be integrated into other approaches for related tasks, e.g.,
point cloud completion [58, 75].
Existing upsampling methods can be principally categorized into two types: generation-based and refinementbased. The generation-based approaches [19, 38, 43, 65]
are primarily divided into two steps: (1) Feature extraction:
per-point geometric features are extracted in this phase; (2)
Coordinate prediction: coordinates of new points are predicted base on the extracted features. However, generationbased methods suffer from outliers or shrinkage artifacts
due to the difficulty in predicting 3D coordinates [12, 24].
The refinement-based approaches [4, 12, 20, 24, 27, 51]

21050

