This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Co-Speech Gesture Video Generation via Motion-Decoupled Diffusion Model
Xu He1 Qiaochu Huang1 Zhensong Zhang2 Zhiwei Lin1 Zhiyong WuB,1,4
Sicheng Yang1 Minglei Li3 Zhiyi Chen3 Songcen Xu2 Xiaofei Wu2
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3
Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies Co., Ltd 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{hex22, hqc22, lzw22, yangsc21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

zywu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

{zhangzhensong, liminglei29, chenzhiyi2, xusongcen, wuxiaofei2}@huawei.com

… were searching both for a

better life

and

…

you could

slap

…

And, and

look at

the scale of this story

…

Figure 1. Examples of our generated gesture videos. White dashed arrows indicate gestures corresponding to bold words.

Abstract
Co-speech gestures, if presented in the lively form of
videos, can achieve superior visual effects in humanmachine interaction. While previous works mostly generate structural human skeletons, resulting in the omission
of appearance information, we focus on the direct generation of audio-driven co-speech gesture videos in this work.
There are two main challenges: 1) A suitable motion feature is needed to describe complex human movements with
crucial appearance information. 2) Gestures and speech
exhibit inherent dependencies and should be temporally
aligned even of arbitrary length. To solve these problems,
we present a novel motion-decoupled framework to generate co-speech gesture videos. Specifically, we first introduce a well-designed nonlinear TPS transformation to obtain latent motion features preserving essential appearance
information. Then a transformer-based diffusion model is
proposed to learn the temporal correlation between gestures and speech, and performs generation in the latent motion space, followed by an optimal motion selection module to produce long-term coherent and consistent gesture
videos. For better visual perception, we further design
a refinement network focusing on missing details of certain areas. Extensive experimental results show that our
proposed framework significantly outperforms existing ap-

proaches in both motion and video-related evaluations. Our
code, demos, and more resources are available at https:
//github.com/thuhcsi/S2G-MDDiffusion.

1. Introduction
Co-speech gestures, as a typical form of non-verbal behavior [7], convey a wealth of information and play an important role in human communication. Appropriate gestures complement human speech and thus benefit comprehension, persuasion, and credibility [46]. Hence providing artificial agents with human-like and speech-appropriate
gestures is crucial in human-machine interaction.
To achieve this goal, several methods have been developed for automatic co-speech gesture generation, with a
particular focus on deep learning techniques. However, they
mostly aim at generating gestures as 2D/3D human skeletons. While relatively easy to generate, skeletons totally
discard appearance information and create a disparity with
human perception [23]. As a result, they need to be further processed for better visualization. For example, some
work binds skeletons to custom virtual avatars and manually renders them using software like Blender and Maya,
consuming exhaustive human labor. Other studies [13, 27]
train independent image synthesizers [4] to translate skeletons into animated images, which still rely on hand-crafted

2263

