This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Customize your NeRF: Adaptive Source Driven 3D Scene Editing via
Local-Global Iterative Training
Runze He1,2 * Shaofei Huang1,2 * Xuecheng Nie3 Tianrui Hui4
Luoqi Liu3 Jiao Dai1,2 Jizhong Han1,2 Guanbin Li5† Si Liu6,7†
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 MT Lab, Meitu Inc.
4
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology
5
Sun Yat-sen University 6 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
7
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University
Original Scenes

Text-Driven Editing

Image-Driven Editing

20
3
“a dog standing in the forest”

“a V* dog standing in the forest”

“a basketball shoe on the mat”

“a V* shoe on the mat”

“a helmet on the fur”

“a V* hat on the fur”

“a Luffy in the exhibition hall”

“a V* statue in the exhibition hall”

24
daw
ei2
个再
优化
一下
(a)

(b) blue: textual prompt

(c) green: hybrid prompt

Figure 1. Adaptive source driven editing by CustomNeRF. Our method can accurately edit the original NeRF scene according to text
descriptions or reference images, which are formulated as textual prompts or hybrid prompts. After editing, the foreground regions exhibit
appropriate geometric and texture modifications consistent with the editing prompts. The layouts and background contents of the edited
scenes remain almost the same as the original ones.

Abstract
In this paper, we target the adaptive source driven 3D
scene editing task by proposing a CustomNeRF model that
* Equal contribution ({hrz010109, nowherespyfly}@gmail.com).
† Corresponding authors.

unifies a text description or a reference image as the editing prompt. However, obtaining desired editing results conformed with the editing prompt is nontrivial since there exist two significant challenges, including accurate editing of
only foreground regions and multi-view consistency given a
single-view reference image. To tackle the first challenge,

6966

