This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SaCo Loss: Sample-wise Affinity Consistency for Vision-Language Pre-training
Sitong Wu1, *

Haoru Tan2,∗
Zhuotao Tian3
Xiaojuan Qi2
Jiaya Jia1,3,†
1

CUHK

2

3

HKU

Yukang Chen1

SmartMore

https://github.com/dvlab-research/SaCo-Loss

Abstract
Vision-language pre-training (VLP) aims to learn joint
representations of vision and language modalities. The contrastive paradigm is currently dominant in this field. However, we observe a notable misalignment phenomenon, that
is, the affinity between samples has an obvious disparity
across different modalities, namely “Affinity Inconsistency
Problem”. Our intuition is that, for a well-aligned model,
two images that look similar to each other should have the
same level of similarity as their corresponding texts that
describe them. In this paper, we first investigate the reason of this inconsistency problem. We discover that the
lack of consideration for sample-wise affinity consistency
across modalities in existing training objectives is the central cause. To address this problem, we propose a novel loss
function, named Sample-wise affinity Consistency (SaCo)
loss, which is designed to enhance such consistency by minimizing the distance between image embedding similarity
and text embedding similarity for any two samples. Our
SaCo loss can be easily incorporated into existing visionlanguage models as an additional loss due to its complementarity for most training objectives. In addition, considering that pre-training from scratch is computationally
expensive, we also provide a more efficient way to continuously pre-train on a converged model by integrating our
loss. Experimentally, the model trained with our SaCo loss
significantly outperforms the baseline on a variety of vision
and language tasks.

1. Introduction
Vision-language pre-training (VLP) has shown remarkable
success since the emergence of contrastive vision-language
learning [55], which aims to promote the paired image and
text samples closer while simultaneously pushing unpaired
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

samples away. The following works achieved further improvements through vision masked modeling [9, 33], finegrained supervision [23, 53], label smoothing [84], augmentations [32], text refinement [11, 21] and noisy data filtering
[14, 67], and text generation supervision [26, 27]. However,
during the contrastive training process, we observe an Affinity Inconsistency Problem, that is, the correlation between
the sample-wise affinity (similarity) in language modality
and visual modality is extremely low. For a highly aligned
vision-language embedding space, the similarity between
every two images shall be similar to the similarity between
their corresponding texts, as both the paired image and text
describe the same object or scene. The detailed qualitative
(Figure 2) and quantitative (Figure 3a) analysis of this problem are discussed in Sec. 3.2.
The reason is that contrastive pre-training mainly focuses
on aligning or pushing away the cross-modal embeddings,
while ignoring whether the affinity between samples is consistent in different modalities, see Sec. 3.3 for more analysis. For better clarity, we present an illustration in Figure 1a, which depicts an embedding space with the affinity inconsistency problem. Taking three image-text pairs as
an example, the circle and square with the same color denote the embedding of paired image and text, respectively.
The blue triangle ( ) connecting three circles represents the
relationship between images. Similarly, the red triangle
( ) connecting three squares reflects the relationship between texts. The shorter side between two images or texts
means the greater affinity between them. In Figure 1a(ii),
we show the geometric inconsistency between “ ” and “ ”
in the contrastively trained space, highlighting the disparity in sample-wise affinity between the vision and language
modalities.
To address this problem, we propose a simple but effective loss function, named Sample-wise affinity Consistency
(SaCo) loss, whose core idea is to minimize the disparity
between image embedding similarity and text embedding
similarity for any two image-text pairs. Intuitively, it is designed to specifically promote the consistency of affinity

27358

