This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DPMesh: Exploiting Diffusion Prior for Occluded Human Mesh Recovery
Yixuan Zhu1 *

Ao Li2 *

Yansong Tang2†

Wenliang Zhao1

Jie Zhou1

Jiwen Lu1

1

2

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
Abstract

The recovery of occluded human meshes presents challenges for current methods due to the difﬁculty in extracting effective image features under severe occlusion. In this
paper, we introduce DPMesh, an innovative framework for
occluded human mesh recovery that capitalizes on the profound diffusion prior about object structure and spatial relationships embedded in a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model. Unlike previous methods reliant on conventional backbones for vanilla feature extraction, DPMesh
seamlessly integrates the pre-trained denoising U-Net with
potent knowledge as its image backbone and performs a
single-step inference to provide occlusion-aware information. To enhance the perception capability for occluded
poses, DPMesh incorporates well-designed guidance via
condition injection, which produces effective controls from
2D observations for the denoising U-Net. Furthermore, we
explore a dedicated noisy key-point reasoning approach to
mitigate disturbances arising from occlusion and crowded
scenarios. This strategy fully unleashes the perceptual
capability of the diffusion prior, thereby enhancing accuracy. Extensive experiments afﬁrm the efﬁcacy of our framework, as we outperform state-of-the-art methods on both
occlusion-speciﬁc and standard datasets. The persuasive
results underscore its ability to achieve precise and robust
3D human mesh recovery, particularly in challenging scenarios involving occlusion and crowded scenes. Code is
available at https://github.com/EternalEvan/
DPMesh.

1. Introduction
The goal of human mesh recovery involves estimating the
3D human pose and shape from either monocular or multiview images and videos. Over the past decade, this ﬁeld has
evolved into a burgeoning and captivating research problem,
gaining prominence for its extensive applications in ﬁlm* Equal contribution.

† Corresponding authors.

denoising
step-by-step

Pose Skeletons

Denoising U-Net

“wear helmet,
play football”
Human Structure
“astronauts,
play soccer”

Control
Net

Conditioned Image Generation
Depth Map

Spatial Interaction

one-step
extraction

Input Image

Denoising U-Net

Control
Net

Noisy Heatmap

Predicted Meshes
DPMesh

Figure 1. Main idea of the proposed DPMesh framework. We
design an innovative framework to fully exploit rich prior knowledge about human structure and spatial interaction of the pretrained diffusion model for challenging occluded human mesh recovery task. By simply adapting the denoising U-Net as a singlestep backbone with spatial conditions, we achieve accurate human
mesh recovery even under severe occlusions.

making, game development, and sports. In recent years, a
plethora of approaches [5, 8, 21, 23–25, 30, 39, 47, 49, 55]
grounded in deep learning have emerged, paving the way
to address this inherently ill-posed problem by effectively
regressing body parameters from image features.
Nonetheless, extracting more effective information from
monocular images in complex scenarios (e.g., occlusions
and crowded environments), remains a pivotal challenge.
Existing methods address the intricacies of mesh recovery
in complex scenarios by incorporating 2D prior knowledge
as hints, drawing the models’ attention to visible body parts
and reinforcing their 2D alignment proﬁciency. Following this line, mainstream methods [7, 28] intuitively apply off-the-shelf key-point detectors to achieve coarse human joints, others such as [24] and [57] introduce partial
segmentation masks and UV maps as pixel-level knowl-

1101

