This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CapHuman: Capture Your Moments in Parallel Universes
Chao Liang1
Fan Ma1
Linchao Zhu1† Yingying Deng2 Yi Yang1
1
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University 2 Huawei Technologies Ltd.
†

Corresponding author

{cs.chaoliang, zhulinchao, yangyics}@zju.edu.cn, flower.fan@foxmail.com, dyy15@outlook.com

https://caphuman.github.io
Reference Image

… a pop singer, sing, play the guitar, piano, take part in the show

… a scientist, work with Hawking, Hinton, present in a conference

3D facial prior

… an astronaut, travel over the universe, collaborate with Obama

Figure 1. Given only one reference facial photograph, our CapHuman can generate photo-realistic specific individual portraits with contentrich representations and diverse head positions, poses, facial expressions, and illuminations in different contexts.

Abstract
We concentrate on a novel human-centric image synthesis task, that is, given only one reference facial photograph,
it is expected to generate specific individual images with
diverse head positions, poses, facial expressions, and illuminations in different contexts. To accomplish this goal,
we argue that our generative model should be capable of
the following favorable characteristics: (1) a strong visual
and semantic understanding of our world and human society for basic object and human image generation. (2)
generalizable identity preservation ability. (3) flexible and
fine-grained head control. Recently, large pre-trained textto-image diffusion models have shown remarkable results,
serving as a powerful generative foundation. As a basis, we

aim to unleash the above two capabilities of the pre-trained
model. In this work, we present a new framework named
CapHuman. We embrace the “encode then learn to align”
paradigm, which enables generalizable identity preservation for new individuals without cumbersome tuning at inference. CapHuman encodes identity features and then
learns to align them into the latent space. Moreover, we introduce the 3D facial prior to equip our model with control
over the human head in a flexible and 3D-consistent manner. Extensive qualitative and quantitative analyses demonstrate our CapHuman can produce well-identity-preserved,
photo-realistic, and high-fidelity portraits with content-rich
representations and various head renditions, superior to established baselines. Code and checkpoint will be released
at https://github.com/VamosC/CapHuman.

6400

