This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Q-Instruct: Improving Low-level Visual Abilities
for Multi-modality Foundation Models
Haoning Wu1♥ , Zicheng Zhang3♥ , Erli Zhang1♥ ,
Chaofeng Chen , Liang Liao1 , Annan Wang1 , Kaixin Xu2,5 , Chunyi Li3 , Jingwen Hou2 ,
Guangtao Zhai3 , Geng Xue5 , Wenxiu Sun4 , Qiong Yan4 , Weisi Lin1,2♦
1
S-Lab for Advanced Intelligence, 2 Nanyang Technological University
3
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4
Sensetime Research
5
2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I R), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR),
1 Fusionopolis Way, 138632, Singapore
1

Q

(a) LLaVA-v1.5-7B
Which part of the image is
clear, without motion blur?
Answer with the option's letter
from the given choices directly.
A. The trees
B. The head of the children
C. The ground

C

Rate the quality of the image.
Think step by step.

Wrong

B

The image is a close-up of a hot dog on a grill, with
the grill being the main focus. The hot dog is placed on a grill
pan, and there are several hot dogs on the grill, making it a
total of ﬁve hot dogs. The grill is placed on a dining table,
which is the background of the image. The overall quality of
the image is good, as it captures the details of the hot dogs
and the grill pan, providing a clear view of the scene.

Correct

How

↑Qualitative Comparison

What

63.99%
55.76%

65.25%

(b) LLaVA-v1.5-7B (Q-Instruct)

←Quantitative Results

59.22%

The overall clarity of this image is acceptable. The
main subject, the sausage, retains most of its texture details.
The background table and the lighting are somewhat blurry,
with some noticeable noise. Therefore, the quality of this
image is considered average.

(Radar Map, on LLVisionQA-test)

47.98%

Other

68.97%

64.60%

78.64%

67.30%

Irrelevant Reasoning Inaccurate Rating Accurate Rating

(a) LLaVA-v1.5-7B
(b) LLaVA-v1.5-7B
(Q-Instruct)

63.78%

Distortion

Legend

Random (dot in the center)
Yes-or-No

LLaVA-v1.5-7B
LLaVA-v1.5-7B (Q-Instruct)

(Continued) Which is the darkest corner of the image?
58.90%

60.07%

(b) LLaVA-v1.5-7B (Q-Instruct)

(a) LLaVA-v1.5-7B

69.29%

In-context Distortion

67.80%

73.76%
79.46%

In-context Other

Overall

The darkest corner of the image is the upper left
corner, where the hot dog is placed on the grill pan.

Answering Multi-Choice Questions (MCQ)
related to Low-level Visual Perception

The darkest corner of the image is the
lower left corner.

Reasoning Quality Evaluation and Multi-turn Conversation

Figure 1. Abilities of Q-Instruct-tuned LLaVA-v1.5-7B [29] on various low-level visual tasks, in comparison with the baseline version.
Loading [MathJax]/extensions/MathMenu.js

Abstract
Multi-modality large language models (MLLMs), as represented by GPT-4V, have introduced a paradigm shift for
visual perception and understanding tasks, that a variety
of abilities can be achieved within one foundation model.
While current MLLMs demonstrate primary low-level visual abilities from the identification of low-level visual attributes (e.g., clarity, brightness) to the evaluation on image
quality, there’s still an imperative to further improve the
accuracy of MLLMs to substantially alleviate human burdens. To address this, we collect the first dataset consisting
of human natural language feedback on low-level vision.
Each feedback offers a comprehensive description of an image’s low-level visual attributes, culminating in an overall quality assessment. The constructed Q-Pathway dataset
includes 58K detailed human feedbacks on 18,973 multisourced images with diverse low-level appearance. To en♥ Equal contribution. ♦ Corresponding author.
♣ Project Page: https://q-future.github.io/Q-Instruct

sure MLLMs can adeptly handle diverse queries, we further propose a GPT-participated transformation to convert
these feedbacks into a rich set of 200K instruction-response
pairs, termed Q-Instruct. Experimental results indicate that
the Q-Instruct consistently elevates various low-level visual
capabilities across multiple base models. We anticipate that
our datasets can pave the way for a future that foundation
models can assist humans on low-level visual tasks.

1. Introduction
Computer vision has witnessed a recent paradigm shift attributed to the emergence of multi-modality large language
models (MLLMs) [7, 11, 30, 37]. These models aim to transcend traditional task-specific experts, and serve as generalpurpose foundation models capable of facilitating humans
across a variety of visual tasks [25]. Specifically, these
foundation models also bring exciting potentials in the domain of low-level visual perception and understanding.
This domain includes not only commonly-focused image

25490

