This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image Restoration by Denoising Diffusion Models with Iteratively
Preconditioned Guidance
Tomer Garber
Open University of Israel

Tom Tirer
Bar-Ilan University, Israel

tomergarber@gmail.com

tirer.tom@gmail.com

Abstract
Training deep neural networks has become a common
approach for addressing image restoration problems. An
alternative for training a “task-specific” network for each
observation model is to use pretrained deep denoisers for
imposing only the signal’s prior within iterative algorithms,
without additional training. Recently, a sampling-based
variant of this approach has become popular with the rise
of diffusion/score-based generative models. Using denoisers for general purpose restoration requires guiding the iterations to ensure agreement of the signal with the observations. In low-noise settings, guidance that is based on backprojection (BP) has been shown to be a promising strategy (used recently also under the names “pseudoinverse”
or “range/null-space” guidance). However, the presence
of noise in the observations hinders the gains from this approach. In this paper, we propose a novel guidance technique, based on preconditioning that allows traversing from
BP-based guidance to least squares based guidance along
the restoration scheme. The proposed approach is robust to
noise while still having much simpler implementation than
alternative methods (e.g., it does not require SVD or a large
number of iterations). We use it within both an optimization
scheme and a sampling-based scheme, and demonstrate its
advantages over existing methods for image deblurring and
super-resolution.

1. Introduction
Image restoration problems appear in a wide range of applications, where the goal is to recover a high-quality image
x⇤ 2 Rn from its degraded version y 2 Rm , which can
be noisy, blurry, low-resolution, etc. In many problems, the
relation between y and x⇤ can be expressed using a linear
observation model
y = Ax⇤ + e

(1)

Figure 1. Motion deblurring with noise level 0.05. From top to
bottom and left to right: original, observation, DPS [6], DiffPIR
[45] and our DDPG.

where A 2 Rm⇥n is a measurement operator with m  n,
and e ⇠ N (0, e2 Im ) is an additive white Gaussian noise.
For example, in the denoising task A is the identity matrix
In ; in the deblurring task A is a blur operator; and in the
super-resolution task A is a composition of sub-sampling
and (anti-aliasing) filtering. Image restoration problems are
ill-posed: just looking for x 2 Rn that fits y based on the
observation model does not suffice for a successful recovery. Thus, it is required to utilize prior knowledge on the
nature of x⇤ .
Nowadays, it has become common to address these problems by exhaustively training a different deep neural network (DNN) for each predefined observation model in a
supervised manner. Namely, using (1) to generate training pairs {yi , x⇤i } and training a DNN to invert the map
[8, 18, 34, 43]. However, these “task-specific” DNNs suffer from a huge performance drop when the observations at
test-time mismatch (even slightly) the assumptions made in
training [1, 28, 37], which limits their applicability in many
practical cases.
An alternative approach is to use pretrained DNNs that
impose only the signal prior, while the agreement with the

25245

