This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Boundary Discontinuity Problem for Oriented Object Detection
Hang Xu1,2 ,* Xinyuan Liu2,3∗ , Haonan Xu2,3 , Yike Ma2 , Zunjie Zhu1,4 , Chenggang Yan1 , Feng Dai2†
1
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
2
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
Lishui Institute of Hangzhou Dianzi University, Lishui, China
{hxu, zunjiezhu, cgyan}@hdu.edu.cn {liuxinyuan21s, xuhaonan23s, ykma, fdai}@ict.ac.cn

training phase

Abstract
Oriented object detection has been developed rapidly in
the past few years, where rotation equivariance is crucial
for detectors to predict rotated boxes. It is expected that the
prediction can maintain the corresponding rotation when
objects rotate, but severe mutation in angular prediction is
sometimes observed when objects rotate near the boundary
angle, which is well-known boundary discontinuity problem. The problem has been long believed to be caused by the
sharp loss increase at the angular boundary, and widely used
joint-optim IoU-like methods deal with this problem by losssmoothing. However, we experimentally find that even stateof-the-art IoU-like methods actually fail to solve the problem.
On further analysis, we find that the key to solution lies in
encoding mode of the smoothing function rather than in joint
or independent optimization. In existing IoU-like methods,
the model essentially attempts to fit the angular relationship
between box and object, where the break point at angular
boundary makes the predictions highly unstable. To deal
with this issue, we propose a dual-optimization paradigm
for angles. We decouple reversibility and joint-optim from
single smoothing function into two distinct entities, which
for the first time achieves the objectives of both correcting
angular boundary and blending angle with other parameters. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets show that
boundary discontinuity problem is well-addressed. Moreover, typical IoU-like methods are improved to the same level
without obvious performance gap. The code is available at
https://github.com/hangxu-cv/cvpr24acm.

1. Introduction
As an expansion of horizontal object detection [11, 12, 20],
oriented object detection has a wider applications in many
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

inference phase

(a)

detector

detector

(b)

detector

detector

Figure 1. Two optimization paradigms for angle in oriented object
detection: (a) in joint-optim methods [35, 36, 38, 45], smoothing function is explicitly applied for detector’s output θp during
loss calculation; (b) while in independent-optim methods [31, 41],
smoothing function is implicitly embedded in the model, and θp is
decoded from detector’s output fp . According to our analysis, only
the latter can really solve boundary discontinuity problem.

scenes, such as aerial images [3, 30], panoramic images
[13, 28, 29], scene text [9], 3D objects [43], etc, since it can
achieve a good balance between fine localization and low
labeling cost. In oriented object detection, a detector needs
to predict the minimal rotated bounding boxes for objects, so
it has a high requirement for rotation equivariance. However,
researchers have observed mutation in angular prediction
when objects rotate near the boundary angle, which is commonly known as boundary discontinuity problem [31, 35].
In previous works, the boundary discontinuity problem
has been long believed to be caused by the sharp loss increase
at the angular boundary during training. To address this problem, researchers designed a series of smooth loss functions
to prevent the sharp loss increase, and these methods can
be divided into two categories, i.e., independent-optim loss
[31, 33, 41] and joint-optim loss (dominated by IoU-like
loss) [35, 36, 38, 45]. Due to the negative impact of the
low consistency between loss and IoU-metric, the detectors
trained through the independent-optim loss are usually worse
than IoU-like loss. It has long been a consensus in object
detection [21, 40, 44], so increasing IoU-like loss methods
become mainstream choices for oriented object detectors.
However, we experimentally find that even state-of-theart IoU-like methods do not actually solve the boundary

17406

