This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unveiling the Unknown: Unleashing the Power of Unknown to Known
in Open-Set Source-Free Domain Adaptation
Fuli Wan*, Han Zhao*, Xu Yang†, and Cheng Deng†
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an710071, China
{wfl128.xidian, hzhao1698, xuyang.xd, chdeng.xd}@gmail.com

Abstract
Open-Set Source-Free Domain Adaptation aims to transfer knowledge in realistic scenarios where the target domain has additional unknown classes compared to the
limited-access source domain. Due to the absence of information on unknown classes, existing methods mainly transfer knowledge of known classes while roughly grouping
unknown classes as one, attenuating the knowledge transfer and generalization. In contrast, this paper advocates
that exploring unknown classes can better identify known
ones, and proposes a domain adaptation model to transfer
knowledge on known and unknown classes jointly. Specifically, given a source pre-trained model, we first introduce
an unknown diffuser that can determine whether classes in
space need to be split and merged through similarity measures, to estimate and generate a wider class space distribution, including known and unknown classes. Based on
such a wider space distribution, we enhance the reliability
of known class knowledge in the source pre-trained model
through contrastive constraint. Finally, various supervision
information, including reliable known class knowledge and
clustered pseudo-labels, optimize the model for impressive
knowledge transfer and generalization. Extensive experiments show that our network can achieve superior exploration and knowledge generalization on unknown classes,
while with excellent known class transfer. The code is available at https://github.com/xdwfl/UPUK.

1. Introduction
By transferring knowledge from label-rich source domains
to unlabeled target domains, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has exhibited huge potential to address the challenges of costly data labeling and domain distribution shifts
in real-world scenarios. Existing methods mainly learn the
domain invariant representation by distribution matching
* Equal contribution.
† The corresponding authors.

Source Domain

Model

Transfer

Target Domain

Existing
method
known class
bike
dog

Ours

unknown class

known class
bike
dog

unknown class
class 1 class 2 class 3

Figure 1. Comparison of existing OS-SFDA methods and our proposed method. Existing methods ignore the unknown classes by
grouping unknown classes as one, while our method can further
explore the unknown class information.

[19, 20, 34, 40, 46] and adversarial optimization [7, 21, 35],
to mitigate domain distribution shift. They can achieve impressive transfer effects by following the close-set and realtime data-accessible assumption, which shares the same
class space in source and target domains, and accesses the
source data at any time. However, in the real world, the
open-set phenomenon, where the target domain has additional unknown class space to the source domain, always
appears along with limited access to source data [5, 16]. In
such most realistic scenarios, these methods fail to transfer
knowledge without accessing source data and shared class
distribution, making the knowledge transfer in such scenarios challenging.
Recently, to tackle such a challenging and realistic task,
the open-set source-free domain adaptation (OS-SFDA) has
emerged to perform knowledge transfer in the open-set scenario by accessing only the source pre-trained model, not
the source data. Considering the lack of information on target unknown classes, existing approaches [6, 22, 31, 37]
focus on transferring knowledge of known classes through
pseudo-supervision, while grouping unknown classes as

24015

