This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Set Domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation
Seun-An Choe*

Jinwoo Choi†

Ah-Hyung Shin*
Keon-Hee Park
Gyeong-Moon Park†

Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Republic of Korea
{dragoon0905, dkgud111, pgh2874, jinwoochoi, gmpark}@khu.ac.kr

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for semantic
segmentation aims to transfer the pixel-wise knowledge
from the labeled source domain to the unlabeled target domain. However, current UDA methods typically assume
a shared label space between source and target, limiting
their applicability in real-world scenarios where novel categories may emerge in the target domain. In this paper, we
introduce Open-Set Domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation (OSDA-SS) for the first time, where the target
domain includes unknown classes. We identify two major
problems in the OSDA-SS scenario as follows: 1) the existing UDA methods struggle to predict the exact boundary of
the unknown classes, and 2) they fail to accurately predict
the shape of the unknown classes. To address these issues,
we propose Boundary and Unknown Shape-Aware openset domain adaptation, coined BUS. Our BUS can accurately discern the boundaries between known and unknown
classes in a contrastive manner using a novel dilationerosion-based contrastive loss. In addition, we propose
OpenReMix, a new domain mixing augmentation method
that guides our model to effectively learn domain and sizeinvariant features for improving the shape detection of the
known and unknown classes. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our proposed BUS effectively
detects unknown classes in the challenging OSDA-SS scenario compared to the previous methods by a large margin.
The code is available at https://github.com/KHUAGI/BUS.

1. Introduction
In semantic segmentation, a model predicts pixel-wise category labels given an input image. Semantic segmentation has a lot of applications, e.g., autonomous driving [1], human-machine interaction [2], and augmented re* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors

(a) Ground truth.

(b) UDA method (MIC [12]).

(c) Confidence-based threshold.

(d) Unknown head-expansion.
(e) BUS (Ours).
Figure 1. Visualization of prediction maps in the OSDA-SS scenario. The pixels detected by the white color mean the unknown
classes. The naive UDA method (b) is completely unaware of the
unknown classes. Even after applying simple techniques to help
the UDA model recognize the unknown, it still struggles to accurately predict the shape of the unknown, as shown in (c) and (d).

ality. Over the past decade, there has been notable advancement in supervised semantic segmentation driven by
deep neural networks [3–6]. However, supervised semantic segmentation requires pixel-level annotations, which
are labor-intensive and costly to collect. To mitigate the
challenges, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has
emerged. Many studies [7–12] leverage the already-labeled
source data to achieve high performance on the unlabeled
target data. Notably, synthetic datasets such as GTA5 [13]
and SYNTHIA [14] which are automatically generated by
game engines present valuable resources for UDA research.
UDA methods typically presume that source and target
domains share the same label space. Such an assumption
is not reasonable in real-world applications. In the target
data, novel categories not presented in the source dataset
(target-private categories) may emerge, leading to an Open-

23943

