This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spacetime Gaussian Feature Splatting for Real-Time Dynamic View Synthesis
Zhan Li1,2∗
Zhang Chen1†
1
OPPO US Research Center
lizhan@pdx.edu

zhang.chen@oppo.com

Zhong Li1†
Yi Xu1
2
Portland State University
zhong.li@oppo.com

yi.xu@oppo.com

https://oppo-us-research.github.io/SpacetimeGaussians-website/

HyperReel

Ours

32.0

Ours

31.5

Size (MB) Method

200

Ours

30.5

311

K-Planes

PSNR

31.0
30.0
29.5

(b) High Quality Result

HyperReel

500

MixVoxels-L

500

MixVoxels-X

29.0

5130 NeRFPlayer

28.5

5330 StreamRF
0

(a) Real-Time 8K Demo at 66 FPS

360

40

FPS 80

120 140

(c) Comparison on Quality, Speed and Size

Figure 1. Our dynamic scene representation achieves photorealistic quality, real-time high-resolution rendering and compact model
size. (a) Our lite-version model can render 8K 6-DoF video at 66 FPS on an Nvidia RTX 4090 GPU. (b) Example novel view rendering
of a challenging scene. (c) Quantitative comparisons of rendering quality, speed and model size with prior arts on the Neural 3D Video
Dataset.

Abstract
Novel view synthesis of dynamic scenes has been an intriguing yet challenging problem. Despite recent advancements, simultaneously achieving high-resolution photorealistic results, real-time rendering, and compact storage
remains a formidable task. To address these challenges,
we propose Spacetime Gaussian Feature Splatting as a
novel dynamic scene representation, composed of three pivotal components. First, we formulate expressive Spacetime
Gaussians by enhancing 3D Gaussians with temporal opacity and parametric motion/rotation. This enables Spacetime Gaussians to capture static, dynamic, as well as transient content within a scene. Second, we introduce splatted feature rendering, which replaces spherical harmonics
with neural features. These features facilitate the modeling
of view- and time-dependent appearance while maintaining
small size. Third, we leverage the guidance of training error and coarse depth to sample new Gaussians in areas that
are challenging to converge with existing pipelines. Experiments on several established real-world datasets demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art rendering
quality and speed, while retaining compact storage. At 8K

resolution, our lite-version model can render at 60 FPS on
an Nvidia RTX 4090 GPU.

1. Introduction
Photorealistic modeling of real-world dynamic scenes has
been persistently pursued in computer vision and graphics. It allows users to freely explore dynamic scenes at
novel viewpoints and timestamps, thus providing strong immersive experience, and can vastly benefit applications in
VR/AR, broadcasting, education, etc.
Recent advances in novel view synthesis, especially
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [66], have greatly improved
the convenience and fidelity of static scene modeling from
casual multi-view inputs in non-lab environments. Since
then, large quantities of work [6–8, 15, 18, 27, 41, 67, 82]
have emerged aiming to enhance rendering quality and
speed. Particularly, [18, 41] propose to use anisotropic radial basis functions as 3D representations, which are highly
adaptive to scene structures and boost the modeling of de† Corresponding authors.
∗ Work done while Zhan was an intern at OPPO US Research Center.

8508

