This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MeshGPT: Generating Triangle Meshes with Decoder-Only Transformers
Yawar Siddiqui1 Antonio Alliegro2 Alexey Artemov1
Tatiana Tommasi Daniele Sirigatti3 Vladislav Rosov3 Angela Dai1 Matthias Nießner1
2

Technical University of Munich1

Politecnico di Torino2

AUDI AG3

Figure 1. Our method creates triangle meshes by autoregressively sampling from a transformer model that has been trained to produce
tokens from a learned geometric vocabulary. These tokens can then be decoded into the faces of a triangle mesh. Our method generates
clean, coherent, and compact meshes, characterized by sharp edges and high fidelity.

Abstract
We introduce MeshGPT, a new approach for generating triangle meshes that reflects the compactness typical of
artist-created meshes, in contrast to dense triangle meshes
extracted by iso-surfacing methods from neural fields. Inspired by recent advances in powerful large language models, we adopt a sequence-based approach to autoregressively generate triangle meshes as sequences of triangles.
We first learn a vocabulary of latent quantized embeddings,
using graph convolutions, which inform these embeddings
of the local mesh geometry and topology. These embeddings
are sequenced and decoded into triangles by a decoder, ensuring that they can effectively reconstruct the mesh. A
transformer is then trained on this learned vocabulary to
predict the index of the next embedding given previous embeddings. Once trained, our model can be autoregressively
sampled to generate new triangle meshes, directly generating compact meshes with sharp edges, more closely imitating the efficient triangulation patterns of human-crafted
meshes. MeshGPT demonstrates a notable improvement
over state of the art mesh generation methods, with a 9%
increase in shape coverage and a 30-point enhancement in
FID scores across various categories.

1. Introduction
Triangle meshes are the main representation for 3D geometry in computer graphics. They are the predominant representation for 3D assets used in video games, movies, and

virtual reality interfaces. Compared to alternative 3D shape
representations such as point clouds or voxels, meshes provide a more coherent surface representation; they are more
controllable, easier to manipulate, more compact, and fit directly into modern rendering pipelines, attaining high visual
quality with far fewer primitives. In this paper, we tackle the
task of automated generation of triangle meshes, streamlining the process of crafting 3D assets.
Recently, 3D vision research has seen great interest in
generative 3D models using representations such as voxels [2, 60], point clouds [37, 64, 65], and neural fields [14,
19, 31, 35, 41]. However, these representations must then
be converted into meshes through a post-process for use in
downstream applications, for instance by iso-surfacing with
Marching Cubes [36]. Unfortunately, this results in dense,
over-tessellated meshes that often exhibit oversmoothing
and bumpy artifacts from the iso-surfacing, as shown in Figure 2. In contrast, artist-modeled 3D meshes are compact in
representation, while maintaining sharp details with much
fewer triangles.
Thus, we propose MeshGPT1 to generate a mesh representation directly, as a set of triangles. Inspired by powerful recent advances in generative models for language,
we adopt a direct sequence generation approach to synthesize triangle meshes as sequences of triangles. Following
text generation paradigms, we first learn a vocabulary of
triangles. Triangles are encoded into latent quantized embeddings through an encoder. To encourage learned trian1 nihalsid.github.io/mesh-gpt

19615

