This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

All in One Framework for Multimodal Re-identiﬁcation in the Wild
He Li1 Mang Ye1 * Ming Zhang2 Bo Du1
1
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence,
School of Computer Science, Hubei Luojia Laboratory,Wuhan University, Wuhan, China,
2
Guangzhou Urban Planning Design Survey Research Institute, Guangzhou, China
Target

Abstract

Uncertain Descriptive Query

The man is
wearing black
and white
tennis shoes
with a pair of…

Real-World
ReID

T
RGB

Model 1
5*%ĺ5*%

IR

Sketch

Text

Model 2

Model 3

Model 4

Model 5

‫ ݶ‬,5ĺ5*% ‫ ݶ‬6NHWFKĺ5*% ‫ ݶ‬7H[Wĺ5*% ‫ݶ‬6NHWFK7H[Wĺ5*%

Unable to Generalize to Other Modalities

(a) Existing Methods
(b) Our Method

Sketch

Cross-modal
Heads

IR

Multi-Modal
Encoder

RGB

Multi-Modal
Tokenizer

In Re-identiﬁcation (ReID), recent advancements yield
noteworthy progress in both unimodal and cross-modal retrieval tasks. However, the challenge persists in developing a uniﬁed framework that could effectively handle varying multimodal data, including RGB, infrared, sketches,
and textual information. Additionally, the emergence of
large-scale models shows promising performance in various vision tasks but the foundation model in ReID is still
blank. In response to these challenges, a novel multimodal
learning paradigm for ReID is introduced, referred to as
All-in-One (AIO), which harnesses a frozen pre-trained big
model as an encoder, enabling effective multimodal retrieval without additional ﬁne-tuning. The diverse multimodal data in AIO are seamlessly tokenized into a uniﬁed space, allowing the modality-shared frozen encoder to
extract identity-consistent features comprehensively across
all modalities. Furthermore, a meticulously crafted ensemble of cross-modality heads is designed to guide the learning trajectory. AIO is the ﬁrst framework to perform allin-one ReID, encompassing four commonly used modalities. Experiments on cross-modal and multimodal ReID
reveal that AIO not only adeptly handles various modal
data but also excels in challenging contexts, showcasing
exceptional performance in zero-shot and domain generalization scenarios. Code will be available at: https:
//github.com/lihe404/AIO.

AIO: All modalities
in One framework

T
Text

Capable to Process Missing and Multimodal Input

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed AIO and existing methods. (a) Existing ReID methods [7, 68, 86] independently learn
the cross-modal ReID models, incapable of handling the uncertain
input modalities in real-world scenarios. (b) Our proposed AIO
framework exhibits the capability to proﬁciently manage diverse
combinations of input modalities, thus addressing the inherent uncertainties prevalent in practical deployment scenarios.

1. Introduction
Person Re-identiﬁcation (ReID) aims to retrieve a target
person captured by multiple non-overlapping cameras [69].
It is widely used in intelligent surveillance, security, and
many other ﬁelds. ReID has been deeply studied in recent
years and achieves human-level performance in both unimodal and cross-modal retrieval tasks [1, 21, 68, 77].
Existing works are capable of retrieving between RGB
* Corresponding Author: Mang Ye (yemang@whu.edu.cn)

images or leveraging different modalities of the query (e.g.
infrared (IR), sketch, or text) to ﬁnd the person in RGB images [13, 22, 23, 64, 72]. However, RGB images are susceptible to environmental light ﬂuctuations, while IR and
sketch images lack vital color information crucial for ReID
tasks. The adage “a picture is worth a thousand words” underscores the ease of accessing textual information, though
it falls short in providing intricate visual details [51]. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 1(a) and Tab. 1, existing cross-modal

17459

