This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OTE: Exploring Accurate Scene Text Recognition Using One Token
Jianjun Xu, Yuxin Wang*, Hongtao Xie, Yongdong Zhang
University of Science and Technology of China
xujj1998@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {wangyx58,htxie,zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel framework to fully exploit the potential of a single vector for scene text recognition (STR). Different from previous sequence-to-sequence
methods that rely on a sequence of visual tokens to represent scene text images, we prove that just one token is
enough to characterize the entire text image and achieve accurate text recognition. Based on this insight, we introduce
a new paradigm for STR, called One Token rEcognizer
(OTE). Specifically, we implement an image-to-vector encoder to extract the fine-grained global semantics, eliminating the need for sequential features. Furthermore, an
elegant yet potent vector-to-sequence decoder is designed
to adaptively diffuse global semantics to corresponding
character locations, enabling both autoregressive and nonautoregressive decoding schemes. By executing decoding
within a high-level representational space, our vector-tosequence (V2S) approach avoids the alignment issues between visual tokens and character embeddings prevalent
in traditional sequence-to-sequence methods. Remarkably,
due to introducing character-wise fine-grained information,
such global tokens also boost the performance of scene
text retrieval tasks. Extensive experiments on synthetic and
real datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method
by achieving new state-of-the-art results on various public STR benchmarks. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/Xu-Jianjun/OTE.

1. Introduction
Scene Text Recognition (STR) is an important task in computer vision that aims to read the text content of a given
cropped scene image. Due to the provision of rich semantic information, it is widely applied in fields such as
autonomous driving, visual question answering, and augmented reality.
Most deep learning methods [5, 8, 9, 12, 44, 47] regard
scene text recognition as a sequence labeling or sequence
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparison between previous methods and our OTE. (a)
The previous methods typically use an image-to-sequence encoder
to extract visual features and a sequence-to-sequence decoder to
align character embeddings and visual tokens. (b) Our method
utilizes an image-to-vector encoder to extract the multi-granularity
global semantic and employs a vector-to-sequence decoder to predict the sequence by reusing this global semantic, avoiding the
process of aligning character embeddings with partial visual tokens.

transcription problem. Such sequence-based pipelines generally employ image-to-sequence encoders for extracting
visual feature sequences, which are subsequently decoded
into text sequences using sequence-to-sequence (S2S) decoders, typically implemented in two forms: attentionbased [5, 9, 37, 41] and CTC-based [8, 31], as shown in
Fig. 1. Specifically, attention-based decoders utilize the
cross-attention mechanism to intricately focus on different
visual feature sequence segments while predicting different
characters. For example, in recognizing the word “Kevin”,
the decoder sequentially identifies each character—‘K’, ‘e’,
‘v’, ‘i’, ‘n’—by actively querying specific visual features.
However, these methods are critically contingent upon the
accuracy of the attention map, and attention drift can drastically undermine the performance, leading to significant accuracy losses. In contrast, CTC-based methods typically
allocate a unique output token for each anticipated character, integrating a special ‘blank’ label to address alignment
issues. However, this approach frequently necessitates substantial post-processing to manage blank and repeated char-

28327

