This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAS: Multi-view Ancestral Sampling
for 3D Motion Generation Using 2D Diffusion
Roy Kapon, Guy Tevet, Daniel Cohen-Or and Amit H. Bermano
Tel Aviv University
roykapon@mail.tau.ac.il

Figure 1. 3D motions generated by Multi-view Ancestral Sampling (MAS) — each one using a different initial noise. Our method generates
novel 3D motions using a 2D diffusion model. As such, it enables learning intricate 3D motion synthesis solely from monocular video
data.

Abstract
We introduce Multi-view Ancestral Sampling (MAS), a
method for 3D motion generation, using 2D diffusion models that were trained on motions obtained from in-the-wild
videos. As such, MAS opens opportunities to exciting and
diverse fields of motion previously under-explored as 3D
data is scarce and hard to collect. MAS works by simultaneously denoising multiple 2D motion sequences representing
different views of the same 3D motion. It ensures consistency across all views at each diffusion step by combining
the individual generations into a unified 3D sequence, and
projecting it back to the original views. We demonstrate
MAS on 2D pose data acquired from videos depicting professional basketball maneuvers, rhythmic gymnastic performances featuring a ball apparatus, and horse races. In each
of these domains, 3D motion capture is arduous, and yet,
MAS generates diverse and realistic 3D sequences. Unlike the Score Distillation approach, which optimizes each
sample by repeatedly applying small fixes, our method uses
a sampling process that was constructed for the diffusion
framework. As we demonstrate, MAS avoids common issues such as out-of-domain sampling and mode-collapse.
https://guytevet.github.io/mas-page/

1. Introduction
3D motion generation is an increasingly popular field that
has prominent applications in computer-animated films,
video games, virtual reality, and more. One of the main bottlenecks of current approaches is reliance on 3D data, which
is typically acquired by actors in motion capture studios or
created by professional animation artists. Both forms of
data acquisition are costly, not scalable, do not capture inthe-wild behavior, and leave entire motion domains underexplored.
Fortunately, the ubiquity of video cameras leads to
countless high-quality recordings of a wide variety of motions. Naively, a possible way to leverage these videos for
motion generation tasks is extracting 3D pose estimations
and using them as training data. However, pose estimation
methods are mostly trained using 3D data [19, 31], thus inheriting the mentioned data limitations. Some methods only
require 2D data [5, 37], but suffer from noticeable artifacts
and temporal inconsistencies.
Recently, Azadi et al. [2] and Zhang et al. [45] incorporated 3D motions estimated from images or videos into
motion synthesis applications. The former used them to
enrich an existing motion capture dataset and the latter as
reference motions while learning a physically-based Rein11965

