This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NB-GTR: Narrow-Band Guided Turbulence Removal
Yifei Xia1,2
1

Chu Zhou3

Chengxuan Zhu3

Minggui Teng1,2

Chao Xu3

Boxin Shi1,2 *

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3

National Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University

{yfxia, zhou chu, peterzhu, minggui teng, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn, xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The removal of atmospheric turbulence is crucial for
long-distance imaging. Leveraging the stochastic nature
of atmospheric turbulence, numerous algorithms have been
developed that employ multi-frame input to mitigate the turbulence. However, when limited to a single frame, existing algorithms face substantial performance drops, particularly in diverse real-world scenes. In this paper, we propose a robust solution to turbulence removal from an RGB
image under the guidance of an additional narrow-band image, broadening the applicability of turbulence mitigation
techniques in real-world imaging scenarios. Our approach
exhibits a substantial suppression in the magnitude of turbulence artifacts by using only a pair of images, thereby
enhancing the clarity and fidelity of the captured scene.

1. Introduction
Atmospheric turbulence is a common yet annoying physical phenomenon that degrades the image quality. Recently,
learning-based single-image turbulence removal (SITR)
methods [5, 25, 26, 30, 39, 40] have been proposed to handle this problem by extracting features from a large amount
of training data, offering visually plausible results and high
efficiency. However, their performance in handling challenging turbulence scenarios encounters limitations, as accurately distinguishing image content from complex turbulence field using only a single observation remains a significantly challenging task due to the highly ill-posed nature of
this problem, which is illustrated in Figure 1.
To alleviate ill-posedness and enhance the overall performance of turbulence removal, some methods propose to
restore the turbulence-free image from multiple consecutive degenerate images [3, 10, 18, 22, 23, 27, 42], utilizing
the time-varying physical properties of atmospheric turbulence (e.g., the lucky frame phenomenon [11], where clearer
* Corresponding author.

Incident light

RGB image

Narrowband filter

TurbNet

Guide
Narrow-band image

Ours

Figure 1. Illustration of the workflow of our narrow-band image
guided turbulence removal approach (NB-GTR) and single-image
turbulence removal methods (SITR, taking TurbNet [25] as an example). TurbNet [25] processes the degenerated image without
any guidance, resulting in inferior performance, while our NBGTR utilizes an additional captured narrow-band image as a guidance, producing a clearer restoration of the original scene with
richer details.

frames occasionally appear in turbulent sequences, and the
zero-mean statistics [44] of turbulence, indicating a timedependent zero-mean Gaussian distribution of tilt). With
the temporal diversity exploited from multiple consecutive
images, these methods usually show better detail recovery
ability and higher robustness. However, multiimage approaches require capturing a sequence of frames (usually
10, 12, or 16 [10, 30, 42]) to acquire sufficient information
about atmospheric turbulence or to encounter the so-called
lucky frames. Moreover, possible motion in practical scenarios can further add to this inconvenience. It is therefore
of great interest to explore a trade-off solution that balances
the robustness of enhancing results and the convenience of
capturing efforts (hopefully using one or two images).
In this work, we propose NB-GTR, a Narrow-Band
Guided Turbulence Removal approach, aiming to remove
the turbulence in a single degenerated RGB image under
the guidance from an additional narrow-band image cap-

24934

