This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SHiNe: Semantic Hierarchy Nexus for Open-vocabulary Object Detection

Abstract

A complicated series of connections between different things.

1. Introduction

SemanEc Hierarchy Nexus Classiﬁer (Ours)
Super-categories

Sub-categories
Oﬀ-the-shelf Open-vocabulary Object Detector
Baseline
184 CoIs
317 CoIs

User C

User B

61 CoIs
User D

18 CoIs

User E
5 CoIs

500 CoIs

User A
Finest

SHiNe (Ours)

mA P 5 0

(%)

User F
Coarsest

90
80
70
60
50
40

Open-vocabulary object detection (OvOD) has transformed detection into a language-guided task, empowering users to freely define their class vocabularies of interest
during inference. However, our initial investigation indicates that existing OvOD detectors exhibit significant variability when dealing with vocabularies across various semantic granularities, posing a concern for real-world deployment. To this end, we introduce Semantic Hierarchy
Nexus (SHiNe), a novel classifier that uses semantic knowledge from class hierarchies. It runs offline in three steps:
i) it retrieves relevant super-/sub-categories from a hierarchy for each target class; ii) it integrates these categories
into hierarchy-aware sentences; iii) it fuses these sentence
embeddings to generate the nexus classifier vector. Our
evaluation on various detection benchmarks demonstrates
that SHiNe enhances robustness across diverse vocabulary granularities, achieving up to +31.9% mAP50 with
ground truth hierarchies, while retaining improvements using hierarchies generated by large language models. Moreover, when applied to open-vocabulary classification on
ImageNet-1k, SHiNe improves the CLIP zero-shot baseline
by +2.8% accuracy. SHiNe is training-free and can be
seamlessly integrated with any off-the-shelf OvOD detector,
without incurring additional computational overhead during inference. The code is open source.

Standard CoI Name Classiﬁer
Ball
Car
Bat
Helmet
Tree
…
Person
Glasses

Mingxuan Liu1,2 * Tyler L. Hayes2 Elisa Ricci1,3 Gabriela Csurka2 Riccardo Volpi2
2
3
1
University of Trento
NAVER LABS Europe
Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Figure 1. (Top) Classifier comparison for open-vocabulary object detectors: (Left) standard methods use solely class names in
the vocabulary specified by the user to extract text embeddings;
(Right) our proposed SHiNe fuses information from super-/subcategories into nexus points to generate hierarchy-aware representations. (Bottom) Open-vocabulary detection performance at different levels of vocabulary granularity specified by users: A standard Baseline under-performs and presents significant variability;
SHiNe allows for improved and more uniform performance across
various vocabularies. Results are on the iNatLoc [6] dataset.

Definition of Nexus, Oxford Dictionary

Open-vocabulary object detection (OvOD) [18, 59, 65,
73] transforms the object detection task into a languageguided matching problem between visual regions and class
names. Leveraging weak supervisory signals and a prealigned vision-language space from Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [22, 42], OvOD methods [18, 29, 65, 72, 73] extend the ability of models to localize and categorize objects
beyond the trained categories. Under the OvOD paradigm,
target object classes are described using text prompts like
"a {Class Name}", rather than class indices. By alter* Correspondence to: mingxuan.liu@unitn.it

ing the "{Class Name}", OvOD methods enable users to
freely define their own Classes of Interest (CoIs) using natural language. This allows new classes of interest to be detected without the need for model re-training.
Yet, recent studies for open-vocabulary classification [14, 38, 40] highlight a key challenge: open-vocabulary
methods are sensitive to the choice of vocabulary. For instance, Parashar et al. [40] enhanced CLIP’s zero-shot performance by substituting scientific CoI names, like "Rosa",
with common English names, such as "Rose". Recent
OvOD models have improved performance by better aligning object features with the VLM semantic space [26, 60].
However, a pivotal question remains: Are off-the-shelf

16634

