This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SNIDA: Unlocking Few-Shot Object Detection with
Non-linear Semantic Decoupling Augmentation
Yanjie Wang1,2 , Xu Zou1,2, *, Luxin Yan1,2 , Sheng Zhong1,2 , Jiahuan Zhou 3
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China
2
National Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology, China
3
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China

Motivation

{aiawyj, zoux, yanluxin, zhongsheng}@hust.edu.cn, jiahuanzhou@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Once only a few-shot annotated samples are available, the performance of learning-based object detection
would be heavily dropped. Many few-shot object detection
(FSOD) methods have been proposed to tackle this issue
by adopting image-level augmentations in linear manners.
Nevertheless, those handcrafted enhancements often suffer from limited diversity and lack of semantic awareness,
resulting in unsatisfactory performance. To this end, we
propose a Semantic-guided Non-linear Instance-level Data
Augmentation method (SNIDA) for FSOD by decoupling the
foreground and background to increase their diversities respectively. We design a semantic awareness enhancement
strategy to separate objects from backgrounds. Concretely,
masks of instances are extracted by an unsupervised semantic segmentation module. Then the diversity of samples would be improved by fusing instances into different
backgrounds. Considering the shortcomings of augmenting
images in a limited transformation space of existing traditional data augmentation methods, we introduce an object
reconstruction enhancement module. The aim of this module is to generate sufficient diversity and non-linear training data at the instance level through a semantic-guided
masked autoencoder. In this way, the potential of data
can be fully exploited in various object detection scenarios.
Extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC and MS-COCO
demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms baselines by a large margin and achieves new state-of-the-art
results under different shot settings.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning based methods have
achieved impressive performance in a variety of visual
tasks, such as object recognition [38, 39], and image segmentation [17, 30]. However, it relies heavily on abundant
* Corresponding author.

Original
image
AP: 52.3

AP: 48.0

AP: 56.9

AP: 65.7

AP: 64.2

AP: 66.9

AP: 54.2

AP: 48.4

AP: 57.8

AP: 63.6

AP: 62.5

AP: 64.1

1 shot

10 shot

Aug to
10 shot

Aug to
10 shot
(Ours)

Figure 1. Confidence weighting maps under different shot settings
on PASCAL VOC. N-shot means each category with N annotations during finetuning. Aug to 10 shot indicates data augmentation from 1-shot to 10-shot with traditional linear augmentation
methods (including flipping, rotating, scaling, and cutting). Our
method (row.4 vs row.5) better adapts to the shape characteristics
of various categories, which means our method possesses superior
semantic awareness capabilities.

annotated data, which limits their applicability to some realistic scenes, where samples are hard to collect or annotations are expensive. In contrast, humans can quickly grasp a
novel concept with few samples. To bridge the gap between
the performance of deep learning and the ability of humans,
few-shot Object detection (FSOD) [9, 34, 45] has attracted
much attention. FSOD, typically with only K instances per

12544

