This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PAD: Patch-Agnostic Defense against Adversarial Patch Attacks
Lihua Jing1,2 , Rui Wang1,2 *, Wenqi Ren3 , Xin Dong1,2 , Cong Zou1,2
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
{jinglihua, wangrui, dongxin, zoucong}@iie.ac.cn, renwq3@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial patch attacks present a significant threat to
real-world object detectors due to their practical feasibility. Existing defense methods, which rely on attack data
or prior knowledge, struggle to effectively address a wide
range of adversarial patches. In this paper, we show two
inherent characteristics of adversarial patches, semantic independence and spatial heterogeneity, independent of their
appearance, shape, size, quantity, and location. Semantic independence indicates that adversarial patches operate autonomously within their semantic context, while spatial heterogeneity manifests as distinct image quality of the
patch area that differs from original clean image due to the
independent generation process. Based on these observations, we propose PAD, a novel adversarial patch localization and removal method that does not require prior knowledge or additional training. PAD offers patch-agnostic defense against various adversarial patches, compatible with
any pre-trained object detectors. Our comprehensive digital
and physical experiments involving diverse patch types, such
as localized noise, printable, and naturalistic patches, exhibit notable improvements over state-of-the-art works. Our
code is available at https://github.com/Lihua-Jing/PAD.

Clean image

(a) Denoising-based defense

(b) External segmenter-based defense

Adversarial image

(c) Entropy-based defense

(d) PAD (Ours)

Figure 1. When attacked by natural-looking adversarial patches,
(a) locates high-frequency areas, and eliminates edge lines instead
of patches [33]; (b) fails to detect the existence of patches since no
such patch data in the training set [28]; (c) produces a heat map
where the patch area and background are difficult to distinguish,
failing to locate the patches [42]. Our proposed PAD achieves accurate patch location and removal.

1. Introduction

fenses [46, 50]. Among these, methods falling under the second category, which act as preprocessing, offer the broadest
range of applications.
Researchers have explored various patch localization
methods to effectively remove adversarial patches from images. Denoising-based defenses [33] smooth out noise-like
regions in images, providing an effective defense against
early localized noise patches. However, they fail to address
natural-looking patches. External segmenter-based defenses
[10, 28] train an adversarial patch segmentation model for
patch localization, using adversarial images generated by
existing attack techniques. However, the reliance on training data makes them ineffective against unseen patch types.
Entropy-based defenses [7, 42] achieve patch localization
by identifying high entropy kernels and patch shape reconstruction. Nevertheless, the entropy threshold setting requires prior knowledge of the distribution for clean data and
patches, and shape reconstruction relies on training data,
posing challenges in practical applications. Despite progress
in certain aspects, these methods face a common challenge
of locating various adversarial patches without relying on
prior attack knowledge. As shown in Figure 1, these three
categories of methods fail to effectively remove patch areas.
In this paper, we propose a new approach for various adversarial patch localization without relying on prior attack

Adversarial attacks substantially challenge the security of
object detectors, leading to potentially severe consequences
in various fields (e.g., autonomous driving). Traditional adversarial attacks typically involve adding perturbations to
the entire image. However, modifying every pixel is unrealistic in real-world attack scenarios. Adversarial patch attacks, on the other hand, focus on introducing disturbances
in a limited area. Their practical feasibility makes them one
of the most threatening forms of adversarial attacks.
Defenses against adversarial patch attacks on object detectors can be broadly categorized into three main types: i)
modifying or intervening within detection models [21, 23,
39], ii) locating and eliminating adversarial patch regions
in images[7, 10, 28, 33, 42], and iii) certifiably robust de* Corresponding author

24472

