This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Guess The Unseen: Dynamic 3D Scene Reconstruction from Partial 2D Glimpses
Inhee Lee

Byungjun Kim
Hanbyul Joo
Seoul National University

For Teaser (light)
{ininin0516, byungjun.kim, hbjoo}@snu.ac.kr
https://snuvclab.github.io/gtu/

Occluded partial observations

Novel View Synthesis

Input: Monocular Video

Novel Pose Synthesis

Output: Animatable Person 3D-GS

Figure 1. We present a method to reconstruct dynamic scenes from a monocular video capturing partial 2D observations. As a key advantage,
our method can estimate the unseen body parts by leveraging a pre-trained diffusion model [40] via SDS method [37]. The reconstructed
scenes can be rendered to any viewpoint and each human body can be transformed into any body posture controlled by SMPL [27]
parameters.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a method to reconstruct the
world and multiple dynamic humans in 3D from a monocular video input. As a key idea, we represent both the world
and multiple humans via the recently emerging 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3D-GS) representation, enabling to conveniently
and efficiently compose and render them together. In particular, we address the scenarios with severely limited and
sparse observations in 3D human reconstruction, a common
challenge encountered in the real world. To tackle this challenge, we introduce a novel approach to optimize the 3D-GS
representation in a canonical space by fusing the sparse cues
in the common space, where we leverage a pre-trained 2D
diffusion model to synthesize unseen views while keeping the
consistency with the observed 2D appearances. We demonstrate our method can reconstruct high-quality animatable
3D humans in various challenging examples, in the presence
of occlusion, image crops, few-shot, and extremely sparse

observations. After reconstruction, our method is capable of
not only rendering the scene in any novel views at arbitrary
time instances, but also editing the 3D scene by removing
individual humans or applying different motions for each
human. Through various experiments, we demonstrate the
quality and efficiency of our methods over alternative existing approaches.

1. Introduction
The process of digitizing our world in 3D necessitates
the reconstruction of not only static environmental elements
but also dynamic objects, particularly humans. Given the
limited availability of multi-view camera setups, a groundbreaking leap can be achieved by developing a 4D reconstruction method capable of rendering the scenes at novel
views and arbitrary times just using a monocular video input. Reconstructing static components (e.g., buildings) from
monocular video benefits from the well-established multi-

1062

