This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalized Predictive Model for Autonomous Driving
Jiazhi Yang1∗ Shenyuan Gao2,1∗ Yihang Qiu1∗ Li Chen3,1† Tianyu Li1 Bo Dai1
Kashyap Chitta4,5 Penghao Wu1 Jia Zeng1 Ping Luo3 Jun Zhang2♮
Andreas Geiger4,5♮ Yu Qiao1♮ Hongyang Li1†
1

OpenDriveLab and Shanghai AI Lab 2 Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
3
University of Hong Kong 4 University of Tübingen 5 Tübingen AI Center

OpenDV-2K

GenAD

2000+ hours Multimodal Driving Data

Generalized Predictive Model
t

YouTube Driving Videos

Tasks

t+1

1. Zero-Shot Generalization
Observed

t+2

…

Diverse
Paired
“ Texts ”

KITTI

GenAD
…

“ Forward ”

Public Driving
Datasets
VLM / LLM

Imagined

Waymo

Cityscapes

Iterative & joint denoising

2. Language-conditioned Prediction

3. Action-conditioned Prediction

Control with different
texts (command/context)

Control with different
future trajectory

Imagine

4. Planning
Control with highlevel command

Imagine

“Turn left towards
the mountain”

GenAD

“Change to
the left lane”

Lightweight
Planner

Predicted
Trajectory

Figure 1. Overview of the GenAD paradigm. We aim to establish a generalized video prediction paradigm for autonomous driving by
presenting the largest multimodal driving video dataset to date, OpenDV-2K, and a generative model that predicts the future given past
visual and textual input, GenAD. The strong generalization and controllability of GenAD is validated spanning a diverse spectrum of tasks,
including zero-shot domain transfer, language-conditioned prediction, action-conditioned prediction, and motion planning.

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the first large-scale video
prediction model in the autonomous driving discipline. To
eliminate the restriction of high-cost data collection and
empower the generalization ability of our model, we acquire massive data from the web and pair it with diverse
and high-quality text descriptions. The resultant dataset
accumulates over 2000 hours of driving videos, spanning
areas all over the world with diverse weather conditions
and traffic scenarios. Inheriting the merits from recent la∗ Equal contribution, ordered by coin toss. ♮ Equal co-advising.
† Project lead. Primary contact: yangjiazhi@opendrivelab.com

tent diffusion models, our model, dubbed GenAD, handles
the challenging dynamics in driving scenes with novel temporal reasoning blocks. We showcase that it can generalize to various unseen driving datasets in a zero-shot manner, surpassing general or driving-specific video prediction
counterparts. Furthermore, GenAD can be adapted into an
action-conditioned prediction model or a motion planner,
holding great potential for real-world driving applications.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving agents, as a promising application of
high-level artificial intelligence, perceive the surrounding

14662

