This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spin-UP: Spin Light for Natural Light Uncalibrated Photometric Stereo
Zongrui Li1,2, * Zhan Lu2,4,⇤,† Haojie Yan3,4 Boxin Shi5,6 Gang Pan3,4 Qian Zheng3,4,‡ Xudong Jiang1,2
1

Rapid-Rich Object Search (ROSE) Lab, Interdisciplinary Graduate Programme, Nanyang Technological University
2

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
3
4

5

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University

The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
6

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University

{zongrui001, zhan007, EXDJiang}@ntu.edu.sg, {hjyan, gpan, qianzheng}@zju.edu.cn, shiboxin@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Natural Light Uncalibrated Photometric Stereo
(NaUPS) relieves the strict environment and light assumptions in classical Uncalibrated Photometric Stereo (UPS)
methods. However, due to the intrinsic ill-posedness and
high-dimensional ambiguities, addressing NaUPS is still
an open question. Existing works impose strong assumptions on the environment lights and objects’ material,
restricting the effectiveness in more general scenarios.
Alternatively, some methods leverage supervised learning with intricate models while lacking interpretability,
resulting in a biased estimation. In this work, we propose
Spin Light Uncalibrated Photometric Stereo (Spin-UP),
an unsupervised method to tackle NaUPS in various
environment lights and objects. The proposed method
uses a novel setup that captures the object’s images on a
rotatable platform, which mitigates NaUPS’s ill-posedness
by reducing unknowns and provides reliable priors to
alleviate NaUPS’s ambiguities. Leveraging neural inverse
rendering and the proposed training strategies, Spin-UP
recovers surface normals, environment light, and isotropic
reflectance under complex natural light with low computational cost. Experiments have shown that Spin-UP
outperforms other supervised / unsupervised NaUPS methods and achieves state-of-the-art performance on synthetic
and real-world datasets. Codes and data are available at
https://github.com/LMozart/CVPR2024-SpinUP.

1. Introduction
Natural light uncalibrated photometric stereo (NaUPS) [6]
is proposed to relieve the dark room and directional light as* Co-first author. ‡Corresponding author.
† Work completed while interning at the State Key Lab of Brain-

Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University.

sumption in classical uncalibrated photometric stereo, aiming to reconstruct the surface normal given images of an
object captured at arbitrary environment light. The implications of NaUPS are far-reaching: it makes photometric
stereo universal. However, solving NaUPS is still an open
question because of the intrinsic ill-posedness introduced
by the varying light of each image and the high dimensional
ambiguities between the light and objects [6].
Previous optimization-based methods use the simple
light model to represent the varying environment lights and
Lambertian reflectance to represent the material [6, 7, 21].
These models help mitigate the ill-posedness and ambiguities to some extent but become ineffective in handling
objects with general reflectance (e.g., non-Lambertian reflectance) under complex environment light, leading to unsatisfactory reconstruction outcomes. Besides, since they
solely model the varying lights in each image, the unknowns
introduced by the light model may increase with the resolution and numbers of the images, restricting their method to
low-resolution and insufficient images.
Considering the difficulties of explicitly mitigating the
ill-posedness and ambiguities, recent advances [10, 11] turn
to data-driven methods: they train a deep learning model
on large-scale datasets and implicitly exploit deep light features from images to improve performance. However, those
methods lack interpretability, making them hard to constrain during training. Consequently, the model may be affected by the data bias and prone to specific types of light
sources [10] or reflection variations [11] among images.
Despite a persistent exploration in this research field, a
method capable of handling general objects under natural
light while free from data bias is still missing. In this paper,
we provide a new perspective on solving NaUPS. Specifically, we propose a novel setup that acquires images on a rotatable platform under a static environment light. In such a

11905

