This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C APS F USION: Rethinking Image-Text Data at Scale
Qiying Yu1,2 * Quan Sun2∗ Xiaosong Zhang2 Yufeng Cui2
Yue Cao3 Xinlong Wang2† Jingjing Liu1
1 Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University

Fan Zhang2

2 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence

3 Independent Researcher

Code & Dataset: https://github.com/baaivision/CapsFusion

Abstract

CapsFusion
CapsFusion

Large multimodal models demonstrate remarkable generalist ability to perform diverse multimodal tasks in a zeroshot manner. Large-scale web-based image-text pairs contribute fundamentally to this success, but suffer from excessive noise. Recent studies use alternative captions synthesized by captioning models and have achieved notable
benchmark performance. However, our experiments reveal significant Scalability Deficiency and World Knowledge Loss issues in models trained with synthetic captions,
which have been largely obscured by their initial benchmark success. Upon closer examination, we identify the
root cause as the overly-simplified language structure and
lack of knowledge details in existing synthetic captions.
To provide higher-quality and more scalable multimodal
pretraining data, we propose C APS F USION, an advanced
framework that leverages large language models to consolidate and refine information from both web-based image-text
pairs and synthetic captions. Extensive experiments show
that C APS F USION captions exhibit remarkable all-round
superiority over existing captions in terms of model performance (e.g., 18.8 and 18.3 improvements in CIDEr score
on COCO and NoCaps), sample efficiency (requiring 11-16
times less computation than baselines), world knowledge
depth, and scalability. These effectiveness, efficiency and
scalability advantages position C APS F USION as a promising candidate for future scaling of LMM training.

1. Introduction
Large Multimodal Models [3, 36, 51] (LMMs), which as
versatile multimodal generalists bridge powerful pretrained
large language models [52, 53] and vision encoders [43,
50], have garnered significant success in zero-shot multimodal tasks. Although image-text pairs harvested directly
from the web [45] contribute instrumentally to the success
of current LMMs, such web-scale data tend to be noisy
* Equal contribution. † Correspondence to wangxinlong@baai.ac.cn.

Raw

Synthetic
Synthetic

Raw

(a) COCO CIDEr Score

(b) SEED-Bench Accuracy

Figure 1. Training process of models trained on different captions.
Raw Caption:
A male Northern Cardinal is feeding a
fledgling on the top of a tree branch.
Synthetic Caption:
Two birds sitting on a tree branch.
(a) Raw caption and synthetic caption (from caption model)
Raw Caption:
Justin Timberlake performs at the 2017
Pilgrimage Music Festival on September
23, 2017 in Franklin, Tennessee.
Conceptual Caption:
pop artist performs at the festival in
a city
(b) Data Collection Process of Conceptual Captions

Figure 2. (a) Comparison of raw and synthetic captions for training. (b) Data processing of Conceptual Captions [47], where
real-world information is substituted with generic concepts .

and sub-optimal for model training [27, 34]. Thus, strategies have been devised to harness synthetic captions generated by image captioning model [34], which has augmented
model performance notably [5, 14, 15, 22, 35, 51] by adopting large-scale synthetic caption datasets such as LAIONCOCO [1] and BLIP-LAION [34].
Although achieving promising performance on classic
benchmarks such as COCO Caption [12], our further evaluations on recent benchmarks such as SEED-Bench [32] reveal that training LMMs with large-scale synthetic captions

14022

