This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HIPTrack: Visual Tracking with Historical Prompts
Wenrui Cai1 , Qingjie Liu1,2,3,∗ , Yunhong Wang1,3
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory, Beijing, China
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University, Hangzhou, China
{wenrui cai, qingjie.liu, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Trackers that follow Siamese paradigm utilize similarity matching between template and search region features
for tracking. Many methods have been explored to enhance
tracking performance by incorporating tracking history to
better handle scenarios involving target appearance variations such as deformation and occlusion. However, the
utilization of historical information in existing methods is
insufficient and incomprehensive, which typically requires
repetitive training and introduces a large amount of computation. In this paper, we show that by providing a tracker
that follows Siamese paradigm with precise and updated
historical information, a significant performance improvement can be achieved with completely unchanged parameters. Based on this, we propose a historical prompt network
that uses refined historical foreground masks and historical
visual features of the target to provide comprehensive and
precise prompts for the tracker. We build a novel tracker
called HIPTrack based on the historical prompt network,
which achieves considerable performance improvements
without the need to retrain the entire model. We conduct experiments on seven datasets and experimental results
demonstrate that our method surpasses the current state-ofthe-art trackers on LaSOT, LaSOText , GOT-10k and NfS.
Furthermore, the historical prompt network can seamlessly
integrate as a plug-and-play module into existing trackers,
providing performance enhancements. The source code is
available at https://github.com/WenRuiCai/HIPTrack.

1. Introduction
Visual tracking aims to estimate the position of a target in
subsequent frames of a video, given the initial state in the
first frame [1, 5, 24, 46]. It can be challenging when the
target experiences deformation, scale variation, and partial
occlusion over time. While Transformer-based one-stream
∗ Corresponding author.

#572

#694

#950

#232

#741

#792

#275

#877

#1030

GRM

SeqTrack

HIPTrack

Ground Truth

Figure 1. Visualized comparisons of our approach and other excellent trackers GRM [16] and SeqTrack [6]. Our method performs
better when the target suffer from occlusion, deformation and scale
variation.

trackers [4, 8, 16, 48] have significantly improved the tracking accuracy by incorporating feature extraction and interaction of template and search regions into a single Transformer, they still follow Siamese paradigm that performs
similarity matching between template and search regions.
Only using the template to predict the target in subsequent
frames may not be effective in handling complex scenarios.
There have been numerous attempts to incorporate historical context into trackers using techniques such as spacetime memory networks [13], utilizing a tracked frame as
auxiliary template [8, 47] and incorporating multiple frames
as inputs to the backbone [18, 38]. However, the target position introduced by space-time memory networks lacks accuracy, while the use of two backbones for the current frame
and tracked frames introduces a substantial number of parameters. Utilizing a tracked frame as auxiliary template is
insufficient and susceptible to introducing distractors. Employing multiple frames as inputs introduces considerable
computational complexity while inadequately preserving a
substantial amount of historical context. Recently, autoregressive trackers [6, 40] have achieved state-of-the-art performance by tokenizing the target position and incorporat-

19258

