This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Training-Free Pretrained Model Merging
Zhengqi Xu1 , Ke Yuan1 , Huiqiong Wang2 , Yong Wang3 , Mingli Song1 , Jie Song1˚
1
Zhejiang University
2
Ningbo Innovation Center, Zhejiang University
3
State Grid Shandong Electric Power Company
{xuzhengqi,keyuan,huiqiong_wang,brooksong,sjie}@zju.edu.cn,wangyong@sd.sgcc.com.cn

Merged Units

1. Introduction
Great success has been achieved on various challenging tasks
in computer vision by using deep neural networks, and a
plethora of deep neural networks are developed and released
publicly, with either their architectures and trained parameters (e.g., Pytorch Hub1 , Hugging Hub2 ). These off-the-shelf
* Corresponding author.
1 https://pytorch.org/hub/
2 https://huggingface.co/HUB

1.0

0.8
Activation Similarity

Recently, model merging techniques have surfaced as
a solution to combine multiple single-talent models into a
single multi-talent model. However, previous endeavors in
this field have either necessitated additional training or finetuning processes, or require that the models possess the same
pre-trained initialization. In this work, we identify a common drawback in prior works w.r.t. the inconsistency of unit
similarity in the weight space and the activation space. To
address this inconsistency, we propose an innovative model
merging framework, coined as merging under dual-space
constraints (MuDSC). Specifically, instead of solely maximizing the objective of a single space, we advocate for the
exploration of permutation matrices situated in a region with
a unified high similarity in the dual space, achieved through
the linear combination of activation and weight similarity
matrices. In order to enhance usability, we have also incorporated adaptations for group structure, including MultiHead Attention and Group Normalization. Comprehensive
experimental comparisons demonstrate that MuDSC can significantly boost the performance of merged models with various task combinations and architectures. Furthermore, the
visualization of the merged model within the multi-task loss
landscape reveals that MuDSC enables the merged model
to reside in the overlapping segment, featuring a unified
lower loss for each task. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/zju-vipa/training_free_model_merging.

Similarity with Parent (Lower Bound)

Abstract

0.8

0.6

0.6

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2
Best Merged

0.0
0.0

0.2
0.4
Weight Similarity

0.6

0.0

Figure 1. We use an intermediate layer of ResNet50 [16] to construct two groups of units as two parents, and then merge them
pairwise. In the figure, each point represents a merged unit. The
x-axis and the y-axis denote the weight and activation similarity between their two parents respectively. The color indicates the smaller
activation similarity between them and their two parents. The star
depicts the best merged unit which is most activation-similar to its
parents. More details are provided in the supplementary material.

models are finely-tuned for a wide range of tasks, providing
users with substantial convenience. However, these models are restricted to the tasks they were trained on, and this
limitation poses significant challenges in terms of model storage [11, 63] and computation as the parameters of models
continue to grow rapidly.
Given the abundance of well-trained models across various tasks, numerous research studies propose the amalgamation of multiple models into a single model that possesses
multiple functionalities simultaneously. The existing body of
literature can be broadly classified into two schools: trainingbased knowledge amalgamation [7, 14, 20, 30, 31, 37, 45,

5915

