This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Locally Adaptive Neural 3D Morphable Models
Michail Tarasiou

Rolandos Alexandros Potamias
Eimear O’Sullivan
Stylianos Ploumpis
Stefanos Zafeiriou
Imperial College London

{michail.tarasiou10,r.potamias,e.o-sullivan,s.ploumpis,s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
We present the Locally Adaptive Morphable Model
(LAMM), a highly flexible Auto-Encoder (AE) framework
for learning to generate and manipulate 3D meshes. We
train our architecture following a simple self-supervised
training scheme in which input displacements over a set of
sparse control vertices are used to overwrite the encoded
geometry in order to transform one training sample into
another. During inference, our model produces a dense
output that adheres locally to the specified sparse geometry while maintaining the overall appearance of the encoded object. This approach results in state-of-the-art performance in both disentangling manipulated geometry and
3D mesh reconstruction. To the best of our knowledge
LAMM is the first end-to-end framework that enables direct local control of 3D vertex geometry in a single forward
pass. A very efficient computational graph allows our network to train with only a fraction of the memory required by
previous methods and run faster during inference, generating 12k vertex meshes at >60fps on a single CPU thread.
We further leverage local geometry control as a primitive
for higher level editing operations and present a set of
derivative capabilities such as swapping and sampling object parts. Code and pretrained models can be found at
https://github.com/michaeltrs/LAMM.

1. Introduction
The capacity to generate and manipulate digital 3D objects
lies at the core of a multitude of applications related to the
entertainment and media industries [9, 44], virtual and augmented reality [12, 25, 29, 37, 42] and healthcare [10, 24].
In particular, the ability to manually shape virtual humans
can result in highly realistic avatars, while granting ultimate
creative control to individual users.
However, achieving fine control in mesh manipulation
necessitates the learning of a disentangled representation of
3D shapes which is still an open research problem [16–18].
Recently proposed methods based on Graph Convolutional

Figure 1. Overview of the Locally Adaptive Morphable Model
(LAMM) use during inference. (top) Our trained decoder fdec receives as inputs a latent code z and displacements δVC over a set of
sparse control points (red vertices). Here displacements for control points in the nose region are shown with green arrows. The
decoder generates the shape of the object encoded in z, overwriting local geometry to respect δVC . (bottom) We can sample latent
codes to generate new instances of human heads in the (a) identity,
(b) expression space. Similarly, we can either randomly sample or
provide vertex displacements manually at control points to manipulate (c) local identity features (ears, nose, mouth shown here) and
(d) add expressions while retaining identity features unchanged.

Network (GCN)-based Auto-Encoders (AEs) [21, 27, 36]
have demonstrated impressive performance in dimensionality reduction but typically learn a highly entangled latent
space making them unsuitable for detailed shape manipulation. Additionally, despite having a low parameter count,
these methods struggle to handle high-resolution meshes,
limiting their applicability. Few works [17, 18] have dealt

1867

