This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiPose: Hierarchical Binary Surface Encoding and Correspondence Pruning
for RGB-D 6DoF Object Pose Estimation
Yongliang Lin1*
Yongzhi Su2,3*
Praveen Nathan2 Sandeep Inuganti2,3
Yan Di4,5
5
5
2,3
2,†
Martin Sundermeyer Fabian Manhardt Didier Stricker
Jason Rambach
Yu Zhang1,†
1
Zhejiang University 2 German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)
3
RPTU Kaiserslautern-Landau 4 Technische Universität München 5 Google
{lyl1020; zhangyu80}@zju.edu.cn, jason.rambach@dfki.de

Abstract
In this work, we present a novel dense-correspondence
method for 6DoF object pose estimation from a single RGBD image. While many existing data-driven methods achieve
impressive performance, they tend to be time-consuming
due to their reliance on rendering-based refinement approaches. To circumvent this limitation, we present HiPose,
which establishes 3D-3D correspondences in a coarse-tofine manner with a hierarchical binary surface encoding.
Unlike previous dense-correspondence methods, we estimate the correspondence surface by employing point-tosurface matching and iteratively constricting the surface
until it becomes a correspondence point while gradually removing outliers. Extensive experiments on public benchmarks LM-O, YCB-V, and T-Less demonstrate that our
method surpasses all refinement-free methods and is even
on par with expensive refinement-based approaches. Crucially, our approach is computationally efficient and enables real-time critical applications with high accuracy requirements.

0

coar
sel
evelmat
chi
ng
usi
ngm bi
t
s

(
a)

m bi
t

m+1bi
t
i
t
er
at
e

(
b)

1

posem

m+2bi
t
i
t
er
at
e

posem+1

posem+2

Figure 1. Illustration of HiPose : (a) For every point cloud with
color and normals as inputs, our network outputs a binary code to
establish a correspondence to a sub-surface on the object. (b) With
the coarse level matching, we estimate an initial pose posem . The
additional n bits are used for iterative fine-grained matching and
pose estimation and gradual outlier rejection. Note that this process is render-free and RANSAC-free, ensuring fast performance
of our algorithm.

1. Introduction
Estimating the 6 Degrees of Freedom (6DoF) object pose
stands as a fundamental challenge in 3D computer vision.
This task plays a pivotal role in numerous real-world applications, including augmented reality [45, 48, 70], robotic
grasping [68, 69], and autonomous driving [39, 51]. Despite
its significance, achieving accurate 6DoF pose estimation
remains challenging, particularly in scenarios characterized
by homogeneous object textures and heavy occlusion.
The advent of deep learning has helped to overcome
*Contributed equally, †Corresponding authors
Code: https://github.com/lyltc1/HiPose

those challenges. A recent branch of RGB-only works [41,
50, 67] shows promising results for handling occlusion. Despite these advancements, estimating object pose from RGB
images alone remains challenging due to the inherent depth
ambiguity in monocular images.
Analogous to the prediction of 2D-3D correspondence
in RGB-only approaches, [5, 62] predict sparse 3D-3D correspondences. However, most methods with depth input
either do not utilize RGB information [10, 11, 31] or rely
on RGB images only to segment the object from the background [4, 11, 25, 34], thus discarding valuable RGB features. To preserve rich RGB information, [16, 17, 58, 74]

10148

