This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SmartEdit: Exploring Complex Instruction-based Image Editing
with Multimodal Large Language Models
∗#

∗#

#

Yuzhou Huang1,2
Liangbin Xie2,3,5
Xintao Wang2,4† Ziyang Yuan2,7
Xiaodong Cun4
Yixiao Ge2,4 Jiantao Zhou3 Chao Dong5,6 Rui Huang1 Ruimao Zhang1† Ying Shan2,4
1

The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-SZ) 2 ARC Lab, Tencent PCG 3 University of Macau 4 Tencent AI Lab
5
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology 6 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 7 Tsinghua University

https://github.com/TencentARC/SmartEdit
“Change the bigger/smaller bear to a wolf”

“Change the left/right animal to a white fox”

“Change the left/middle/right apple to an orange”

“Change the dog in mirror to a tiger”

“Change the red/green apple to a peach”

“Please replace the animal that is usually known
as friend of human's with a tiger”

“Please remove the object that can tell the time”

Figure 1. We propose SmartEdit, an instruction-based image editing model that leverages Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
to enhance the understanding and reasoning capabilities of instruction-based editing methods. With the specialized design, our SmartEdit
is capable of handling complex understanding (the instructions that contain various object attributes like location, relative size, color, and
in or outside the mirror) and reasoning scenarios.

Abstract
Current instruction-based image editing methods, such
as InstructPix2Pix, often fail to produce satisfactory results in complex scenarios due to their dependence on the
simple CLIP text encoder in diffusion models. To rectify
this, this paper introduces SmartEdit, a novel approach of
instruction-based image editing that leverages Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs) to enhance its understanding and reasoning capabilities. However, direct integration of these elements still faces challenges in situations requiring complex reasoning. To mitigate this, we
∗ Equal contribution
Lab, Tencent PCG

† Corresponding author

# Interns in ARC

propose a Bidirectional Interaction Module (BIM) that enables comprehensive bidirectional information interactions
between the input image and the MLLM output. During
training, we initially incorporate perception data to boost
the perception and understanding capabilities of diffusion
models. Subsequently, we demonstrate that a small amount
of complex instruction editing data can effectively stimulate SmartEdit’s editing capabilities for more complex instructions. We further construct a new evaluation dataset,
Reason-Edit, specifically tailored for complex instructionbased image editing. Both quantitative and qualitative results on this evaluation dataset indicate that our SmartEdit
surpasses previous methods, paving the way for the practical application of complex instruction-based image editing.

8362

