This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Point Cloud Pre-training with Diffusion Models
Xiao Zheng1 Xiaoshui Huang2 * Guofeng Mei3 Yuenan Hou2
Zhaoyang Lyu2 Bo Dai2 Wanli Ouyang2 Yongshun Gong1 *
1
Shandong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Abstract
Pre-training a model and then fine-tuning it on downstream tasks has demonstrated significant success in the 2D
image and NLP domains. However, due to the unordered
and non-uniform density characteristics of point clouds, it
is non-trivial to explore the prior knowledge of point clouds
and pre-train a point cloud backbone. In this paper, we
propose a novel pre-training method called Point cloud
Diffusion pre-training (PointDif). We consider the point
cloud pre-training task as a conditional point-to-point generation problem and introduce a conditional point generator. This generator aggregates the features extracted by the
backbone and employs them as the condition to guide the
point-to-point recovery from the noisy point cloud, thereby
assisting the backbone in capturing both local and global
geometric priors as well as the global point density distribution of the object. We also present a recurrent uniform
sampling optimization strategy, which enables the model
to uniformly recover from various noise levels and learn
from balanced supervision. Our PointDif achieves substantial improvement across various real-world datasets for diverse downstream tasks such as classification, segmentation
and detection. Specifically, PointDif attains 70.0% mIoU
on S3DIS Area 5 for the segmentation task and achieves
an average improvement of 2.4% on ScanObjectNN for the
classification task compared to TAP. Furthermore, our pretraining framework can be flexibly applied to diverse point
cloud backbones and bring considerable gains. Code is
available at https://github.com/zhengxiaozx/PointDif.

1. Introduction
In recent years, a surging number of studies, including
SAM [21], VisualChatGPT [55], and BLIP-2 [23], have
demonstrated the exceptional performance of pre-trained
models across a broad range of 2D image and natural language processing (NLP) tasks. Pre-training on large-scale
datasets endows the model with abundant prior knowledge,
enabling the pre-trained models to exhibit superior perfor* Corresponding authors

Figure 1. Schematic illustration of our PointDif. Our PointDif can pre-train different backbones by reconstructing the original point cloud point-to-point from the noisy point cloud. During
pre-training, the latent features guide the restoration of noisy point
clouds at various levels, allowing the backbone to learn more hierarchical geometric prior.

mance and enhanced generalization capabilities after finetuning, compared to models trained solely on downstream
tasks [13, 19, 20, 23]. Similar to the 2D and NLP fields,
pre-training methods in point cloud data [18, 33, 60] have
also become essential in enhancing model performance and
boosting model generalization ability.
Contemporary point cloud pre-training methods can
be casted into two categories, i.e., contrastive-based and
generative-based pre-training. Contrastive-based methods [1, 57, 63] resort to the contrastive objective to make
deep models grasp the similarity knowledge between samples. By contrast, generative-based methods involve pretraining by reconstructing the masked point cloud [33, 62]
or its 2D projections [15, 51]. However, several factors
mainly account for the inferior pre-training efficacy in the
3D domain. For contrastive-based methods [1, 57], selecting the proper negative samples to construct the contrastive
objective is non-trivial. The generative-based pre-training
approaches, such as Point-MAE [33] and Point-M2AE [62],
solely reconstruct the masked point patches. In this way,
they cannot capture the global density distribution of the object. Additionally, there is no precise one-to-one matching
for MSE loss and set-to-set matching for Chamfer Distance

22935

