This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaskCLR: Attention-Guided Contrastive Learning for
Robust Action Representation Learning
Mohamed Abdelfattah*

Mariam Hassan

Alexandre Alahi

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
firstname.lastname@epfl.ch

MotionBERT

Abstract

Unactivated

Different
head &
hand
motion!

More
Joints
Activated

Activated

MaskCLR (Ours)

(a) Activated joints by MotionBERT [51] and our MaskCLR. Actions
are from NTU60-XSub [33] dataset. Labels from left to right: “throw”,
“wear a shoe”, “brush hair”, “drink water”, and “pickup.”
+5.9

98
Top-1 Accuracy (%)

Current transformer-based skeletal action recognition
models tend to focus on a limited set of joints and low-level
motion patterns to predict action classes. This results in
significant performance degradation under small skeleton
perturbations or changing the pose estimator between training and testing. In this work, we introduce MaskCLR, a new
Masked Contrastive Learning approach for Robust skeletal
action recognition. We propose an Attention-Guided Probabilistic Masking strategy to occlude the most important joints
and encourage the model to explore a larger set of discriminative joints. Furthermore, we propose a Multi-Level Contrastive Learning paradigm to enforce the representations of
standard and occluded skeletons to be class-discriminative,
i.e., more compact within each class and more dispersed
across different classes. Our approach helps the model capture the high-level action semantics instead of low-level
joint variations, and can be conveniently incorporated into
transformer-based models. Without loss of generality, we
combine MaskCLR with three transformer backbones: the
vanilla transformer, DSTFormer, and STTFormer. Extensive
experiments on NTU60, NTU120, and Kinetics400 show that
MaskCLR consistently outperforms previous state-of-the-art
methods on standard and perturbed skeletons from different
pose estimators, showing improved accuracy, generalization,
and robustness. Project website: https://maskclr.github.io.

MotionBERT
MaskCLR (Ours)

+5.8
93

+5.9

+6.8

88
83
78
NTU60-Xsub

NTU60-XView
NTU120-XSub
Datasets

NTU120-XSet

(b) Accuracy under Gaussian noise N (0, 0.0022 ).

Figure 1. Our proposed approach (MaskCLR) (a) uses a bigger set
of discriminative joints to recognize actions and hence, (b) is more
robust to noisy skeletons compared to baseline MotionBERT [51].

1. Introduction
A skeleton is a representation of the human body structure
that typically consists of a set of keypoints or joints, each
associated with a specific body part. Compared to RGBbased action recognition, which focuses on extracting feature
representations from RGB frames [1, 38, 41] and/or optical
flow [36], skeleton-based approaches [44, 48] rely only on
skeleton data. Transformers [39] have been proposed to
* Corresponding author.

encode the skeleton information for action recognition using
Multi-Head Self Attention (MHSA) blocks [51]. Generally,
MHSA blocks assign higher weights, i.e., attention, to the
most important joints/input regions that characterize every
action to distinguish between different classes. For example,
the hand joints in the action “throw” are assigned the highest
weights while the rest of joints remain relatively unactivated.
Motivated by this observation, we ask: Is it possible to

18678

