This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompt-Driven Referring Image Segmentation with Instance Contrasting
Zichen Song, Heqian Qiu ∗, Lanxiao Wang, Fanman Meng,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China

Chao Shang,

Hongliang Li ∗

shangc@std.uestc.edu.cn, szc.uestc@gmail.com, hqqiu@uestc.edu.cn,
lanxiao.wang@std.uestc.edu.cn, fmmeng@uestc.edu.cn, hlli@uestc.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Referring Image Segmentation [6, 11, 14] is one of the
most challenging tasks in the field of vision-language understanding, which aims to segment corresponding target
referent given a natural language description. Compared
with semantic segmentation task [3, 40] that only segment
predefined fixed categories, RIS can more flexibly segment
targets of any category, location or attribute based on freefrom language, which requires a more comprehensive understanding and alignment between diverse language expressions and images, so it can be widely used in real-world
scenarios like robots and human-computer interactions.
∗ Corresponding authors.

masked
image embs

Mask
Generator
Standing girl
in pink.

mask proposals

text embs

...
similarity
score

CLIP Text Encoder
(a) mask-classification method
SAM Image Encoder
mask, point, text
prompts

CLIP Image Encoder
Cross-Modal Prompting
Standing girl
in pink.

SAM
Decoder

Referring image segmentation (RIS) aims to segment the
target referent described by natural language. Recently,
large-scale pre-trained models, e.g., CLIP and SAM, have
been successfully applied in many downstream tasks, but
they are not well adapted to RIS task due to inter-task differences. In this paper, we propose a new prompt-driven
framework named Prompt-RIS, which bridges CLIP and
SAM end-to-end and transfers their rich knowledge and
powerful capabilities to RIS task through prompt learning.
To adapt CLIP to pixel-level task, we first propose a CrossModal Prompting method, which acquires more comprehensive vision-language interaction and fine-grained textto-pixel alignment by performing bidirectional prompting.
Then, the prompt-tuned CLIP generates masks, points, and
text prompts for SAM to generate more accurate mask
predictions. Moreover, we further propose Instance Contrastive Learning to improve the model’s discriminability to
different instances and robustness to diverse languages describing the same instance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the performance of our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods consistently in both general and
open-vocabulary settings.

CLIP Image Encoder

crop

...

Abstract

CLIP-based
Prompting

CLIP Text Encoder
(b) our prompt-driven method

Figure 1. Existing methods (a) of adapting CLIP to segmentation
typically adopt two-stage mask-classification manner. Our method
(b) bridges CLIP and SAM end-to-end through prompt learning.

Most existing methods [14, 19, 41, 46] typically use traditional single-modal pre-trained image or text backbones
to extract features for RIS tasks. Recently, with the rise
of large-scale pre-trained models [9, 23, 38], their powerful generalization capabilities have attracted increasing research attention. Among them, vision-language models,
like CLIP [38] and ALIGN [17], that are pre-trained on
large-scale image-text pairs, demonstrates powerful generalization capabilities in multiple downstream tasks. And the
large-scale segmentation model SAM [23] also shows the
ability to generate promising segmentation results based on
its data engine and diverse prompts.
Currently, increasing researchers focus on how to adapt
these pre-trained models, represented by CLIP [38], to different downstream tasks. On the one hand, to avoid CLIP
forgetting the generalized knowledge during fine-tuning,
many prompt learning methods [18, 21, 25, 52] are proposed, which freeze the model parameters and introduce
additional learnable prompt tokens for new task adaptation.

4124

