This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Correspondence-Free Non-Rigid Point Set Registration Using
Unsupervised Clustering Analysis
*

Mingyang Zhao1 Jingen Jiang2 Lei Ma3 Shiqing Xin2 Gaofeng Meng1,4,5 Dong-Ming Yan4,5
1
CAIR, HKISI, CAS 2 Shandong University 3 Peking University 4 MAIS, CASIA 5 UCAS

Figure 1. Non-rigid registration on 3D point sets. The blue and gray models represent the source and target point clouds, respectively, while
the yellow models are our registration results. Our method achieves successful registrations even for shapes with challenging deformations.

Abstract
This paper presents a novel non-rigid point set registration method that is inspired by unsupervised clustering
analysis. Unlike previous approaches that treat the source
and target point sets as separate entities, we develop a
holistic framework where they are formulated as clustering centroids and clustering members, separately. We then
adopt Tikhonov regularization with an ℓ1 -induced Laplacian kernel instead of the commonly used Gaussian kernel to ensure smooth and more robust displacement fields.
Our formulation delivers closed-form solutions, theoretical
guarantees, independence from dimensions, and the ability
to handle large deformations. Subsequently, we introduce
a clustering-improved Nyström method to effectively reduce
the computational complexity and storage of the Gram matrix to linear, while providing a rigorous bound for the lowrank approximation. Our method achieves high accuracy
results across various scenarios and surpasses competitors
by a significant margin, particularly on shapes with substantial deformations. Additionally, we demonstrate the
versatility of our method in challenging tasks such as shape
transfer and medical registration. [Code release]
* Corresponding Authors.

1. Introduction
Non-rigid point set registration is to optimize a non-linear
displacement field that accurately aligns one geometric
shape with another. Due to its fundamental importance,
non-rigid registration plays a dominant role in a wide range
of applications, such as scene reconstruction [35, 52, 54],
pose tracking [34], animation [38], deformable shape manipulation and editing [42], and so on.
However, given two point sets, one acting as the source
and the other as the target, non-rigid registration presents
a highly ill-posed and much more complex challenge compared to the rigid counterpart. This increased complexity
is primarily attributed to the additional freedom of deformations allowed in non-rigid registration, especially when
dealing with shapes that exhibit large deformations (Fig. 1).
To enhance the registration quality for shapes undergoing large deformations, numerous pioneering methods
have been actively researched. Rather than directly optimizing the registration process, these methods usually employ a two-step approach [30, 36, 47, 48]. First, they perform shape matching by identifying corresponding points
between the source and target shapes without considering
geometry deformations. Then, they estimate the alignment
transformation based on the established correspondences
via off-the-shelf registration techniques. While there has

21199

*

