This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D LiDAR Mapping in Dynamic Environments
Using a 4D Implicit Neural Representation
Xingguang Zhong1
1

Yue Pan1

Cyrill Stachniss1,2

Jens Behley1

2

Center for Robotics, University of Bonn, Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence
{zhong, yue.pan, cyrill.stachniss, jens.behley}@igg.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Building accurate maps is a key building block to enable reliable localization, planning, and navigation of autonomous vehicles. We propose a novel approach for building accurate maps of dynamic environments utilizing a sequence of LiDAR scans. To this end, we propose encoding
the 4D scene into a novel spatio-temporal implicit neural
map representation by fitting a time-dependent truncated
signed distance function to each point. Using our representation, we extract the static map by filtering the dynamic
parts. Our neural representation is based on sparse feature
grids, a globally shared decoder, and time-dependent basis functions, which we jointly optimize in an unsupervised
fashion. To learn this representation from a sequence of LiDAR scans, we design a simple yet efficient loss function
to supervise the map optimization in a piecewise way. We
evaluate our approach 1 on various scenes containing moving objects in terms of the reconstruction quality of static
maps and the segmentation of dynamic point clouds. The
experimental results demonstrate that our method is capable of removing the dynamic part of the input point clouds
while reconstructing accurate and complete 3D maps, outperforming several state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Mapping using range sensors, like LiDAR or RGB-D cameras, is a fundamental task in computer vision and robotics.
Often, we want to obtain accurate maps to support downstream tasks such as localization, planning, or navigation.
For achieving an accurate reconstruction of an outdoor environment, we have to account for dynamics caused by
moving objects, such as vehicles or pedestrians. Furthermore, dynamic object removal plays an important role in autonomous driving and robotics applications for creating digital twins for realistic simulation and high-definition mapping, where a static map is augmented with semantic and
task-relevant information.
1 Code: https://github.com/PRBonn/4dNDF

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Given a sequence of point clouds, as shown in (a), we
optimize our 4D neural representation that can be queried at arbitrary positions for a specific time. (b) Based on the estimated
time-dependent TSDF values, we can extract a mesh at a specific
point in time. Additionally, our 4D neural representation can be
also used for static mapping (c) and dynamic object removal (c).

Mapping and state estimation in dynamic environments
is a classical problem in robotics [5, 56, 57]. Approaches for
simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) can apply
different strategies to deal with dynamics. Common ways
are: (1) filtering dynamics from the input [1, 30, 47, 48, 51]
as a pre-processing step, which requires a semantic interpretation of the scene; (2) modeling the occupancy in the
map representation [17, 34, 37, 49, 50, 64], where dynamics can be implicitly removed by retrospectively removing
measurements in free space; (3) including it in the state estimation [4, 16, 55, 61, 67] to model which measurements
originated from the dynamic and static parts of the environment. Our proposed method falls into the last category and
allows us to model dynamics directly in the map representation leading to a spatio-temporal map representation.
Recently, implicit neural representations gained increas-

15417

