This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Batch Normalization Alleviates the Spectral Bias in Coordinate Networks
Zhicheng Cai1 , Hao Zhu1 ,* Qiu Shen1 , Xinran Wang1,2 , Xun Cao1
1
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Interdisciplinary Research Center for Future Intelligent Chips (Chip-X), Nanjing University, Suzhou, China
Corresponding author: zhuhao photo@nju.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Coordinate networks, which take the coordinates as inputs
and output the signal attributes using multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) models, have become a promising framework for
solving various inverse problems. Different from the classical convolution-based networks which could only support
up to 3D patterns as input [20, 57], the input coordinates are
organized as 1D vectors in coordinate networks, enabling
the advantage of a general framework for solving inverse
problems with any dimensions. Therefore, coordinate networks have been widely applied in different areas of scientific computing [30], such as the hologram/tomography
* This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation
of China under Grants T2221003, 62071216 and the Leading Technology
of Jiangsu Basic Research Plan (BK20192003).

Eigenvalues

Eigenvalues

Eigenvalues

without BN

(a) Histograms of NTK Eigenvalues

23.25 dB

27.18 dB

28.79 dB

30.84 dB

31.31 dB

with BN

Representing signals using coordinate networks dominates the area of inverse problems recently, and is widely
applied in various scientific computing tasks. Still, there
exists an issue of spectral bias in coordinate networks, limiting the capacity to learn high-frequency components. This
problem is caused by the pathological distribution of the
neural tangent kernel’s (NTK’s) eigenvalues of coordinate
networks. We find that, this pathological distribution could
be improved using the classical batch normalization (BN),
which is a common deep learning technique but rarely used
in coordinate networks. BN greatly reduces the maximum
and variance of NTK’s eigenvalues while slightly modifies
the mean value, considering the max eigenvalue is much
larger than the most, this variance change results in a shift
of eigenvalues’ distribution from a lower one to a higher
one, therefore the spectral bias could be alleviated (see
Fig. 1). This observation is substantiated by the significant
improvements of applying BN-based coordinate networks to
various tasks, including the image compression, computed
tomography reconstruction, shape representation, magnetic
resonance imaging and novel view synthesis.

Count

Abstract

30.05 dB
MLP

PEMLP-1

(b) Reconstructed images

PEMLP-5

Figure 1. Batch normalization significantly alleviates the spectral
bias of coordinate networks. (a) Batch normalization shifts the
NTK’s eigenvalues distribution from a lower one to a higher one,
thus (b) the spectral bias is alleviated and better performance is
achieved compared with the one without batch normalization (e.g.,
the texture on the lion’s left paw). From left to right, each column
refers to the coordinate networks with ReLU activations, and positional encoding [78] with 1 and 5 Fourier bases, respectively.

imaging in microscopy [39, 83], 3D reconstruction and freeviewpoint roaming in computer vision/graphics [37, 48],
physical simulation in material design and hydrodynamics [8, 59] and medical imaging [67, 68].
Yet, due to the spectral bias [58] of ReLU-based MLP,
coordinate networks prefer to learn the low-frequency components of the signal, while the high-frequency components are learned at an extremely slow convergence. Several works have been proposed to alleviate the spectral bias,
such as the positional encoding [78] or frequency-related
activation functions [60, 72]. However, these explorations
introduce the ‘frequency-specified spectral bias’ [81], i.e.,

25160

