This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video2Game: Real-time, Interactive, Realistic and Browser-Compatible
Environment from a Single Video

1

Hongchi Xia1,2 Zhi-Hao Lin1 Wei-Chiu Ma3 Shenlong Wang1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 Cornell University
https://video2game.github.io/

collect coins

run

stand

break objects

View 1

View 2

Vase drops
drive

Throw ball at vase

bump into a car

Figure 1. Video2Game takes an input video of an arbitrary scene and automatically transforms it into a real-time, interactive, realistic and
browser-compatible environment. The users can freely explore the environment and interact with the objects in the scene.

Abstract
Creating high-quality and interactive virtual environments, such as games and simulators, often involves complex and costly manual modeling processes. In this paper,
we present Video2Game, a novel approach that automatically converts videos of real-world scenes into realistic and
interactive game environments. At the heart of our system are three core components: (i) a neural radiance fields
(NeRF) module that effectively captures the geometry and
visual appearance of the scene; (ii) a mesh module that distills the knowledge from NeRF for faster rendering; and (iii)
a physics module that models the interactions and physical
dynamics among the objects. By following the carefully designed pipeline, one can construct an interactable and actionable digital replica of the real world. We benchmark our
system on both indoor and large-scale outdoor scenes. We
show that we can not only produce highly-realistic renderings in real-time, but also build interactive games on top.

1. Introduction
Crafting a visually compelling and interactive environment
is crucial for immersive experiences in various domains,

such as video games, virtual reality applications, and selfdriving simulators. This process, however, is complex and
expensive. It demands the skills of experts in the field and
the use of professional software development tools [21, 24].
For instance, Grand Theft Auto V [23], known for its intricately detailed environment, was one of the most expensive video games ever developed, with a budget over $265
million primarily for asset creation. Similarly, the development of the CARLA autonomous driving simulator [19] involves a multidisciplinary team of 3D artists, programmers,
and engineers to meticulously craft and texture the virtual
cityscapes, creating its lifelike environments.
An appealing alternative to extensive manual modelling
is creating environments directly from the real world. For
instance, photogrammetry, a technique for constructing digital replicas of objects or scenes from overlapping realworld photographs, has been utilized for environment creation [52, 53]. Success stories also span various games
and simulators. However, most use cases are limited
to creating object assets and necessitate significant postprocessing, such as material creation, texturing, and geometry fixes [66]. People thus turns to neural radiance fields
(NeRFs) [46], as it offers a more promising approach to

4578

