This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompt-Free Diffusion: Taking “Text” out of Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Xingqian Xu1,5 , Jiayi Guo1,2 , Zhangyang Wang3,5 , Gao Huang2 , Irfan Essa4 , Humphrey Shi1,4,5
1

SHI Labs @ UIUC, Georgia Tech & Oregon, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 UT Austin, 4 Georgia Tech, 5 Picsart AI Research (PAIR)
https://github.com/SHI-Labs/Prompt-Free-Diffusion

Text Prompt

Optional Structural Cond

Pretrained
T2I Diffuser
Ref Image

Initial Noise

Figure 1. Given a pre-trained Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion model, Prompt-Free Diffusion modiﬁes it to intake a reference image as
“context”, an optional image structural conditioning (i.e. canny edge in this case), and an initial noise. No text prompt is needed: instead,
the reference image governs the semantics and appearance, and the optional conditioning provides additional control over the structure.
Note that the generated image instances are precisely controlled (with only small variations, as larger variations would mean less control
precision), to faithfully reﬂect the desired style (reference image) and structure (conditioning).

Abstract
Text-to-image (T2I) research has grown explosively in
the past year, owing to the large-scale pre-trained diffusion
models and many emerging personalization and editing approaches. Yet, one pain point persists: the text prompt
engineering, and searching high-quality text prompts for
customized results is more art than science. Moreover, as
commonly argued: “an image is worth a thousand words”
- the attempt to describe a desired image with texts often ends up being ambiguous and cannot comprehensively
cover delicate visual details, hence necessitating more additional controls from the visual domain. In this paper,
we take a bold step forward: taking “Text” out of a pretrained T2I diffusion model, to reduce the burdensome
prompt engineering efforts for users. Our proposed framework, Prompt-Free Diffusion, relies on only visual inputs
to generate new images: it takes a reference image as “context”, an optional image structural conditioning, and an
initial noise, with absolutely no text prompt. The core architecture behind the scene is Semantic Context Encoder

(SeeCoder), substituting the commonly used CLIP-based
or LLM-based text encoder. The reusability of SeeCoder
also makes it a convenient drop-in component: one can
also pre-train a SeeCoder in one T2I model and reuse it
for another. Through extensive experiments, Prompt-Free
Diffusion is experimentally found to (i) outperform prior
exemplar-based image synthesis approaches; (ii) perform
on par with state-of-the-art T2I models using prompts following the best practice; and (iii) be naturally extensible to
other downstream applications such as anime ﬁgure generation and virtual try-on, with promising quality. Our code
and models will be open-sourced.

1. Introduction
The high demand for personalized synthetic results has promoted several text-to-image (T2I) related technologies, including model ﬁnetuning, prompt engineering, and controllable editing, to a new level of importance. A considerable number of recent works such as [16, 20, 23, 24, 36,
37, 47, 59, 62, 70] also emerge to address personalization

8682

