This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NAYER: Noisy Layer Data Generation for Efficient and Effective Data-free
Knowledge Distillation
Minh-Tuan Tran1 , Trung Le1 , Xuan-May Le2 , Mehrtash Harandi1 , Quan Hung Tran3 ,
Dinh Phung1
1
Monash University, 2 University of Melbourne, 3 ServiceNow
{tuan.tran7,trunglm,mehrtash.harandi,dinh.phung}@monash.edu
xuanmay.le@student.unimelb.edu.au, hungquan.tran@servicenow.com

15x

Abstract

𝐍𝐀𝐘𝐄𝐑 𝟏𝟎𝟎

Data-Free Knowledge Distillation (DFKD) has made
significant recent strides by transferring knowledge from a
teacher neural network to a student neural network without accessing the original data. Nonetheless, existing approaches encounter a significant challenge when attempting
to generate samples from random noise inputs, which inherently lack meaningful information. Consequently, these
models struggle to effectively map this noise to the groundtruth sample distribution, resulting in prolonging training
times and low-quality outputs. In this paper, we propose a
novel Noisy Layer Generation method (NAYER) which relocates the random source from the input to a noisy layer
and utilizes the meaningful constant label-text embedding
(LTE) as the input. LTE is generated by using the language
model once, and then it is stored in memory for all subsequent training processes. The significance of LTE lies in
its ability to contain substantial meaningful inter-class information, enabling the generation of high-quality samples
with only a few training steps. Simultaneously, the noisy
layer plays a key role in addressing the issue of diversity
in sample generation by preventing the model from overemphasizing the constrained label information. By reinitializing the noisy layer in each iteration, we aim to facilitate the generation of diverse samples while still retaining
the method’s efficiency, thanks to the ease of learning provided by LTE. Experiments carried out on multiple datasets
demonstrate that our NAYER not only outperforms the stateof-the-art methods but also achieves speeds 5 to 15 times
faster than previous approaches. The code is available at
https://github.com/tmtuan1307/nayer.

1. Introduction
Knowledge distillation (KD) [12, 26, 29, 36, 41] aims to
train a student model capable of emulating the capabilities

8x
𝐍𝐀𝐘𝐄𝐑 𝟐𝟎𝟎

5x
𝐍𝐀𝐘𝐄𝐑 𝟑𝟎𝟎

𝐅𝐌𝟐𝟎𝟎

𝐅𝐌𝟑𝟎𝟎

𝐒𝐩𝐚𝐜𝐞𝐬𝐡𝐢𝐩𝐍𝐞𝐭

𝐅𝐌𝟏𝟎𝟎

𝐂𝐌𝐈
𝐌𝐀𝐃
𝐃𝐞𝐞𝐩𝐈𝐧𝐯
𝐃𝐅𝐐

𝐙𝐒𝐊𝐓

Figure 1. Accuracy of student models and GPU hours of training
time on CIFAR-100 dataset. All variants of our method NAYER
not only attains the highest accuracies across but also accelerates
the training process by 5 to 15 times compared to DeepInv [37].

of a pre-trained teacher model. Over the past decade, KD
has been explored across diverse domains, including image
recognition [25, 30], software engineering [10], and natural language processing [33]. Conventional KD methods
generally assume that the student model has access to all
or part of the teacher’s training data. However, real-world
applications often impose constraints on accessing the original training data. This issue becomes particularly relevant
in cases of privacy-sensitive medical data, which may contain personal information or data considered proprietary by
vendors. Consequently, in such contexts, conventional KD
methods no longer suffice to address the challenges posed.
Data-Free Knowledge Distillation (DFKD) [1, 6, 8, 28,
35, 37, 39] has recently seen significant advancements as
an alternative method. Its core principle involves transferring knowledge from a teacher neural network (T ) to a
student neural network (S) by generating synthetic data instead of accessing the original training data. The synthetic
data enable adversarial training of the generator and student [21, 24]. In this setup, the student seeks to match the
teacher’s predictions on synthetic data, while the generator
aims to create samples that maximize the discrepancy be-

23860

