This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Taming Self-Training for Open-Vocabulary Object Detection
Shiyu Zhao1,∗
Samuel Schulter2
Long Zhao3
Zhixing Zhang1
Vijay Kumar B G2
Yumin Suh2
Manmohan Chandraker2,4
Dimitris N. Metaxas1
1

Rutgers University

2

NEC Laboratories America

Abstract
Recent studies have shown promising performance
in open-vocabulary object detection (OVD) by utilizing
pseudo labels (PLs) from pretrained vision and language
models (VLMs). However, teacher-student self-training, a
powerful and widely used paradigm to leverage PLs, is
rarely explored for OVD. This work identifies two challenges of using self-training in OVD: noisy PLs from VLMs
and frequent distribution changes of PLs. To address these
challenges, we propose SAS-Det that tames self-training
for OVD from two key perspectives. First, we present a
split-and-fusion (SAF) head that splits a standard detection into an open-branch and a closed-branch. This design
can reduce noisy supervision from pseudo boxes. Moreover, the two branches learn complementary knowledge
from different training data, significantly enhancing performance when fused together. Second, in our view, unlike in closed-set tasks, the PL distributions in OVD are
solely determined by the teacher model. We introduce a
periodic update strategy to decrease the number of updates to the teacher, thereby decreasing the frequency of
changes in PL distributions, which stabilizes the training
process. Extensive experiments demonstrate SAS-Det is
both efficient and effective. SAS-Det outperforms recent
models of the same scale by a clear margin and achieves
37.4 AP50 and 29.1 APr on novel categories of the COCO
and LVIS benchmarks, respectively. Code is available at
https://github.com/xiaofeng94/SAS-Det.

1. Introduction
Traditional closed-set object detectors [4, 13, 32] are restricted to detecting objects with a limited number of categories. Increasing the size of detection vocabularies usually requires heavy human labor to collect annotated data.
With the recent advent of strong vision and language models (VLMs) [20, 30], open-vocabulary object detection
∗ Part of this work was done during an internship at NEC Laboratories
America. Correspondence to: Shiyu Zhao sz553@rutgers.edu

3

Google Research

4

UC San Diego

(OVD) [11] provides an alternative direction to approach
this challenge. Typically, OVD detectors are trained with
annotations of base categories and expected to generalize to
novel categories with the power of pretrained VLMs.
One promising thread of recent studies for OVD [8, 9,
42, 49] leverages VLMs to obtain pseudo labels (PLs) beyond base categories. But they rarely explore self-training,
a powerful and widely used schema for utilizing PLs in
closed-set tasks [37, 38, 44, 45]. We investigate this and find
the vanilla self-training approach does not improve OVD
performance due to the following challenges.
First, the typical self-training in closed-set tasks sets a
confidence threshold to remove noisy PLs based on the fact
that the quality of PLs is positively correlated to their confidences. However, VLMs employed in OVD are pretrained
for image-level alignment with texts instead of instancelevel object detection that requires the localization ability.
Thus, the confidence score from pretrained VLMs is usually
not a good indicator for the quality of box locations (i.e.,
pseudo boxes) provided by PLs. For example, prior studies [11, 49] show that CLIP [30] tends to output imperfect
object boxes as predictions with high confidence. Recent
methods for OVD [9, 49] just apply thresholding to VLMs’
confidence scores and ignore the poor quality of pseudo
boxes, which provides noisy supervision to the model. This
issue becomes even worse when self-training is applied directly, since the noise accumulates which degrades the performance on novel categories. Moreover, these methods
handle noisy PLs in the same way as ground truth of base
categories during training, which further decreases the performance on base categories [9, 23].
Second, self-training for closed-set object detection [19,
38, 45] usually follows an online teacher-student manner.
In each training iteration, the teacher generates PLs, and the
student is trained with a mixture of ground truth and PLs.
Then, the teacher is updated by the student with exponential
moving average (EMA). However, we find such EMA updates degrade OVD models (see Table 4). Our hypothesis is
that, unlike closed-set tasks, OVD provides no ground truth
for target categories, and thus, the supervision for target cat-

13938

