This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SeeSR: Towards Semantics-Aware Real-World Image Super-Resolution
Rongyuan Wu1,2 , Tao Yang3 , Lingchen Sun1,2 , Zhengqiang Zhang1,2 , Shuai Li1,2 Lei Zhang1,2, *
1
2
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
OPPO Research Institute
ByteDance Inc.
{rong-yuan.wu, ling-chen.sun, zhengqiang.zhang, novak.li}@connect.polyu.hk
yangtao9009@gmail.com,

Abstract
Owe to the powerful generative priors, the pre-trained
text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have become increasingly popular in solving the real-world image superresolution problem. However, as a consequence of the
heavy quality degradation of input low-resolution (LR) images, the destruction of local structures can lead to ambiguous image semantics. As a result, the content of reproduced high-resolution image may have semantic errors,
deteriorating the super-resolution performance. To address
this issue, we present a semantics-aware approach to better preserve the semantic fidelity of generative real-world
image super-resolution. First, we train a degradationaware prompt extractor, which can generate accurate soft
and hard semantic prompts even under strong degradation. The hard semantic prompts refer to the image tags,
aiming to enhance the local perception ability of the T2I
model, while the soft semantic prompts compensate for the
hard ones to provide additional representation information.
These semantic prompts encourage the T2I model to generate detailed and semantically accurate results. Furthermore, during the inference process, we integrate the LR
images into the initial sampling noise to mitigate the diffusion model’s tendency to generate excessive random details. The experiments show that our method can reproduce more realistic image details and hold better the semantics. The source code of our method can be found at
https://github.com/cswry/SeeSR.

1. Introduction
Images inevitably undergo degradation due to factors such
as subpar imaging devices, unfavorable capturing environments, transmission losses, etc. This degradation manifests
in various forms, including low-resolution, blurriness and
noise. Image super-resolution (ISR) aims to reconstruct a
* Corresponding author. This work is supported by the Hong Kong RGC
RIF grant (R5001-18) and the PolyU-OPPO Joint Innovation Lab.

cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

high-resolution (HR) image from the given low-resolution
(LR) input. Traditionally, researchers investigate the ISR
problem by assuming simple and known image degradations (e.g., bicubic downsampling), and developed many
successful models [7, 8, 14, 33, 41, 53, 74, 75, 79]. However, these methods often yield over-smoothed outcomes
due to their fidelity-focused learning objectives. To enhance
visual perception, generative adversarial networks (GANs)
[15] have been adopted to solve the ISR problem [56]. By
using the adversarial loss in training, the ISR models can
be supervised to generate perceptually realistic details, yet
there can be much visual artifacts.
Despite the remarkable advancements, when applying
the above mentioned models to real-world LR images,
whose degradations are much more complex and even unknown, the output HR images can have low visual quality
with many artifacts. This is mainly caused by the domain
gap between the synthetic training data and the real-world
test data. The goal of real-world ISR (Real-ISR) is to reproduce a perceptually realistic HR image from its LR observation with complex and unknown degradation. To this
end, some researchers proposed to collect real-world LRHR image pairs using long-short camera focal lens [3, 61].
Another more cost-effective way is to simulate the complex
real-world image degradation process using random combinations of basic degradation operations. The representative
work along this line include BSRGAN [70], Real-ESRGAN
[57] and their variants [6, 34, 35, 63]. With the abundant
amount of more realistic synthetic training pairs, the GANbased Real-ISR methods can generate more authentic details. However, they still tend to introduce many unpleasant visual artifacts due to the unstable adversarial training.
LDL [34] can suppress much the visual artifacts by detecting the problematic pixels using local image statistics. Unfortunately, it is not able to generate additional details.
Recently, denoising diffusion probabilistic models
(DDPMs) [22] have exhibited remarkable performance in
the realm of image generation, gradually emerging as
successors to GANs in various downstream tasks [46,
48]. Some researchers [26, 58] have leveraged pretrained

25456

