This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gradient Alignment for Cross-Domain Face Anti-Spoofing
Binh M. Le
Simon S. Woo*
Computer Science & Engineering Department, Sungkyunkwan University, South Korea
{bmle,swoo}@g.skku.edu

Abstract
Recent advancements in domain generalization (DG)
for face anti-spoofing (FAS) have garnered considerable
attention. Traditional methods have focused on designing learning objectives and additional modules to isolate
domain-specific features while retaining domain-invariant
characteristics in their representations. However, such approaches often lack guarantees of consistent maintenance
of domain-invariant features or the complete removal of
domain-specific features. Furthermore, most prior works of
DG for FAS do not ensure convergence to a local flat minimum, which has been shown to be advantageous for DG. In
this paper, we introduce GAC-FAS, a novel learning objective that encourages the model to converge towards an optimal flat minimum without necessitating additional learning
modules. Unlike conventional sharpness-aware minimizers, GAC-FAS identifies ascending points for each domain
and regulates the generalization gradient updates at these
points to align coherently with empirical risk minimization
(ERM) gradient updates. This unique approach specifically
guides the model to be robust against domain shifts. We
demonstrate the efficacy of GAC-FAS through rigorous testing on challenging cross-domain FAS datasets, where it establishes state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
With the increasing importance of security systems, face
recognition technologies [9, 41, 61] have become ubiquitous in many industrial applications. However, these systems are vulnerable to presentation attacks, such as printed
faces [29], and 3D masks [17], among others. Consequently, face anti-spoofing (FAS) has emerged as an essential technology to safeguard recognition systems over the
past decades [6,8,13,27,37,47,68]. Although existing methods have achieved promising performance, they often suffer
from poor generalization when exposed to unseen environments. This limitation is largely due to their assumption
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Illustration of Our Learning Objective. Most SoTA
methods [43, 65, 75] for DG in FAS rely on auxiliary modules to
learn domain-invariant features, and do not guarantee convergence
towards a flat minimum. In contrast, our method coherently aligns
the generalization gradients at ascending points of each domain
with gradients derived from ERM. This approach ensures that the
model converges to an optimal flat minimum and is robust against
domain shifts.

of stationary settings, such as lighting conditions or sensor
variations, which often do not hold in real-world scenarios.
To address this challenge, recent studies have focused
on improving domain generalization (DG) for FAS by
learning domain-invariant features from source training domains [5, 23, 43, 54, 56, 58, 62, 65, 75]. Primary efforts
include removing domain-specific features from representations through adversarial training [23, 53, 59] or metalearning [5, 54, 62]. Subsequent works have applied metric learning methods [56,58] and style ensemble techniques
[65, 75] to enhance robustness under domain shifts. However, most of these studies assume that domain-invariant
features are preserved for DG through their specific designs
of additional learning modules, without ensuring convergence of the model to a local flat minimum.
In this research, we introduce a novel training objective, namely Gradient Alignment for Cross-Domain Face
Anti-Spoofing (GAC-FAS), designed to guide detectors to-

188

