This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Morphable Diffusion:
3D-Consistent Diffusion for Single-image Avatar Creation
Xiyi Chen1

Marko Mihajlovic1

Shaofei Wang1,2,3

Sergey Prokudin1,4

Siyu Tang1

ETH Zürich1 ; University of Tübingen2 ; Tübingen AI Center3 ;
ROCS, University Hospital Balgrist, University of Zürich4
https://xiyichen.github.io/morphablediffusion/

Figure 1. Morphable diffusion. We introduce a morphable diffusion model to enable consistent controllable novel view synthesis of
humans from a single image. Given a single input image (a) and a morphable mesh model with a target facial expression (b) our method
directly generates 3D consistent and photo-realistic images from novel viewpoints (c). Using the generated multi-view consistent images,
we can reconstruct a coarse 3D model (d) using off-the-shelf neural surface reconstruction methods such as [80].

Abstract
Recent advances in generative diffusion models have enabled the previously unfeasible capability of generating 3D
assets from a single input image or a text prompt. In this
work, we aim to enhance the quality and functionality of
these models for the task of creating controllable, photorealistic human avatars. We achieve this by integrating a
3D morphable model into the state-of-the-art multi-viewconsistent diffusion approach. We demonstrate that accurate conditioning of a generative pipeline on the articulated
3D model enhances the baseline model performance on the
task of novel view synthesis from a single image. More importantly, this integration facilitates a seamless and accurate incorporation of facial expression and body pose control into the generation process. To the best of our knowledge, our proposed framework is the first diffusion model to
enable the creation of fully 3D-consistent, animatable, and
photorealistic human avatars from a single image of an unseen subject; extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate the advantages of our approach over existing state-of-the-art avatar creation models on both novel
view and novel expression synthesis tasks. The code for our
project is publicly available.

1. Introduction
The field of photorealistic controllable human avatar generation has been subject to several technological leaps in the
recent decade. The introduction of large 3D scan collections has facilitated the construction of expressive, articulated models of 3D human bodies [47, 55], faces [5, 39, 56],
and hands [65]. From the outset, one of the primary applications of these models was to reconstruct a 3D avatar from
highly under-constrained setups, such as monocular video
or a single image [5, 18, 37, 55].
While allowing for rich semantic information to be inferred, these 3D morphable models were limited in the level
of photorealism due to their focus on minimally clothed
bodies and face regions, as well as their reliance on the standard mesh-based computer graphics pipelines for rendering.
Recently, the task of generating photorealistic avatars
[57] gained significant attention from the research community due to its potential to revolutionize our ways of digital
communication. Here, combining novel neural rendering
techniques [50, 86] with articulated human models allowed
for a new level of generated image quality. However, the
best-performing models here still require a significant visual input, such as calibrated multi-view images [21, 78] or
monocular video sequences of the subject [61, 82, 95, 99].

10359

