This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning from Synthetic Human Group Activities
Che-Jui Chang†
Rutgers University

Danrui Li
Rutgers University

Deep Patel
NEC Laboratories

chejui.chang@rutgers.edu

danrui.li@rutgers.edu

dpatel@nec-labs.com

Parth Goel
Rutgers University

Honglu Zhou
NEC Laboratories

Seonghyeon Moon†
Rutgers University

goel.parth210@gmail.com

hozhou@nec-labs.com

sm206@cs.rutgers.edu

Samuel S. Sohn
Rutgers University

Sejong Yoon
The College of New Jersey

Vladimir Pavlovic
Rutgers University

samuel.sohn@rutgers.edu

yoons@tcnj.edu

vladimir@rutgers.edu

Mubbasir Kapadia
Roblox
mkapadia@roblox.com

Abstract
The study of complex human interactions and group activities has become a focal point in human-centric computer
vision. However, progress in related tasks is often hindered
by the challenges of obtaining large-scale labeled datasets
from real-world scenarios. To address the limitation, we introduce M3 Act, a synthetic data generator for multi-view
multi-group multi-person human atomic actions and group
activities. Powered by Unity Engine, M3 Act features multiple semantic groups, highly diverse and photorealistic images, and a comprehensive set of annotations, which facilitates the learning of human-centered tasks across singleperson, multi-person, and multi-group conditions. We
demonstrate the advantages of M3 Act across three core experiments. The results suggest our synthetic dataset can significantly improve the performance of several downstream
methods and replace real-world datasets to reduce cost.
Notably, M3 Act improves the state-of-the-art MOTRv2 on
DanceTrack dataset, leading to a hop on the leaderboard
from 10th to 2nd place. Moreover, M3 Act opens new research for controllable 3D group activity generation. We
define multiple metrics and propose a competitive baseline
for the novel task. Our code and data are available at our
project page: http://cjerry1243.github.io/M3Act.

1. Introduction
Understanding collective human activities and social
groups carries significant implications across diverse domains, as it contributes to bolstering public safety within
† Work done during internship at Roblox

surveillance systems, ensuring safe navigation for autonomous robots and vehicles amidst human crowds, and
enriching social awareness in human-robot interactions [8,
9, 11, 12, 21, 37, 49, 51]. However, the advancement in
related tasks is often impeded by the challenges of obtaining large-scale human group activity datasets in real-world
scenarios with fine-grained multifaceted annotations.
Generating synthetic data is an emerging alternative to
collecting real-world data due to its capability of producing large-scale datasets with perfect annotations. Nonetheless, most synthetic datasets [4, 20, 40, 48, 53] are primarily designed to facilitate human pose and shape estimation. They can only provide data with independentlyanimated persons, which is unsuitable for tasks in singlegroup and multi-group conditions [51]. To address the limitation, we propose M3 Act, a synthetic data generator, with
multi-view multi-group multi-person human actions and
group activities. As presented in Tab. 1, M3 Act stands
out by offering comprehensive annotations including both
2D and 3D annotations as well as fine-grained person-level
and group-level labels, thereby making it an ideal synthetic
dataset generator to support tasks such as human activity
recognition and multi-person tracking across all listed realworld datasets.
Illustrated in Fig. 1, our synthetic data generator features
multiple semantic groups, highly diverse and photorealistic
images, and a rich set of annotations. It encompasses 25
photometric 3D scenes, 104 HDRIs (High Dynamic Range
Images), 5 lighting volumes, 2200 human models, 384 animations (categorized into 14 atomic action classes), and 6
group activities. For our experiments, We generated two

21922

