This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probabilistic Sampling of Balanced K-Means
using Adiabatic Quantum Computing

Adiabatic quantum computing (AQC) is a promising approach for discrete and often NP-hard optimization problems. Current AQCs allow to implement problems of research interest, which has sparked the development of quantum representations for many computer vision tasks. Despite requiring multiple measurements from the noisy AQC,
current approaches only utilize the best measurement, discarding information contained in the remaining ones. In
this work, we explore the potential of using this information
for probabilistic balanced k-means clustering. Instead of
discarding non-optimal solutions, we propose to use them
to compute calibrated posterior probabilities with little additional compute cost. This allows us to identify ambiguous
solutions and data points, which we demonstrate on a DWave AQC on synthetic tasks and real visual data.

1. Introduction
Clustering and uncertainty quantification (UQ) are fundamental problems in machine learning and computer vision.
Clustering, the task of grouping objects based on the similarity of their features, plays a pivotal role in analysis and
organization of vast quantities of unlabeled visual data with
applications including image classification [16, 51, 65], segmentation [23, 32], tracking [48], and network training
[22, 75, 76]. UQ, on the other hand, aims to assess the
trustworthiness of predictions and accounts for the impact
of data variability. As a crucial element for certifying confidence in results, UQ is indispensable in clustering, especially given the often ambiguous nature of data partitioning [41].
Clustering typically involves solving for an optimal assignment of data points to (latent) centroids, while a full
Bayesian UQ approach strives to accurately depict the posterior distribution. Unfortunately, both of these problems
are known to be notoriously difficult, classified within the

0.174

Abstract

Luc Van Gool
ETH Zurich
INSAIT, Sofia University
Sofia, Bulgaria

0.011

Tolga Birdal
Imperial College
London

0.604

Martin Danelljan
ETH Zurich

0.172

Jan-Nico Zaech
ETH Zurich
INSAIT, Sofia University
Sofia, Bulgaria

Figure 1. The proposed approach uses an adiabatic quantum computer to sample solutions of a balanced k-means problem. By using an energy-based formulation, likely solutions are drawn from
a Boltzmann distribution. By reparametrizing the distribution, the
calibrated posterior probability of each solution can be estimated.

NP complexity class1 [24, 26, 55]. These challenges within
the Turingian modes of computation have motivated: (i)
continuous relaxations in clustering [78] and (ii) the advent
of approximate Bayesian inference methods for UQ, including the EM algorithm [30], variational inference [13], and
sequential MCMC [29].
In this paper, departing from the above-mentioned approximations or continuous relaxations, we take a completely different approach and harness the upcoming and
novel computational paradigm of quantum computers to
tackle the challenging task of clustering with calibrated
uncertainty quantification. Specifically, we focus on the
widely used balanced K-means [52, 54, 56], which is an iterative algorithm that first assigns each data point to a cluster followed by an update of cluster centroids.
Despite their early state, quantum machine learning algorithms have approached tasks such as optimization of
quadratic problems [47], training of restricted Boltzmann
machines [33], and learning with quantum neural networks [1]. While the current quantum computers can only
solve small-scale problems, they provide the basis to develop and test algorithms that can considerably increase the
size of feasible problems in the future. In our work, we interpret K-means clustering in an energy-based framework
1 Computing marginal probabilities on a Bayesian network is, basically,
a counting problem that can become arbitrarily hard to solve.

26191

