This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PNeRV: Enhancing Spatial Consistency via
Pyramidal Neural Representation for Videos
Qi Zhao
Nanjing University

M. Salman Asif
University of California Riverside

Zhan Ma*
Nanjing University

qizhao@smail.nju.edu.cn

sasif@ucr.edu

mazhan@nju.edu.cn

Figure 1. High-quality video (1920 × 960) reconstruction comparisons between the proposed Pyramidal NeRV and other models, PSNR
in yellow. PNeRV outperforms other models on perceptual quality with less noise and artifacts, maintaining spatial consistency.

Abstract
The primary focus of Neural Representation for Videos
(NeRV) is to effectively model its spatiotemporal consistency. However, current NeRV systems often face a significant issue of spatial inconsistency, leading to decreased
perceptual quality. To address this issue, we introduce
the Pyramidal Neural Representation for Videos (PNeRV),
which is built on a multi-scale information connection
and comprises a lightweight rescaling operator, Kronecker
Fully-connected layer (KFc), and a Benign Selective Memory (BSM) mechanism. The KFc, inspired by the tensor decomposition of the vanilla Fully-connected layer, facilitates
low-cost rescaling and global correlation modeling. BSM
merges high-level features with granular ones adaptively.
Furthermore, we provide an analysis based on the Universal Approximation Theory of the NeRV system and validate the effectiveness of the proposed PNeRV. We conducted
comprehensive experiments to demonstrate that PNeRV surpasses the performance of contemporary NeRV models,
achieving the best results in video regression on UVG and
1 Corresponding author: Zhan Ma (mazhan@nju.edu.cn)

DAVIS under various metrics (PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS, and
FVD). Compared to vanilla NeRV, PNeRV achieves a +4.49
dB gain in PSNR and a 231% increase in FVD on UVG,
along with a +3.28 dB PSNR and 634% FVD increase on
DAVIS.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Implicit Neural Representation (INR) has
emerged as a pivotal area of research across various vision
tasks, including neural radiance fields modeling [35, 51],
3D vision [6, 40, 45] and multimedia neural coding [7, 42].
INR operates on the philosophy that target implicit mapping
will be encoded into a learnable neural network through
end-to-end training. By leveraging the modeling capabilities of neural nets, INR can approximate a wide range of
complex nonlinear or high-dimensional mappings.
However, when considering the video coding task, extant NeRV systems exhibit a notable deficiency in perceptual quality. The reconstructions of foreground subjects,
which are obscured by high-frequency irrelevant details or
blurring, prove challenging for current NeRV models. This
issue of spatial inconsistency is primarily attributed to se-

19103

