This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SyncTalk: The Devil is in the Synchronization for Talking Head Synthesis
Ziqiao Peng1

Wentao Hu2 Yue Shi3 Xiangyu Zhu4 Xiaomei Zhang4 Hao Zhao5
Jun He1 Hongyan Liu5∗ Zhaoxin Fan1∗
1
Renmin University of China 2 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
3
Psyche AI Inc. 4 Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 Tsinghua University

Speech

Reference

Face-Sync Controller

Generated

SyncTalk

>>>

+

>>>

Reference

Tri-Plane Hash
Representation

Features:
Lip Sync

>>>

Head-Sync Stabilizer

ER-NeRF

Ours

Portrait-Sync Generator

Expression Control
>>>

Pose Stable
High Resolution

Figure 1. The proposed SyncTalk synthesizes synchronized talking head videos, employing tri-plane hash representations to maintain
subject identity. It can generate synchronized lip movements, facial expressions, and stable head poses, and restores hair details to create
high-resolution videos.

Abstract
Achieving high synchronization in the synthesis of realistic, speech-driven talking head videos presents a significant challenge. Traditional Generative Adversarial Networks (GAN) struggle to maintain consistent facial identity,
while Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) methods, although
they can address this issue, often produce mismatched lip
movements, inadequate facial expressions, and unstable
head poses. A lifelike talking head requires synchronized
coordination of subject identity, lip movements, facial expressions, and head poses. The absence of these synchronizations is a fundamental flaw, leading to unrealistic and
artificial outcomes. To address the critical issue of synchronization, identified as the “devil” in creating realistic talking heads, we introduce SyncTalk. This NeRF-based method
effectively maintains subject identity, enhancing synchronization and realism in talking head synthesis. SyncTalk
employs a Face-Sync Controller to align lip movements
* Corresponding authors.

with speech and innovatively uses a 3D facial blendshape
model to capture accurate facial expressions. Our HeadSync Stabilizer optimizes head poses, achieving more natural head movements. The Portrait-Sync Generator restores hair details and blends the generated head with the
torso for a seamless visual experience. Extensive experiments and user studies demonstrate that SyncTalk outperforms state-of-the-art methods in synchronization and realism. We recommend watching the supplementary video:
https://ziqiaopeng.github.io/synctalk

1. Introduction
The quest to generate dynamic and realistic speech-driven
talking heads has intensified, driven by expanding applications in digital assistants [39], virtual reality [32], and
film-making [18]. The ultimate goal is to enhance the realism of synthetic videos to align with human perceptual
expectations. However, a fundamental challenge that persists across existing methods is the need for synchroniza-

666

