This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unlocking the Potential of Prompt-Tuning in Bridging Generalized and
Personalized Federated Learning
Wenlong Deng, Christos Thrampoulidis⇤ , Xiaoxiao Li*
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
The University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada
{dwenlong,cthrampo,xiaoxiao.li}@ece.ubc.ca
https://github.com/ubc-tea/SGPT
Abstract
Vision Transformers (ViT) and Visual Prompt Tuning
(VPT) achieve state-of-the-art performance with improved
efficiency in various computer vision tasks. This suggests a
promising paradigm shift of adapting pre-trained ViT models
to Federated Learning (FL) settings. However, the challenge
of data heterogeneity among FL clients presents a significant
hurdle in effectively deploying ViT models. Existing Generalized FL (GFL) and Personalized FL (PFL) methods have
limitations in balancing performance across both global and
local data distributions. In this paper, we present a novel algorithm, SGPT, that integrates GFL and PFL approaches by
employing a unique combination of both shared and groupspecific prompts. This design enables SGPT to capture both
common and group-specific features. A key feature of SGPT
is its prompt selection module, which facilitates the training
of a single global model capable of automatically adapting
to diverse local client data distributions without the need
for local fine-tuning. To effectively train the prompts, we utilize block coordinate descent (BCD), learning from common
feature information (shared prompts), and then more specialized knowledge (group prompts) iteratively. Theoretically,
we justify that learning the proposed prompts can reduce the
gap between global and local performance. Empirically, we
conduct experiments on both label and feature heterogeneity
settings in comparison with state-of-the-art baselines, along
with extensive ablation studies, to substantiate the superior
performance of SGPT.

1. Introduction
FL is a framework that allows machine learning models
to be learned from multiple clients without sharing their
data [37]. In the landscape of computer vision, the integration of ViT [9] with FL emerges as a pivotal research domain
* Equal Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. Global accuracy and worst local accuracy on CIFAR-100
with s = 10 (s is the number of classes per client). Points located
in the top-right corner correspond to great performance on both
the global data and local clients’ data distributions. PFL models
perform well on local data, however, lack the ability to predict
out-of-client data. Global models have a better generalization but
cannot well adapt to each local data distribution. Our proposed
SGPT (?) achieves the best trade-off.

as it promises a significant improvement in image recognition tasks. Firstly, ViT’s attention mechanism has demonstrated exceptional ability in deriving robust and discriminative representations [2, 3, 9, 51] in terms of scalability and
adaptability to a variety data scenarios; a feature crucial in
FL environments. Secondly, ViTs demonstrate a remarkable
ability to generalize from limited data by leveraging powerful publicly available pre-trained ViT models [9, 17, 19, 22]
as initialization, making them inherently suitable for FL’s
decentralized nature. While ViTs are often seen as computationally demanding, recent advancements have significantly enhanced their efficiency casting them suitable for
FL1 . These improvements include 1) updating part of model
parameters [47] or 2) optimizing additional parameters with
1 A detailed related work review on parameter efficient tuning for transformer is provided in the appendix.

6087

