This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoDeF: Content Deformation Fields for Temporally Consistent Video Processing
Hao Ouyang1,2* Qiuyu Wang2* Yuxi Xiao2,3* Qingyan Bai1,2 Juntao Zhang1
Kecheng Zheng2 Xiaowei Zhou3 Qifeng Chen1† Yujun Shen2†
1

HKUST

2

3

Ant Group

CAD&CG, ZJU

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Versatile applications of CoDeF including (a) text-guided video-to-video translation (left half: translated frames, right
half: input frames), (b) video object tracking, and (c) video keypoint tracking. It is noteworthy that, with the proposed type of video
representation, we manage to directly lift image algorithms for video processing without any tuning on videos.

Abstract
We present the content deformation field (CoDeF) as
a new type of video representation, which consists of a
canonical content field aggregating the static contents in
the entire video and a temporal deformation field recording
the transformations from the canonical image (i.e., rendered
from the canonical content field) to each individual frame
along the time axis. Given a target video, these two fields
are jointly optimized to reconstruct it through a carefully
tailored rendering pipeline. We advisedly introduce some
regularizations into the optimization process, urging the
canonical content field to inherit semantics (e.g., the object
shape) from the video. With such a design, CoDeF naturally
supports lifting image algorithms for video processing, in

the sense that one can apply an image algorithm to the
canonical image and effortlessly propagate the outcomes to
the entire video with the aid of the temporal deformation
field. We experimentally show that CoDeF is able to
lift image-to-image translation to video-to-video translation
and lift keypoint detection to keypoint tracking without any
training. More importantly, thanks to our lifting strategy
that deploys the algorithms on only one image, we achieve
superior cross-frame consistency in processed videos compared to existing video-to-video translation approaches,
and even manage to track non-rigid objects like water and
smog. Code is made available at https://qiuyu96.
github.io/CoDeF/.

8089

