This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improved Implicit Neural Representation
with Fourier Reparameterized Training
Kexuan Shi Xingyu Zhou Shuhang Gu*
School of Computer Science and Engineering, UESTC
{kexuanshi712, xy.chous526, shuhanggu}@gmail.com

Abstract
Implicit Neural Representation (INR) as a mighty representation paradigm has achieved success in various computer vision tasks recently. Due to the low-frequency bias issue of vanilla multi-layer perceptron (MLP), existing methods have investigated advanced techniques, such as positional encoding and periodic activation function, to improve
the accuracy of INR. In this paper, we connect the network
training bias with the reparameterization technique and
theoretically prove that weight reparameterization could
provide us a chance to alleviate the spectral bias of MLP.
Based on our theoretical analysis, we propose a Fourier
reparameterization method which learns coefficient matrix
of fixed Fourier bases to compose the weights of MLP. We
evaluate the proposed Fourier reparameterization method
on different INR tasks with various MLP architectures, including vanilla MLP, MLP with positional encoding and
MLP with advanced activation function, etc. The superiority approximation results on different MLP architectures
clearly validate the advantage of our proposed method.
Armed with our Fourier reparameterization method, better
INR with more textures and less artifacts can be learned
from the training data. The codes are available at https:
//github.com/LabShuHangGU/FR-INR.

1. Introduction
Recently, a novel signal representation paradigm called
implicit neural representation (INR) has gained great attention in the field of computer vision and graphics. The main
idea of INR is using multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to parameterize continuous and differentiable functions in an implicit manner. For example, given a gray scale image, INR
takes the coordinates of the pixels as inputs to MLP and
trains it to output the exact gray values using gradient-based
optimization methods. Benefiting from the continuity nature and the expressive power of MLP, a more versatile continuous representation can be learned than traditional dis* Corresponding author

Λ ∈ ℝd×M

y

x

……

W=
R

G

……
……
……
……

B ∈ ℝM×d

×

……

Trainable
Coefficient matrix

B

Fixed
Fourier basis

Optimize by Gradient Descent
Optimize by Gradient Descent

Distributions of NTK Eigenvalues
Direct Training

Reparameterized Training

Concentrated
Eigenvalue Distribution

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

Remain

Balanced
Eigenvalue Distribution

1st

2nd

3rd

4th

Remain

Figure 1. A conceptual illustration of our Fourier reparameterization method. We reparameterize the linear weight W with a
trainable coefficient matrix Λ and a fixed Fourier basis matrix
B. More balanced eigenvalue distribution of neural tangent kernel (NTK) matrix implies that our method is able to alleviate the
low-frequency bias of deep neural network, and therefore leads to
better implicit neural representation.

crete grid-based methods. Consequently, INR has achieved
state-of-the-art performance across a variety of tasks such
as signal representation [34, 35], 3D shape reconstruction
[3, 6, 30] and novel view synthesis [26, 28, 37].
Despite the universal approximation capabilities of MLP
which have been proved in [16], obtaining highly accurate
INR is not trivial. Specifically, MLP with ReLU activation
function often fails to represent the high-frequency components of the signal such as the complex texture information
in images and the intricate geometric shapes involved in 3D
shape reconstruction. Such tendency of MLP to learn simple patterns of the target function is referred to as spectral
bias [31] or low-frequency bias [43]. To improve the performance of INR, great efforts have been made to alleviate
or circumvent the spectral bias of MLP. One main category

25985

