This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dispel Darkness for Better Fusion: A Controllable Visual Enhancer based on
Cross-modal Conditional Adversarial Learning
Hao Zhang, Linfeng Tang, Xinyu Xiang, Xuhui Zuo, Jiayi Ma*
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{zhpersonalbox, linfeng0419, jyma2010}@gmail.com, {xiangxinyu, xuhuizuo2001}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a controllable visual enhancer, named
DDBF, which is based on cross-modal conditional adversarial learning and aims to dispel darkness and achieve
better visible and infrared modalities fusion. Specifically, a
guided restoration module (GRM) is firstly designed to enhance weakened information in the low-light visible modality. The GRM utilizes the light-invariant high-contrast characteristics of the infrared modality as the central target distribution, and constructs a multi-level conditional adversarial sample set to enable continuous controlled brightness enhancement of visible images. Then, we develop
an information fusion module (IFM) to integrate the advantageous features of the enhanced visible image and the
infrared image. Thanks to customized explicit information preservation and hue fidelity constraints, the IFM produces visually pleasing results with rich textures, significant contrast, and vivid colors. The brightened visible
image and the final fused image compose the dual output of our DDBF to meet the diverse visual preferences of
users. We evaluate DDBF on the public datasets, achieving state-of-the-art performances of low-light enhancement
and information integration that is available for both day
and night scenarios. The experiments also demonstrate
that our DDBF is effective in improving decision accuracy
for object detection and semantic segmentation. Moreover,
we offer a user-friendly interface for the convenient application of our model. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/HaoZhang1018/DDBF.

1. Introduction
Infrared and visible modality fusion is an enhancement
technology that aims to integrate the advantages of both
modalities to produce fused images with rich textures, significant contrast, and vibrant colors [3, 20, 25, 27, 50]. Due
to the outstanding visual characteristics of fused images, in* Corresponding author

Low-light Visible

Infrared

Ours (Controllable)

U2Fusion

ratio

Figure 1. An example of infrared and visible image fusion in lowlight environment.

frared and visible modality fusion has found extensive applications in adverse environments such as nighttime. Thus,
it is of great interest to develop an effective fusion algorithm
to achieve night visual enhancement, thereby promoting the
performance of tasks such as video surveillance and vehicle
navigation [4, 32, 38, 43, 54].
The advancement of deep learning has significantly accelerated progress in the field of infrared and visible modality fusion in recent decades [14, 15, 19, 21, 44, 47, 52, 53].
Deep fusion methods utilize specific network architectures
to automatically extract and fuse features and reconstruct
images under the guidance of meticulously designed loss
functions [17, 28, 43, 46, 48], achieving promising visual
performance. However, there are still several challenges
that need to be addressed.
Firstly, the design concept for the loss function used to
guide texture and contrast preservation still remains at the
level of the multi-modal weighted game (see Eq. (1)), that
is, setting multiple optimization objectives in the same domain. Such a multi-objective optimization [37] will force
the network to sacrifice the optimal solutions in each domain during the learning process in favor of minimizing
the total loss, resulting in weakened texture and contrast in
the fused image [26, 42]. Secondly, nearly all deep fusion

26487

