This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-time 3D-aware Portrait Video Relighting
Ziqi Cai1,2
1

Kaiwen Jiang3

Shu-Yu Chen1

Yu-Kun Lai4

Hongbo Fu5,6

Boxin Shi8,9

Lin Gao*1,7

Beijing Key Laboratory of Mobile Computing and Pervasive Device, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Beijing Jiaotong University 3 University of California San Diego 4 Cardiff University 5 City University of Hong Kong
6
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 7 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
8
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
9
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
{zqtsai,kevinjiangedu}@gmail.com, chenshuyu@ict.ac.cn, Yukun.Lai@cs.cardiff.ac.uk
hongbofu@cityu.edu.hk, shiboxin@pku.edu.cn, gaolin@ict.ac.cn

Yaw = 0.3

Abstract
Synthesizing realistic videos of talking faces under custom lighting conditions and viewing angles benefits various
downstream applications like video conferencing. However,
most existing relighting methods are either time-consuming
or unable to adjust the viewpoints. In this paper, we present
the first real-time 3D-aware method for relighting in-thewild videos of talking faces based on Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF). Given an input portrait video, our method
can synthesize talking faces under both novel views and
novel lighting conditions with a photo-realistic and disentangled 3D representation. Specifically, we infer an albedo
tri-plane, as well as a shading tri-plane based on a desired lighting condition for each video frame with fast dualencoders. We also leverage a temporal consistency network
to ensure smooth transitions and reduce flickering artifacts.
Our method runs at 32.98 fps on consumer-level hardware
and achieves state-of-the-art results in terms of reconstruction quality, lighting error, lighting instability, temporal
consistency and inference speed. We demonstrate the effectiveness and interactivity of our method on various portrait
videos with diverse lighting and viewing conditions.

1. Introduction
Portrait videos are widely used in various scenarios, such as
video conferencing, video editing, entertainment, virtual reality, etc. However, many portrait videos are captured under
unsatisfactory conditions, such as environments that are either too dark or too bright, or with virtual backgrounds that
do not match the lighting of the foreground. These factors
degrade the visual quality and realism of videos and affect
the user experience.
Of particular significance is the context of augmented re* Corresponding author is Lin Gao

Front

Lighting

Albedo

Lighting

Geometry

Figure 1. Given a portrait video shown in the leftmost column, our
method reconstructs a 3D relightable face for each video frame.
Users can then adjust their viewpoints and lighting conditions interactively. The second column displays relighted video frames
with a head pose yaw of 0.3, while the third column presents faces
relighted under an alternative lighting condition with a frontal head
pose. The rightmost column provides the predicted albedo and geometry of the reconstructed face. Please see the supplementary
video for the full results.

ality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) applications, where users
often seek to create 3D faces that can be dynamically relighted to fit the environment. This dynamic relighting capability becomes possible only when the underlying method
is inherently 3D-aware and operates in real time.
However, 3D-aware portrait video relighting is a challenging task, since it involves modeling the complex interactions between the light, geometry, and appearance of human faces, as well as ensuring the temporal coherence and
naturalness of synthesized videos. It is even more challeng-

6221

