This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language-only Efficient Training of Zero-shot Composed Image Retrieval
Geonmo Gu⇤, 1

Sanghyuk Chun⇤, 2
1

NAVER Vision

Wonjae Kim2
2

Yoohoon Kang1

NAVER AI Lab

Abstract

1. Introduction
Composed image retrieval (CIR) is a challenging visionlanguage (VL) task that takes a composed query of image
and text, aiming to search relative images for both conditions [29]. As language serves as the most natural method
for encoding human interaction, CIR provides a higher degree of freedom and a better user experience for imagebased search engine applications, such as web commerce.
One of the main challenges of CIR is the expensive
dataset collection pipeline. CIR datasets consist of triplets
hxiR , xc , xi i, where xiR is an image query, xc is a text
query, and xi is the target image. Unlike image-text paired
datasets, such as CC3M [39] or LAION [38], such triplets

20.0

G

17.5

H

Equal contribution

Pic2Word
SEARLE
LinCIR (ours)

H

CIRCO mAP@5

Composed image retrieval (CIR) task takes a composed
query of image and text, aiming to search relative images
for both conditions. Conventional CIR approaches need a
training dataset composed of triplets of query image, query
text, and target image, which is very expensive to collect.
Several recent works have worked on the zero-shot (ZS) CIR
paradigm to tackle the issue without using pre-collected
triplets. However, the existing ZS-CIR methods show limited backbone scalability and generalizability due to the
lack of diversity of the input texts during training. We propose a novel CIR framework, only using language for its
training. Our LinCIR (Language-only training for CIR) can
be trained only with text datasets by a novel self-supervision
named self-masking projection (SMP). We project the text
latent embedding to the token embedding space and construct a new text by replacing the keyword tokens of the
original text. Then, we let the new and original texts have
the same latent embedding vector. With this simple strategy, LinCIR is surprisingly efficient and highly effective;
LinCIR with CLIP ViT-G backbone is trained in 48 minutes
and shows the best ZS-CIR performances on four different
CIR benchmarks, CIRCO, GeneCIS, FashionIQ, and CIRR,
even outperforming supervised method on FashionIQ. Code
is available at github.com/navervision/lincir

⇤

Sangdoo Yun2

15.0
G

L

12.5

H

L

10.0
L
7.5
G
5.0
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

Training time (hours)

Figure 1. Training time (hours) vs. Zero-shot Composed Image Retrieval (ZS-CIR) performance. Thanks to our efficient
language-only training strategy, our LinCIR outperforms the previous ZS-CIR methods in both training time and CIR performance.
The training time is measured on 8 A100 GPUs. We compare the
models on the CIRCO mAP@5 [3] score for a more comprehensive evaluation of CIR models (more results are in Fig. 4). Notably, when we scale up the backbone CLIP [19, 35] model size by
ViT-L, ViT-H and ViT-G, LinCIR shows a promising performance
boost with surprisingly short training time (48 mins for ViT-G). On
the other hand, Pic2Word [37] and SEARLE [3] cannot be scaled
up to CLIP ViT-G due to their limitation on restricted textual expressions and the lack of diversity of input texts.

are almost impossible to collect by web crawling and require expensive human labor to create each triplet. For example, the datasets are constructed by gathering candidates
of hxiR , xi i and manually annotating xc by human annotators [29, 47], which is hard to scalable. Therefore, the
size of the training triplets is usually small (e.g., 46.6k [47],
28.8k [29]), and the existing CIR methods trained on such
triplets [2, 6–8, 11, 12, 20–22, 24, 30, 40, 42, 46, 48] suffer
from the lack of generalizability to diverse unseen domains.
To overcome the drawback, recent studies have explored
zero-shot CIR (ZS-CIR), a scalable direction, by eliminating the dependency on the pre-collected triplet datasets.
For example, Saito et al. [37] and Baldrati et al. [3]
propose projection-based ZS-CIR methods without using
triplet datasets. Based on the pre-trained CLIP [35], they
train a lightweight projection module that projects the
CLIP image latent embedding zi to the CLIP text token

13225

