This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DSGG: Dense Relation Transformer for an End-to-end Scene Graph Generation
Zeeshan Hayder1 , Xuming He2 ,
1
Data61-CSIRO, Australia, 2 ShanghaiTech University,
zeeshan.hayder@data61.csiro.au, hexm@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Scene graph generation aims to capture detailed spatial and semantic relationships between objects in an image, which is challenging due to incomplete labelling, longtailed relationship categories, and relational semantic overlap. Existing Transformer-based methods either employ
distinct queries for objects and predicates or utilize holistic queries for relation triplets and hence often suffer from
limited capacity in learning low-frequency relationships. In
this paper, we present a new Transformer-based method,
called DSGG, that views scene graph detection as a direct
graph prediction problem based on a unique set of graphaware queries. In particular, each graph-aware query encodes a compact representation of both the node and all
of its relations in the graph, acquired through the utilization of a relaxed sub-graph matching during the training
process. Moreover, to address the problem of relational semantic overlap, we utilize a strategy for relation distillation,
aiming to efficiently learn multiple instances of semantic
relationships. Extensive experiments on the VG and the
PSG datasets show that our model achieves state-of-theart results, showing a significant improvement of 3.5% and
6.7% in mR@50 and mR@100 for the scene-graph generation task and achieves an even more substantial improvement of 8.5% and 10.3% in mR@50 and mR@100 for the
panoptic scene graph generation task. Code is available at
https://github.com/zeeshanhayder/DSGG.

1. Introduction
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) [27] seeks to detect and generate a graph-structured summary of all the objects present in
the scene, with edges describing their visual interactions or
pairwise relationships. This topological representation of an
image is helpful for visual understanding and image reasoning tasks such as image caption generation, visual question
answering, cross-model retrieval, and human-object interaction recognition. This task is analogous to (or a sub-task of)
the panoptic scene graph generation (PSG) [32] task, where
the subjects and objects can also belong to the stuff classes

Figure 1. Illustration of different queries used in SGG networks. a)
Multi-query transformer networks learn entities and predicates separately. b) Triplet query-based transformer networks use a separate
query for each triplet. c) Our proposed graph-aware queries learn a
compact representation of objects and all of its relations jointly.

and the semantic segmentation of the entities are used to
evaluate the scene graphs.
Specifically, given an image, the SGG task focuses on
predicting all the objects along with their class labels, bounding boxes, pixel-accurate segmentation, and their relations
to all other objects. The graph-based scene generation methods [28, 34] are often limited by the high complexity of the
underlying object detectors [25] and by the representation
of the scene context. Unbiased SGG methods [29] attempt
to learn the semantic relationships without considering the
label bias in the data and then use simple post-processing
to correct the label distribution. Nevertheless, these techniques have challenges with images that have multiple semantic relations between the same pair of objects and are
vulnerable to long-tail problems with relation categories.
Transformer-based methods [9, 12–14, 17, 29, 32, 34, 37]
attempt to provide a single-stage solution for scene graph
generation. Traditional transformer-based approaches utilize
a two-stream network with either a shared query or separate query for estimating the object relations [9, 13, 29, 34].
Recent approaches, such as [12, 14, 17, 18, 30, 32, 33, 36],
adopt a holistic strategy by directly predicting a list of <sub-

28317

