This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CDMAD: Class-Distribution-Mismatch-Aware Debiasing
for Class-Imbalanced Semi-Supervised Learning
Hyuck Lee
Heeyoung Kim
Department of Industrial and Systems Engineering, KAIST
Daejeon 34141, Republic of Korea
{dlgur0921, heeyoungkim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Pseudo-label-based semi-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms trained on a class-imbalanced set face two cascading challenges: 1) Classifiers tend to be biased towards
majority classes, and 2) Biased pseudo-labels are used for
training. It is difficult to appropriately re-balance the classifiers in SSL because the class distribution of an unlabeled
set is often unknown and could be mismatched with that of
a labeled set. We propose a novel class-imbalanced SSL algorithm called class-distribution-mismatch-aware debiasing (CDMAD). For each iteration of training, CDMAD first
assesses the classifier’s biased degree towards each class
by calculating the logits on an image without any patterns
(e.g., solid color image), which can be considered irrelevant
to the training set. CDMAD then refines biased pseudolabels of the base SSL algorithm by ensuring the classifier’s
neutrality. CDMAD uses these refined pseudo-labels during
the training of the base SSL algorithm to improve the quality
of the representations. In the test phase, CDMAD similarly
refines biased class predictions on test samples. CDMAD
can be seen as an extension of post-hoc logit adjustment
to address a challenge of incorporating the unknown class
distribution of the unlabeled set for re-balancing the biased
classifier under class distribution mismatch. CDMAD ensures Fisher consistency for the balanced error. Extensive
experiments verify the effectiveness of CDMAD.

1. Introduction
Classifiers trained on a class-imbalanced set suffer from
being biased toward the majority classes. Under semisupervised learning (SSL) settings, classifiers of pseudolabel-based algorithms tend to be further biased because of
the use of biased pseudo-labels for training. The use of biased pseudo-labels also decreases the quality of representations. This problem becomes more serious when the class
distributions of the labeled and unlabeled sets differ significantly. In fact, recent SSL algorithms, such as ReMixMatch

[1] and CoMatch [18], rely on the assumption that the class
distribution of the unlabeled set is the same as that of the labeled set and cannot consider a potential class distribution
mismatch between the labeled and unlabeled sets.
Recently, many class imbalanced SSL (CISSL) algorithms [7, 12, 15, 17, 21, 26] have been proposed. However,
Fan et al. [7], Lee et al. [17], Wei et al. [26] assumed that the
class distribution of the unlabeled set is known and the same
as that of the labeled set, although the class distribution of
the unlabeled set can be unknown in practice (e.g., STL-10
[2]) and training sets comprising labeled and unlabeled sets
collected from different periods are likely to have a class
distribution mismatch. Kim et al. [12], Lai et al. [15], Oh
et al. [21] did not make an assumption of the same class distributions for labeled and unlabeled sets in the main training
stage. However, after the main training stage, they additionally used the re-balancing technique of Classifier Retraining (cRT) [11] or post-hoc logit-adjustment (LA) [20],
which were proposed for fully supervised class-imbalanced
learning. When using cRT for CISSL, there are disadvantages that the classifier cannot be learned interactively with
representations, and only the labeled set is used for training
the classifier [17]. Using LA for CISSL may not re-balance
the classifier to an appropriate degree when the class distribution of the unlabeled set is unknown and differs from that
of the labeled set, because LA can not consider the unknown
class distribution of the unlabeled set.
We propose a CISSL algorithm, class-distributionmismatch-aware debiasing (CDMAD), which effectively
mitigates class imbalance in SSL even under severe class
distribution mismatch between labeled and unlabeled sets.
The key idea of CDMAD is to consider the classifier’s biased degree towards each class for refining both the biased
pseudo-labels of the base SSL algorithm and class predictions on test samples. To measure the classifier’s biased
degree, we utilize the class prediction on an input that is
reasonably assumed to be irrelevant to the training set.
In general, a trained classifier predicts a class of a new
sample based on the learned features. Therefore, for an im-

23891

