This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What, when, and where? Self-Supervised Spatio-Temporal Grounding
in Untrimmed Multi-Action Videos from Narrated Instructions
Brian Chen 1
Samuel Thomas6,7
1

Nina Shvetsova2,3 Andrew Rouditchenko4 Daniel Kondermann 5
Shih-Fu Chang1 Rogerio Feris6,7 James Glass4 Hilde Kuehne2,3,7

Columbia University, 2 Goethe University Frankfurt, 3 University of Bonn, 4 MIT CSAIL
5

Quality Match GmbH, 6 IBM Research AI, 7 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

{bc2754,sc250}@columbia.edu, shvetsov@uni-frankfurt.de, {roudi,glass}@mit.edu
dk@quality-match.com, {sthomas,rsferis}@us.ibm.com, kuehne@cs.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Spatio-temporal grounding describes the task of localizing events in space and time, e.g., in video data, based
on verbal descriptions only. Models for this task are usually trained with human-annotated sentences and bounding box supervision. This work addresses this task from
a multimodal supervision perspective, proposing a framework for spatio-temporal action grounding trained on loose
video and subtitle supervision only, without human annotation. To this end, we combine local representation learning, which focuses on leveraging fine-grained spatial information, with a global representation encoding that captures higher-level representations and incorporates both in
a joint approach. To evaluate this challenging task in a reallife setting, a new benchmark dataset is proposed, providing dense spatio-temporal grounding annotations in long,
untrimmed, multi-action instructional videos for over 5K
events. We evaluate the proposed approach and other methods on the proposed and standard downstream tasks, showing that our method improves over current baselines in various settings, including spatial, temporal, and untrimmed
multi-action spatio-temporal grounding.

1. Introduction
Spatio-temporal grounding (STG) describes the challenging
task of locating events in space and time within video data
based on text referential expressions. Methods in this field
usually rely on a combination of spatio-temporal bounding box annotation, together with a human-generated caption, describing the visual content of the bounding box
[23, 54], which limits their generalizability beyond the
given training scenario. Compared to that, as a second line
of work, multimodal self-supervised learning tries to leverage “free” data sources, such as video and automatic speech

Training Setup: Unlabeled videos with narrated instructions

"To this we will add
one carrot chopped
into jong jullien …"

"… you can use the
forks to pull it a bit
appart…"

"… stir it a bit so it mixes
well…"

Evaluation Setup: Referential queries - "Crack egg", "Mix egg", etc.
… background

"Crack egg"

…

background

"Mix egg"

background …

…

Task: Spatio-Temporal Grounding - Find the temporal boundary of a
queried action in an untrimmed video and spatially localize the action.

Figure 1. Learning Spatio-temporal grounding in untrimmed
videos. In training, we learn from unlabeled videos without human
annotation. In evaluation, we perform spatio-temporal grounding
using an action description such as “crack egg” as a query. The
model needs to localize both the action’s temporal boundary and
spatial region in the long untrimmed video. We visualize the heatmap from the annotation points as well as derived bounding boxes.

recognition (ASR) captions from large-scale instructional
videos to learn representations without human annotation
[3, 4, 8, 35, 36]. The resulting models achieve state-ofthe-art performance on zero-shot tasks such as cross-modal
video retrieval or classification and also for zero-shot temporal action segmentation and detection based on free text
queries [8, 28, 42, 47, 66], but usually lack spatial localization abilities. A third line of work focuses on labelfree spatial grounding, e.g. by training on image-caption

18419

