This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SfmCAD: Unsupervised CAD Reconstruction by Learning Sketch-based Feature
Modeling Operations
Pu Li1,2

Jianwei Guo1,2 * Huibin Li2,1

Bedrich Benes3

Dong-Ming Yan1,2

1

2

MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Computer Science, Purdue University

Figure 1. SfmCAD parses voxel shapes and reconstructs them into a parameterized set of sketch-based feature modeling operations: the
input voxels, neural typed sketch+path representation, and the final CAD model (each part is randomly colored).

Abstract
This paper introduces SfmCAD, a novel unsupervised
network that reconstructs 3D shapes by learning the Sketchbased Feature Modeling operations commonly used in
modern CAD workflows. Given a 3D shape represented
as voxels, SfmCAD learns a neural-typed sketch+path parameterized representation, including 2D sketches of feature primitives and their 3D sweeping paths without supervision, for inferring feature-based CAD programs. SfmCAD
employs 2D sketches for local detail representation and 3D
paths to capture the overall structure, achieving a clear
separation between shape details and structure. This conversion into parametric forms enables users to seamlessly
adjust the shape’s geometric and structural features, thus
enhancing interpretability and user control. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method by applying SfmCAD to many different types of objects, such as CAD parts,
ShapeNet objects, and tree shapes. Extensive comparisons
show that SfmCAD produces compact and faithful 3D reconstructions with superior quality compared to alternatives. The code is released at https://github.com/
BunnySoCrazy/SfmCAD.

* Corresponding author: jianwei.guo@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

1. Introduction
Reconstructing shapes into CAD representations is a fundamental problem in computer vision and graphics with numerous commercial applications in industrial design and
manufacturing [39]. Recent years have seen an increased
interest in leveraging deep learning techniques to learn geometric representations of 3D shapes, including implicit
fields [2, 25, 28], geometric primitives [19, 22, 24, 37],
boundary representation (B-Rep) [9, 17], or Constructive
Solid Geometry (CSG) [3, 36, 49], each with its unique
characteristics and applications, contributing to the rich
tapestry of research and development in this field.
However, current CAD reconstruction methods are still
lacking detail reconstruction accuracy, compactness, and
interpretability of the obtained models. For example, a typical line of research is dedicated to reconstruction-oriented
tasks, i.e., representing 3D shapes as parametric primitives,
implicit fields, or B-rep. These methods deliver a high level
of detail and accuracy by capturing intricate details and
complex geometries with remarkable precision. However,
constructing CAD models by assembling instances of primitives or by identifying faces, edges, and vertices is a tedious
process [35]. Besides, the results often include complex and
unintuitive operations that make the model difficult to inter-

4671

