This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Simple and Effective Point-based Network
for Event Camera 6-DOFs Pose Relocalization
Hongwei Ren*, Jiadong Zhu* , Yue Zhou, Haotian Fu, Yulong Huang, Bojun Cheng †
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology(Guangzhou)
{hren066,jzhu484,yzhou833,hfu373,yhuang496}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, bocheng@hkust-gz.edu.cn

Abstract
Event cameras exhibit remarkable attributes such as
high dynamic range, asynchronicity, and low latency, making them highly suitable for vision tasks that involve highspeed motion in challenging lighting conditions. These
cameras implicitly capture movement and depth information in events, making them appealing sensors for Camera Pose Relocalization (CPR) tasks. Nevertheless, existing CPR networks based on events neglect the pivotal finegrained temporal information in events, resulting in unsatisfactory performance. Moreover, the energy-efficient features are further compromised by the use of excessively
complex models, hindering efficient deployment on edge devices. In this paper, we introduce PEPNet, a simple and
effective point-based network designed to regress six degrees of freedom (6-DOFs) event camera poses. We rethink the relationship between the event camera and CPR
tasks, leveraging the raw Point Cloud directly as network
input to harness the high-temporal resolution and inherent sparsity of events. PEPNet is adept at abstracting the
spatial and implicit temporal features through hierarchical structure and explicit temporal features by Attentive Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory (A-Bi-LSTM). By employing a carefully crafted lightweight design, PEPNet delivers state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance on both indoor
and outdoor datasets with meager computational resources.
Specifically, PEPNet attains a significant 38% and 33%
performance improvement on the random split IJRR and
M3ED datasets, respectively. Moreover, the lightweight design version PEPNettiny accomplishes results comparable
to the SOTA while employing a mere 0.5% of the parameters.

1. Introduction
Event camera is a type of bio-inspired vision sensor that
responds to local changes in illumination exceeding a pre* equal contribution. †corresponding author.

Figure 1. The average results using the random split method
benchmarked on the CPR dataset [23]. The vertical axis represents
the combined rotational and translational errors (m+rad). PEPNet
is the first point-based CPR network for event cameras.

defined threshold [17]. Differing from conventional framebased cameras, event cameras independently and asynchronously produce pixel-level events. Notably, event cameras boast an exceptional triad: high dynamic range, low latency, and ultra-high temporal resolution. This unique combination empowers superior performance under challenging
light conditions, adeptly capturing the swift scene and rapid
motion changes in near-microsecond precision [27]. Additionally, event cameras boast remarkably low power consumption positioning them as a popular choice for many
power-constrained devices. Camera Pose Relocalization
(CPR) is an emerging application in power-constrained devices and has gained significant attention. It aims to train
several scene-specific neural networks to accurately relocalize the camera pose within the original scene used for training. It is extensively employed in numerous applications,
including Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR),
and robotics [35], all of which are deployed on batterypowered devices and are power-constrained.
CPR tasks using event cameras significantly diverge
from their conventional CPR counterpart that employs
frame-based cameras, primarily due to the inherent dissimilarity in data output mechanisms between these two
camera types. Furthermore, events inherently encompass
information regarding object motion and depth changes

18112

