This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Fact Checker: Enabling High-Fidelity Detailed Caption Generation
Yunhao Ge

Xiaohui Zeng

Jacob Samuel Huffman

Tsung-Yi Lin

Ming-Yu Liu

Yin Cui

NVIDIA
https://research.nvidia.com/labs/dir/vfc/

VFC

GPT-4V

A happy little girl is standing in a green field, wearing
a plaid shirt and holding onto a string of pink balloons.
The balloons are floating in the air, creating a playful
and joyful atmosphere. The girl appears to be enjoying
the moment, with a smile on her face. In the
background, there is a vast expanse of green grass,
stretching out as far as the eye can see. The sky above
is a bright blue, with a few white clouds scattered
about. The overall mood of the scene is one of
carefree happiness and joy, with the pink balloons
adding a touch of whimsy and playfulness to the
atmosphere.

The image shows a young girl in a field with her arms
joyfully raised. She is holding a bunch of pink
balloons in her right hand. She's wearing a plaid shirt
and jeans, and her hair is styled in what appears to be
a ponytail. The girl is smiling widely, and her pose
suggests she is in mid-celebration or play. The field is
filled with wildflowers, and trees can be seen in the
background under a blue sky with some clouds. The
setting appears to be a sunny day, perfect for outdoor
activities. The image captures a moment of carefree
childhood happiness.

VFC
A 3D model of a three-level, intricately designed
wooden tower with a contrasting blue roof and door,
standing on a wooden base. The tower, brown in
color, resembles a fusion of a house, a tower, and a
castle. At the very top of the tower, there is a
crescent moon design. The overall design adds a
touch of fantasy to the scene.

Cap3D
A 3D model of a small wooden tower with a blue roof.

Figure 1. Comparison of VisualFactChecker (VFC) with GPT-4V and Cap3D. VFC can generate high-fidelity detailed captions that closely
match GPT-4V’s quality for 2D images and offer significantly more details for 3D objects than Cap3D. VFC used a pre-trained Llama-2 as
the LLM when generating the caption for the above 2D image.

Abstract
Existing automatic captioning methods for visual content face challenges such as lack of detail, content hallucination, and poor instruction following. In this work, we
propose VisualFactChecker (VFC), a flexible training-free
pipeline that generates high-fidelity and detailed captions
for both 2D images and 3D objects. VFC consists of three
steps: 1) proposal, where image-to-text captioning models
propose multiple initial captions; 2) verification, where a
large language model (LLM) utilizes tools such as object
detection and VQA models to fact-check proposed captions;
3) captioning, where an LLM generates the final caption by
summarizing caption proposals and the fact check verifica-

tion results. In this step, VFC can flexibly generate captions in various styles following complex instructions. We
conduct comprehensive captioning evaluations using four
metrics: 1) CLIP-Score for image-text similarity; 2) CLIPImage-Score for measuring the image-image similarity between the original and the reconstructed image generated
by a text-to-image model using the caption. 3) human study
on Amazon Mechanical Turk; 4) GPT-4V for fine-grained
evaluation. Evaluation results show that VFC outperforms
state-of-the-art open-sourced captioning methods for 2D
images on the COCO dataset and 3D assets on the Objaverse dataset. Our study demonstrates that by combining
open-source models into a pipeline, we can attain captioning capability comparable to proprietary models such as
GPT-4V, despite being over 10⇥ smaller in model size.

14033

