This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Viewpoint-Aware Visual Grounding in 3D Scenes
Xiangxi Shi
Oregon State University

Zhonghua Wu
SenseTime Research

Stefan Lee
Oregon State University

shixia@oregonstate.edu

wuzhonghua@sensetime.com

leestef@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Referring expressions for visual objects often include descriptions of relative spatial arrangements to other objects
– e.g. “to the right of” – that depend on the point of view
of the speaker. In 2D referring expression tasks, this viewpoint is captured unambiguously in the image. However,
grounding expressions with such spatial language in 3D
without viewpoint annotations can be ambiguous. In this
paper, we investigate the significance of viewpoint information in 3D visual grounding – introducing a model that
explicitly predicts the speaker’s viewpoint based on the referring expression and scene. We pretrain this model on
a synthetically generated dataset that provides viewpoint
annotations and then finetune on 3D referring expression
datasets. Further, we introduce an auxiliary uniform object representation loss to encourage viewpoint invariance
in learned object representations. We find that our proposed
ViewPoint Prediction Network (VPP-Net) achieves state-ofthe-art performance on ScanRefer, SR3D, and NR3D – improving Accuracy@0.25IoU by 1.06%, 0.60%, and 2.00%
respectively compared to prior work.

1. Introduction
Visual grounding of referring expressions requires algorithms to reason about natural language object descriptions
to identify object referents in visual scenes. Naturally, describing relative spatial relations between objects is a common strategy when a speaker produces a referring expression – e.g., “The chair to the right of the couch.” As such,
many methods for visual grounding put algorithmic emphasis on handling these spatial relations [7, 18, 24, 34, 36].
However, these sorts of spatial relations depend upon the
point of view of the speaker. For instance, Fig. 1 depicts two
different viewpoints of the same 3D scene and notes that
these views produce contradictory referring expressions. In
2D visual grounding tasks, the point of view of the speaker
is typically also that of the image – introducing no ambiguity into spatial reasoning. However, viewpoint annotations
are not typically captured for 3D visual grounding tasks that

Figure 1. Expressions referring to the same object from different
viewpoints can lead to contradictory spatial relations.

reason about whole scenes. As a result, identifying referent objects may be ambiguous if multiple object instances
align with the referring expression in differing views. Moreover, the lack of reliable grounding for spatial language may
simply make the reasoning task more difficult to learn even
when the referent is still uniquely identifiable.
Despite this, most of the recent work in 3D visual
grounding has not addressed the role of viewpoint in the
learning process [12, 17, 26, 35, 43, 46]. Those methods
that have attempted to consider the influence of viewpoint
have been hindered by the lack of viewpoint supervision
in existing datasets – instead relying on rendering multiple views of a 3D scene and using attention mechanisms to
softly select between them [13, 16] in an end-to-end model.
In this work, we develop a straightforward approach to
viewpoint-aware visual grounding in 3D scenes – explicitly
predicting the speaker’s viewpoint and then transforming
the input accordingly. To support this direction, we create a
synthetic visual grounding dataset that provides annotations
to directly supervise viewpoint prediction. We propose a
novel framework called ViewPoint Prediction Net (VPPNet) to estimate the viewpoints of expression-pointcloud
pairs and rotate the 3D scenes accordingly before performing expression grounding. This model is first pre-trained on
the synthetic dataset and then fine-tuned on a combination
of the synthetic and target datasets. To our knowledge, this

14056

