This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Desigen: A Pipeline for Controllable Design Template Generation
Haohan Weng1 ,* Danqing Huang2 , Yu Qiao3 , Zheng Hu3 ,*
Chin-Yew Lin2 , Tong Zhang1 , C. L. Philip Chen1
1
South China University of Technology, 2 Microsoft, 3 Central South University

Content: Heavy arms Gundam
mech, studio photo, intricate
details, highly detailed

Content: A tent in a field with
stars in the sky, highly detailed,
intricate detail

Content: A picture of sunset
over the ocean, trending on art
station, studio photo

Content: Yellow large flowers
with dark background, actual
Photography, intricate detail

Layout: 2 × Text Box

Layout: 2 × Text Box

Layout: Given layout mask

Layout: Given layout mask

Figure 1. Design templates (background image and layout elements) generated by Desigen with in-the-wild prompts and layout specification. Our proposed pipeline flexibly supports synthesizing the templates from scratch (1st and 2nd columns) or conditioned on a fixed
layout (3rd and 4th columns).

Abstract
Templates serve as a good starting point to implement
a design (e.g., banner, slide) but it takes great effort from
designers to manually create. In this paper, we present Desigen, an automatic template creation pipeline which generates background images as well as harmonious layout elements over the background. Different from natural images,
a background image should preserve enough non-salient
space for the overlaying layout elements. To equip existing advanced diffusion-based models with stronger spatial
control, we propose two simple but effective techniques to
constrain the saliency distribution and reduce the attention weight in desired regions during the background generation process. Then conditioned on the background, we
synthesize the layout with a Transformer-based autoregressive generator. To achieve a more harmonious composition, we propose an iterative inference strategy to adjust
the synthesized background and layout in multiple rounds.
We constructed a design dataset with more than 40k advertisement banners to verify our approach. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed pipeline generates high-quality templates comparable to human designers. More than a single-page design, we further show an
application of presentation generation that outputs a set of
* Work done during internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

theme-consistent slides. The data and code are available at
https://whaohan.github.io/desigen.

1. Introduction
Design templates are predefined graphics that serve as
good starting points for users to create and edit a design
(e.g., banners and slides). For designers, the template creation process typically consists of collecting theme-relevant
background images, experimenting with different layout
variations, and iteratively refining them to achieve a harmonious composition. Previous works [5, 63, 73] mainly
focus on layout generation conditioned on a given background image and have achieved promising results, but it
still remains unexplored to accelerate the handcrafted background creation and the laborious refinement of the background and layout composition. In this paper, we make an
initial attempt to establish an automatic pipeline Desigen for
design template generation as shown in Figure 1. Desigen
is decomposed into two main components, background generation and layout generation respectively, whose working
flow is demonstrated in Figure 2.
Generating an appropriate background is the first step
toward successful design creation. Different from natural
images, a well-chosen background should contain the context of a design (e.g., theme-related visual content) while

12721

