This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HIT: Estimating Internal Human Implicit Tissues from the Body Surface
Marilyn Keller1, Vaibhav Arora2, Abdelmouttaleb
Dakri , Shivam Chandhok , Jürgen Machann3, Andreas Fritsche3, Michael J. Black1, and Sergi Pujades2
2

2

1

2

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
Université Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK, France
3
IDM, Helmholtz Center Munich at the University of Tübingen

Figure 1. Left half: From volumetric human MRI scans, we learn to segment human internal tissues: subcutaneous adipose tissue (yellow),
intra-muscular and visceral adipose tissue (blue), lean tissue (red), and long bones (white). We segment the MRI to extract a point cloud of the
human body surface (red rings) to which we fit a human body model (SMPL, gray mesh). From this internal and external paired data, we learn
Human Implicit Tissues (HIT), an implicit volumetric model that predicts the type and location of internal tissue. Right half: input body (blue
mesh) and predicted tissues: subcutaneous adipose tissue (yellow) and lean tissue (red). We use OSSO [32] to infer the bones.

Abstract
The creation of personalized anatomical digital twins is
important in the fields of medicine, computer graphics, sports
science, and biomechanics. To observe a subject’s anatomy,
expensive medical devices (MRI or CT) are required and the creation of the digital model is often time-consuming and involves
manual effort. Instead, we leverage the fact that the shape
of the body surface is correlated with the internal anatomy;
e.g. from surface observations alone, one can predict body
composition and skeletal structure. In this work, we go further
and learn to infer the 3D location of three important anatomic
tissues: subcutaneous adipose tissue (fat), lean tissue (muscles
and organs), and long bones. To learn to infer these tissues, we
tackle several key challenges. We first create a dataset of human
tissues by segmenting full-body MRI scans and registering the
SMPL body mesh to the body surface. With this dataset, we train

HIT (Human Implicit Tissues), an implicit function that, given
a point inside a body, predicts its tissue class. HIT leverages the
SMPL body model shape and pose parameters to canonicalize
the medical data. Unlike SMPL, which is trained from upright
3D scans, MRI scans are acquired with subjects lying on a table,
resulting in significant soft-tissue deformation. Consequently,
HIT uses a learned volumetric deformation field that undoes
these deformations. Since HIT is parameterized by SMPL,
we can repose bodies or change the shape of subjects and the
internal structures deform appropriately. We perform extensive
experiments to validate HIT’s ability to predict a plausible
internal structure for novel subjects. The dataset and HIT
model are available at https://hit.is.tue.mpg.de
to foster future research in this direction.

3480

