This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Transferable Targeted Adversarial Attacks with Model
Self-Enhancement
Han Wu*
Guanyan Ou*
Weibin Wu†
Zibin Zheng
School of Software Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
{wuhan36, ougy3}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {wuwb36, zhzibin}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Various transfer attack methods have been proposed to
evaluate the robustness of deep neural networks (DNNs).
Although manifesting remarkable performance in generating untargeted adversarial perturbations, existing proposals still fail to achieve high targeted transferability. In this
work, we discover that the adversarial perturbations’ overfitting towards source models of mediocre generalization
capability can hurt their targeted transferability. To address
this issue, we focus on enhancing the source model’s generalization capability to improve its ability to conduct transferable targeted adversarial attacks. In pursuit of this goal,
we propose a novel model self-enhancement method that incorporates two major components: Sharpness-Aware SelfDistillation (SASD) and Weight Scaling (WS). Specifically,
SASD distills a fine-tuned auxiliary model, which mirrors
the source model’s structure, into the source model while
flattening the source model’s loss landscape. WS obtains an
approximate ensemble of numerous pruned models to perform model augmentation, which can be conveniently synergized with SASD to elevate the source model’s generalization capability and thus improve the resultant targeted perturbations’ transferability. Extensive experiments corroborate the effectiveness of the proposed method. Notably, under the black-box setting, our approach can outperform the
state-of-the-art baselines by a significant margin of 12.2%
on average in terms of the obtained targeted transferability.
Code is available at https://github.com/g4alllf/SASD.

1. Introduction
Despite their wide range of applications in real-world scenarios, deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown vulnerability in the face of imperceptible adversarial perturbations
[41, 43, 49, 50]. In recent years, numerous transfer attack
methods have been proposed to evaluate the robustness of
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Target Label

Source Model

True Label

Enhanced Model

Target Model

𝑥

𝑎𝑑𝑣
𝑥𝑠𝑜𝑢𝑟𝑐𝑒

𝑎𝑑𝑣
𝑥𝑒𝑛
ℎ𝑎𝑛𝑐𝑒𝑑

Figure 1. The motivation of the proposed method that enhances
the source model’s generalization capability to enable more transferable targeted adversarial attacks.

DNNs [1, 42, 44, 48]. Although existing approaches have
demonstrated excellent performances on untargeted transfer
attacks, it is still challenging to accomplish targeted transfer
attacks, which require the attacker to generate perturbations
that can mislead the black-box victims to return a target label [22, 30].
Adversarial perturbations are prone to overfit the source
model and manifest limited targeted transferability when
the source model’s generalization capability is mediocre.
Specifically, neural networks can capture features essential for decision-making, with some features being general
while the others being model-specific [16]. Intuitively, adversarial examples that primarily manipulate model-specific
features are unlikely to transfer well among different models. Working towards a more generalized source model can
alleviate the reliance on model-specific features, thus enhancing the transferability of the synthesized adversarial examples [35].
Therefore, we propose to enhance the source model’s
generalization capability to enable more transferable targeted adversarial attacks. We conceptually illustrate the
motivation of our method in Figure 1. Since different models rely on different features to make decisions, and their
loss landscapes are often sharp, the transferable targeted adversarial examples are likely to reside away from the local optima of different models. It is thus challenging to
transfer the adversarial examples generated by the vanilla

24615

