This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking the Spatial Inconsistency in Classifier-Free Diffusion Guidance
Dazhong Shen1 , Guanglu Song2 , Zeyue Xue3 , Fu-Yun Wang4 , Yu Liu1,2,
1
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, 2 SenseTime Research,
3
The University of Hong Kong, 4 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

*

Abstract
Classifier-Free Guidance (CFG) has been widely used
in text-to-image diffusion models, where the CFG scale
is introduced to control the strength of text guidance on
the whole image space. However, we argue that a global
CFG scale results in spatial inconsistency on varying semantic strengths and suboptimal image quality. To address
this problem, we present a novel approach, Semantic-aware
Classifier-Free Guidance (S-CFG), to customize the guidance degrees for different semantic units in text-to-image
diffusion models. Specifically, we first design a trainingfree semantic segmentation method to partition the latent
image into relatively independent semantic regions at each
denoising step. In particular, the cross-attention map in
the denoising U-net backbone is renormalized for assigning each patch to the corresponding token, while the selfattention map is used to complete the semantic regions.
Then, to balance the amplification of diverse semantic units,
we adaptively adjust the CFG scales across different semantic regions to rescale the text guidance degrees into a
uniform level. Finally, extensive experiments demonstrate
the superiority of S-CFG over the original CFG strategy
on various text-to-image diffusion models, without requiring any extra training cost. our codes are available at
https://github.com/SmilesDZgk/S-CFG.

1. Introduction
Recently, text-to-image generation has witnessed rapid development and various applications [29, 30, 32, 33, 45],
where visually stunning images can be created by simply
typing in a text prompt. In particular, after DDPM [7, 12]
succeeded GANs [3, 8], diffusion models [39], such as Stable Diffusion [33] and DallE-3 [2], have emerged as the new
state-of-the-art family for image-generative models.
The key feature of diffusion models is to approximate the
true data distribution p(x) by reversing the process of perturbing the data with noise progressively in a long iterative
* the corresponding author: liuyuisanai@gmail.com

Figure 1. A motivation example. The first line shows images
generated by Stable Diffusion with CFG and S-CFG, where the
prompt is “a photo of an astronaut riding a horse” and the segmentation maps are manually labeled (Ground, Sky, Horse, Astronaut). The below line shows the average norm curves of the
estimated classifier score ∇xt log p(c|xt ) (solid line) and diffusion score ∇xt log p(xt ) (dashed line) in each semantic region.
The Y-axis scale unit is set as the dynamic variance parameter σt
for better illustrations without damaging the conclusion.

chain. To incorporate the text prompt c into the final generation, it is necessary to enhance the likelihood of c given
the current latent image xt at each reversed diffusion step t.
Instead of training extra classifiers to model p(c|xt ) at each
diffusion step t [7], classifier-free guidance (CFG) [11] has
recently been proposed to estimate both the classifier score
∇xt log p(c|xt ) and the diffusion score ∇xt p(xt ) with the
same neural model, such as U-net [34]. In particular, an
empirical CFG scale is introduced to control the strength of
the text guidance on the whole image space.
However, we argue that a global CFG scale results in
spatial inconsistency on varying semantic strengths during
the denoising process and suboptimal quality of the final
image. Figure 1 shows samples generated by Stable Diffusion [33]. The images can be segmented into four semantic
regions corresponding to “astronaut”, “horse”, “sky” and
“ground”. To compare the guidance degrees assigned to
different semantic units, the figures in the second line illustrate the average norm curves of the estimated classifier

9370

