This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

What You See is What You GAN:
Rendering Every Pixel for High-Fidelity Geometry in 3D GANs
Alex Trevithick* 2 , Matthew Chan1 , Towaki Takikawa1 , Umar Iqbal1 , Shalini De Mello1 , Manmohan
Chandraker2 , Ravi Ramamoorthi2 , and Koki Nagano1
1

NVIDIA

2

University of California, San Diego

Figure 1. Left: Our results. The split view in the middle demonstrates the high degree of agreement between our 2D rendering and
corresponding 3D geometry. Our method can learn fine-grained 3D details (e.g., eyeglass frame and cat’s fur) that are geometrically wellaligned to 2D images without multiview or 3D scan data. Right: Comparison with EG3D [7]. Our tight SDF prior provides smooth and
detailed surfaces on the face and hat while EG3D exhibits geometry artifacts and discrepancies between geometry and rendering. Please
see Fig. 5 and the accompanying video for more examples, and Fig. 6 for comparison to other baselines.

Abstract
3D-aware Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
have shown remarkable progress in learning to generate
multi-view-consistent images and 3D geometries of scenes
from collections of 2D images via neural volume rendering. Yet, the significant memory and computational costs of
dense sampling in volume rendering have forced 3D GANs
to adopt patch-based training or employ low-resolution rendering with post-processing 2D super resolution, which
sacrifices multiview consistency and the quality of resolved
geometry. Consequently, 3D GANs have not yet been able
to fully resolve the rich 3D geometry present in 2D images.
In this work, we propose techniques to scale neural volume rendering to the much higher resolution of native 2D
images, thereby resolving fine-grained 3D geometry with
* This project was initiated and substantially carried out during an in-

ternship at NVIDIA.

unprecedented detail. Our approach employs learningbased samplers for accelerating neural rendering for 3D
GAN training using up to 5 times fewer depth samples.
This enables us to explicitly ”render every pixel” of the
full-resolution image during training and inference without
post-processing superresolution in 2D. Together with our
strategy to learn high-quality surface geometry, our method
synthesizes high-resolution 3D geometry and strictly viewconsistent images while maintaining image quality on par
with baselines relying on post-processing super resolution.
We demonstrate state-of-the-art 3D gemetric quality on
FFHQ and AFHQ, setting a new standard for unsupervised
learning of 3D shapes in 3D GANs.

1. Introduction
Training 3D generative models from the abundance of 2D
images allows the creation of 3D representations of realworld objects for content creation and novel view synthe-

22765

