This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAMEL: CAusal Motion Enhancement tailored for Lifting
Text-driven Video Editing

1

Guiwei Zhang1 *, Tianyu Zhang2 *, Guanglin Niu3†, Zichang Tan4 , Yalong Bai2 , Qing Yang2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University. 2 Du Xiaoman Financial.
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University.
4
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.
{zhangguiwei,beihangngl}@buaa.edu.cn, tianyu1949@gmail.com
tanzichang@baidu.com, ylbai@outlook.com, yangqing@duxiaoman.com

Abstract
Text-driven video editing poses significant challenges in
exhibiting flicker-free visual continuity while preserving the
inherent motion patterns of original videos. Existing methods operate under a paradigm where motion and appearance are intricately intertwined. This coupling leads to the
network either over-fitting appearance content – failing to
capture motion patterns – or focusing on motion patterns
at the expense of content generalization to diverse textual
scenarios. Inspired by the pivotal role of wavelet transform
in dissecting video sequences, we propose CAusal Motion
Enhancement tailored for Lifting text-driven video editing
(CAMEL), a novel technique with two core designs. First,
we introduce motion prompts, designed to summarize motion concepts from video templates through direct optimization. The optimized prompts are purposefully integrated
into latent representations of diffusion models to enhance
the motion fidelity of generated results. Second, to enhance
motion coherence and extend the generalization of appearance content to creative textual prompts, we propose the
causal motion-enhanced attention mechanism. This mechanism is implemented in tandem with a novel causal motion filter, synergistically enhancing the motion coherence
of disentangled high-frequency components, and concurrently preserving the generalization of appearance content
across various textual scenarios. Extensive experimental
results show the superior performance of CAMEL.

1. Introduction
With rapid developments of text-to-image (T2I) diffusion
models [16, 24, 26, 40], there have been several endeav* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author

https://github.com/zhangguiwei610/CAMEL

ors dedicated to replicating this success in text-to-video
(T2V) generation [5, 7, 20, 30]. These models adopt the
paradigm of inflating spatial-only T2I generation models to
the spatiotemporal domain and then train on high-quality
large-scale text-video pairs [1, 32] from scratch. Despite
advancements, this paradigm is computationally expensive
and time-consuming. Since pre-trained T2I models already
capture the knowledge of open-domain concepts, recent
works [14, 22, 33, 41] attempt to train a generalizable motion modeling module and plug it into the advanced T2I
models for text-driven video editing. This enables preserving knowledge of pre-trained T2I models by freezing corresponding weights, thereby degrading computational costs.
The main challenges in text-driven video editing lie in
two points: (1) content consistency, i.e., the content in
the generated result should exhibit flicker-free visual consistency; and (2) motion coherence, i.e., the generated
video should preserve the motion patterns from the video
template without structural distortion. To overcome these
challenges, most existing methods focused on parameterefficient tuning on additional temporal modeling [33],
or training spatial-temporal Low-Rank Adaptions (LoRAs)
[12]. However, these methods operate under a paradigm
where motion and appearance are intricately intertwined.
This coupling inevitably leads to the network either overfitting appearance content, i.e., failing to capture the underlying motion patterns, or focusing only on motion patterns at the expense of content generation to creative textual prompts. Although recent works on controllable textto-video generation [14, 41] introduce signals representing pre-defined motion patterns (e.g., depth maps or edges),
strict spatial constraints imposed by the signals significantly
limited freedom of motion dynamics.
To this end, we investigate a more suitable solution to
disentangle content and motion dynamics within video templates through a frequency-based perspective. We first uti-

9079

