This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pose Adapted Shape Learning for Large-Pose Face Reenactment
Gee-Sern Jison Hsu
Jie-Ying Zhang
Huang Yu Hsiang
Wei-Jie Hong
National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan
{jison, m11151021, m11103421 ,m11003424}@mail.ntust.edu.tw

Abstract
We propose the Pose Adapted Shape Learning (PASL) for
large-pose face reenactment. The PASL framework consists
of three modules, namely the Pose-Adapted face Encoder
(PAE), the Cycle-consistent Shape Generator (CSG), and
the Attention-Embedded Generator (AEG). Different from
previous approaches that use a single face encoder for identity preservation, we propose multiple Pose-Adapted face
Encodes (PAEs) to better preserve facial identity across
large poses. Given a source face and a reference face, the
CSG generates a recomposed shape that fuses the source
identity and reference action in the shape space and meets
the cycle consistency requirement. Taking the shape code
and the source as inputs, the AEG learns the attention
within the shape code and between the shape code and
source style to enhance the generation of the desired target face. As existing benchmark datasets are inappropriate
for evaluating large-pose face reenactment, we propose a
scheme to compose large-pose face pairs and introduce the
MPIE-LP (Large Pose) and VoxCeleb2-LP datasets as the
new large-pose benchmarks. We compared our approach
with state-of-the-art methods on MPIE-LP and VoxCeleb2LP for large-pose performance and on VoxCeleb1 for the
common scope of pose variation.

1. Introduction
Face reenactment refers to the transformation of the action
of a reference face to a source face, and the action includes
facial pose and expression. It is required that the reference
action can be duplicated by the source and the source identity can be preserved after the transformation. The requirements can be concisely stated as the reference action transformation and source identity preservation. As face reenactment has a broad scope of applications in fields such as animation, film making, virtual reality, and others, it received
increasing attention with many approaches proposed in recent years [2, 9, 14, 24, 26, 29, 31–33].
Many approaches rely on a face encoder to warrant
the source identity preservation. VGGFace2 [4] and Arc-

Face [7] are two popular choices to many reenactment approaches [2, 3, 14, 20, 28]. Most, if not all, face encoders
are made by pose-biased training, i.e., the training set is imbalanced in pose. More data are close to frontal pose and
fewer data are with large or extreme pose. When encoding
faces within median poses, i.e., yaw< 45◦ , these face encoders serve well as the encoding confidence is high. However, when encoding faces of large or extreme poses, the
encoding confidence drops as the encoders are trained on
less data of such poses. We propose the Pose-Adapted face
Encoders (PAEs) to address this issue and better handle the
identity preservation for large-pose face reenactment. Each
PAE learns the identity features for a limited pose range.
We designed 6 PAEs to cover all pose differences between
the source and reference. The Pose-Adapted Encoding can
be considered as a piece-wise approximate solution to encoding the nonlinear facial pose variation.
We propose the Cycle-consistent Shape Generator
(CSG) and the Attention-Embedded Generator (AEG) in
the framework to work with the PAEs for handling largepose reenactment. Given a source face and a reference
face as inputs, the CSG generates a shape code that fuses
the source identity and reference action in the shape space
and meets the cycle-consistency requirement. Taking the
shape code and the source as inputs, the AEG learns the
self-attention within the shape code and cross-attention between the shape code and source style to enhance the generation of the desired target face. Due to the fact that current benchmark datasets are inappropriate for the evaluation
of large-pose face reenactment, we propose a scheme to select large-pose face pairs and construct the MPIE-LP (Large
Pose) and VoxCeleb2-LP datasets from their originals.
We summarize the contributions of this work as follows:
• The PAEs (Pose-Adapted face Encoders) are verified effective for measuring and preserving facial identity across
large-pose variation, and can be applied to other work
where large-pose identity preservation is a concern.
• The proposed framework with cycle-consistent shape
learning and attention-embedded generation is novel in
architecture and outperforms state-of-the-art approaches
for large-pose face reenactment.

7413

