This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiverGen: Improving Instance Segmentation by Learning Wider Data
Distribution with More Diverse Generative Data
Chengxiang Fan1 * Muzhi Zhu1 * Hao Chen1† Yang Liu1 Weijia Wu1 Huaqi Zhang2 Chunhua Shen1†
1

Zhejiang University, China

Abstract
Instance segmentation is data-hungry, and as model capacity increases, data scale becomes crucial for improving
the accuracy. Most instance segmentation datasets today
require costly manual annotation, limiting their data scale.
Models trained on such data are prone to overfitting on the
training set, especially for those rare categories. While recent works have delved into exploiting generative models
to create synthetic datasets for data augmentation, these
approaches do not efficiently harness the full potential of
generative models.
To address these issues, we introduce a more efficient
strategy to construct generative datasets for data augmentation, termed DiverGen. Firstly, we provide an explanation of the role of generative data from the perspective of
distribution discrepancy. We investigate the impact of different data on the distribution learned by the model. We
argue that generative data can expand the data distribution that the model can learn, thus mitigating overfitting.
Additionally, we find that the diversity of generative data
is crucial for improving model performance and enhance
it through various strategies, including category diversity,
prompt diversity, and generative model diversity. With these
strategies, we can scale the data to millions while maintaining the trend of model performance improvement. On
the LVIS dataset, DiverGen significantly outperforms the
strong model X-Paste, achieving +1.1 box AP and +1.1
mask AP across all categories, and +1.9 box AP and +2.5
mask AP for rare categories. Our codes are available at
https://github.com/aim-uofa/DiverGen.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation [1, 3, 8] is one of the challenging
tasks in computer vision, requiring the prediction of masks
and categories for instances in an image, which serves as
the foundation for numerous visual applications. As mod* Equal contribution.
† Correspondence should be addressed to HC and CS.

2

vivo Mobile Communication Co.

els’ learning capabilities improve, the demand for training
data increases. However, current datasets for instance segmentation heavily rely on manual annotation, which is timeconsuming and costly, and the dataset scale cannot meet
the training needs of models. Despite the recent emergence
of the automatically annotated dataset SA-1B [11], it lacks
category annotations, failing to meet the requirements of instance segmentation. Meanwhile, the ongoing development
of the generative model has largely improved the controllability and realism of generated samples. For example, the
recent text2image diffusion model [20, 22] can generate
high-quality images corresponding to input prompts. Therefore, current methods [25, 26, 32] use generative models for
data augmentation by generating datasets to supplement the
training of models on real datasets and improve model performance. Although current methods have proposed various
strategies to enable generative data to boost model performance, there are still some limitations: 1) Existing methods
have not fully exploited the potential of generative models.
First, some methods [32] not only use generative data but
also need to crawl images from the internet, which is significantly challenging to obtain large-scale data. Meanwhile, the
content of data crawled from the internet is uncontrollable
and needs extra checking. Second, existing methods do not
fully use the controllability of generative models. Current
methods often adopt manually designed templates to construct prompts, limiting the potential output of generative
models. 2) Existing methods [25, 26] often explain the role
of generative data from the perspective of class imbalance or
data scarcity, without considering the discrepancy between
real-world data and generative data. Moreover, these methods typically show improved model performance only in
scenarios with a limited number of real samples, and the
effectiveness of generative data on existing large-scale real
datasets, like LVIS [7], is not thoroughly investigated.
In this paper, we first explore the role of generative data
from the perspective of distribution discrepancy, addressing two main questions: 1) Why does generative data augmentation enhance model performance? 2) What types of
generative data are beneficial for improving model perfor-

3986

