This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Amodal Completion via Progressive Mixed Context Diffusion
Katherine Xu1
Lingzhi Zhang2
Jianbo Shi1
1
University of Pennsylvania, 2 Adobe Inc.

co-occurrence

accidental

kite

image boundary

person,
motorcycle

multiple occlusions
Figure 1. Our method can recover the hidden pixels of objects in diverse images. Occluders may be co-occurring (a person on a surfboard),
accidental (a cat in front of a microwave), the image boundary (giraffe), or a combination of these scenarios.

Abstract
Our brain can effortlessly recognize objects even when
partially hidden from view. Seeing the visible of the hidden is
called amodal completion; however, this task remains a challenge for generative AI despite rapid progress. We propose
to sidestep many of the difficulties of existing approaches,
which typically involve a two-step process of predicting
amodal masks and then generating pixels. Our method involves thinking outside the box, literally! We go outside the
object bounding box to use its context to guide a pre-trained
diffusion inpainting model, and then progressively grow the
occluded object and trim the extra background. We overcome
two technical challenges: 1) how to be free of unwanted cooccurrence bias, which tends to regenerate similar occluders,
and 2) how to judge if an amodal completion has succeeded.
Our amodal completion method exhibits improved photorealistic completion results compared to existing approaches in
numerous successful completion cases. And the best part? It
doesn’t require any special training or fine-tuning of models.

1. Introduction
Have you ever wondered how objects regularly occlude one
another, yet we can effortlessly recognize and imagine their
unoccluded appearance? Our visual system performs this
Project page and code: https://k8xu.github.io/amodal/

task of amodal completion using the continuity and symmetry of an object’s shape [49] and everyday familiarity of
the world [57]. Amodal completion, filling in hidden object
parts, is a challenging AI task despite rapid advances in computer vision. This technology has many applications, such
as in robotics, autonomous vehicles, and augmented reality.
A reasonable amodal completion approach [3, 60] consists of two stages: 1) completing a binary amodal mask; 2)
synthesizing RGB pixel values within the mask. However, directly regressing the amodal mask is an ill-posed formulation
due to the diversity of possible completions.
Computational issues aside, how can we create a dataset
for amodal completion? Previous research attempts to construct datasets through random mask placement to simulate
occlusion [24], computer graphics rendering techniques [17],
or by asking humans to label amodal segmentation masks
given the modal masks [1, 39, 67]. However, a domain gap
persists between synthetic and natural images, and labeled
natural images are expensive to obtain.
But what if we can sidestep all these difficulties? This
involves thinking outside the box, literally: 1) extend from
the bounding box of an occluded object to include sufficient
image context, 2) remove the occluders, 3) use a pre-trained
diffusion model to grow the object, and 4) trim off the extra
background. Our amodal completion pipeline avoids pre-

9099

