This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-conditional Attribute Alignment across Latent Spaces for 3D Controllable
Face Image Synthesis

1

Feifan Xu1 , Rui Li2* , Si Wu1,3,4* , Yong Xu1,3,4 and Hau San Wong5
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Department of Computer Science, Shantou University
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory 4 PAZHOU LAB
5
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong

cs feifan@mail.scut.edu.cn, ruili@stu.edu.cn, {cswusi, yxu}@scut.edu.cn, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk

+Melancholic

+Hospitable
+Displeased
Lighting Control
Pose Control

+Neutral
0
0

+Disgust

+Angry
Lighting Control
Pose Control

+Happy

Figure 1. The examples to demonstrate that the proposed method that can explicitly control face expression, pose, and illumination in a
fine-grained manner. The manipulated images are consistent with the 3D rendered images shown in the last row.

Abstract
With the advent of generative models and visionlanguage pretraining, significant improvement has been
made in text-driven face manipulation. The text embedding
can be used as target supervision for expression control.
However, it is non-trivial to associate with its 3D attributes,
i.e., pose and illumination. To address these issues, we propose a Text-conditional Attribute aLignment approach for
3D controllable face image synthesis, and our model is referred to as TcALign. Specifically, since the 3D rendered
image can be precisely controlled with the 3D face repre* Co-corresponding author.

sentation, we first propose a Text-conditional 3D Editor to
produce the target face representation to realize text-driven
manipulation in the 3D space. An attribute embedding
space spanned by the target-related attributes embeddings
is also introduced to infer the disentangled task-specific direction. Next, we train a cross-modal latent mapping network conditioned on the derived difference of 3D representation to infer a correct vector in the latent space of StyleGAN. This correction vector learning design can accurately
transfer the attribute manipulation on 3D images to 2D images. We show that the proposed method delivers more precise text-driven multi-attribute manipulation for 3D controllable face image synthesis. Extensive qualitative and
quantitative experiments verify the effectiveness and supe-

9172

