This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Aerial Lifting: Neural Urban Semantic and Building Instance Lifting
from Aerial Imagery
Yuqi Zhang1,2
1

Guanying Chen1,3 * Jiaxing Chen1,3

FNii, CUHKSZ

2

SSE, CUHKSZ

3

Shuguang Cui2,1

Sun Yat-sen University

Abstract
We present a neural radiance field method for urbanscale semantic and building-level instance segmentation
from aerial images by lifting noisy 2D labels to 3D. This is
a challenging problem due to two primary reasons. Firstly,
objects in urban aerial images exhibit substantial variations in size, including buildings, cars, and roads, which
pose a significant challenge for accurate 2D segmentation.
Secondly, the 2D labels generated by existing segmentation methods suffer from the multi-view inconsistency problem, especially in the case of aerial images, where each
image captures only a small portion of the entire scene.
To overcome these limitations, we first introduce a scaleadaptive semantic label fusion strategy that enhances the
segmentation of objects of varying sizes by combining labels predicted from different altitudes, harnessing the novelview synthesis capabilities of NeRF. We then introduce a
novel cross-view instance label grouping based on the 3D
scene representation to mitigate the multi-view inconsistency problem in the 2D instance labels. Furthermore, we
exploit multi-view reconstructed depth priors to improve
the geometric quality of the reconstructed radiance field,
resulting in enhanced segmentation results. Experiments
on multiple real-world urban-scale datasets demonstrate
that our approach outperforms existing methods, highlighting its effectiveness. The source code is available at
https://github.com/zyqz97/Aerial lifting.

1. Introduction
3D urban-scale semantic understanding plays a crucial role
in various applications, from urban planning to autonomous
driving systems. Accurate semantic and instance-level segmentation of objects in 3D scenes is essential for a wide
range of tasks.
Existing 3D urban semantic understanding methods primarily rely on point cloud representation [34, 64]. They
typically train a point cloud segmentation method on la* Corresponding author

Aerial
Lifting

…
Aerial Images

Urban Scene

Radiance Field

Semantic Field

Building Instance Field

Figure 1. Given multi-view aerial images, our method lifts 2D
labels to optimize the radiance, semantic, and instance fields for
urban-scale semantic and building-level instance understanding.

beled 3D datasets [32]. However, annotating 3D data is
labor-intensive, posing challenges in creating a comprehensive training dataset with diverse scenes.
Recently, neural radiance fields (NeRF) [57] have
emerged as an effective 3D scene representation, enabling
photorealistic rendering of fine details. Several methods
are proposed to perform semantic segmentation or panoptic segmentation on NeRF by lifting 2D estimation to 3D
[71, 101]. However, these methods mainly validate on the
room-scale indoor scenes or street-view outdoor scenes. In
this work, we aim to perform urban-scale semantic and
building-level instance segmentation from multi-view aerial
images. Our method leverages neural radiance fields to lift
noisy 2D labels to a 3D representation without manual 3D
annotations, effectively bridging the gap between 2D imagery and the complex 3D urban environment (see Fig. 1).
This is inherently challenging due to several factors. On
one hand, urban aerial images capture scenes that encompass a wide range of object sizes, including buildings, vehicles, and roads [51]. Existing segmentation methods often struggle to handle these variations effectively as their
training data distribution is different from that of aerial images [13], or lack large-scale labeled aerial images for finetuning [85]. On the other hand, 2D instance labels generated by existing segmentation methods often suffer from
the multi-view inconsistency problem (e.g., an object is
segmented as one instance in a view might be segmented

21092

