This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Recipe for Scaling up Text-to-Video Generation with Text-free Videos
Xiang Wang1∗ Shiwei Zhang2† Hangjie Yuan3 Zhiwu Qing1 Biao Gong2 Yingya Zhang2
Yujun Shen4 Changxin Gao1 Nong Sang1†
1

Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
3
4
Alibaba Group
Zhejiang University
Ant Group
{wxiang,qzw,cgao,nsang}@hust.edu.cn, {zhangjin.zsw,yingya.zyy}@alibaba-inc.com
hj.yuan@zju.edu.cn, {a.biao.gong,shenyujun0302}@gmail.com

Text-to-video generation

“Close-up of Caucasian mother and baby girl sitting at windowsill and reading book. Young woman educating daughter at home.”

Resolution
448x256
“Female Customer Sending Text Message Sitting Outside Coffee Shop On Busy City High Street In Fall”

Resolution
896x512

(Text & Sketch & Depth)

“Slow motion of Asian girl playing piano, Pan shot”

Compositional video synthesis

Resolution
448x256

(Text & Sketch)

“Male designer in office working on laptop with model house”

Resolution
1280x768

Figure 1. Example video results generated by the proposed TF-T2V on text-to-video generation and compositional video synthesis tasks
without training on any video-text pairs.

Abstract
Diffusion-based text-to-video generation has witnessed
impressive progress in the past year yet still falls behind
text-to-image generation. One of the key reasons is the
limited scale of publicly available data (e.g., 10M videotext pairs in WebVid10M vs. 5B image-text pairs in LAION),
considering the high cost of video captioning. Instead, it
could be far easier to collect unlabeled clips from video
platforms like YouTube. Motivated by this, we come up
∗ Intern at Alibaba Group. † Corresponding authors.

with a novel text-to-video generation framework, termed
TF-T2V, which can directly learn with text-free videos.
The rationale behind is to separate the process of text
decoding from that of temporal modeling. To this end, we
employ a content branch and a motion branch, which are
jointly optimized with weights shared. Following such a
pipeline, we study the effect of doubling the scale of training set (i.e., video-only WebVid10M) with some randomly
collected text-free videos and are encouraged to observe
the performance improvement (FID from 9.67 to 8.19 and
FVD from 484 to 441), demonstrating the scalability of

6572

