This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mind The Edge: Refining Depth Edges in Sparsely-Supervised Monocular Depth
Estimation
Lior Talker1
Aviad Cohen1
Erez Yosef1,2
1
Samsung Israel R&D Center, Tel Aviv, Israel

Alexandra Dana1
Michael Dinerstein1
2
Tel Aviv University, Israel

{lior.talker,aviad.cohen,alex.dana,m.dinerstein}@samsung.com

(a)

RGB Baseline Ours

(b)

Baseline

erez.yo@gmail.com

RGB

Ours

Baseline

Ours

Baseline Ours

Figure 1. Refining depth edges with our method when using Packnet-SAN [18] as an MDE baseline. (a) Depth estimation (DDAD
dataset). Zoom-in on the crops (on the right) to see the improvement in the 2D localization of the depth edges between the baseline and
our method. (b) Augmented reality. An example of virtual objects planted in a scene from the KITTI dataset for AR applications. Zoom-in
and inspect the boundaries for the best impression of the depth edges accuracy.

Abstract
Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) is a fundamental
problem in computer vision with numerous applications.
Recently, LIDAR-supervised methods have achieved remarkable per-pixel depth accuracy in outdoor scenes. However, significant errors are typically found in the proximity
of depth discontinuities, i.e., depth edges, which often hinder the performance of depth-dependent applications that
are sensitive to such inaccuracies, e.g., novel view synthesis and augmented reality. Since direct supervision for the
location of depth edges is typically unavailable in sparse
LIDAR-based scenes, encouraging the MDE model to produce correct depth edges is not straightforward. To the best
of our knowledge this paper is the first attempt to address
the depth edges issue for LIDAR-supervised scenes. In this
work we propose to learn to detect the location of depth
edges from densely-supervised synthetic data, and use it to
generate supervision for the depth edges in the MDE training. To quantitatively evaluate our approach, and due to
the lack of depth edges GT in LIDAR-based scenes, we
manually annotated subsets of the KITTI and the DDAD
datasets with depth edges ground truth. We demonstrate
significant gains in the accuracy of the depth edges with
comparable per-pixel depth accuracy on several challeng-

ing datasets. Code and datasets are available at https:
//github.com/liortalker/MindTheEdge.

1. Introduction
Monocular Depth Estimation (MDE) aims to recover the
depth of each pixel in a single RGB image. It is used
in many important applications, such as robotic navigation
[10], novel view synthesis [6] and Augmented Reality (AR)
[27]. Nonetheless, MDE is an ill-posed problem; that is,
a single RGB image may be generated from many possible scenes. However, in recent years, many MDE methods, based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have
shown remarkable results. CNN-based supervised methods
are trained with depth Ground Truth (GT) which is usually
dense for indoor scenes, e.g., acquired using a RGBD camera [41], and sparse for outdoor scenes, e.g., acquired using
a LIDAR sensor [15].
It was observed in several papers [29, 49, 55] that the
2D locations of depth discontinuities, which we refer to as
depth edges in this paper, are often poorly estimated, resulting in thick smooth depth gradients or incorrectly-localized
edges (see the baseline in Fig. 1). Some applications that
use predicted depth maps are highly sensitive to errors in
depth edges, which are often part of the silhouette of ob-

10606

