This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TutteNet: Injective 3D Deformations by Composition of 2D Mesh Deformations
Bo Sun
UT Asutin

Thibault Groueix
Adobe Research

Chen Song
UT Austin

Qixing Huang
UT Austin

bosun@cs.utexas.edu

groueix@adobe.com

song@cs.utexas.edu

huangqx@cs.utexas.edu

Noam Aigerman
University of Montreal
noam.aigerman@umontreal.ca
Layer

Input NeRF

Layer

Layer

Deformed NeRF

TutteNet
Figure 1. Elastically deforming a NeRF [55] based on user-designated positioning of the head (turned) tail (bent) and body (lowered), and
optimizing the degrees of freedom of TutteNet to minimize the elastic energy of the deformation. TutteNet guarantees an injective (1-to-1)
deformation of the ambient 3D space surrounding the T-Rex, ensuring the NeRF is rendered correctly without artifacts by enabling “pulling
back” points and view directions from deformed space. Each layer within TutteNet views the T-Rex over a different 2D plane (in this case,
alternating between the 3 main axes in a tri-plane manner). In each layer, the T-Rex is enveloped with a regular 2D mesh of the unit square
(top row). The 2D mesh is deformed using the layer’s optimizeable parameters which define a Tutte’s embedding [19, 80] (bottom row).
This defines an injective 2D piecewise-linear map, which can be applied to the 3D T-Rex, without modifying the normal direction to the
plane, resulting in an injective 3D deformation i . Composition of these layers yields the final expressive 3D injective deformation.

Abstract
This work proposes a novel representation of injective
deformations of 3D space, which overcomes existing limitations of injective methods, namely inaccuracy, lack of robustness, and incompatibility with general learning and optimization frameworks. Our core idea is to reduce the problem to a “deep” composition of multiple 2D mesh-based
piecewise-linear maps. Namely, we build differentiable layers that produce mesh deformations through Tutte’s embedding (guaranteed to be injective in 2D), and compose these
layers over different planes to create complex 3D injective
deformations of the 3D volume. We show our method provides the ability to efficiently and accurately optimize and
learn complex deformations, outperforming other injective
approaches. As a main application, we produce complex
and artifact-free NeRF and SDF deformations.

1. Introduction
This work concerns computation and learning of 3D deformations. As the most immediate mode of manipulation and
interaction with 3D shapes, deformations play a crucial role
in various fields such as vision [81], medical imaging [52],

3D registration [13], and graphics [32]. In many real-world
applications, it is crucial that the deformation does not create any self-overlaps, i.e., is injective (a 1-to-1 mapping).
An example that is a key motivation for this work, is deformation of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [55]: when
deforming NeRFs, lack of injectivity can easily cause severe rendering artifacts due to intersecting “deformed” rays
during the ray tracing process, see Figure 3.
Unfortunately, current approaches do not provide an injective deformation method that is both sufficiently expressive and robust, as well as lending itself to practical optimization and learning:
– On one hand, within geometry processing and graphics, 3D deformations are heavily-researched through triangular/tetrahedral mesh deformations, i.e., modifying the position of each vertex of the mesh. Mesh deformations provide a finite set of meaningful geometric degrees of freedom leading to stable, quick, and straightforward computation, as well as access to geometric quantities such as the
deformation gradients (Jacobians), critical in most meshdeformation approaches [87]. However, mesh deformations
cannot be learned while ensuring injectivity, nor are di-

21378

