This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Turb-Seg-Res: A Segment-then-Restore Pipeline for Dynamic Videos with
Atmospheric Turbulence
Ripon Kumar Saha1 ,
1

Dehao Qin2 ,

Nianyi Li2 ,

Jinwei Ye3 ,

Suren Jayasuriya1

Arizona State University, 2 Clemson University, 3 George Mason University

{rsaha8, sjayasur}@asu.edu, {dehaoq, nianyil}@clemson.edu, jinweiye@gmu.edu

Abstract
Tackling image degradation due to atmospheric turbulence, particularly in dynamic environments, remains a
challenge for long-range imaging systems. Existing techniques have been primarily designed for static scenes or
scenes with small motion. This paper presents the first
segment-then-restore pipeline for restoring the videos of dynamic scenes in turbulent environments. We leverage mean
optical flow with an unsupervised motion segmentation
method to separate dynamic and static scene components
prior to restoration. After camera shake compensation
and segmentation, we introduce foreground/background enhancement leveraging the statistics of turbulence strength
and a transformer model trained on a novel noise-based
procedural turbulence generator for fast dataset augmentation. Benchmarked against existing restoration methods, our approach restores most of the geometric distortion and enhances the sharpness of videos. We make
our code, simulator, and data publicly available to advance the field of video restoration from turbulence:
riponcs.github.io/TurbSegRes

1. Introduction
Atmospheric turbulence poses a considerable impediment
to high-fidelity long-range imaging, inducing geometric
distortions and blur that severely compromise image quality [7, 11, 49]. This issue becomes particularly acute in
long-range horizontal and slant path imaging in environments with extreme temperature gradients. Such unpredictable variations in air density and velocity induce characteristic distortions including random pixel displacements,
referred to as tilt [6], blur, and contrast reduction. This
presents a formidable challenge for current vision algorithms to consistently detect, classify, and delineate objects
within such degraded images.
Conventional multi-frame techniques such as “lucky
frame” or geometric stabilization [13, 17, 18, 31, 33, 36]

perform well in static or slightly dynamic scenes but struggle in highly dynamic environments with significant scene
or camera motion. Supervised deep learning-based methods [38, 56] leverage turbulence simulators to generate
training data [8, 37]. While these models show potential,
they often exhibit temporal artifacts when applied to realworld dynamic video sequences with moving objects.
The limitation of previous methods for dynamic video
stems from the compounded effect of object motion and atmospheric turbulence. These factors disrupt optical flow
maps which makes image registration difficult for multiframe techniques. In this paper, we address this challenge
by proposing a unique segment-then-restore pipeline. This
method utilizes integrated optical flows computed between
frames for unsupervised motion segmentation, which then
enables the individual processing of static background and
dynamic foreground elements. We use a weighted image stacking technique for background enhancement, and
a transformer model for both foreground and background
sharpening trained on data from a novel tilt-and-blur turbulence simulator. Our approach notably reduces background
distortions while maintaining the clarity of foreground details throughout the sequence.
Our specific contributions include:
• An unsupervised segmentation method that utilizes integrated optical flow with optimized number of frames calculated to segment a frame into static background and
moving foreground.
• An adaptive Gaussian-weighted image stacking method
for background processing which utilizes physics-based
turbulence strength statistics for optimal frame selection
across a range of turbulence intensities.
• An image restoration transformer model trained on simulated data generated from a novel turbulence video simulator that incorporates both tilt and adaptive blur based on
procedural noise to generate plausible turbulence effects.
To validate our approach, we conduct experiments on two
well-established datasets, CLEAR [2], OTIS [19]. We also
augment the recent URG-T [45] segmentation dataset with

25286

