This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IReNe: Instant Recoloring of Neural Radiance Fields
Alessio Mazzucchelli1,2
Fernando Rivas-Manzaneque4,8
1

Adrian Garcia-Garcia1
Francesc Moreno-Noguer6

Elena Garces3,5
Adrian Penate-Sanchez7

Arquimea Research Center 2 Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya 3 Universidad Rey Juan Carlos
4
Volinga AI 5 SEDDI 6 Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC
7
Universidad de las Palmas de Gran Canaria, IUSIANI 8 Universidad Politécnica de Madrid
Model optimization (IReNe)

User edited image

Multiview edited color

Pre-trained NeRF

Total optimization time: 5 seconds

High Quality color editions

High Quality color editions

Multicolor editions

Partial object editions
◦

Figure 1. IReNe enables instant 360 recoloring of pre-trained NeRFs using only a single image edited by the user (top row). We introduce
an optimization scheme to avoid color bleeding at object boundaries and ensure consistency in view-dependent effects. Furthermore, as
illustrated in the bottom row, various types of recoloring are possible, including full-object, partial-object, and multiple-object recoloring.

Abstract
Advances in NERFs have allowed for 3D scene reconstructions and novel view synthesis. Yet, efficiently editing these representations while retaining photorealism is
an emerging challenge. Recent methods face three primary
limitations: they’re slow for interactive use, lack precision
at object boundaries, and struggle to ensure multi-view consistency. We introduce IReNe to address these limitations,
enabling swift, near real-time color editing in NeRF. Leveraging a pre-trained NeRF model and a single training image with user-applied color edits, IReNe swiftly adjusts network parameters in seconds. This adjustment allows the
model to generate new scene views, accurately representing the color changes from the training image while also

controlling object boundaries and view-specific effects. Object boundary control is achieved by integrating a trainable
segmentation module into the model. The process gains efficiency by retraining only the weights of the last network
layer. We observed that neurons in this layer can be classified into those responsible for view-dependent appearance
and those contributing to diffuse appearance. We introduce
an automated classification approach to identify these neuron types and exclusively fine-tune the weights of the diffuse
neurons. This further accelerates training and ensures consistent color edits across different views. A thorough validation on a new dataset, with edited object colors, shows
significant quantitative and qualitative advancements over
competitors, accelerating speeds by 5× to 500×.

5937

