This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ShapeMatcher: Self-Supervised Joint Shape Canonicalization,
Segmentation, Retrieval and Deformation
Yan Di1∗ , Chenyangguang Zhang2∗ , Chaowei Wang3∗ , Ruida Zhang2 , Guangyao Zhai1 , Yanyan Li1 ,
Bowen Fu2 , Xiangyang Ji2 and Shan Gao†3
1
Technical University of Munich, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Northwestern Polytechnical University
shangbuhuan13@gmail.com, gaoshan@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present ShapeMatcher, a uniﬁed selfsupervised learning framework for joint shape canonicalization, segmentation, retrieval and deformation. Given
a partially-observed object in an arbitrary pose, we ﬁrst
canonicalize the object by extracting point-wise afﬁneinvariant features, disentangling inherent structure of the
object with its pose and size. These learned features
are then leveraged to predict semantically consistent part
segmentation and corresponding part centers. Next, our
lightweight retrieval module aggregates the features within
each part as its retrieval token and compare all the tokens with source shapes from a pre-established database
to identify the most geometrically similar shape. Finally,
we deform the retrieved shape in the deformation module to
tightly ﬁt the input object by harnessing part center guided
neural cage deformation. The key insight of ShapeMaker
is the simultaneous training of the four highly-associated
processes: canonicalization, segmentation, retrieval, and
deformation, leveraging cross-task consistency losses for
mutual supervision. Extensive experiments on synthetic
datasets PartNet, ComplementMe, and real-world dataset
Scan2CAD demonstrate that ShapeMatcher surpasses competitors by a large margin. Code is released at https:
//github.com/Det1999/ShapeMaker.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a notable surge in research interest focused on generating high-quality 3D models from scans of complex scenes [6, 15, 16, 21, 35, 49, 73].
This technology encourages extensive applications in both
artistic creation [56, 57], robotics [66, 67] and 3D scene
perception [41, 69]. Existing methods [41, 54] typically
directly utilize deep neural networks to reconstruct 3D
*Authors with equal contributions. † Corresponding author.

Aligned database

Canonicalization, Segmentation,
Retrieval & Deformation

T

Arbitrary pose scans

R, s

ShapeMatcher

Figure 1. Illustration of ShapeMatcher. Objects obtained from
real-world scans are typically noisy, partial and exhibit various
poses, making it challenging to conduct an effective R&D process
(Red ’X’ on the left). To address this issue, we propose ShapeMatcher that ﬁrst canonicalizes the objects and then segments
them into semantic parts, facilitating R&D processes (Green ’’
on the right).

models from imperfect scans. However, the presence of
noise and occlusions poses a signiﬁcant challenge in accurately capturing ﬁne-grained geometric structures. To
overcome this, Retrieval and Deformation (R&D) techniques [10,28,40,46,56–58,64] have been developed. These
methods generally involve two key steps: ﬁrst, identifying
the most geometrically similar source shape from a precurated 3D database; and second, deforming the retrieved
shape to achieve precise alignment with the target input.
The R&D approach is particularly effective in producing
3D models enriched with ﬁne details from source shapes.
However, existing R&D methods usually encounter two
primary challenges that make them susceptible to noise,
occlusion and pose variations, and difﬁcult to be practically utilized. 1) Most R&D techniques [10, 17, 28, 40,
46, 56–58, 64] operate under the assumption that target
shapes are aligned in a pre-processed canonical space. Typ21017

