This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Density-guided Translator Boosts Synthetic-to-Real Unsupervised Domain
Adaptive Segmentation of 3D Point Clouds
Zhimin Yuan1 Wankang Zeng1 Yanfei Su1 Weiquan Liu1 Ming Cheng1 * Yulan Guo2 Cheng Wang1
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University
2
National University of Defense Technology

Abstract
3D synthetic-to-real unsupervised domain adaptive segmentation is crucial to annotating new domains. Selftraining is a competitive approach for this task, but its performance is limited by different sensor sampling patterns (i.e.,
variations in point density) and incomplete training strategies. In this work, we propose a density-guided translator
(DGT), which translates point density between domains, and
integrates it into a two-stage self-training pipeline named
DGT-ST. First, in contrast to existing works that simultaneously conduct data generation and feature/output alignment within unstable adversarial training, we employ the
non-learnable DGT to bridge the domain gap at the input level. Second, to provide a well-initialized model for
self-training, we propose a category-level adversarial network in stage one that utilizes the prototype to prevent negative transfer. Finally, by leveraging the designs above,
a domain-mixed self-training method with source-aware
consistency loss is proposed in stage two to narrow the
domain gap further. Experiments on two synthetic-to-real
segmentation tasks (SynLiDAR → semanticKITTI and SynLiDAR → semanticPOSS) demonstrate that DGT-ST outperforms state-of-the-art methods, achieving 9.4% and 4.3%
mIoU improvements, respectively. Code is available at
https://github.com/yuan-zm/DGT-ST.

1. Introduction
3D point cloud segmentation is crucial owing to its diverse
applications, e.g., autonomous driving and robotics. Although supervised methods [1, 5, 11, 37, 47] have made substantial strides, they need costly human-annotated data. In
contrast, we can obtain massive synthetic labeled data from
simulation platforms. However, the domain gap between
the synthetic (source) and real-world (target) data makes
training directly using synthetic data infeasible. One alternative approach is unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA),
* Corresponding author.

SynLiDAR
64-beam

SemanticKITTI
64-beam

SynLiDAR
Translated
40-beam

SemanticPOSS
40-beam

Point density

Point density

0-10m

50-60m

10-20m

60-70m

20-30m

70-80m

30-40m

80-90m
SynLiDAR

40-50m

SemanticKITTI

𝟏𝟎𝟒

90-100m

SemanticPOSS

𝟏𝟎𝟏

𝟏𝟎𝟐

𝟏𝟎𝟑

Figure 1. Distinct sampling patterns between synthetic and realworld scans. The synthetic scan (upper left) is integral and clean,
whereas the real-world data (upper and middle right) contains unexpected and irregular noise. DGT enhances the realism of synthetic
scan (middle left). Point densities of three datasets at various distances from the LiDAR center are shown at the bottom.

which transfers the learned source domain knowledge to
make models perform better on the unlabeled target domain.
UDA seeks to acquire invariant knowledge across domains. As shown in Fig. 1, the sampling pattern mismatch
between different sensors is the primary cause of the 3D
domain gap, directly resulting in distinct point densities (i.e.,
the number of beams and the point number per beam) between domains. Besides, the synthetic data is integral and
clean, whereas real-world data contains varying degrees of
noise. Contemporary 3D synthetic-to-real UDA segmentation methods can generally be categorized into two groups:
(1) Adversarial training [6, 13, 38–40, 44], which adopts a
discriminator to ensure features/predictions of the segmentor
domain-invariant. The limitation of this line of approaches

23303

