This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Check, Locate, Rectify: A Training-Free Layout Calibration System for
Text-to-Image Generation
Biao Gong1† , Siteng Huang2†* , Yutong Feng1 , Shiwei Zhang1 , Yuyuan Li2 , Yu Liu1
1
Alibaba Group 2 Zhejiang University
{a.biao.gong, siteng.huang}@gmail.com y2li@zju.edu.cn
{fengyutong.fyt, zhangjin.zsw, ly103369}@alibaba-inc.com
Before

After

Before

After

Before

After

(a) A cartoon fox with clouds on the left.

(b) A cartoon fox with clouds on the right.

(e) A lion with a crown and flowers, the
crown on the bottom, flowers on the top.

(f) An angel, a flower on the top, an apple (g) A cat on the bottom right, a lamp on the
on the bottom, a mountain on the top. top, a cake on the bottom, balloons on the left.

Before

After

(c) A cartoon fox with clouds on the top. (d) A cartoon fox with clouds on the bottom.

(h) A boy on the left looked up at the aurora on the top right.

(i) Eiffel Tower with a storm on the bottom.

Figure 1. Given only the input textual prompt, our system can autonomously detect and rectify the layout inconsistencies across various
position requirements (a-d), object quantities (e-g), and resolutions (h-i).

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently achieved remarkable
progress in generating realistic images. However, challenges remain in accurately understanding and synthesizing the layout requirements in the textual prompts. To align
the generated image with layout instructions, we present
a training-free layout calibration system SimM that intervenes in the generative process on the fly during inference time. Specifically, following a “check-locate-rectify”
pipeline, the system first analyses the prompt to generate the
target layout and compares it with the intermediate outputs
to automatically detect errors. Then, by moving the located
activations and making intra- and inter-map adjustments,
† Equal contribution.

Corresponding author.

* Work done during internship at Alibaba Group.

the rectification process can be performed with negligible
computational overhead. To evaluate SimM over a range of
layout requirements, we present a benchmark SimMBench
that compensates for the lack of superlative spatial relations
in existing datasets. And both quantitative and qualitative
results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed SimM
in calibrating the layout inconsistencies. Our project page
is at https://simm-t2i.github.io/SimM .

1. Introduction
Text-to-image generation [11, 20, 29, 31] has emerged as
a promising application of AI-generated content (AIGC),
demonstrating the remarkable ability to generate synthetic
images from conditional text descriptions. This technology
has attracted considerable attention in recent years due to

6624

