This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffAgent: Fast and Accurate Text-to-Image API Selection with Large Language
Model
Lirui Zhao1,2†‡ Yue Yang5,2†
Yuxin Zhang1 Yu Qiao2

Kaipeng Zhang2†⋆ Wenqi Shao2†⋆
Ping Luo2,4 Rongrong Ji1,3∗

1

Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University
2
OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 The University of Hong Kong,
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University 5 Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
Text-to-image (T2I) generative models have attracted
significant attention and found extensive applications
within and beyond academic research. For example, the
Civitai community, a platform for T2I innovation, currently
hosts an impressive array of 74,492 distinct models. However, this diversity presents a formidable challenge in selecting the most appropriate model and parameters, a process
that typically requires numerous trials. Drawing inspiration from the tool usage research of large language models
(LLMs), we introduce DiffAgent, an LLM agent designed
to screen the accurate selection in seconds via API calls.
DiffAgent leverages a novel two-stage training framework,
SFTA, enabling it to accurately align T2I API responses
with user input in accordance with human preferences.
To train and evaluate DiffAgent’s capabilities, we present
DABench, a comprehensive dataset encompassing an extensive range of T2I APIs from the community. Our evaluations reveal that DiffAgent not only excels in identifying the
appropriate T2I API but also underscores the effectiveness
of the SFTA training framework. Codes are available at
https://github.com/OpenGVLab/DiffAgent.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in text-to-image (T2I) generative
models [1, 13, 20, 21, 23] have garnered considerable attention, courtesy of their extraordinary proficiency in following
text prompts and the exceptional capability in image generation. As a prominent technique, Stable Diffusion (SD) [21]
is widely utilized in various generative applications, and has
∗ Corresponding author: rrji@xmu.edu.cn
† Equal contribution ⋆ Project lead
‡ This work was done during his internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.

User
A cute happy corgi, pixel art
Input

User
Multi-attempts
In hours

DiffAgent
One-shot
In 4.81s

AIGC Community

Default Model
SD XL 1.0

Selected Model
Pixel Wave

70K+ Models

…

Selected Model
Pixel Art 1.1

Figure 1. The comparison of different ways to T2I generation.

gained significant traction within the research community
and broader adoption.
However, the vanilla SD model falls short in catering
to diverse personalized styles such as pixel art. For example, a corgi covered by several messy lines is generated by the SD-XL model [17] with the user’s request of
‘A cute happy corgi, pixel art’, as shown in Fig. 1. Such
a limitation has spurred the emergence of various personalized models, which are tailor-made to excel in specific
styles. Innovations in lightweight personalization techniques such as Low-Rank Adaption (LoRA) [11] and other
approaches [7, 22, 34] have streamlined the process of finetuning these models from the original SD framework, making it more cost-efficient. Such advancements foster a wide
adoption and influence of customized models in the opensourced community [4, 6]. For instance, Civitai [4] hosts

6390

