This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAPSeg: Unified Unsupervised Domain Adaptation for Heterogeneous Medical
Image Segmentation Based on 3D Masked Autoencoding and Pseudo-Labeling
Xuzhe Zhang1† , Yuhao Wu2† , Elsa Angelini1,3 , Ang Li4 , Jia Guo1 , Jerod M. Rasmussen5 ,
Thomas G. O’Connor6 , Pathik D. Wadhwa5 , Andrea Parolin Jackowski7 ,
Hai Li2 , Jonathan Posner2 , Andrew F. Laine1‡ , Yun Wang2,8‡
1
Columbia University 2 Duke University 3 Télécom Paris, LTCI, Institut Polytechnique de Paris
4
University of Maryland, College Park 5 University of California, Irvine 6 University of Rochester
7
Universidade Federal de São Paulo 8 Emory University

Abstract
Robust segmentation is critical for deriving quantitative measures from large-scale, multi-center, and longitudinal medical scans. Manually annotating medical scans,
however, is expensive and labor-intensive and may not always be available in every domain. Unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) is a well-studied technique that alleviates this label-scarcity problem by leveraging available labels from another domain. In this study, we introduce
Masked Autoencoding and Pseudo-Labeling Segmentation
(MAPSeg), a unified UDA framework with great versatility and superior performance for heterogeneous and volumetric medical image segmentation. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first study that systematically reviews and develops a framework to tackle four different domain shifts in medical image segmentation. More importantly, MAPSeg is the first framework that can be applied
to centralized, federated, and test-time UDA while maintaining comparable performance. We compare MAPSeg
with previous state-of-the-art methods on a private infant
brain MRI dataset and a public cardiac CT-MRI dataset,
and MAPSeg outperforms others by a large margin (10.5
Dice improvement on the private MRI dataset and 5.7 on
the public CT-MRI dataset). MAPSeg poses great practical
value and can be applied to real-world problems. GitHub:
https://github.com/XuzheZ/MAPSeg/.

1. Introduction
Quantitative measures from medical scans serve as
biomarkers for various types of medical research and clinical practice. For instance, neurodevelopmental studies
† Co-first authors.
‡ Co-senior supervising authors.

Cross-modality

(a).

Cross-site

Cross-sequence

Cross-age

Centralized UDA

Test-time UDA

Federated UDA

S Source Domain

Source-only Training

Cloud Server

T Target Domain
Centralized Server

S

S

T

T
S

T

T

Test-time Finetuning

Client Servers

Communication Efficiency

Communication Efficiency

Communication Efficiency

Privacy

Privacy

Privacy

Performance

3D Multi-scale
MAE

(b).

Pretrained
Encoder

Performance

...

Performance

Centralized UDA:
Centralized and Synchronous MPL

Sec.3.4

Federated UDA:
Decentralized and Synchronous MPL

Sec.3.5

Test-time UDA:
Decentralized and Asynchronous MPL

Sec.3.6

Figure 1. (a). Illustrations of four different domain shifts in medical images. (b). Overview of different UDA settings and how
MAPSeg can fit into different scenarios.

utilize metrics such as brain volume and cortex thickness/surface area from infant brain magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) to investigate the early brain development
and neurodevelopmental disorders [2, 11, 23, 56]. Therefore, robust segmentation of medical images acquired from
large-scale, multi-center, and longitudinal studies is desired,
yet often challenged by the domain shifts across different imaging techniques and even within a single modality
(Fig.1a). For example, computed tomography (CT) and
MRI provide markedly different signals for the same structure (e.g., cardiac regions, Fig.1a). MRI, a widely adopted
radiation-free imaging technique, bears various types of in-

5851

