This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

H OLODECK: Language Guided Generation of 3D Embodied AI Environments
Yue Yang*1 , Fan-Yun Sun*2 , Luca Weihs*4 , Eli Vanderbilt4 , Alvaro Herrasti4 ,
Winson Han4 , Jiajun Wu2 , Nick Haber2 , Ranjay Krishna3,4 , Lingjie Liu1 ,
Chris Callison-Burch1 , Mark Yatskar1 , Aniruddha Kembhavi3,4 , Christopher Clark4
1
University of Pennsylvania, 2 Stanford University,
3
University of Washington, 4 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
yueyang1996.github.io/holodeck/
an arcade room with a pool table

Modern-style living room

a spa with large hot tubs

Victorian-style living room

a sculpture museum with diverse statues

a 1b1b apartment of a researcher who has a cat

three professors’ office connected to a long hallway, the professor in office 1 is a fan of Star Wars

Figure 1. Example outputs of H OLODECK—a large language model powered system, which can generate diverse types of environments
(arcade, spa, museum), customize for styles (Victorian-style), and understand fine-grained requirements (“has a cat”, “fan of Star Wars”).

Abstract
3D simulated environments play a critical role in Embodied AI, but their creation requires expertise and extensive
manual effort, restricting their diversity and scope. To mitigate this limitation, we present H OLODECK, a system that
generates 3D environments to match a user-supplied prompt
fully automatedly. H OLODECK can generate diverse scenes,
e.g., arcades, spas, and museums, adjust the designs for
* Equal technical contribution. Work done while at PRIOR@AI2.

styles, and can capture the semantics of complex queries
such as “apartment for a researcher with a cat” and “office
of a professor who is a fan of Star Wars”. H OLODECK leverages a large language model (i.e., GPT-4) for common sense
knowledge about what the scene might look like and uses
a large collection of 3D assets from Objaverse to populate
the scene with diverse objects. To address the challenge of
positioning objects correctly, we prompt GPT-4 to generate
spatial relational constraints between objects and then optimize the layout to satisfy those constraints. Our large-scale

16227

