This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PH-Net: Semi-Supervised Breast Lesion Segmentation via Patch-wise Hardness
Siyao Jiang1 , Huisi Wu1 ,* Junyang Chen1 , Qin Zhang1 , Jing Qin2
1
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Centre for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
2200271019@email.szu.edu.cn, {hswu, junyangchen, qinzhang}@szu.edu.cn, harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
We present a novel semi-supervised framework for breast
ultrasound (BUS) image segmentation, which is a very challenging task owing to (1) large scale and shape variations
of breast lesions and (2) extremely ambiguous boundaries
caused by massive speckle noise and artifacts in BUS images. While existing models achieved certain progress in
this task, we believe the main bottleneck nowadays for further improvement is that we still cannot deal with hard cases
well. Our framework aims to break through this bottleneck,
which includes two innovative components: an adaptive
patch augmentation scheme and a hard-patch contrastive
learning module. We first identify hard patches by computing the average entropy of each patch and then shield hard
patches to prevent them from being cropped out while performing random patch cutmix. Such a scheme is able to
prevent hard regions from being inadequately trained under strong augmentation. We further develop a new hardpatch contrastive learning algorithm to direct model attention to hard regions by applying extra contrast to pixels in hard patches, further improving segmentation performance on hard cases. We demonstrate the superiority of our framework to state-of-the-art approaches on two
famous BUS datasets, achieving better performance under different labeling conditions. The code is available at
https://github.com/jjjsyyy/PH-Net.

1. Introduction
Breast cancer is the most common cancer among females
worldwide. According to newly released statistics [27], one
in eight newly diagnosed cancer patients develops breast
cancer. Due to its unclear etiology and unpredictable variability, early screening of breast cancer plays a vital role in
early intervention and hence significantly reduces mortality [9]. Currently, ultrasound imaging is the most widely
used tool for breast cancer screening, owing to its non* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Typical challenges in segmentation of BUS images: (a)(c) large variations in scale and shape of lesions, (d)-(e) lesions
with low contrast and ambiguous boundaries. Blue arrows and red
lines indicate blurring boundaries and ground truth, respectively.

invasiveness, cost-effectiveness, and real-time nature [26].
However, manual screening of breast ultrasound (BUS) images is labor-intensive, time-consuming, and error-prone. In
addition, it heavily depends on physicians’ expertise and
hence there usually exists large intra- and inter-observer
variability. To the end, automated screening tools are highly
demanded in clinical practice to improve diagnosis accuracy and efficacy.
One of the essential tasks in developing such an automated screening system is to automatically segment lesions
from BUS images. However, segmentation of BUS images
presents a highly challenging task, as shown in Fig. 1. First,
lesions exhibit highly ambiguous boundaries due to the low
contrast of BUS images. Second, tumors have substantial
variability in scale and shape. Third, due to heavy speckle
noise and artifacts in BUS images, some lesions are exceptionally challenging to recognize. In this regard, a lot of
effort has been dedicated to tackling this challenging task.
In recent years, with the rapid developments of deep
learning techniques, fully supervised methods [30, 34, 37,
46] have achieved remarkable performance in BUS image segmentation. However, these fully supervised methods heavily rely on extensive annotated data, while acquiring large-scale pixel-level annotations for segmentation remains time-consuming and labor-intensive. To mitigate this

11418

