This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-aligned Part-aware Panoptic Segmentation
through Joint Object-Part Representations
Daan de Geus
Gijs Dubbelman
Eindhoven University of Technology
{d.c.d.geus, g.dubbelman}@tue.nl

Abstract
Part-aware panoptic segmentation (PPS) requires (a)
that each foreground object and background region in an
image is segmented and classified, and (b) that all parts
within foreground objects are segmented, classified and
linked to their parent object. Existing methods approach
PPS by separately conducting object-level and part-level
segmentation. However, their part-level predictions are not
linked to individual parent objects. Therefore, their learning objective is not aligned with the PPS task objective,
which harms the PPS performance. To solve this, and make
more accurate PPS predictions, we propose Task-Aligned
Part-aware Panoptic Segmentation (TAPPS). This method
uses a set of shared queries to jointly predict (a) objectlevel segments, and (b) the part-level segments within those
same objects. As a result, TAPPS learns to predict partlevel segments that are linked to individual parent objects,
aligning the learning objective with the task objective, and
allowing TAPPS to leverage joint object-part representations. With experiments, we show that TAPPS considerably
outperforms methods that predict objects and parts separately, and achieves new state-of-the-art PPS results.

1. Introduction
To fully understand what is depicted in an image, it is important to consider concepts at different levels of abstraction. For rich scene understanding, we should not only
recognize foreground objects (e.g., car, human) and background regions (e.g., sky, ocean), but also simultaneously
identify the parts that constitute the objects (e.g., car-wheel,
human-arm). In a step towards such comprehensive scene
understanding, De Geus et al. introduced part-aware panoptic segmentation (PPS) [5]. The objective of this computer
vision task is (1) to output a segmentation mask and class
label for all thing objects and stuff regions in an image like
for panoptic segmentation [13] – we call these object-level
segments – and (2) to simultaneously segment and classify

(a) Separate object and part segmentation
✘ Learning objective not aligned with task objective
Object queries

Per object query

Example outputs
Object-level segment

Object class

Backbone

Object mask

Decoder
Per part query

Car

Part-level segment

(object instance unaware)

Part class
Part mask

Part queries

Car-body

(b) Joint object and part segmentation (ours)
Learning objective aligned with task objective

Example outputs
Object-level segment

Per shared query

Shared queries

Object class

Backbone
Decoder

Object mask

Car

Part segments
within object
Part mask

Part-level segments
within object

Part class
Car-body, car-wheel, etc.

Figure 1. Task-aligned part-aware panoptic segmentation.
(a) Existing works separately predict object-level segments and
object-instance-unaware part-level segments. (b) In this work, we
predict objects and parts jointly, using a set of shared queries. This
allows our method to predict parts within individual object segments, aligning its learning objective with the PPS task objective.

all parts within each identified object. These are called partlevel segments and should be explicitly linked to an objectlevel segment, establishing a part-whole relation.
Current state-of-the-art methods [18, 19] address PPS by
using two different sets of learnable queries to separately
predict object-level and part-level segments, see Fig. 1a.
While these methods outperform earlier baselines [5], they
have one main limitation: their learning objective is not
aligned with the task objective. Where the PPS task objective is to predict parts within each individual object-level
segment, these existing works conduct part-level semantic
segmentation, predicting part-level masks that cover multiple objects (see Fig. 1a). In other words, these networks

3174

