This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CrossMAE: Cross-Modality Masked Autoencoders for
Region-Aware Audio-Visual Pre-Training
Yuxin Guo1,2,3 , Siyang Sun3 , Shuailei Ma4,5 , Kecheng Zheng4
Xiaoyi Bao1,2,3 , Shijie Ma1,2 , Wei Zou1,2 *, Yun Zheng3
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
Alibaba Group 4 Ant Group 5 Northeastern University
{guoyuxin2021, wei.zou}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Learning joint and coordinated features across modalities is essential for many audio-visual tasks. Existing pretraining methods primarily focus on global information,
neglecting fine-grained features and positions, leading to
suboptimal performance in dense prediction tasks. To address this issue, we take a further step towards region-aware
audio-visual pre-training and propose CrossMAE, which
excels in Cross-modality interaction and region alignment.
Specifically, we devise two masked autoencoding (MAE)
pretext tasks at both pixel and embedding levels, namely
Cross-Conditioned Reconstruction and Cross-Embedding
Reconstruction. Taking the visual modality as an example (the same goes for audio), in Cross-Conditioned Reconstruction, the visual modality reconstructs the input
image pixels conditioned on audio Attentive Tokens. As
for the more challenging Cross-Embedding Reconstruction,
unmasked visual tokens reconstruct complete audio features under the guidance of Learnable Queries implying
positional information, which effectively enhances the interaction between modalities and exploits fine-grained semantics. Experimental results demonstrate that CrossMAE
achieves state-of-the-art performance not only in classification and retrieval, but also in dense prediction tasks. Furthermore, we dive into the mechanism of modal interaction
and region alignment of CrossMAE, highlighting the effectiveness of the proposed components.

1. Introduction
Visual and auditory perception are the fundamental abilities of humans to understand the world. Similarly, for intelligent machines, a well-trained audio-visual model can be
leveraged in a myriad of applications, such as video pars* Corresponding author.

GT

Audio-CLIP CAV-MAE CrossMAE

GT

Audio-CLIP CAV-MAE CrossMAE

Figure 1. Audio-visual source localization results. It can be observed that existing pre-trained models perform poorly on downstream tasks involving dense audio-visual predictions. However,
CrossMAE, due to its ability to concentrate on fine-grained local
features of tokens and cross-modal interactions, exhibits outstanding performance in audio-visual source localization tasks.

ing [41, 46], sound source localization [15, 30, 38, 51], navigation [3, 4], sound separation [9, 42, 43], and environment
perception [35]. To make audio-visual models strong, various pre-training strategies [11, 12, 14, 17, 20, 44] have been
widely used [15, 25, 26, 32, 37, 40, 45].
Specifically, Audio-CLIP [17] and CAV-MAE [14], primarily focus on aligning global features of two modalities,
yielding superior results in tasks such as audio-visual classification and retrieval. However, dense prediction audiovisual tasks, such as audio-visual source localization and
segmentation, require a nuanced understanding of finegrained object details and temporal-frequency characteristics of sound, aspects that prior methodologies have largely
overlooked. Considering this, a natural question is whether
these models can handle dense prediction tasks like audiovisual source localization?
To answer this question, we evaluated the performance
of several pre-trained models [14, 17] in audio-visual source
localization [6, 15, 16, 29, 30, 38, 50]. However, as shown

26721

