This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LPSNet: End-to-End Human Pose and Shape Estimation with Lensless Imaging
Haoyang Ge1,† , Qiao Feng1,† , Hailong Jia1 , Xiongzheng Li1 , Xiangjun Yin1 ,
You Zhou2 , Jingyu Yang1 , Kun Li1,∗
1
Tianjin University, China 2 Nanjing University, China
{ ghy0623,fengqiao,jhl,lxz,yinxiangjun,yjy,lik} @tju.edu.cn

zhouyou@nju.edu.cn

Figure 1. LPSNet: End-to-End Human Pose and Shape Estimation with Lensless Imaging. We contribute a framework for estimating
human poses and shapes from individual lensless measurements. The first row shows the input measurements acquired by our lensless
imaging system, the second row shows the estimated human poses and shapes from lensless measurements, and the bottom row shows the
3D results shown in different views.

Abstract
Human pose and shape (HPS) estimation with lensless
imaging is not only beneficial to privacy protection but also
can be used in covert surveillance scenarios due to the
small size and simple structure of this device. However,
this task presents significant challenges due to the inherent
ambiguity of the captured measurements and lacks effective
methods for directly estimating human pose and shape from
lensless data. In this paper, we propose the first end-toend framework to recover 3D human poses and shapes from
lensless measurements to our knowledge. We specifically
design a multi-scale lensless feature decoder to decode the
lensless measurements through the optically encoded mask
† Equal contribution.
* Corresponding author.

for efficient feature extraction. We also propose a doublehead auxiliary supervision mechanism to improve the estimation accuracy of human limb ends. Besides, we establish a lensless imaging system and verify the effectiveness
of our method on various datasets acquired by our lensless imaging system. The code and dataset are available at
https://cic.tju.edu.cn/faculty/likun/projects/LPSNet.

1. Introduction
In recent years, lensless imaging technologies [6, 7,
19, 25] have advanced significantly due to their many advantages, such as privacy protection, smaller size, simple structure, and lower cost. 3D human pose and shape
(HPS) estimation [11, 14, 34, 35] requires miniaturized and

1471

