This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

All Rivers Run to the Sea: Private Learning with Asymmetric Flows
Yue Niu1 Ramy E. Ali2 * Saurav Prakash3 Salman Avestimehr1
1
University of Southern California 2 Samsung 3 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
yueniu@usc.edu

ramy.ali@samsung.com

Abstract
Data privacy is of great concern in cloud machinelearning service platforms, when sensitive data are exposed
to service providers. While private computing environments
(e.g., secure enclaves), and cryptographic approaches (e.g.,
homomorphic encryption) provide strong privacy protection, their computing performance still falls short compared
to cloud GPUs. To achieve privacy protection with high
computing performance, we propose Delta, a new private
training and inference framework, with comparable model
performance as non-private centralized training. Delta
features two asymmetric data flows: the main informationsensitive flow and the residual flow. The main part flows
into a small model while the residuals are offloaded to a
large model. Specifically, Delta embeds the informationsensitive representations into a low-dimensional space while
pushing the information-insensitive part into high-dimension
residuals. To ensure privacy protection, the low-dimensional
information-sensitive part is secured and fed to a small
model in a private environment. On the other hand, the residual part is sent to fast cloud GPUs, and processed by a large
model. To further enhance privacy and reduce the communication cost, Delta applies a random binary quantization
technique along with a DP-based technique to the residuals
before sharing them with the public platform. We theoretically show that Delta guarantees differential privacy in
the public environment and greatly reduces the complexity
in the private environment. We conduct empirical analyses on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet datasets and
ResNet-18 and ResNet-34, showing that Delta achieves
strong privacy protection, fast training, and inference without significantly compromising the model utility.

1. Introduction
In the current machine learning (ML) era, cloud ML services
with high-end GPUs have become indispensable. On the
other hand, ensuring data privacy is one of the most critical
* R.E. Ali was with the University of Southern California.

sauravp2@illinois.edu

avestime.usc.edu

challenges in the ML platforms. During training, privacy
breaches may occur if training data is exposed to ML service
providers, increasing vulnerability to potential attacks. Additionally, users’ inference queries can also be susceptible
to attacks when accessing ML services with sensitive data
[36, 44]. In particular, an untrusted ML platform can cache,
learn, and leak queries without users’ awareness [45].
Related Works Overview.
While prior privacypreserving machine learning (PPML) frameworks [1, 7, 35,
39, 42, 51] mitigate privacy concerns in training and inference, they also come with different tradeoffs. Differential
privacy (DP) based methods perturb the data before outsourcing to an untrusted cloud [38, 61] to ensure privacy, but they
usually result in degraded model utility even under moderate
privacy constraints [8]. On the other hand, crypto-based techniques [39, 51], that provide data protection with encryption
schemes, have not yet proved efficient and scalable to large
models due to their prohibitive complexities.
PPML with private environments (e.g., trusted execution
environments (TEEs), local environments) presents a promising solution by physically isolating the running computing
environments. Such private environments are, however, usually resource-constrained compared to public cloud services
with high-end GPUs, resulting in lower computing performance [19, 47]. However, the prior works based on leveraging these private environments along with the public GPUs
also incur high complexity [20, 40, 41, 55]. One reason for
these methods being inefficient is the heavy communication
between the private and the public environments.
Proposed Solution Overview. In this paper, we consider a private training and inference setting where users can
access both private and public environments, as shown in
Figure 1a. We propose a new private training and inference
framework, Delta, that achieves strong privacy protection
with high model utility and low complexity. The core idea of
Delta originates from an observation that the intermediate
representations (IRs) in ML models exhibit an asymmetric
structure. Specifically, the primary sensitive information
is usually encoded in a low-dimensional space, while the
high-dimensional residuals contain very little information.
Inspired by such an observation, we design a two-way train-

12353

