This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seeing and Hearing: Open-domain Visual-Audio Generation with Diffusion
Latent Aligners
Yazhou Xing1 * Yingqing He1∗
1
HKUST

Zeyue Tian1∗ Xintao Wang2
ARC Lab, Tencent PCG

Abstract
Video and audio content creation serves as the core technique for the movie industry and professional users. Recently, existing diffusion-based methods tackle video and
audio generation separately, which hinders the technique
transfer from academia to industry. In this work, we aim
at filling the gap, with a carefully designed optimizationbased framework for cross-visual-audio and joint-visualaudio generation. We observe the powerful generation ability of off-the-shelf video or audio generation models. Thus,
instead of training the giant models from scratch, we propose to bridge the existing strong models with a shared latent representation space. Specifically, we propose a multimodality latent aligner with the pre-trained ImageBind
model. Our latent aligner shares a similar core as the classifier guidance that guides the diffusion denoising process
during inference time. Through carefully designed optimization strategy and loss functions, we show the superior
performance of our method on joint video-audio generation, visual-steered audio generation, and audio-steered visual generation tasks. The project website can be found
at https://yzxing87.github.io/Seeing-and-Hearing/.

1. Introduction
Recently, AI-generated content has made significant advances in creating diverse and high-realistic images [4, 9,
22, 32, 34], videos [4, 7, 15, 19, 20, 22, 38], or sound [25,
28–30, 46], based on the input descriptions from users.
However, existing works primarily concentrate on generating content within a single modality, disregarding the multimodal nature of the real world. Consequently, the generated videos lack accompanying audio, and the generated
audio lacks synchronized visual effects. This research gap
restricts users from creating content with greater impact,
such as producing films that necessitate the simultaneous
creation of both visual and audio modalities. In this work,
we study the visual-audio generation task for crafting both
* equal contribution

Qifeng Chen1

2

video and audio content.
One potential solution to this problem is to generate visual and audio content in two stages. For example, users
can first generate the video based on the input text prompt
utilizing existing text-to-video (T2V) models [7, 18]. Then,
a video-to-audio (V2A) model can be employed to generate aligned audio. Alternatively, a combination of text-toaudio (T2A) and audio-to-video (A2V) models can be used
to generate paired visual-audio content. However, existing
V2A and A2V generation methods [26, 48] either have limited capability to specific downstream domains or exhibit
poor generation performance. Moreover, the task of joint
video-audio generation (Joint-VA) has received limited attention, and existing work [36] shows limited generation
performance even within a small domain and also lacks semantic control.
In this work, we propose a new generation paradigm
for open-domain visual-audio generation. We observe that:
(1) There are well-trained single-modality text-conditioned
generation models that demonstrate excellent performance.
Leveraging these pre-trained models can avoid expensive
training for synthesizing each modality. (2) We have noticed that the pre-trained model ImageBind [17] possesses
remarkable capability in establishing effective connections
between different data modalities within a shared semantic
space. Our objective is to explore how we can leverage ImageBind as a bridge to connect and integrate various modalities effectively.
Leveraging these observations, we propose to utilize ImageBind as an aligner in the diffusion latent space of different modalities. During the generation of one modality, we
input the noisy latent and the guided condition of another
modality to our aligner to produce a guidance signal that influences the generation process. By gradually injecting the
guidance into the denoising process, we bridge the generated content closer to the input condition in the ImageBind
embedding space. For Joint-VA generation, we make the
guidance bidirectional to impact the generation processes
of both modalities.
With our design, we successfully bridge the pre-trained
single-modality generation models into an organic system

7151

