This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning by Correction: Efficient Tuning Task for Zero-Shot Generative
Vision-Language Reasoning
Rongjie Li1 * Yu Wu1 * Xuming He1,2‡
1
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
2
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
{lirj2, wuyu1, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Generative vision-language models (VLMs) have shown
impressive performance in zero-shot vision-language tasks
like image captioning and visual question answering. However, improving their zero-shot reasoning typically requires
second-stage instruction tuning, which relies heavily on
human-labeled or large language model-generated annotation, incurring high labeling costs. To tackle this challenge, we introduce Image-Conditioned Caption Correction (ICCC), a novel pre-training task designed to enhance
VLMs’ zero-shot performance without the need for labeled
task-aware data. The ICCC task compels VLMs to rectify
mismatches between visual and language concepts, thereby
enhancing instruction following and text generation conditioned on visual inputs. Leveraging language structure and
a lightweight dependency parser, we construct data samples of ICCC task from image-text datasets with low labeling and computation costs. Experimental results on BLIP2 and InstructBLIP demonstrate significant improvements
in zero-shot image-text generation-based VL tasks through
ICCC instruction tuning.

Image-text
Pre-training

2nd-stage Tuning

Zero-shot Adaption
on VL Tasks

The image features a jockey riding a brown
horse on a track, with several people
surrounding the horse and jockey. . .
ChatGPT LLM

LLM Generated data
What relation between horse and left
person? Short Answer: Hold

Horse Man Man
Object annotations

What color of jacket wear by a man riding
on horse? Short Answer: Green
Human Labeled VQA data

Instruction Tuning with Labeled Data
spaCy
NLP Parser

Universal Dependency

Task Constructor

“A man is wearing red shirt.”
A man is wearing
green jackets.
A man rides a horse
wearing a mask.
Image-text Pair Dataset

1. Introduction

the “red shirt” is “green jacket”.
“Man wearing a horse rides a mask.”
the “wearing” and “rides” should be
swapped.
Generated Caption Correction Samples

Image Caption Correction Tuning

Vision-language models (VLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance across a wide range of visionlanguage (VL) tasks, including image captioning [1, 19,
22, 33, 36], visual recognition [15, 29, 44], image-text retrieval [18, 29], and answering visual questions [1, 19, 22,
33, 36]. Generally, existing VLMs are able to conduct two

Figure 1. Illustration of second-stage tuning for zero-shot VL
task adaptation comparison. The instruction tuning in recent
works needs human label or LLM-generated data; in contrast, our
image caption correction tuning is conducted on unlabeled imagetext data with an NLP parser.

* Equal Contribution.
This work was supported by NSFC
62350610269, the Shanghai Frontiers Science Center of Human-centered
Artificial Intelligence, and the MoE Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and
Human-Machine Collaboration (ShanghaiTech University).
‡ denotes
corresponding author. Code is available: https://github.com/
SHTUPLUS/ICCC_CVPR2024

essential tasks: image-text matching (ITM) and image-text
generation (ITG). The contrastive-based ITM aims to model
the similarity between vision and text through a shared embedding [15, 18, 29]. In contrast, the generative-based ITG
has more flexibility in adapting to various VL tasks. More-

13428

