This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GaussianShader: 3D Gaussian Splatting with Shading Functions
for Reflective Surfaces
Yingwenqi Jiang1 Jiadong Tu1 Yuan Liu2 Xifeng Gao3
Xiaoxiao Long2,∗ Wenping Wang4 Yuexin Ma1, *
ShanghaiTech University

PSNR: 21.69

2

PSNR: 28.87

The University of Hong Kong

PSNR: 32.67

3

Tencent America

PSNR: 32.46

PSNR: 26.34

PSNR: 23.74

PSNR: 19.89

PSNR: 24.59

ENVIDR

Ref-NeRF

Gaussian Splatting

Ours

4

Texas A&M University

PSNR

1

Ground Truth

(a) Qualitative comparison

Circle size: training time

FPS
(b) Comparisons between FPS,
training time and accuracy

Figure 1. GaussianShader maintains real-time rendering speed and renders high-fidelity images for both general and reflective surfaces.
Ref-NeRF[45] and ENVIDR[27] attempt to handle reflective surfaces, but they suffer from quite time-consuming optimization and slow
rendering speed. 3D Gaussian splatting [21] keeps high efficiency but cannot handle such reflective surfaces.

Abstract
The advent of neural 3D Gaussians [21] has recently
brought about a revolution in the field of neural rendering, facilitating the generation of high-quality renderings at
real-time speeds. However, the explicit and discrete representation encounters challenges when applied to scenes featuring reflective surfaces. In this paper, we present GaussianShader, a novel method that applies a simplified shading function on 3D Gaussians to enhance the neural rendering in scenes with reflective surfaces while preserving
the training and rendering efficiency. The main challenge
in applying the shading function lies in the accurate normal estimation on discrete 3D Gaussians. Specifically, we
proposed a novel normal estimation framework based on
the shortest axis directions of 3D Gaussians with a delicately designed loss to make the consistency between the
normals and the geometries of Gaussian spheres. Exper* Corresponding author.
This work was supported by NSFC
(No.62206173), MoE Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and
Human-Machine Collaboration (ShanghaiTech University), Shanghai
Frontiers Science Center of Human-centered Artificial Intelligence, the Innovation and Technology Commission of the HKSAR Government under
the InnoHK initiative, and Ref. T45-205/21-N of Hong Kong RGC.

iments show that GaussianShader strikes a commendable
balance between efficiency and visual quality. Our method
surpasses Gaussian Splatting [21] in PSNR on specular object datasets, exhibiting an improvement of 1.57dB. When
compared to prior works handling reflective surfaces, such
as Ref-NeRF [45], our optimization time is significantly accelerated (23h vs. 0.58h). Please click on our project website to see more results.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the field of 3D computer vision has witnessed remarkable advancements in the 3D reconstruction
and visualization of 3D scenes. Innovations such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [32] have achieved substantial
breakthroughs in generating novel views of 3D objects and
scenes, presenting the potential for high-quality and photorealistic renderings. Despite these advancements, NeRFrelated methodologies [6, 27, 45], still contend with challenges such as computationally expensive optimization and
slow rendering speed. These limitations restrict their application in real-time interactive scenarios.

5322

