This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HUGS: Holistic Urban 3D Scene Understanding via Gaussian Splatting
Hongyu Zhou1 , Jiahao Shao1 , Lu Xu1 , Dongfeng Bai2 , Weichao Qiu2 , Bingbing Liu2
Yue Wang1 , Andreas Geiger3,4 , Yiyi Liao1B
1

Zhejiang University

2

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

3

University of Tübingen

4

Tübingen AI Center

Input Images

➧
Predicted Flow

➧

Novel View Synthesis

Novel View Semantic Synthesis

Optical Flow

Depth

Predicted Semantic

Predicted 3D Trackings

3D Semantic Reconstruction & 3D Trackings

Figure 1. Illustration. Given posed RGB images as input, our method lifts noisy 2D & 3D predictions to the 3D space via decomposed
3D Gaussians, and enables holistic scene understanding in 2D and 3D space.

Abstract
Holistic understanding of urban scenes based on RGB
images is a challenging yet important problem. It encompasses understanding both the geometry and appearance to
enable novel view synthesis, parsing semantic labels, and
tracking moving objects. Despite considerable progress,
existing approaches often focus on specific aspects of this
task and require additional inputs such as LiDAR scans
or manually annotated 3D bounding boxes. In this paper, we introduce a novel pipeline that utilizes 3D Gaussian
Splatting for holistic urban scene understanding. Our main
idea involves the joint optimization of geometry, appearance, semantics, and motion using a combination of static
and dynamic 3D Gaussians, where moving object poses are
regularized via physical constraints. Our approach offers
the ability to render new viewpoints in real-time, yielding
2D and 3D semantic information with high accuracy, and
reconstruct dynamic scenes, even in scenarios where 3D
bounding box detection are highly noisy. Experimental results on KITTI, KITTI-360, and Virtual KITTI 2 demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. Our project page
is at https://xdimlab.github.io/hugs website.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing urban scenes is an important task in computer vision with numerous applications. Consider the creation of a photorealistic simulator for autonomous driving,
B Corresponding author.

in this context, it becomes crucial to holistically represent
all aspects of the scene relevant to driving. This entails
tasks like synthesizing images at interpolated and extrapolated viewpoints in real-time, reconstructing 2D and 3D
semantics, generating depth information, and tracking dynamic objects. To minimize sensor cost, achieving such a
holistic understanding exclusively from posed RGB images
holds significant value.
With the rise of neural rendering, many approaches have
emerged to lift 2D information to 3D space, enabling scene
understanding based solely on RGB images. Several previous works focus on reconstructing static urban scenes,
achieving high-quality novel view appearance and semantic synthesis [11, 30, 51]. Another line of work addresses
dynamic scenes [19, 27, 40, 46], but most of them require
ground truth 3D bounding boxes of dynamic objects as input, which are costly to acquire. PNF [19] is the only
method that utilizes noisy bounding boxes obtained through
monocular 3D detection and tracking, where the transformations of the bounding boxes are jointly optimized during
training. However, naı̈ve joint optimization of per-frame
pose transformations is prone to local minima and sensitive
to the initialization. Furthermore, while existing methods
are capable of rendering accurate 2D semantic labels, it is
non-trivial to extract accurate semantics in 3D due to the inaccurate (inferred) 3D geometry. In addition, most of these
methods are unable to achieve real-time rendering.
In this paper, We leverage predicted 2D semantic labels,
optical flow, and 3D tracks, despite their inherent noise and
imperfections, to achieve a holistic understanding of the dy-

21336

