This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tactile-Augmented Radiance Fields
Yiming Dou1
1

Fengyu Yang2

Yi Liu1

University of Michigan

2

Antonio Loquercio3
Yale University

3

Andrew Owens1

UC Berkeley
Vision

Touch Sample

Vision

Touch Pred.

Figure 1. Tactile-augmented radiance fields. We capture a tactile-augmented radiance field (TaRF) from photos and sparsely sampled
touch probes. To do this, we register the captured visual and tactile signals into a shared 3D space, then train a diffusion model to impute
touch at other locations within the scene. Here, we visualize two touch probes and their (color coded) 3D positions in the scene. We also
show two touch signals estimated by the diffusion model. The touch signals were collected using a vision-based touch sensor [32] that
represents the touch signals as images. Please see our project page for video results.

Abstract
We present a scene representation, which we call a
tactile-augmented radiance field (TaRF), that brings vision
and touch into a shared 3D space. This representation
can be used to estimate the visual and tactile signals for
a given 3D position within a scene. We capture a scene’s
TaRF from a collection of photos and sparsely sampled
touch probes. Our approach makes use of two insights: (i)
common vision-based touch sensors are built on ordinary
cameras and thus can be registered to images using methods from multi-view geometry, and (ii) visually and structurally similar regions of a scene share the same tactile features. We use these insights to register touch signals to a
captured visual scene, and to train a conditional diffusion
model that, provided with an RGB-D image rendered from
a neural radiance field, generates its corresponding tactile
signal. To evaluate our approach, we collect a dataset of
TaRFs. This dataset contains more touch samples than previous real-world datasets, and it provides spatially aligned
visual signals for each captured touch signal. We demonstrate the accuracy of our cross-modal generative model
and the utility of the captured visual-tactile data on several downstream tasks. Project page: https://douyiming.github.io/TaRF.

1. Introduction
As humans, our ability to perceive the world relies crucially
on cross-modal associations between sight and touch [19,
50]. Tactile sensing provides a detailed understanding of
material properties and microgeometry, such as the intricate patterns of bumps on rough surfaces and the complex
motions that soft objects make when they deform. This
type of understanding, which largely eludes today’s computer vision models, is a critical component of applications that require reasoning about physical contact, such as
robotic locomotion [3, 24, 31, 34, 37, 38] and manipulation [6, 7, 11, 42, 60], and methods that simulate the behavior of materials [4, 13, 40, 41].
In comparison to many other modalities, collecting tactile data is an expensive and tedious process, since it requires direct physical interaction with the environment. A
recent line of work has addressed this problem by having
humans or robots probe the environment with touch sensors
(see Table 1). Early efforts have been focused on capturing
the properties of only a few objects either in simulation [16,
17, 52] or in lab-controlled settings [6, 7, 18, 28, 35, 52, 63],
which may not fully convey the diversity of tactile signals
in natural environments. Other works have gone beyond a

26529

