This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NoiseCollage: A Layout-Aware Text-to-Image Diffusion Model
Based on Noise Cropping and Merging
Takahiro Shirakawa, Seiichi Uchida
Kyushu University, Japan
takahiro.shirakawa@human.ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp, uchida@ait.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Abstract

layout
text

Layout-aware text-to-image generation is a task to generate multi-object images that reflect layout conditions in
addition to text conditions. The current layout-aware textto-image diffusion models still have several issues, including mismatches between the text and layout conditions and
quality degradation of generated images. This paper proposes a novel layout-aware text-to-image diffusion model
called NoiseCollage to tackle these issues. During the
denoising process, NoiseCollage independently estimates
noises for individual objects and then crops and merges
them into a single noise. This operation helps avoid condition mismatches; in other words, it can put the right objects
in the right places. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations
show that NoiseCollage outperforms several state-of-theart models. These successful results indicate that the cropand-merge operation of noises is a reasonable strategy to
control image generation. We also show that NoiseCollage
can be integrated with ControlNet to use edges, sketches,
and pose skeletons as additional conditions. Experimental results show that this integration boosts the layout accuracy of ControlNet. The code is available at https:
//github.com/univ-esuty/noisecollage.

obj
#1

1. Introduction
Diffusion models, such as StableDiffusion (SD) [28], have
rapidly improved text-to-image generation. In general, diffusion models generate images through a denoising process,
an iterative process to remove noise from an initial Gaussian noise image. A UNet estimates the noise with a text
condition. After the denoising iterations, the model gives a
noise-free (clean) image that reflects the text condition.
Text-to-image diffusion models have recently been extended to generate multiple objects with layout awareness.
Namely, these models can generate images with multiple objects while controlling their spatial locations. There
are two approaches for the extension: attention manipula-

obj
#2
bg

UNet

UNet

Crop
and
merge

UNet

noise
removal
-1
A man wearing an orange jacket is sitting at a table.
A bronze hair woman wearing navy sweater sitting
at a table with smile.
A man and woman posing for a photo are sitting
at a table with a couple of pizzas.

layout condition

text conditions

Figure 1. Denoising processes of NoiseCollage. (Although illustrated as a process in the image space, the actual denoising process is performed in a latent space like [28] for computational efficiency.)

tion [4, 9, 16, 19, 20, 24, 34, 35] and iterative image editing [1, 2, 31, 38, 41, 42]. The former manipulates the cross
attention layers in the UNet for letting a certain region only
focus on a certain object. The latter generates an initial image and then puts another object in the initial image. More
objects can be arranged by repeating this editing process.
The current layout-aware text-to-image diffusion models
still have the following limitations. Specifically, the first approach, attention manipulation, often shows mismatches between the text and layout conditions. The second approach,
iterative editing, shows the image quality degradation as it
iterates to show more objects.
This paper proposes a novel layout-aware text-to-image

8921

