This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adapting to Length Shift: FlexiLength Network for Trajectory Prediction
Yi Xu Yun Fu
Northeastern University, USA
xu.yi@northeastern.edu, yunfu@ece.neu.edu

Abstract
Trajectory prediction plays an important role in various
applications, including autonomous driving, robotics, and
scene understanding. Existing approaches mainly focus on
developing compact neural networks to increase prediction
precision on public datasets, typically employing a standardized input duration. However, a notable issue arises
when these models are evaluated with varying observation
lengths, leading to a significant performance drop, a phenomenon we term the Observation Length Shift. To address
this issue, we introduce a general and effective framework,
the FlexiLength Network (FLN), to enhance the robustness
of existing trajectory prediction techniques against varying observation periods. Specifically, FLN integrates trajectory data with diverse observation lengths, incorporates
FlexiLength Calibration (FLC) to acquire temporal invariant representations, and employs FlexiLength Adaptation
(FLA) to further refine these representations for more accurate future trajectory predictions. Comprehensive experiments on multiple datasets, i.e., ETH/UCY, nuScenes, and
Argoverse 1, demonstrate the effectiveness and flexibility of
our proposed FLN framework.

1. Introduction
The goal of trajectory prediction is to predict the future
locations of agents conditioned on their past observed
states, a key step in understanding their motion and behavior patterns. This task is essential yet challenging in
many real-world applications such as autonomous driving [21, 23, 59, 77], robotics [10, 36], and scene understanding [11, 69]. Recent advancements in deep learning
have significantly improved the accuracy of trajectory predictions [2, 4, 8, 9, 17, 27, 38, 44, 47, 50, 52, 65, 66, 76].
However, achieving such promising prediction performance
typically requires complex models and extensive computational resources. Additionally, many state-of-the-art methods are developed on public datasets [7, 55, 61, 74] with
a fixed observation length, failing to consider the potential
discrepancies between training conditions and diverse real-

Figure 1. The Observation Length Shift phenomenon is a common
issue in the trajectory prediction task. The AgentFormer model is
trained with a standard observation length of 8 timesteps and tested
at varying lengths to compare with Isolated Training (IT). For each
dataset, the bar groups from left to right correspond to observation
lengths of 2, 4, and 6 timesteps, respectively.

world scenarios. Consequently, the fixed training setups are
often too rigid to meet in practice, especially when faced
with environmental changes or observational variables.
Recently, some studies have explored the issue of
training-testing discrepancy in trajectory prediction. For example, work [68] proposes a solution for scenarios where
observations might be incomplete due to occlusions or limited viewpoints, by developing a method that combines
trajectory imputation and prediction. Other research efforts [5, 24, 26, 67] focus on tackling the domain shift
challenge, where the testing environment differs from the
training. Additionally, studies [34, 40, 54] address situations with limited observations, such as having only one or
two data points available. These approaches try to mitigate
the training-testing gap from various angles. Acknowledging these efforts, the importance of addressing the trainingtesting gap is highlighted. In our paper, we concentrate on
the less-explored issue of observation length discrepancy.
For certain well-known architectures such as RNN [22]
and Transformer [57], the ability to process inputs of varying lengths presents a straightforward solution: train the
model with the standard input length and then evaluate at
different input lengths. This solution is contrasted with Isolated Training (IT), where the model is trained at the specific observation length and evaluated with the same input
length. We conducted experiments using a Transformer-

15226

