This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VCoder: Versatile Vision Encoders for Multimodal Large Language Models
Jitesh Jain1
1

SHI Labs @ Georgia Tech

Jianwei Yang2
2

Humphrey Shi1,3

Microsoft Research, Redmond

3

Picsart AI Research (PAIR)

https://github.com/SHI-Labs/VCoder

Abstract
Humans possess the remarkable skill of Visual Perception,
the ability to see and understand the seen, helping them
make sense of the visual world and, in turn, reason. Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLM) have recently
achieved impressive performance on vision-language tasks
ranging from visual question-answering and image captioning to visual reasoning and image generation. However,
when prompted to identify or count (perceive) the entities
in a given image, existing MLLM systems fail. Working
towards developing an accurate MLLM system for perception and reasoning, we propose using Versatile vision enCoders (VCoder) as perception eyes for Multimodal LLMs.
We feed the VCoder with perception modalities such as segmentation or depth maps, improving the MLLM’s perception abilities. Secondly, we leverage the images from COCO
and outputs from off-the-shelf vision perception models to
create our COCO Segmentation Text (COST) dataset for
training and evaluating MLLMs on the object perception
task. Thirdly, we introduce metrics to assess the object perception abilities in MLLMs on our COST dataset. Lastly,
we provide extensive experimental evidence proving the
VCoder’s improved object-level perception skills over existing Multimodal LLMs, including GPT-4V. We open-source
our dataset, code, and models to promote research.

1. Introduction
‘Perception is the soil; reasoning, the seed. Without fertile ground, the seed cannot flourish.’
(GPT-4 [48], 2023)
The ability to think and reason is one of the most remarkable traits that help humans function daily. Generally, understanding the environment precedes the act of thinking
and reasoning [28]. Following the success of ChatGPT-like
instruction following AI agents [3, 11, 47, 48, 60] at language understanding and reasoning, researchers have leveraged LLMs to develop instruct frameworks [14, 40, 68, 74]
that can understand vision and language inputs in an effort to imitate human perception and reasoning ability. We

USER

Difficulty Level

What is happening in the image?

GPT-4V
Characters from "Friends" are gathered in a living room, wearing various
Halloween costumes, possibly celebrating or attending a Halloween party.
Chandler stands out in a pink bunny costume.

VCoder
HIGHgathered in what appears to be a living room
The image shows a group of people
or a dining area, dressed in various silly, quirky costumes. They are sitting at a
dining table with chairs, engaged in a social event or party.

USER
Can you count the number
of people in the image?

Difficulty Level

GPT-4V

VCoder

Yes, there are ten

Yes, there are a total of

people visible in the

14 people in the image.

image.

Figure 1. GPT-4V [48] (access date: Dec 16, 2023) returns impressive responses when prompted to describe complex visual scenes.
However, it fails at the simple task of counting in the same scene.
Our VCoder returns the correct count of people.

refer to such systems as Multimodal LLMs (MLLM). Although MLLMs exhibit the ability to perform complex
vision-language tasks like visual captioning [2, 4, 39], image generation [26, 27, 57], visual reasoning and grounding [22, 51, 72], they often display sub-par performance
at simple tasks like counting objects (Fig. 1). As shown
in Fig. 2, MLLMs output incorrect object counts (people,
chairs) and hallucinate about the presence (handbag, couch)
of certain objects when prompted to identify entities in a
visual input. The perception performance is much worse

27992

