This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Commonsense Prototype for Outdoor Unsupervised 3D Object Detection
Hai Wu1 Shijia Zhao1 Xun Huang1 Chenglu Wen1 * Xin Li2 Cheng Wang1
1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University
2
Section of Visual Computing and Interactive Media, Texas A&M University
Human commonsense intuition

Abstract

‫ݖ‬

The prevalent approaches of unsupervised 3D object detection follow cluster-based pseudo-label generation and
iterative self-training processes. However, the challenge
arises due to the sparsity of LiDAR scans, which leads
to pseudo-labels with erroneous size and position, resulting in subpar detection performance. To tackle this problem, this paper introduces a Commonsense Prototype-based
Detector, termed CPD, for unsupervised 3D object detection. CPD ﬁrst constructs Commonsense Prototype
(CProto) characterized by high-quality bounding box and
dense points, based on commonsense intuition. Subsequently, CPD reﬁnes the low-quality pseudo-labels by leveraging the size prior from CProto. Furthermore, CPD enhances the detection accuracy of sparsely scanned objects
by the geometric knowledge from CProto. CPD outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised 3D detectors on Waymo
Open Dataset (WOD), PandaSet, and KITTI datasets by a
large margin. Besides, by training CPD on WOD and testing on KITTI, CPD attains 90.85% and 81.01% 3D Average Precision on easy and moderate car classes, respectively. These achievements position CPD in close proximity to fully supervised detectors, highlighting the signiﬁcance of our method. The code will be available at
https://github.com/hailanyi/CPD.

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving requires reliable detection of 3D objects (e.g. vehicle and cyclist) in urban scenes for safe path
planning and navigation. Thanks to the power of neural networks, numerous studies have developed high-performance
3D detectors through fully supervised approaches[4, 15,
30–33]. However, these models heavily depend on human
annotations from diverse scenes to guarantee their effectiveness across various scenarios. This data labeling process is
typically laborious and time-consuming, limiting the wide
deployment of detectors in practice [40].
* Corresponding author

‫ݔ‬

On road surface

Certain shape

瀖

‫ݐ‬ଵ

‫ݐ‬ଶ

‫ݐ‬ଷ

Consistent size

Prototypes

…
௣

௣

ሼ‫ݔ‬ଵ ǡ ܾଵ ሽ

௣

௣

ሼ‫ݔ‬ଶ ǡ ܾଶ ሽ

௣

௣

ሼ‫ݔ‬௞ ǡ ܾ௞ ሽ

Supervision

LiDAR points

3D Detector

3D boxes

Figure 1. Illustration of commonsense prototypes for unsupervised
3D object detection in autonomous driving scenes.

Several studies have explored approaches to reduce labeling requirements by weakly supervised learning [3, 26,
46], decreasing the label cost by over 80%. Notably, the
objects within a 3D scene exhibit distinguishable attributes
and can be easily identiﬁed through certain commonsense
reasoning (see Fig. 1). For example, the objects are usually located on the ground surface with a certain shape;
the object sizes are ﬁxed across frames. This insight has
prompted us to develop an unsupervised 3D detector that
operates without using human annotations.
In recent years, traditional methods leveraged ground removal [9] and clustering technique [42] for unsupervised
3D object detection. However, these methods often struggle to achieve satisfactory performance due to the sparsity
and occlusion of objects in 3D scenes. Advanced methods
create initial pseudo-labels from point cloud sequences by
clustering and bootstrap a good detector by iteratively training a deep network [41]. Nevertheless, the sparse and viewlimited nature of LiDAR scanning leads to pseudo-labels
with inaccurate sizes and positions, misleading the network
convergence and resulting in suboptimal detection performance. A subset of objects, denoted as complete objects T ,

14968

