This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoRF: Rendering Dynamic Radiance Fields as 2D Feature Video Streams
Liao Wang1,3∗

Kaixin Yao1,3∗

Chengcheng Guo1

Jingyi Yu1
Lan Xu1†
1
2
3
ShanghaiTech University
KU Leuven
NeuDim

Zhirui Zhang1

Qiang Hu4#

Minye Wu2†
4
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Figure 1. Our proposed VideoRF views dynamic radiance field as 2D feature video streams combined with deferred rendering. This
technique facilitates hardware video codec and shader-based rendering, enabling smooth high-quality rendering across diverse devices.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) excel in photorealistically rendering static scenes. However, rendering dynamic,
long-duration radiance fields on ubiquitous devices remains
challenging, due to data storage and computational constraints. In this paper, we introduce VideoRF, the first approach to enable real-time streaming and rendering of dynamic human-centric radiance fields on mobile platforms.
At the core is a serialized 2D feature image stream representing the 4D radiance field all in one. We introduce a
tailored training scheme directly applied to this 2D domain
to impose the temporal and spatial redundancy of the feature image stream. By leveraging the redundancy, we show
that the feature image stream can be efficiently compressed
by 2D video codecs, which allows us to exploit video hardware accelerators to achieve real-time decoding. On the
other hand, based on the feature image stream, we propose a novel rendering pipeline for VideoRF, which has specialized space mappings to query radiance properties efficiently. Paired with a deferred shading model, VideoRF
has the capability of real-time rendering on mobile devices
* Authors contributed equally to this work. † The corresponding authors are Minye Wu (minye.wu@kuleuven.be) and Lan Xu (xulan1@shanghaitech.edu.cn). # Work done while at ShanghaiTech University.

thanks to its efficiency. We have developed a real-time interactive player that enables online streaming and rendering of dynamic scenes, offering a seamless and immersive
free-viewpoint experience across a range of devices, from
desktops to mobile phones. Our project page is available at
https://aoliao12138.github.io/VideoRF/.

1. Introduction
Photorealistic Free-Viewpoint Video (FVV) of dynamic
scenes offers an immersive experience in virtual reality
and telepresence. Work involving Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs) has shown great potential in creating photorealistic Free-Viewpoint Videos (FVVs). However, there are still
challenges in smoothly delivering and rendering FVVs using NeRFs on commonly used devices, similar to the ease of
watching online videos. The difficulty lies in reducing the
data capacity for transmitting and storing long sequences
and ensuring a low, mobile-compatible computational load.
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [39] surpasses traditional
3D reconstruction methods in photorealistic novel view
synthesis. Several works extend NeRF to dynamic scenes
by maintaining a canonical space and matching it implicitly
[10, 42, 48] or explicitly [34] to align with each frame’s live
space. However, their dependence on canonical space limits effectiveness in sequences with large motions or topo-

470

