This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PSDPM: Prototype-based Secondary Discriminative Pixels Mining for Weakly
Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Xinqiao Zhao1,2,∗
1

XJTLU

2

Ziqian Yang1,2,∗

University of Liverpool

Tianhong Dai3
3

University of Aberdeen

Abstract
Image-level Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
(WSSS) has received increasing attention due to its low annotation cost. Class Activation Mapping (CAM) generated
through classifier weights in WSSS inevitably ignores certain useful cues, while the CAM generated through class
prototypes can alleviate that. However, because of the different goals of image classification and semantic segmentation, the class prototypes still focus on activating primary
discriminative pixels learned from classification loss, leading to incomplete CAM. In this paper, we propose a plugand-play Prototype-based Secondary Discriminative Pixels
Mining (PSDPM) framework for enabling class prototypes
to activate more secondary discriminative pixels, thus generating a more complete CAM. Specifically, we introduce
a Foreground Pixel Estimation Module (FPEM) for estimating potential foreground pixels based on the correlations between primary and secondary discriminative pixels and the semantic segmentation results of baseline methods. Then, we enable WSSS model to learn discriminative features from secondary discriminative pixels through
a consistency loss calculated between FPEM result and
class-prototype CAM. Experimental results show that our
PSDPM improves various baseline methods significantly
and achieves new state-of-the-art performances on WSSS
benchmarks. Codes are available at https://github.
com/xinqiaozhao/PSDPM .

1. Introduction
Deep learning technology shows impressive performances
on image [3, 18, 57] and video segmentation [56, 60] tasks.
Among them, image-level weakly supervised semantic segmentation has received increasing attention due to its low
annotation cost. Existing methods mainly rely on Class
Activation Mapping (CAM) and knowledge from CLIP [16]
to obtain pseudo labels for training semantic segmentation
models [1]. Considering the fact that CAM based on clas∗:Equal contributions †:Corresponding author

Bingfeng Zhang4
4

Jimin Xiao1,†

China University of Petroleum

sifier weights only focuses on limited regions as the classifier weights deviate from the center of foreground features
and can only activate foreground pixels around it [5], many
works intend to acquire a more complete CAM by leveraging class prototypes. Chen et al. [7] use the cluster centers
of each class pixel-wise features as the class prototypes to
replace the classifier weights to generate CAMs. Similarly,
Chen et al. [5] propose an image-specific prototype CAM
generation method, which fuses class discriminative features learned by classifier weight with other image-specific
information, mitigating the activation center shifting issues
and completing the CAM.
However, the aforementioned prototype-based methods
still remain shortcomings. Since the pixel-wise feature distribution of each class in one image is still very sparse (e.g.,
t-SNE visualization results in Fig. 1(b2)), only foreground
features close to the class prototype can be activated with
high confidence, while those far away from the class prototype cannot be activated. This observation explains the
reason that the class-prototype CAMs are still incomplete
for certain images (e.g., SIPE CAMs in Fig. 1(b1)).
One reason behind the sparse distribution of foreground
pixel-wise features is that the discriminative features in certain foreground pixels are not learned by WSSS model, and
the extracted features from these pixels fail to exhibit close
proximity to the discriminative prototype which originates
from the classifier weights of WSSS model. Specifically,
current prototype-based works [5, 7] concentrate on fusing features acquired from classifier weights with imagespecific features, and the learning of their WSSS models are
still driven by classification loss. However, WSSS model
trained through classification loss primarily captures and
learns from parts of foreground pixels which are most discriminative and enough for reducing the classification loss
to the converge point, while ignoring the other foreground
pixels. In this paper, we refer to the discriminative pixels
captured and learned by WSSS model through classification loss as primary discriminative pixels. In contrast, the
remaining discriminative pixels which are not captured by
WSSS model are referred to as secondary discriminative
pixels. Since current prototype-based approaches do not en-

3437

