This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S HAP -E DITOR: Instruction-guided Latent 3D Editing in Seconds
Minghao Chen Junyu Xie Iro Laina Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
{minghao, jyx, iro, vedaldi}@robots.ox.ac.uk
silent-chen.github.io/Shap-Editor

“Make its color look like rainbow”
“Make it look like a panda”
“Add a Santa hat to it”
“Make it wear a blue sweater ”

～1 sec
Figure 1. Given 3D assets as inputs, S HAP -E DITOR achieves fast 3D editing in just one second by learning a feed-forward mapping in the
latent space of a 3D asset generator.

Abstract
We propose a novel feed-forward 3D editing framework
called S HAP -E DITOR. Prior research on editing 3D objects
primarily concentrated on editing individual objects by
leveraging off-the-shelf 2D image editing networks, utilizing a process called 3D distillation, which transfers knowledge from the 2D network to the 3D asset. Distillation necessitates at least tens of minutes per asset to attain satisfactory editing results, thus it is not very practical. In
contrast, we ask whether 3D editing can be carried out directly by a feed-forward network, eschewing test-time optimization. In particular, we hypothesise that this process
can be greatly simplified by first encoding 3D objects into a
suitable latent space. We validate this hypothesis by building upon the latent space of Shap-E. We demonstrate that
direct 3D editing in this space is possible and efficient by
learning a feed-forward editor network that only requires
approximately one second per edit. Our experiments show
that S HAP -E DITOR generalises well to both in-distribution
and out-of-distribution 3D assets with different prompts and
achieves superior performance compared to methods that
carry out test-time optimisation for each edited instance.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of generating and editing 3D objects based on instructions expressed in natural language.

With the advent of denoising diffusion models [20, 56, 62,
64], text-based image generation [56] and editing [3, 18, 49]
have witnessed remarkable progress. Many authors have
since attempted to transfer such capabilities to 3D via testtime optimisation, where a 3D model is optimised from
scratch until its rendered 2D appearance satisfies an underlying prior captured by a pre-trained 2D models [17, 24, 59].
While optimisation-based methods obtain encouraging
results, they are not scalable — in fact, a single 3D generation or edit can take from minutes to hours. It is thus natural to seek more efficient generators and editors that can
directly work in 3D. We hypothesise that this can be greatly
facilitated by first learning a suitable latent space for 3D
models. Such an approach is exemplified by Shape-E [23],
a conditional generative model that learns an auto-encoder
mapping 3D objects into vectors (latents). For generation,
these vectors can be sampled directly by a diffusion model,
eschewing test-time optimisation entirely.
In this paper, we explore the capability of a 3D latent
space to not only facilitate 3D generation but also enable efficient 3D editing. To this end, we propose S HAP -E DITOR,
a method that enables semantic, text-driven edits directly
in the latent space of 3D asset generators. Because of the
properties of the latent space, once learned, the editor function is capable of applying the edit to any new object in just
one second, in contrast to the several minutes or even hours
required by optimisation-based approaches.

26456

