This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ManipLLM: Embodied Multimodal Large Language Model for
Object-Centric Robotic Manipulation
Xiaoqi Li1 , Mingxu Zhang2 , Yiran Geng1 , Haoran Geng1 , Yuxing Long1 ,
Yan Shen1 , Renrui Zhang3 , Jiaming Liu1 , Hao Dong1*
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 3 MMLab, CUHK
Input

Abstract
Robot manipulation relies on accurately predicting contact points and end-effector directions to ensure successful operation. However, learning-based robot manipulation, trained on a limited category within a simulator, often struggles to achieve generalizability, especially when
confronted with extensive categories. Therefore, we introduce an innovative approach for robot manipulation that
leverages the robust reasoning capabilities of Multimodal
Large Language Models (MLLMs) to enhance the stability and generalization of manipulation. By fine-tuning the
injected adapters, we preserve the inherent common sense
and reasoning ability of the MLLMs while equipping them
with the ability for manipulation. The fundamental insight
lies in the introduced fine-tuning paradigm, encompassing
object category understanding, affordance prior reasoning,
and object-centric pose prediction to stimulate the reasoning ability of MLLM in manipulation. During inference,
our approach utilizes an RGB image and text prompt to
predict the end effector’s pose in chain of thoughts. After the initial contact is established, an active impedance
adaptation policy is introduced to plan the upcoming waypoints in a closed-loop manner. Moreover, in real world,
we design a test-time adaptation (TTA) strategy for manipulation to enable the model better adapt to the current
real-world scene configuration. Experiments in simulator
and real-world show the promising performance of ManipLLM. More details and demonstrations can be found at
https://sites.google.com/view/manipllm.

1. Introduction
As robot manipulation requires robots to interact with diverse objects, the robustness and explainability of lowlevel action prediction become essential for manipulating
reliability. While certain approaches [9, 11–13, 22, 23]
* Corresponding author: hao.dong@pku.edu.cn

‘Specify the contact
point and gripper
direction of manipulating the object’

ManipLLM
‘The contact point is (x,y,z),
the gripper up direction is
(xu,yu,zu),
the gripper forward direction is (xf,yf,zf)’

Figure 1. The prediction of ManipLLM. Given the text prompt,
RGB image, and depth map inputs, we obtain 3D contact point
(x, y, z). Here, x and y represent the pixel coordinates in the image predicted by ManipLLM, while z corresponds to the depth
obtained from the depth camera. Additionally, ManipLLM predicts the gripper’s up direction (xu , yu , zu ) and forward direction
(xf , yf , zf ), forming the end-effector SO(3) rotation.

demonstrate impressive performance, they often sacrifice
interpretability by treating low-level manipulation prediction as a black-box prediction problem and lack the inherent
common-sense reasoning abilities inherent in humans, limiting their capacity to manipulate wide-spread categories of
objects.
Existing advancements in Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs)[1, 19, 22, 38] highlight their proficiency
in common sense reasoning and remarkable generalization
in vision tasks [2, 8]. However, training Multi-Label Language Models (MLLMs) directly to learn robotic low-level

18061

