This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BANF: Band-limited Neural Fields for Levels of Detail Reconstruction
Akhmedkhan (Ahan) Shabanov1 , Shrisudhan Govindarajan1 , Cody Reading1 , Lily Goli2 , Daniel Rebain3 ,
Kwang Moo Yi3 , Andrea Tagliasacchi1, 2 , 4
1

Simon Fraser University, 2 University of Toronto 3 University of British Columbia, 4 Google DeepMind

Figure 1. We introduce BANF, a method for band-limited frequency decomposition in neural fields. Our minimal yet impactful enhancements to the training process achieves anti-aliased coarse-to-fine signal reconstruction, seamlessly integrating with commonly used mesh
extraction techniques [25], significantly surpassing prior methods in quality. The reconstruction artifacts due to view-dependent effects (i.e.
vase bowl not being smooth) are due to the reconstruction baseline we employ, and is orthogonal to our method.

Abstract
Largely due to their implicit nature, neural fields lack a direct mechanism for filtering, as Fourier analysis from discrete signal processing is not directly applicable to these
representations. Effective filtering of neural fields is critical
to enable level-of-detail processing in downstream applications, and support operations that involve sampling the
field on regular grids (e.g. marching cubes). Existing methods that attempt to decompose neural fields in the frequency
domain either resort to heuristics or require extensive modifications to the neural field architecture. We show that via
a simple modification, one can obtain neural fields that are
low-pass filtered, and in turn show how this can be exploited
to obtain a frequency decomposition of the entire signal.
We demonstrate the validity of our technique by investigating level-of-detail reconstruction, and showing how coarser
representations can be computed effectively. Source code is
available at https://theialab.github.io/banf

1. Introduction
Recent research enabled neural rendering to accurately
model 3D scenes from multi-view images alone. Many neural rendering techniques employ neural fields as the underlying 3D representation – coordinate neural networks that
can represent a variety of signals including images [27,
37], surface manifolds [32, 42, 48], and volumetric densities [29]. These representations are now used in a plethora
of applications that include robotics [1], semantic understanding [20], scene capture [22], editing [14], and generative modeling from natural language [33].
While neural fields are most commonly trained to represent the entire spectrum of signals, it is an established practice in classical signal processing to decompose the signal
into separate frequency bands due to the many advantages
it brings [2]. For example, signal decomposition allows 3D
objects to be represented at multiple levels of detail, which
finds application in reducing the computational cost of rendering or physics-based simulations [26]. In classical signal
processing, frequency decomposition can be studied via the

20571

