This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Regressor-Segmenter Mutual Prompt Learning for Crowd Counting
Mingyue Guo1,2 , Li Yuan2,3 ,* Zhaoyi Yan2†, Binghui Chen, Yaowei Wang2 , Qixiang Ye1,2†
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 2 Pengcheng Lab 3 Peking University
guomingyue21@mails.ucas.ac.cn
yanzhaoyi@outlook.com

yuanli-ece@pku.edu.cn
wangyw@pcl.ac.cn

chenbinghui@bupt.cn

qxye@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Crowd counting has achieved significant progress by
training regressors to predict instance positions. In heavily crowded scenarios, however, regressors are challenged
by uncontrollable annotation variance, which causes density map bias and context information inaccuracy. In
this study, we propose mutual prompt learning (mPrompt),
which leverages a regressor and a segmenter as guidance
for each other, solving bias and inaccuracy caused by annotation variance while distinguishing foreground from background. In specific, mPrompt leverages point annotations
to tune the segmenter and predict pseudo head masks in a
way of point prompt learning. It then uses the predicted
segmentation masks, which serve as spatial constraint, to
rectify biased point annotations as context prompt learning.
mPrompt defines a way of mutual information maximization
from prompt learning, mitigating the impact of annotation
variance while improving model accuracy. Experiments
show that mPrompt significantly reduces the Mean Average Error (MAE), demonstrating the potential to be general
framework for down-stream vision tasks. Code is available
at https://github.com/csguomy/mPrompt.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting, which estimates the number of people in
images of crowded or cluttered backgrounds, has garnered
increasing attention for its wide-ranging applications in
public security [23, 42], traffic monitoring [13], and agriculture [2, 38]. Many existing methods converted crowd counting as a density map regression problem [3, 27, 28, 62],
i.e., generating density map targets by convolving the point
annotations with the predefined Gaussian kernels and then
training a model to learn from these targets.
Unfortunately, point annotations exhibit considerable
variances, termed label variance, which impedes the accu* This work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program
of China (2022ZD0118101).
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Upper: The biased point annotation impedes accurate model learning. mPrompt leverages context prompt
and point prompt to mine spatial context and rectify biased annotation for crowd counting. Lower: Illustration of mutual
prompt learning (mPrompt), which completes pseudo segmentation mask by using point prompt learning. Meanwhile, it leverages the rectified masks as spatial context information to refine biased point annotations in a way of context prompt learning. (Best
viewed in color)

rate learning of models. As shown in Fig. 1, label variance is an inherent issue, where the annotated point are
coarsely placed within head regions rather than at precise
center positions. To mitigate the label variance, loss relaxation approaches [40, 52, 54] modified the strict pixelwise loss constraint via constructing probability density
functions. Segmentation-based approaches [41, 48, 64]
suppressed background noises by introducing an auxiliary
branch to regressor networks [41].
Unfortunately, loss relaxation methods comprise point
position variance, which could introduce background noises
to the regressor. Segmentation-based methods manage to
alleviate label variance using spatial context, but are chal-

28380

