This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PaSCo: Urban 3D Panoptic Scene Completion with Uncertainty Awareness
Anh-Quan Cao1
1

Inria

Angela Dai2
2

Raoul de Charette1

Technical University of Munich

https://astra-vision.github.io/PaSCo
Panoptic Scene Completion

Abstract

Uncertainty
Voxel-wise

Input point cloud

We propose the task of Panoptic Scene Completion (PSC)
which extends the recently popular Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) task with instance-level information to produce a richer understanding of the 3D scene. Our PSC
proposal utilizes a hybrid mask-based technique on the nonempty voxels from sparse multi-scale completions. Whereas
the SSC literature overlooks uncertainty which is critical
for robotics applications, we instead propose an efficient
ensembling to estimate both voxel-wise and instance-wise
uncertainties along PSC. This is achieved by building on
a multi-input multi-output (MIMO) strategy, while improving performance and yielding better uncertainty for little
additional compute. Additionally, we introduce a technique to aggregate permutation-invariant mask predictions.
Our experiments demonstrate that our method surpasses all
baselines in both Panoptic Scene Completion and uncertainty estimation on three large-scale autonomous driving
datasets. Our code and data are available at https://astravision.github.io/PaSCo .

1. Introduction
Understanding scenes holistically plays a vital role in various fields, including robotics, VR/AR, and autonomous
driving. A fundamental challenge in this domain is the simultaneous estimation of complete scene geometry, semantics, and instances from incomplete 3D input data, which is
often sparse, noisy, and ambiguous due to occlusions and
the inherent complexity of the real scenes. Despite these
challenges, achieving this level of understanding is crucial
to enable machines to interact with their environment in a
smart and safe manner.
Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) tackles 3D scene understanding by inferring the full scene geometry and semantics from a sparse observation. There have been significant advancements in SSC which has gained in popularity. Initial methods [7, 10, 16, 45, 66] focused on indoor
scenes characterized by dense, regular, and small-scale in-

PaSCo

Instance-wise

Figure 1. PaSCo output. Our method infers Panoptic Scene Completion (PSC) from a sparse input point cloud while concurrently
assessing uncertainty at both the voxel and instance levels.

put point clouds. The recent release of the Semantic KITTI
dataset has ignited interest for SSC in outdoor driving scenarios [14, 63, 72, 73], which present unique challenges due
to the sparsity, large scale, and varying densities of input
point clouds [64].
Despite its remarkable performance, current SSC techniques overlook instance-level information and uncertainty
prediction. The absence of instance-level prediction hinders their utility in applications that require identification
and tracking of individual objects while the lack of uncertainty estimation limits their deployment in real-world
safety-critical applications.
To address these challenges, we propose the novel task
of Panoptic Scene Completion (PSC), which aims to holistically predict the geometry, semantics, and instances of
a scene from a sparse observation. We present the first
method for this task, named PaSCo, which is a MIMOinspired [30] ensemble approach boosting PSC performance and uncertainty estimation at minimal computational
cost. It combines multi-scale generative sparse networks
with a transformer decoder, implementing a mask-centric
strategy for instance prediction [12, 13]. Consequently,
we introduce a novel ensembling technique for combining
unordered mask sets. Through extensive evaluations, our
method demonstrates superior performance in PSC and provides valuable insights into the predictive uncertainty. Our
contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We formulate the new task of Panoptic Scene Completion
(PSC), extending beyond Semantic Scene Completion to
reason about instances.

14554

