This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Day-Night Cross-domain Vehicle Re-identification
Hongchao Li1 , Jingong Chen1 , Aihua Zheng2 , Yong Wu1∗ , Yonglong Luo1
1
Anhui Normal University, 2 Anhui University
{lhc950304, ahzheng214}@foxmail.com, {chenjingong6, wuyong tj}@163.com, ylluo@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Previous advances in vehicle re-identification (ReID)
are mostly reported under favorable lighting conditions,
while cross-day-and-night performance is neglected, which
greatly hinders the development of related traffic intelligence applications. This work instead develops a novel
Day-Night Dual-domain Modulation (DNDM) vehicle reidentification framework for day-night cross-domain traffic scenarios. Specifically, a unique night-domain glare
suppression module is provided to attenuate the headlight
glare from raw nighttime vehicle images. To enhance vehicle features under low-light environments, we propose a
dual-domain structure enhancement module in the feature
extractor, which enhances geometric structures between appearance features. To alleviate day-night domain discrepancies, we develop a cross-domain class awareness module that facilitates the interaction between appearance and
structure features in both domains. In this work, we address the Day-Night cross-domain ReID (DN-ReID) problem and provide a new cross-domain dataset named DNWild, including day and night images of 2,286 identities,
giving in total 85,945 daytime images and 54,952 nighttime
images. Furthermore, we also take into account the matter of balance between day and night samples, and provide
a dataset called DN-348. Exhaustive experiments demonstrate the robustness of the proposed framework in the DNReID problem. The code and benchmark are released at
https://github.com/chenjingong/DN-ReID.

1. Introduction
Vehicle re-identification (ReID) is an important and advanced research topic in computer vision. It has great potential in multiple applications, such as intelligent transportation, urban surveillance, and social security. This is mainly
because vehicles play a vital role as the primary objects of
interest in urban surveillance scenarios. ReID aims to identify vehicle images of interest from the gallery captured by
*Corresponding author.

Features

Cam1

Embeddings

CNN
Cam2
(a) Feature embedding of daytime vehicle images
Features

Visible
CNN

Embeddings
modality gap

Infrared
(b) Feature embedding of visible and infrared person images
Features

Embeddings

Day
CNN

domain gap

Night
(c) Feature embedding of daytime and nighttime vehicle images

Figure 1. Comparison of different ReID frameworks: (1) the most
common single-modality visible domain ReID framework; (2) the
cross-modality visible-infrared ReID framework; (3) the day-night
cross-domain ReID framework.

non-overlapping surveillance cameras. The main solution
for ReID entails training a Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) [9, 10]. This allows samples of the same identity
from different cameras to learn a consistent feature representation, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). Driven by large-scale
datasets [17, 20, 22, 33] and the blossom of CNN, emerging re-identification methods [14, 21, 26, 42] keep setting
state-of-the-art (SOTA) results in recent years.
Despite the advancements, the majority of vehicle reidentification (ReID) benchmarks and methods mainly concentrate on day-to-day matching, which is the common
single-modality visible domain Re-ID problem. In numerous nighttime surveillance and low-light settings, thermal
(near)-infrared cameras have the ability to capture the visual appearances of targets. This raises significant crossmodality visible-infrared ReID problems, such as visibleinfrared person re-identification (VI-ReID) [27, 34]. The
VI-ReID framework is typically formulated by learning
modality-shared or invariant features to bridge the modal-

12626

