This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modeling Collaborator: Enabling Subjective Vision Classification With Minimal
Human Effort via LLM Tool-Use
Imad Eddine Toubal1,2∗ Aditya Avinash1 Neil Gordon Alldrin1 Jan Dlabal1 Wenlei Zhou1
Enming Luo1 Otilia Stretcu1 Hao Xiong1 Chun-Ta Lu1 Howard Zhou1
Ranjay Krishna1,3 † Ariel Fuxman1 Tom Duerig1
1

Google Research

2

University of Missouri

3

University of Washington

itdfh@umsystem.edu, {adity,nalldrin}@google.com

PaLI-X (baseline)

Abstract
From content moderation to wildlife conservation, the
number of applications that require models to recognize
nuanced or subjective visual concepts is growing. Traditionally, developing classifiers for such concepts requires
substantial manual effort measured in hours, days, or even
months to identify and annotate data needed for training. Even with recently proposed Agile Modeling techniques, which enable rapid bootstrapping of image classifiers, users are still required to spend 30 minutes or more
of monotonous, repetitive data labeling just to train a single classifier. Drawing on Fiske’s Cognitive Miser theory,
we propose a new framework that alleviates manual effort
by replacing human labeling with natural language interactions, reducing the total effort required to define a concept by an order of magnitude: from labeling 2,000 images
to only 100 plus some natural language interactions. Our
framework leverages recent advances in foundation models, both large language models and vision-language models, to carve out the concept space through conversation
and by automatically labeling training data points. Most
importantly, our framework eliminates the need for crowdsourced annotations. Moreover, our framework ultimately
produces lightweight classification models that are deployable in cost-sensitive scenarios. Across 15 subjective concepts and across 2 public image classification datasets, our
trained models outperform traditional Agile Modeling as
well as state-of-the-art zero-shot classification models like
ALIGN, CLIP, CuPL, and large visual question answering
models like PaLI-X.

1. Introduction
The field of computer vision has primarily focused on
recognizing concepts that are objectively agreed upon, such
∗ This work was done during an internship at Google.
† This work was done during working at Google.

Prompt: Is this tuna gourmet?
Justify your answer.
PaLI: No, this tuna is not
gourmet. It is a simple salad with
tuna, sesame seeds, and
vegetables. It is not a fancy or
elaborate dish.
Prompt: Could this be an image of
gourmet tuna?
PaLI: Yes, this could be an image
of gourmet tuna.
Prompt: Is this tuna gourmet? Are
you sure?
PaLI: I'm not sure if this tuna is
gourmet. It looks like it could
be, but it's hard to say for sure
without tasting it.
Modeling Collaborator (Ours)
Decision: Positive
Reasons: The image shows a plate of food with chopsticks on
it. The food is a salad with tuna, pineapple, avocado, and
sesame seeds. The salad is on a plate with chopsticks on
it. The dish is gourmet and contains tuna.

Figure 1. We introduce Modeling Collaborator: a framework
that allows anyone to train vision models using natural language interactions and minimal effort. We show that today’s
best models (e.g. PaLI-X [6]) change their answers depending on
the prompt when classifying subjective concepts like gourmet
tuna. Meanwhile, Modeling Collaborator uses LLMs and tooluse to train vision models by interacting with users to carve out
the concept space.

as dogs, cats, or cars [11, 28, 30]. Even research on finegrained recognition (e.g. “black footed albatross”) and
compositional concepts (e.g., “red car next to a motorcycle”) have universal consensus [22, 27, 32, 35]. However,
many practical real-world vision applications frequently involve recognizing subjective concepts that suffer from significant disagreements amongst individuals. Applications
include predicting emotions, measuring aesthetic appeal, or
content moderation [10, 25, 26, 45]. A content moderator

17553

