This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ExACT: Language-guided Conceptual Reasoning and Uncertainty Estimation
for Event-based Action Recognition and More
Jiazhou Zhou1 Xu Zheng1 Yuanhuiyi Lyu1 Lin Wang1,2 *
1
AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ) 2 Dept. of CSE, HKUST
{jiazhouzhou,yuanhuiyilv}@hkust-gz.edu.cn, zhengxu128@gmail.com, linwang@ust.hk
Project Page: https://vlislab22.github.io/ExACT/

Abstract
Event cameras have recently been shown beneficial for
practical vision tasks, such as action recognition, thanks
to their high temporal resolution, power efficiency, and reduced privacy concerns. However, current research is hindered by 1) the difficulty in processing events because of
their prolonged duration and dynamic actions with complex
and ambiguous semantics and 2) the redundant action depiction of the event frame representation with fixed stacks.
We find language naturally conveys abundant semantic information, rendering it stunningly superior in reducing semantic uncertainty. In light of this, we propose ExACT, a
novel approach that, for the first time, tackles event-based
action recognition from a cross-modal conceptualizing perspective. Our ExACT brings two technical contributions.
Firstly, we propose an adaptive fine-grained event (AFE)
representation to adaptively filter out the repeated events
for the stationary objects while preserving dynamic ones.
This subtly enhances the performance of ExACT without
extra computational cost. Then, we propose a conceptual
reasoning-based uncertainty estimation module, which simulates the recognition process to enrich the semantic representation. In particular, conceptual reasoning builds the
temporal relation based on the action semantics, and uncertainty estimation tackles the semantic uncertainty of actions
based on the distributional representation. Experiments
show that our ExACT achieves superior recognition accuracy of 94.83%(+2.23%), 90.10%(+37.47%) and 67.24%
on PAF, HARDVS and our SeAct datasets respectively.

1. Introduction
Action recognition is a crucial vision task with many applications, such as robot navigation [33, 43], and abnormal human behavior recognition [25, 35]. Many framebased learning approaches have been presented, leading
to impressive performance improvements [24, 43]. How* Corresponding author.

(a)

Comparison

1) Duration:

Dynamic Action:
Sit down
Avg. 5s

2) Semantic:
(b)

Our AEF representation

(c)

Conceptual
Reasoning

Stationary Object:
Dragonfly

Prolonged

Avg. 0.1s Short

Ambiguous
&Complex

Limited

VS.

Previous event frame rep.

t

t

Temporal Relation

Contrastive
Alignment

Uncertainty
Estimation
Squatting?
Sitting?
Standing?

Figure 1. (a) Unlike stationary objects, e.g., ‘Dragonfly’ with
short duration (0.1s) and limited semantics, dynamic actions like
‘Sit down’ have the prolonged duration (5s) with ambiguous
and complex semantics. (b) Compared with previous event representation, stacking events with fixed counts, we adaptively filter
out events recording stationary actions while preserving dynamic
ones; (c) We introduce language guidance to stimulate the recognition process, particularly focusing on conceptually reasoning temporal relations and estimating uncertain semantics.

ever, these methods may not be ideal solutions for powerconstrained scenarios, e.g., surveillance [3, 24]. RGB cameras also degrade due to environment bias [36] like motion
blur and lighting variations. Moreover, frame-based cameras trigger considerable privacy concerns as they directly
capture users’ appearance.
Recently, bio-inspired event cameras are gaining popularity [1, 14, 27], which ignore the background and only
record moving objects. This leads to sensing efficiency and
resilience to rapid motion and illumination changes with
low power consumption. Also, event cameras mostly reflect
objects’ edges, which alleviates users’ privacy concerns like
skin color and gender. Owing to these advantages, eventbased action recognition offers more pragmatic solutions
for real-world implementations. This has inspired research
endeavors [14, 27, 36, 39, 49, 54, 55] in event-based action
recognition areas with plausible performance.

18633

