This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Florence-2: Advancing a Unified Representation for a Variety of Vision Tasks
Bin Xiao†

Haiping Wu∗ Weijian Xu∗ Xiyang Dai Houdong Hu
Yumao Lu Michael Zeng Ce Liu‡ Lu Yuan‡
†

project lead

∗

‡

equal contribution

directional lead

Microsoft

1. Introduction
In the realm of Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) systems, there has been a notable shift towards utilizing pretrained, versatile representations, acknowledged for taskagnostic benefits accross diverse applications. This trend
is evident in natural language processing (NLP), where advanced models [6, 7, 19, 38, 52, 53] show adaptability with
comprehensive knowledge spanning various domains and
tasks with simple instructions. The success of NLP motivates a parallel approach in computer vision.
Universal representation for diverse vision tasks presents
unique challenges, notably the need for comprehensive perceptual abilities. Unlike NLP, which deals mainly with text,
computer vision requires handling intricate visual data like

Fine-grained
semantic

The image shows a person riding a red
bicycle on a road with a red car in the
background. The road is lined with
trees on both sides and there is another
person riding another bicycle in front of
her. The date " 9/22/2023" is visible in
the bottom.
visual grounding

detailed caption

& object detection

FLD-5B
(Comprehensive Annotations)

Coarse
semantic

We introduce Florence-2, a novel vision foundation
model with a unified, prompt-based representation for various computer vision and vision-language tasks. While existing large vision models excel in transfer learning, they
struggle to perform diverse tasks with simple instructions,
a capability that implies handling the complexity of various spatial hierarchy and semantic granularity. Florence-2
was designed to take text-prompt as task instructions and
generate desirable results in text forms, whether it be captioning, object detection, grounding or segmentation. This
multi-task learning setup demands large-scale, high-quality
annotated data. To this end, we co-developed FLD-5B that
consists of 5.4 billion comprehensive visual annotations on
126 million images, using an iterative strategy of automated
image annotation and model refinement. We adopted a
sequence-to-sequence structure to train Florence-2 to perform versatile and comprehensive vision tasks. Extensive
evaluations on numerous tasks demonstrated Florence-2 to
be a strong vision foundation model contender with unprecedented zero-shot and fine-tuning capabilities.

Semantic
Granularity

A woman
riding a bike
down a
street next
to a red car .
person
car
road

caption

red vintage car
on street

phrase segmentation

visual grounding
& object detection

Florence-2
(Unified Architecture)

classification
None
semantic

Abstract

regional proposal
Image-level

Region-level

segmentation
Pixel-level

Spatial
Hierarchy

Figure 1. We aim to build a vision foundation model to enable extensive perception capabilities including spatial hierarchy
and semantic granularity. To achieve this, a single unified model
Florence-2 is pre-trained on our FLD-5B dataset encompassing
a total of 5.4B comprehensive annotations across 126M images,
which are collected by our Florence data engine.

object location, masked contours, and attributes. Attaining universal representation in computer vision demands
adept management of a spectrum of complex tasks, organized two-dimensionally as illustrated in Figure 1:
• Spatial Hierarchy: The model must discern spatial
details across varying scales, understanding imagelevel concepts and fine-grained pixel specifics. Accommodating the intricate spatial hierarchy within vision demands the model’s proficiency in handling diverse levels of granularity.
• Semantic Granularity: Universal representation in
computer vision should span a spectrum of semantic granularity. The model transitions from high-level
captions to nuanced descriptions, enabling versatile
understanding for diverse applications.
This pursuit is characterized by distinctiveness and substantial challenges. A key hurdle is the scarcity of com-

4818

