This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dr.Hair: Reconstructing Scalp-Connected Hair Strands without Pre-Training
via Differentiable Rendering of Line Segments
Yusuke Takimoto1∗
1

Hikari Takehara1∗

Hiroyuki Sato1∗
2

Huawei Technologies Japan K.K.

Image

LPMVS [31]

Strand Integration [29]

Zihao Zhu1,2†

Bo Zheng1

Keio University

NeuralHaircut [45]

Ours

Figure 1. Results of existing strand-based 3D reconstruction methods and our method tested with the data captured by a multi-camera
system. In the upper row, color and colored arrows represent 3D orientation of hair strands. The overlaid black arrows were drawn
manually to visualize rough orientations. The lower row shows individual strands with random color. LPMVS and Strand Integration failed
to estimate consistent direction, and their strands are too short not to connect to the scalp. The absolute orientation of strands estimated
by NeuralHaircut is mostly the opposite of the actual hair orientation. Our method demonstrates better precision in reconstructing the
directional flow of scalp-connected hair.

Abstract
In the film and gaming industries, achieving a realistic hair appearance typically involves the use of strands
originating from the scalp. However, reconstructing these
strands from observed surface images of hair presents significant challenges. The difficulty in acquiring Ground
Truth (GT) data has led state-of-the-art learning-based
methods to rely on pre-training with manually prepared synthetic CG data. This process is not only labor-intensive
and costly but also introduces complications due to the domain gap when compared to real-world data. In this study,
we propose an optimization-based approach that eliminates
the need for pre-training. Our method represents hair
strands as line segments growing from the scalp and optimizes them using a novel differentiable rendering algo* Core authors
† Work done during an internship at Huawei Technologies Japan K.K.

rithm. To robustly optimize a substantial number of slender
explicit geometries, we introduce 3D orientation estimation
utilizing global optimization, strand initialization based on
Laplace’s equation, and reparameterization that leverages
geometric connectivity and spatial proximity. Unlike existing optimization-based methods, our method is capable of
reconstructing internal hair flow in an absolute direction.
Our method exhibits robust and accurate inverse rendering,
surpassing the quality of existing methods and significantly
improving processing speed.

1. Introduction
High-quality 3D hair data is essential for depicting realistic
human figures in movies, games, and metaverse. However,
capturing real hair is notoriously difficult due to its intricate properties, including its elongated shape, overlapping
strands, transparency, reflectivity, and uniformity, which

20601

