This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

P HY S CENE: Physically Interactable 3D Scene Synthesis for Embodied AI
Yandan Yang∗

Baoxiong Jia∗

Peiyuan Zhi

Siyuan Huang

National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI
https://physcene.github.io

Figure 1. Illustration of the P HY S CENE, physically interactable scene synthesis method to generate interactive 3D scenes characterized
by realistic layouts, articulated objects, and rich physical interactivity tailored for embodied agents.

Abstract
With recent developments in Embodied Artificial Intelligence (EAI) research, there has been a growing demand
for high-quality, large-scale interactive scene generation.
While prior methods in scene synthesis have prioritized
the naturalness and realism of the generated scenes, the
physical plausibility and interactivity of scenes have been
largely left unexplored. To address this disparity, we introduce P HY S CENE, a novel method dedicated to generating interactive 3D scenes characterized by realistic layouts, articulated objects, and rich physical interactivity tailored for embodied agents. Based on a conditional diffusion
model for capturing scene layouts, we devise novel physicsand interactivity-based guidance mechanisms that integrate
constraints from object collision, room layout, and object
reachability. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that P HY S CENE effectively leverages these guidance
functions for physically interactable scene synthesis, outperforming existing state-of-the-art scene synthesis meth∗ indicates equal contribution.

ods by a large margin. Our findings suggest that the scenes
generated by P HY S CENE hold considerable potential for
facilitating diverse skill acquisition among agents within interactive environments, thereby catalyzing further advancements in embodied AI research.

1. Introduction
The exploration of scene synthesis [7, 11, 14, 16, 30, 45,
54, 58, 62, 67] has constituted a persistent focus within the
field of computer vision. Initially conceived to facilitate indoor design applications, scene synthesis aimed to create
diverse 3D environments characterized by both realism and
naturalness. However, with the advent of embodied artificial intelligence (EAI) [1, 12, 25, 27], the objectives of
this task have taken on new dimensions. Simulated environments [9, 10, 33, 35, 50, 57], now supporting a plethora
of intricate embodied tasks, have propelled the task of scene
synthesis into an important data source that provides unlimited scenarios for agents to robustly learn skills like navigation [2, 34] and manipulation [18, 31, 48]. This trend underscores the growing importance of scene synthesis within

16262

