This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVDinsTN: A Tensor Network Paradigm for Efficient Structure Search
from Regularized Modeling Perspective
Chao Li4
Yu-Bang Zheng1
Xi-Le Zhao2, * Junhua Zeng3,4
4
1
Qibin Zhao
Heng-Chao Li
Ting-Zhu Huang2
1
School of Information Science and Technology, Southwest Jiaotong University, China
2
School of Mathematical Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
3
School of Automation, Guangdong University of Technology, China
4
Tensor Learning Team, RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project (AIP), Japan
zhengyubang@163.com, xlzhao122003@163.com, jh.zenggdut@gmail.com, chao.li@riken.jp
qibin.zhao@riken.jp, hcli@home.swjtu.edu.cn, tingzhuhuang@126.com

Abstract
Tensor network (TN) representation is a powerful technique for computer vision and machine learning. TN structure search (TN-SS) aims to search for a customized structure to achieve a compact representation, which is a challenging NP-hard problem. Recent “sampling-evaluation”based methods require sampling an extensive collection of
structures and evaluating them one by one, resulting in prohibitively high computational costs. To address this issue,
we propose a novel TN paradigm, named SVD-inspired TN
decomposition (SVDinsTN), which allows us to efficiently
solve the TN-SS problem from a regularized modeling perspective, eliminating the repeated structure evaluations. To
be specific, by inserting a diagonal factor for each edge of
the fully-connected TN, SVDinsTN allows us to calculate
TN cores and diagonal factors simultaneously, with the factor sparsity revealing a compact TN structure. In theory,
we prove a convergence guarantee for the proposed method.
Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method
achieves approximately 100 ∼ 1000 times acceleration compared to the state-of-the-art TN-SS methods while maintaining a comparable level of representation ability.

1. Introduction
Tensor network (TN) representation, which aims to express
higher-order data with small-sized tensors (called TN cores)
by a specific operation among them, has gained significant
attention in various areas of data analysis [1, 11, 25, 37],
machine learning [5, 9, 27], computer vision [21, 30, 35,
36, 39], etc. By regarding TN cores as nodes and oper* Corresponding author.

ations as edges, a TN corresponds to a graph (called TN
topology). The vector composed of the weights of all edges
in the topology is defined as the TN rank. TN structure (including topology and rank) search (TN-SS) aims to search
for a suitable TN structure to achieve a compact representation for a given tensor, which is known as a challenging
NP-hard problem [13, 18]. The selection of TN structure
dramatically impacts the performance of TN representation
in practical applications [12, 15, 17, 18].
Recently, there have been several notable efforts to tackle
the TN-SS problem [12, 15, 17, 18]. But most of them adopt
the “sampling-evaluation” framework, which requires sampling a large number of structures as candidates and conducting numerous repeated structure evaluations. For instance, for a tensor of size 40 × 60 × 3 × 9 × 9 (used in Section 4.2), TNGA in [15] requires thousands of evaluations
and TNALE in [18] requires hundreds of evaluations, where
each evaluation entails solving an optimization problem to
compute TN cores iteratively. Consequently, the computational cost becomes exceedingly high. A meaningful question is whether we can optimize the TN structure simultaneously during the computation of TN cores, thus escaping the
“sampling-evaluation” framework and fundamentally addressing the computationally consuming issue.
In this paper, we introduce for the first time a regularized
modeling perspective on solving the TN-SS problem. This
perspective enables us to optimize the TN structure simultaneously during the computation of TN cores, effectively
eliminating the need for repetitive structure evaluations. To
be specific, we propose a novel TN paradigm, termed as
SVD-inspired TN decomposition (SVDinsTN), by inserting
diagonal factors between any two TN cores in the “fullyconnected” topology (see Figure 1(b)). The intuition behind
SVDinsTN is to leverage the sparsity of the inserted diago-

26254

