This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Complementing Event Streams and RGB Frames for Hand Mesh Reconstruction
Jianping Jiang†1,2,3 , Xinyu Zhou†4 , Bingxuan Wang1,2,3 , Xiaoming Deng‡5,6 , Chao Xu4 , Boxin Shi‡1,2,3
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3
AI Innovation Center, School of Computer Science, Peking University
4
National Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
5
Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences 6 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Overexposure

Abstract
Reliable hand mesh reconstruction (HMR) from
commonly-used color and depth sensors is challenging especially under scenarios with varied illuminations and fast
motions. Event camera is a highly promising alternative
for its high dynamic range and dense temporal resolution
properties, but it lacks salient texture appearance for
hand mesh reconstruction. In this paper, we propose
EvRGBHand – the first approach for 3D hand mesh
reconstruction with an event camera and an RGB camera
compensating for each other. By fusing two modalities
of data across time, space, and information dimensions,
EvRGBHand can tackle overexposure and motion blur
issues in RGB-based HMR and foreground scarcity as
well as background overflow issues in event-based HMR.
We further propose EvRGBDegrader, which allows our
model to generalize effectively in challenging scenes, even
when trained solely on standard scenes, thus reducing
data acquisition costs. Experiments on real-world data
demonstrate that EvRGBHand can effectively solve the
challenging issues when using either type of camera alone
via retaining the merits of both, and shows the potential of
generalization to outdoor scenes and another type of event
camera. For code, models, and dataset, please refer to
https://alanjiang98.github.io/evrgbhand.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Reliable 3D hand mesh reconstruction (HMR) is essential
for various applications in virtual reality and robotics. Although great progress on HMR has been made for color [4,
6, 25], depth [9, 10, 19, 32], and event cameras [37, 39],
HMR based on a single sensor can not achieve satisfactory
performance for different scenarios. The frame-based RGB
or depth imaging mechanism inevitably faces degenerated
† equal contribution, ‡ corresponding author

Motion
blur

Foreground
scarcity

Background
overflow

RGB
camera

Event
camera

Hand
mesh

Figure 1. Due to the differences in RGB camera and event camera
imaging mechanisms, it is promising to make complementary use
of both modalities of data to achieve robust hand mesh reconstruction and tackle their respective challenging issues listed at the top.
The arrows between the first and second rows point to the compensated data domain using the data from their tails.

issues, such as overexposure under strong light conditions
and motion blur when hands move fast, which poses challenges to conducting robust HMR.
Recently, event cameras have shown great potential in
HMR for high dynamic range (HDR) and fast motion
scenes [39] thanks to their superior properties from neuromorphic imaging mechanism in dynamic range and temporal resolution. Being generated asynchronously by measuring per-pixel intensity changes, event streams [26] are
incapable in preserving effective texture and edge information in two typical scenarios. First, events triggered
from hands are rare when hands keep static (we call it
“foreground scarcity” issue). Second, events triggered
from the background are excessive when illumination significantly changes, which can heavily confuse the events
from hand motion (we call it “background overflow” is-

24944

