This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SignGraph: A Sign Sequence is Worth Graphs of Nodes
Shiwei Gan† Yafeng Yin† * Zhiwei Jiang† Hongkai Wen‡ Lei Xie† Sanglu Lu†
†

State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
‡

sw@smail.nju.edu.cn

Department of Computer Science, The University of Warwick, UK
{yafeng,jzw,lxie,sanglu}@nju.edu.cn

hongkai.wen@warwick.ac.uk

Abstract
Despite the recent success of sign language research, the
widely adopted CNN-based backbones are mainly migrated
from other computer vision tasks, in which the contours and
texture of objects are crucial for identifying objects. They
usually treat sign frames as grids and may fail to capture
effective cross-region features. In fact, sign language tasks
need to focus on the correlation of different regions in one
frame and the interaction of different regions among adjacent frames for identifying a sign sequence. In this paper,
we propose to represent a sign sequence as graphs and introduce a simple yet effective graph-based sign language
processing architecture named SignGraph, to extract crossregion features at the graph level. SignGraph consists of
two basic modules: Local Sign Graph (LSG) module for
learning the correlation of intra-frame cross-region features in one frame and Temporal Sign Graph (T SG) module for tracking the interaction of inter-frame cross-region
features among adjacent frames. With LSG and T SG, we
build our model in a multiscale manner to ensure that the
representation of nodes can capture cross-region features
at different granularities. Extensive experiments on current public sign language datasets demonstrate the superiority of our SignGraph model. Our model achieves very
competitive performances with the SOTA model, while not
using any extra cues. Code and models are available at:
https://github.com/gswycf/SignGraph.

1. Introduction
Computer vision technology and natural language processing technology have greatly advanced sign language (SL)
research, including Sign Language Recognition (SLR) and
Sign Language Translation (SLT). The former task aims at
recognizing an isolated sign/continuous signs as a corresponding gloss or gloss sequence, while the latter task aims
at translating continuous signs into spoken language [3]. In
the modern sign language processing models (SLR models
and SLT models), one of the key points of these deep learn* Yafeng Yin is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison of feature extraction between convolutional
network and our graph convolutional network.

ing based methods is to learn sign-related features through
training with extensive sign video data. As a matter of
course, 2D CNNs and 3D CNNs are used to be the defacto standard visual backbones [7, 10] for extracting local sign frame features, while 1D CNN, LSTM and Transformer [3, 11, 37] are used as the temporal module to capture dynamic changes of sign frames.
However, as shown in Figure 1, the widely-used CNNbased backbones that are mainly migrated from image
recognition and object detection tasks, treat the sign
frame/sign clips as grids and adopt ‘kernels’ to extract local features by sliding across sign frames. These CNNs are
good at capturing contour-based representation and texturebased representation [12], but they may fail to capture the
explicit collaboration of signs in different regions. In fact,
sign language tasks need to focus on manual and nonmanual features, especially the collaboration of these cues
in different regions [35]. Besides, temporal modules like
LSTM and Transformer layer usually regard a sign frame
as a whole region and learn the overall variance of whole
frames, while ignoring the interaction of subregions in adjacent frames. Other temporal methods like 1D CNN can
only focus on the same regions in adjacent frames, which
may fail to track dynamic motions across different regions.
In fact, the dynamic movements in the body, hands, and
face which are reflected in the same/different regions between adjacent frames, are primary elements of identifying
a sign for sign language tasks.
In order to make up for the shortcomings of typical CNN
backbones explicitly or implicitly and allow the model to
learn robust sign-related features, exiting work committed
to designing various CNN-based backbones by injecting do-

13470

