This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Discovering Interpretable Diffusion Latent Directions for Responsible
Text-to-Image Generation

1

Hang Li1,4,5
Chengzhi Shen3
Philip Torr2
Volker Tresp1,4
Jindong Gu2 *
2
3
LMU Munich, Germany University of Oxford, UK Technical University of Munich, Germany
4
Munich Center for Machine Learning, Germany 5 Siemens AG, Germany
Abstract

Diffusion-based models have gained significant popularity for text-to-image generation due to their exceptional
image-generation capabilities. A risk with these models is
the potential generation of inappropriate content, such as
biased or harmful images. However, the underlying reasons for generating such undesired content from the perspective of the diffusion model’s internal representation
remain unclear. Previous work interprets vectors in an
interpretable latent space of diffusion models as semantic concepts. However, existing approaches cannot discover directions for arbitrary concepts, such as those related to inappropriate concepts. In this work, we propose
a novel self-supervised approach to find interpretable latent directions for a given concept. With the discovered
vectors, we further propose a simple approach to mitigate inappropriate generation. Extensive experiments have
been conducted to verify the effectiveness of our mitigation approach, namely, for fair generation, safe generation,
and responsible text-enhancing generation. Project page:
https://interpretdiffusion.github.io.

1. Introduction
The rapid advances in vision language models have sparked
increasing interest in ensuring their safety and responsible
use [7, 23, 24]. In particular, text-to-image diffusion models, which have exhibited remarkable performance in creating images from text prompts [13, 15, 20, 31, 35, 37, 49],
raise concerns about the risks of generating inappropriate
content. The generated images may exhibit biases and unsafe elements, including instances of gender discrimination
or the depiction of violent scenes that could be harmful to
children. Recent research efforts have focused on introducing safety mechanisms to mitigate these issues, such as filtering out inappropriate text input, detecting inappropriate
images with a safety guard classifier [4, 32, 36, 38] and
* Corresponding author

building safe diffusion models [5, 6, 17]. However, the underlying mechanism of how diffusion models generate inappropriate content remains poorly understood. In this work,
we aim to explore the following questions. 1) Are there any
internal representations associated with these inappropriate
concepts in the diffusion model-based generation process?
2) Can we manipulate representations to avoid inappropriate content corresponding to a given concept, i.e., to achieve
responsible image generation?
To understand the image generation process of diffusion
models, previous work has identified the bottleneck layer
of the U-Net as a semantic representation space, dubbed
h-space [18]. They demonstrated that a vector in the hspace can be associated with a specific semantic concept in
the generated image. Manipulating the vector in the space
can alter the generated image in a semantically meaningful way, such as adding a smile to a face. Several approaches [9, 18, 30] have been proposed to discover meaningful directions in this h-space. For instance, an approach
in [9] uses PCA to identify a set of latent directions that may
represent semantic concepts.
However, existing approaches to identifying interpretable latent vectors are limited. In unsupervised approaches [9, 30], it is not clear to which semantic concepts those identified vectors correspond. The found vectors must be interpreted with humans in a loop. Furthermore, the number of interpretable directions depends on the
training data [9, 30]. It is highly likely that some target
concepts may not be found in the discovered directions, especially those related to fairness and safety. Supervised approaches [9, 18] have also been explored to identify target
concepts. These methods require training external attribute
classifiers supervised by human annotations. Additionally,
the quality of the identified vectors is sensitive to the classifier’s performance. Furthermore, new concepts require the
training of new classifiers. Overall, existing interpretation
methods cannot be easily applied to identify the corresponding semantic vector for a given inappropriate concept.
In this work, we propose a self-discovery approach to
find interpretable latent directions in the h-space for user-

12006

