This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multimodal Sense-Informed Forecasting of 3D Human Motions
Zhenyu Lou1
Qiongjie Cui2 *
3
Haofan Wang
Xu Tang3
Hong Zhou1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 3 Xiaohongshu Inc
11915044@zju.edu.cn

cuiqiongjie@126.com

Figure 1. The proposed SIF3D: multimodal Sense-Informed Forecasting of 3D human motions. Our SIF3D takes the observed motion
sequence, as well as the 3D scene point cloud as input modalities, and is able to identify salient points (redder) and underlying ones (bluer),
to generate the accurate trajectory and high-fidelity future poses within given 3D scenarios. In contrast, the state-of-the-art baseline of
BiFu [73] equally considers the global scene embedding, and thus cannot distinguish the saliency of the 3D scene, leading to the physically
implausible motions, e.g., human mesh intersecting or distorting with the 3D environment, violating any physical constraints.

Abstract
Predicting future human pose is a fundamental application for machine intelligence, which drives robots to plan
their behavior and paths ahead of time to seamlessly accomplish human-robot collaboration in real-world 3D scenarios. Despite encouraging results, existing approaches
rarely consider the effects of the external scene on the motion sequence, leading to pronounced artifacts and physical implausibilities in the predictions. To address this limitation, this work introduces a novel multi-modal senseinformed motion prediction approach, which conditions
high-fidelity generation on two modal information: external
3D scene, and internal human gaze, and is able to recognize
their salience for future human activity. Furthermore, the
gaze information is regarded as the human intention, and
combined with both motion and scene features, we construct
a ternary intention-aware attention to supervise the generation to match where the human wants to reach. Meanwhile,
we introduce semantic coherence-aware attention to explicitly distinguish the salient point clouds and the underlying
ones, to ensure a reasonable interaction of the generated
sequence with the 3D scene. On two real-world benchmarks, the proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance both in 3D human pose and trajectory prediction.
More detailed results are available on the page: https:
//sites.google.com/view/cvpr2024sif3d.
* Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Forecasting future human poses, from the observed ones,
stands as a fundamental application in the domain of machine intelligence, autonomous vehicles, and human-robot
collaboration [11, 12, 18, 33, 39, 40, 42, 48, 65, 70, 73].
Human motion is fundamentally intertwined with and
constrained by its environment [36, 55, 59], a reality often
overlooked in previous motion prediction methods [2, 33,
41, 42]. This oversight could lead to noticeable anomalies
and unrealistic outcomes in the predictions. We notice this
issue and aim to solve it.
In robotics, scene information is commonly represented
as a point cloud [6, 35, 57, 71], where a large number of
points are constructed as a collection to describe a 3D
environment. Existing methods perform motion prediction/generation by encoding the entire scene information
into a unified global embedding [5, 22, 73]. Despite their
good performance, we note that not all information within
the point cloud is equally relevant to the motion prediction
task; instead, only a small subset is salient. Moreover, the
global embedding fails to capture the intricate local details
of the scene; therefore, the generation may deviate from the
intended scene semantics. In addition, the human gaze is a
valuable manifestation, providing an intention that the human is likely to reach or a direction that the human is likely
to move toward [16, 63, 72]. By jointly considering the 3D
scene and human gaze, it is possible to capture the human’s
behavior of wanting to move toward a specific location, and

2144

