This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Empowering Resampling Operation for Ultra-High-Definition Image
Enhancement with Model-Aware Guidance
Wei Yu*, Jie Huang*, Bing Li, Kaiwen Zheng, Qi Zhu, Man Zhou, Feng Zhao†
University of Science and Technology of China
{patrick914y, hj0117, bing0123, kezh, zqcrafts, manman}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, fzhao956@ustc.edu.cn

No Correlation

Up

Down

Model

(a) Down-Enhancement-Up

PSNR：25.59

PSNR：28.51

PSNR：30.78

PSNR：31.05

LMAR

×4

×3

×2

×1.5

PSNR：28.09

PSNR：29.56

PSNR：32.24

PSNR：33.16

Up

Down

Model

Scales

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Comparison between previous Downsampling-Enhancement-Upsampling paradigm and our proposed method. (a) Previous
works treat resampling operators and inner models as separate components, while (b) our method integrates them via empowering modelaware resampling. As shown on the right side, our approach achieves significant performance gains over various resampling scales.

Abstract
Image enhancement algorithms have made remarkable advancements in recent years, but directly applying
them to Ultra-high-definition (UHD) images presents intractable computational overheads. Therefore, previous
straightforward solutions employ resampling techniques
to reduce the resolution by adopting a ”DownsamplingEnhancement-Upsampling” processing paradigm. However, this paradigm disentangles the resampling operators
and inner enhancement algorithms, which results in the
loss of information that is favored by the model, further
leading to sub-optimal outcomes. In this paper, we propose a novel method of Learning Model-Aware Resampling
(LMAR), which learns to customize resampling by extracting model-aware information from the UHD input image,
under the guidance of model knowledge. Specifically, our
method consists of two core designs, namely compensatory
kernel estimation and steganographic resampling. At the
first stage, we dynamically predict compensatory kernels
tailored to the specific input and resampling scales. At
* Both authors contributed equally to this research.
† Corresponding author.

the second stage, the image-wise compensatory information is derived with the compensatory kernels and embedded into the rescaled input images. This promotes the representation of the newly derived downscaled inputs to be
more consistent with the full-resolution UHD inputs, as perceived by the model. Our LMAR enables model-aware and
model-favored resampling while maintaining compatibility
with existing resampling operators. Extensive experiments
on multiple UHD image enhancement datasets and different
backbones have shown consistent performance gains after
correlating resizer and enhancer, e.g., up to 1.2dB PSNR
gain for ×1.8 resampling scale on UHD-LOL4K. The code
is available at https://github.com/YPatrickW/LMAR.

1. Introduction
Over time, learning-based image enhancement algorithms
have achieved progressive performance improvements.
However, the majority of existing methods are not compatible with UHD images due to the heavy computational
burdens imposed by their megapixel counts.
To address this, previous works have sought to alleviate computation overheads by employing downsampling to
reduce the resolution, as shown in Figure 1. Concretely,
UHD input images are often resampled to smaller sizes for

25722

