This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Looking Similar, Sounding Different: Leveraging Counterfactual Cross-Modal
Pairs for Audiovisual Representation Learning
Chih-Wei Wu2
Iroro Orife2
Nikhil Singh1 *
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
1

nsingh1@mit.edu

2

Mahdi Kalayeh2
2
Netflix

[chihweiw, iorife, mkalayeh]@netflix.com

Figure 1. (Left) Audiovisual scenes can be perceptually similar even as the words spoken in them differ, which may be a challenge for
self-supervised audiovisual representation learning. (Right) We propose to leverage movie dubs during training and show that it improves
the quality of learned representations on a wide range of tasks.

Abstract
Audiovisual representation learning typically relies on
the correspondence between sight and sound. However,
there are often multiple audio tracks that can correspond
with a visual scene. Consider, for example, different conversations on the same crowded street. The effect of such
counterfactual pairs on audiovisual representation learning has not been previously explored. To investigate this,
we use dubbed versions of movies and television shows to
augment cross-modal contrastive learning. Our approach
learns to represent alternate audio tracks, differing only
in speech, similarly to the same video. Our results, from
a comprehensive set of experiments investigating different
training strategies, show this general approach improves
performance on a range of downstream auditory and audiovisual tasks, without majorly affecting linguistic task performance overall. These findings highlight the importance
of considering speech variation when learning scene-level
audiovisual correspondences and suggest that dubbed audio can be a useful augmentation technique for training audiovisual models toward more robust performance on diverse downstream tasks.

* Most of the work conducted during author’s internship at Netflix.

1. Introduction
Can two videos look similar while sounding different? Consider the two scenes on the left in Fig. 1. These come
from different sources, but share elements like a violinist
in the background, other tables further away, and a couple’s voices in an upscale restaurant environment; but what
are they saying? This can vary considerably between the
two scenes, even without changing other aspects. Generalpurpose self-supervised audiovisual representations are often focused on non-speech applications, evidenced by both
existing training datasets and common downstream evaluation tasks. In audio alone, there is a myriad of applications beyond semantic speech processing, leading to recent
benchmarks which evaluate generalization across and tradeoffs between types of tasks [76, 81]. How then can we focus
on learning robust representations from audiovisual content
with speech mixed into it? Importantly, there are many nonsemantic, or paralinguistic, speech processing tasks of interest, as speech is much more than audible text. These too
require discovering other similarities beyond words.
Imagine a movie discussion scene, as in Fig. 2. Many audiovisual elements are present: background chatter, glasses
clinking, music, footsteps, and characters’ voices, but a priori this scene could contain many different dialogs without changing the fundamental scene attributes, beyond local

26907

