This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling Vision-Language Models on Millions of Videos
Yue Zhao1,2∗ Long Zhao1 Xingyi Zhou1 Jialin Wu1 Chun-Te Chu1 Hui Miao1 Florian Schroff1
Hartwig Adam1 Ting Liu1 Boqing Gong1 Philipp Krähenbühl2 Liangzhe Yuan1
1
Google Research 2 University of Texas, Austin

Abstract
The recent advance in vision-language models is largely
attributed to the abundance of image-text data. We aim
to replicate this success for video-language models, but
there simply is not enough human-curated video-text data
available. We thus resort to fine-tuning a video-language
model from a strong image-language baseline with synthesized instructional data. The resulting video model by
video-instruction-tuning (VIIT) is then used to auto-label
millions of videos to generate high-quality captions. We
show the adapted video-language model performs well on a
wide range of video-language benchmarks. For instance, it
surpasses the best prior result on open-ended NExT-QA by
2.8%. Besides, our model generates detailed descriptions
for previously unseen videos, which provide better textual
supervision than existing methods. Experiments show that
a video-language dual-encoder model contrastively trained
on these auto-generated captions is 3.8% better than the
strongest baseline that also leverages vision-language models. Our best model outperforms state-of-the-art methods
on MSR-VTT zero-shot text-to-video retrieval by 6%. As a
side product, we generate the largest video capation dataset
to date.

Raw
alt-text:

smiling businessman balancing on a surfboard on the
beach in slow motion

Image
Captioner:

Man standing on
the beach near
the ocean.

Video
Captioner:

There’s a man on the beach practicing martial arts.

Man standing on
one leg on the
beach near the
ocean.

Man standing on
the beach near
the ocean.

Instruction: Describe the video in detail:
Our model:

Output: A man is standing on a beach. He's wearing a
black shirt and black pants. He is doing a basic Tai
Chi Chuan exercise. He is standing on one leg and he
is moving his hand while talking and moving his body.
Instruction: Caption the video in a short sentence:
Output: A man is doing Tai Chi Chuan exercise.
Instruction: Give a short answer: what does the man do
after lifting one leg?
Output: Move his hand and his body.

Figure 1. Our video-language model takes a video along with any
form of instruction as input and generates text according to the instruction. It generates textual descriptions with multiple granularities, including static appearance, general action, and detailed
body movements. In contrast, raw alt-text can be erroneous; image captioners fail to capture the action; video captioners prefer
outputting short text. Our generated data trains a significantly better video-language dual-encoder model. Best viewed in color.

1. Introduction
Much progress in image understanding [15, 45, 59, 75, 81]
is fueled by large-scale high-quality image-text datasets [9,
27, 48, 51]. Despite the wide availability on the Internet, annotating videos is nontrivial. For images, humans
construct most annotations within 15∼90 seconds per instance [27, 35]. For videos, the annotation time is 1∼2
orders of magnitude higher: it takes about 70 hours to
transcribe narratives for a 1-hour video [21, 68] and 700
hours to provide a 1-hour video with instance-level annotations [12]. There have been attempts to automate such a process by retrieving alt-text [2, 42] or transcribing text from
audio [40, 76]. However, alt-text can be irrelevant to the
∗ Work done during an internship at Google Research.

video content; audio transcription is often misaligned with
the visual information [22]. Recent work [63] leverages existing image-based vision-language models (VLMs). However, the resulting captions are often biased towards static
scenes and lose videos’ rich temporal information.
In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective approach
to adapt an image-based VLM to video and then create
high-quality pseudo-captions on millions of videos. As a
VLM is generally composed of a visual encoder and a language model, we propose to adapt each component separately to better leverage the relatively small video-text corpora. We first fine-tune the visual encoder on video captioning data while keeping the language component frozen.
This adapts the model to dynamic scenes while retain-

13106

