This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EFormer: Enhanced Transformer towards Semantic-Contour Features of
Foreground for Portraits Matting
Zitao Wang

Qiguang Miao∗

Yue Xi∗

Peipei Zhao

Xidian University, China
{21181214174@stu., qgmiao@, xiyue@, zhpp2023@}xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
The portrait matting task aims to extract an alpha matte
with complete semantics and finely detailed contours. In
comparison to CNN-based approaches, transformers with
self-attention module have a better capacity to capture
long-range dependencies and low-frequency semantic information of a portrait. However, recent research shows
that the self-attention mechanism struggles with modeling
high-frequency contour information and capturing fine contour details, which can lead to bias while predicting the
portrait’s contours. To deal with this issue, we propose
EFormer to enhance the model’s attention towards both
the low-frequency semantic and high-frequency contour
features. For the high-frequency contours, our research
demonstrates that cross-attention module between different resolutions can guide our model to allocate attention
appropriately to these contour regions. Supported by this,
we can successfully extract the high-frequency detail information around the portrait’s contours, which were previously ignored by self-attention. Based on the cross-attention
module, we further build a semantic and contour detector
(SCD) to accurately capture both the low-frequency semantic and high-frequency contour features. And we design
a contour-edge extraction branch and semantic extraction
branch to extract refined high-frequency contour features
and complete low-frequency semantic information, respectively. Finally, we fuse the two kinds of features and leverage the segmentation head to generate a predicted portrait
matte. Experiments on VideoMatte240K (JPEG SD Format)
and Adobe Image Matting (AIM) datasets demonstrate that
EFormer outperforms previous portrait matte methods.

1. Introduction
Portrait matting aims to extract a precise alpha matte of persons from natural images. It has gathered great momentum
in vision applications, including but not limited to photo
* Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. (I) Visualization with Grad-CAM of output from each
layer within different transformer blocks. (a) The features captured from Self-attention and MLP layers in the original transformer block. (b) In comparison, the features captured from each
layer in the proposed transformer block. (II) Comparisons of different transformer blocks. (c) The original transformer block in
ViT. (d) The proposed transformer block for portrait matte.

editing and background replacement.
Existing methods[20, 30, 33, 35] attempt to estimate a
portrait matte with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs)
under the guidance of a pre-determined trimap, which is a
three-class map that indicates the foreground, background,
and unknown region. However, it is time-consuming and
labor-intensive to obtain abundant trimaps by manually an-

3880

