This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Rank Patches for Unbiased Image Redundancy Reduction
*

Yang Luo1 , Zhineng Chen1 , Peng Zhou2 , Zuxuan Wu1 , Xieping Gao3 , Yu-Gang Jiang1
1

School of Computer Science, Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing, Fudan University
2
University of Maryland, College Park
3
College of Information Science and Engineering, Hunan Normal University
yangluo21@m.fudan.edu.cn, {zhinchen, zxwu, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn,
pengzhou@terpmail.umd.edu, xpgao@hunnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Images suffer from heavy spatial redundancy because
pixels in neighboring regions are spatially correlated. Existing approaches strive to overcome this limitation by reducing less meaningful image regions. However, current
leading methods rely on supervisory signals. They may
compel models to preserve content that aligns with labeled
categories and discard content belonging to unlabeled categories. This categorical inductive bias makes these methods less effective in real-world scenarios. To address this
issue, we propose a self-supervised framework for image
redundancy reduction called Learning to Rank Patches
(LTRP). We observe that image reconstruction of masked
image modeling models is sensitive to the removal of visible patches when the masking ratio is high (e.g., 90%).
Building upon it, we implement LTRP via two steps: inferring the semantic density score of each patch by quantifying variation between reconstructions with and without this patch, and learning to rank the patches with the
pseudo score. The entire process is self-supervised, thus
getting out of the dilemma of categorical inductive bias.
We design extensive experiments on different datasets and
tasks. The results demonstrate that LTRP outperforms both
supervised and other self-supervised methods due to the
fair assessment of image content. Code is available at
https://github.com/irsLu/ltrp.

1. Introduction
Image redundancy reduction refers to discarding the less informative regions of an image while preserving its essential
semantics. It is a fundamental task in computer vision as
compact image representation is an attractive property in
various applications, especially in the era of vision Trans* Corresponding author: Zhineng Chen

Raw

Supervised methods
GT

Raw

LTRP
Informative patches

Reconstructions
Visible patches

Removed patch

Figure 1. Redundancy reduction (upper): given an image, LTRP
selects informative patches regardless of whether they are from the
categories already learned. While for supervised methods (from
left to right: GFNet [41], Grad-CAM [38] using ViT, EViT [24])
the preserved patches are mostly located on the learned category.
Patch removing (bottom): an image and its reconstructions using
MAE [20] with different sets of visible patches, columns 3-5 denote that the red patch is removed from the visible set. They generate reconstructions with different levels of semantic shift, e.g.,
without the dog tail, eyes, etc.

former (ViT) [14, 29]. The computational complexity of
ViT grows quadratically with the number of image patches,
making patch-level image redundancy reduction gaining increasing attention.
Current leading methods [12, 31, 41, 48] generally require supervised learning to endow the model with the capability to recognize informative image patches. Specifically, the model is simultaneously trained to estimate the
patch’s informativeness and classify the image to the right
category. Thus, the learning process tends to select image
patches that are less likely to degrade the classification accuracy, leading to categorical inductive bias. The bias may
cause the model to remove image patches containing mean-

22831

