This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Holoported Characters: Real-time Free-viewpoint Rendering of Humans from
Sparse RGB Cameras
Ashwath Shetty1,2

Marc Habermann1,3

Vladislav Golyanik1
1

Guoxing Sun1

Christian Theobalt1,3

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
3

Diogo Luvizon1,3
2

Saarland University

Saarbrücken Research Center for Visual Computing, Interaction and AI

Abstract
We present the first approach to render highly realistic
free-viewpoint videos of a human actor in general apparel,
from sparse multi-view recording to display, in real-time at
an unprecedented 4K resolution. At inference, our method
only requires four camera views of the moving actor and the
respective 3D skeletal pose. It handles actors in wide clothing, and reproduces even fine-scale dynamic detail, e.g.
clothing wrinkles, face expressions, and hand gestures. At
training time, our learning-based approach expects dense
multi-view video and a rigged static surface scan of the actor. Our method comprises three main stages. Stage 1 is
a skeleton-driven neural approach for high-quality capture
of the detailed dynamic mesh geometry. Stage 2 is a novel
solution to create a view-dependent texture using four testtime camera views as input. Finally, stage 3 comprises a
new image-based refinement network rendering the final 4K
image given the output from the previous stages. Our approach establishes a new benchmark for real-time rendering resolution and quality using sparse input camera views,
unlocking possibilities for immersive telepresence. Code
and data is available on our project page.

1. Introduction
Human free-viewpoint rendering is a long-standing and
highly challenging problem in Vision and Graphics. The
goal is to render any virtual viewpoint of the character
given a discrete set of input camera views. Earlier approaches resorted to variants of explicit multi-view photometric reconstruction [4, 33, 34], reconstruction based on
light fields [22], point primitives [40], or template-based
scene representations [1, 5, 43] to compute an estimate of
dynamic shape and appearance from the multi-view input.
Despite great progress, these solutions are often limited
along multiple dimensions, for example: They often require
a very high number of camera views for good quality; com-

Figure 1. We propose Holoported Characters, a novel approach
for real-time free-view point rendering of humans at 4K resolution.
During inference, our method only requires four sparse images observing the human and the respective 3D skeletal pose. Then, our
three-stage pipeline generates novel views of the performance in
real-time and at an unprecedented resolution of 4K. We highlight
that our approach can account for detailed effects such as clothing
wrinkles, facial expressions, and hand gestures.

putation times are often far from real-time; ghosting artifacts in rendered appearance are prevalent since even the
best methods fail to capture error-free scene geometry.
In recent years, a new class of approaches to human
free-viewpoint rendering that combines explicit dynamic
scene representation with neural-network-based representation and image formation has led to a boost in result quality. These methods utilize neural implicit scene representations to encode the moving human [6, 7, 15, 20, 23, 25–
29, 37]. However, even the most advanced learning-based
approaches face clear limitations: Real-time processing
from capture to rendering on the basis of neural implicit
representations is hard to achieve [7]. Rendering resolu11206

