This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multiscale Vision Transformers meet Bipartite Matching for efficient single-stage
Action Localization

1

Ioanna Ntinou†,1 Enrique Sanchez†,2 Georgios Tzimiropoulos1,2
2
Queen Mary University London, UK
Samsung AI Center Cambridge, UK
†

i.ntinou@qmul.ac.uk

Equal contribution

kike.sanc@gmail.com

Abstract
Action Localization is a challenging problem that combines detection and recognition tasks, which are often addressed separately. State-of-the-art methods rely on off-theshelf bounding box detections pre-computed at high resolution, and propose transformer models that focus on the classification task alone. Such two-stage solutions are prohibitive
for real-time deployment. On the other hand, single-stage
methods target both tasks by devoting part of the network
(generally the backbone) to sharing the majority of the workload, compromising performance for speed. These methods
build on adding a DETR head with learnable queries that
after cross- and self-attention can be sent to corresponding
MLPs for detecting a person’s bounding box and action.
However, DETR-like architectures are challenging to train
and can incur in big complexity.
In this paper, we observe that a straight bipartite matching loss can be applied to the output tokens of a vision
transformer. This results in a backbone + MLP architecture that can do both tasks without the need of an extra
encoder-decoder head and learnable queries. We show
that a single MViTv2-S architecture trained with bipartite
matching to perform both tasks surpasses the same MViTv2S when trained with RoI align on pre-computed bounding
boxes. With a careful design of token pooling and the proposed training pipeline, our Bipartite-Matching Vision Transformer model, BMViT, achieves +3 mAP on AVA2.2. w.r.t.
the two-stage MViTv2-S counterpart. Code is available at
https://github.com/IoannaNti/BMViT

1. Introduction
Action Localization is a challenging task that requires
detecting a person’s bounding box within a given frame and
classifying their corresponding actions. This task shares
similarities with object detection, with the particularity that
the detected objects are always people and the classes cor-

g.tzimiropoulos@qmul.ac.uk

respond to various actions that can sometimes co-occur. It
poses the additional challenge that actions require temporal
reasoning, as well as the fact that a person detector can contribute to false positives if a given person is not performing
any of the target actions. The current golden benchmark
of AVA 2.2. [18] has a fairly low mean Average Precision
(mAP) compared to that of e.g. COCO [22].
Interestingly, state-of-the-art approaches achieving high
absolute mAP outsource the detection task to a pre-trained
Faster-RCNN [27], and focus on large capacity networks and
the use of large pre-training data (see Fig. 1a)). These methods serve the purpose of boosting the absolute performance
by means of accuracy but are in many cases prohibitive even
for standard GPU accelerators.
In this paper, we contribute to the domain of low-regime
scalable models that perform both the detection and the
recognition tasks. Because of its similarities with the object
detection task, many recent methods targeting a single-stage
model build on having a strong backbone that provides temporal features to a DETR [1] architecture [44, 47]. A DETR
architecture is an encoder-decoder transformer with learnable queries that are assigned to the ground-truth pairs of
bounding box/action in a set prediction fashion (Fig. 1b)).
While DETR-based architectures have shown to be efficient choices for end-to-end action localization (i.e. for joint
detection and classification tasks), their design involves a
video backbone and an encoder-decoder transformer architecture. This poses the question of whether there is room
for further improvement in the network design. To answer
this question, we draw inspiration from the recent advances
in Open-World Object Detection using Vision Transformers
(OWL-ViT [24]) and make the following contribution: we
propose the use of a bipartite matching loss between the
spatio-temporal output embeddings of a single transformer
backbone and the ground-truth instances in a video clip
(Fig. 1c). In this setting, the video embeddings are independent tokens that can be matched to the predictions similarly
to that of DETR. This implies that a) no learnable tokens are
necessary, nor a transformer decoder with self- and cross-

18827

