This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ScanFormer: Referring Expression Comprehension by Iteratively Scanning
Wei Su1 Peihan Miao2 Huanzhang Dou1 Xi Li1,3*
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
3
Zhejiang-Singapore Innovation and Al Joint Research Lab
{weisuzju, peihan.miao, hzdou, xilizju}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) aims to localize the target objects specified by free-form natural language descriptions in images. While state-of-the-art methods achieve impressive performance, they perform a dense
perception of images, which incorporates redundant visual
regions unrelated to linguistic queries, leading to additional
computational overhead. This inspires us to explore a question: can we eliminate linguistic-irrelevant redundant visual regions to improve the efficiency of the model? Existing relevant methods primarily focus on fundamental visual
tasks, with limited exploration in vision-language fields. To
address this, we propose a coarse-to-fine iterative perception framework, called ScanFormer. It can iteratively exploit the image scale pyramid to extract linguistic-relevant
visual patches from top to bottom. In each iteration, irrelevant patches are discarded by our designed informativeness prediction. Furthermore, we propose a patch selection
strategy for discarded patches to accelerate inference. Experiments on widely used datasets, namely RefCOCO, RefCOCO+, RefCOCOg, and ReferItGame, verify the effectiveness of our method, which can strike a balance between
accuracy and efficiency.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental task in vision-language understanding,
Referring Expression Comprehension (REC) [9, 48, 53, 55]
relies on free-form natural language descriptions to identify
the referred target object. The development of REC not only
can underpin various vision-language tasks [18, 30, 40, 56],
but also potentially contribute to real-world applications
such as human-computer interaction [39, 46].
In REC, images typically contain a substantial amount
of redundant information when contrasted with highly concise and information-dense linguistic queries. For instance,
* corresponding author.

Figure 1. The comparison of dense perception and coarse-to-fine
iterative perception. The dense perception extracts features with
sliding windows or non-overlapping patches by traversing the image. In contrast, our iterative perception can identify and discard
linguistic-irrelevant redundant regions from coarse to fine scales.

as shown in Fig. 1, the image has considerable redundant
visual regions that are weakly correlated or even unrelated
to the language query, such as persons around the target
catcher and extensive low-information background regions.
However, state-of-the-art methods [9, 48, 53] adopt the
form of dense perception to obtain visual features for subsequent cross-modal interaction. These methods use visual
encoders such as ResNet [14], DarkNet [36], Swin Transformer [27], etc., and traverse the entire spatial locations
of the image using sliding windows or non-overlapping
patches to extract features, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). Despite achieving impressive performance, the form of dense
perception brings a significant amount of redundant information and increases computational overhead for the entire
model. Especially in Transformer-based models [9, 48], the
computational complexity of multi-head self-attention [43]
is quadratic. This leads to a research question: is it possible
to discard linguistic-irrelevant redundant visual regions
to enhance the efficiency of the model?
It is worth noting that there is an emerging trend [4, 6,
44, 45, 52] to explore the elimination of redundant visual
features. Typical bottom-up merging methods [4, 44, 52]

13449

