This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unmixing Diffusion for Self-Supervised Hyperspectral Image Denoising
Haijin Zeng 1 Jiezhang Cao 2 * Kai Zhang 3 Yongyong Chen 4 Hiep Luong 1 Wilfried Philips 1
1
IMEC-UGent 2 ETH Zurich 3 Nanjing University 4 Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
{Haijin.Zeng, Hiep.Luong, Wilfried.Philips}@UGent.be, jiezhang.cao@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Hyperspectral images (HSIs) have extensive applications in various fields such as medicine, agriculture, and
industry. Nevertheless, acquiring high signal-to-noise ratio HSI poses a challenge due to narrow-band spectral filtering. Consequently, the importance of HSI denoising is
substantial, especially for snapshot hyperspectral imaging
technology. While most previous HSI denoising methods
are supervised, creating supervised training datasets for
the diverse scenes, hyperspectral cameras, and scan parameters is impractical. In this work, we present DiffUnmix, a self-supervised denoising method for HSI using diffusion denoising generative models. Specifically,
Diff-Unmix addresses the challenge of recovering noisedegraded HSI through a fusion of Spectral Unmixing and
conditional abundance generation. Firstly, it employs a
learnable block-based spectral unmixing strategy, complemented by a pure transformer-based backbone. Then, we
introduce a self-supervised generative diffusion network to
enhance abundance maps from the spectral unmixing block.
This network reconstructs noise-free Unmixing probability
distributions, effectively mitigating noise-induced degradations within these components. Finally, the reconstructed
HSI is reconstructed through unmixing reconstruction by
blending the diffusion-adjusted abundance map with the
spectral endmembers. Experimental results on both simulated and real-world noisy datasets show that Diff-Unmix
achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral images (HSIs) offer richer spectral information compared to RGB images, making them valuable for
various applications such as face recognition [48, 49], vegetation detection [6], and medical diagnosis [54]. However,
the substantial number of spectral bands in HSIs, combined
with scanning designs [3] and narrow band spectral filtering, results in limited photon counts per band, making HSIs
susceptible to noise [62]. This noise not only degrades
* Corresponding Author

GT Patch

Noisy Patch

DDS2M
Diff-Unmix
Hyperspectral Image Toy
Figure 1. Comparison (wavelength 600nm) between diffusion
based DDS2M [36] and the proposed Diff-Unmix on a hyperspectral image Toy corrupted with Gaussian noise N (0, 0.3). DiffUnmix shows the ability to restore fine details by leveraging a pretrained diffusion model on RGB images.

visual quality but also hinders downstream tasks, which
makes denoising a crucial pre-processing step.
Similar to RGB images, HSIs exhibit spatial selfsimilarity, implying that similar pixels can be jointly denoised. Furthermore, HSIs possess inherent spectral correlations due to their nominal spectral resolution. Consequently, effective denoising methods for HSIs must consider the prior within both spatial and spectral domains.
Traditional model-based HSI denoising approaches [11, 17,
22] rely on handcrafted priors to capture spatial and spectral correlations through iterative optimization. These methods often employ priors like total variation [20, 22, 68],
non-local similarity [18], low-rank [9, 10] properties, and
sparsity [53]. Nonetheless, the effectiveness of these methods relies heavily on the precision of manually crafted priors. Furthermore, model-based denoising entails significant
computational demands due to iterative processes and may
struggle to generalize across a wide range of scenarios.
To achieve robust noise removal, deep learning approaches [7, 44, 52, 60] have been applied to HSI denoising, achieving impressive results. However, many of these
methods employ convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for
feature extraction, relying on local filter responses within
a limited receptive field to distinguish noise from signal.
Recently, vision Transformers have shown promise in various tasks, including both high-level [16, 50] and low-

27820

