This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

QDFormer: Towards Robust Audiovisual Segmentation in Complex
Environments with Quantization-based Semantic Decomposition
Xiang Li1 *, Jinglu Wang2 , Xiaohao Xu3 , Xiulian Peng2 , Rita Singh1 , Yan Lu2 , Bhiksha Raj1
1
CMU, 2 Microsoft Research Asia, 3 UMich
Single-Source

1. Introduction
Prompt-guided video object segmentation (VOS) [18, 31,
40, 41] focuses on the segmentation of objects in videos
according to prompts and predict the object classes if required. The use of various modalities of prompts, such as
text and audio, has promising implications for multi-modal
understanding and user-interactive video applications.
Numerous recent referring VOS methods [7, 66–68]
have demonstrated their effectiveness in using linguistic
* This work was done when Xiang Li and Xiaohao Xu were interns at
Microsoft.

Video

Audiovisual segmentation (AVS) is a challenging task
that aims to segment visual objects in videos according to
their associated acoustic cues. With multiple sound sources
and background disturbances involved, establishing robust
correspondences between audio and visual contents poses
unique challenges due to (1) complex entanglement across
sound sources and (2) frequent changes in the occurrence
of distinct sound events. Assuming sound events occur independently, the multi-source semantic space can be represented as the Cartesian product of single-source subspaces. We are motivated to decompose the multi-source
audio semantics into single-source semantics for more effective interactions with visual content. We propose a semantic decomposition method based on product quantization, where the multi-source semantics can be decomposed and represented by several disentangled and noisesuppressed single-source semantics. Furthermore, we introduce a global-to-local quantization mechanism, which
distills knowledge from stable global (clip-level) features
into local (frame-level) ones, to handle frequent changes in
audio semantics. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our semantically decomposed audio representation significantly improves AVS performance, e.g., +21.2% mIoU on
the challenging AVS-Semantic benchmark with ResNet50
backbone.

Audio

Abstract

Singing

Guitar

A

B

G

⋯

Multi-Source

With Noise

Singing
+Guitar

Singing
+BG Noise

？

？

⋯

C

D

⋯

(a) Audiovisual Segmentation (AVS)
Quantized & Decomposed

Audio

Video

1
2
3
⋯
K
Codebook

Segmentation

(b) Quantization-based Semantic Decomposition
Figure 1. (a) AVS aims to segment masks associated with sounding objects at each timestamp and predict their classes if required.
It presents substantial challenges with multi-source audio (Frame
C) or background disturbances (Frame D), due to feature entanglement and noise. (Provided class labels are for visualization only
and not included in the input.) (b) Our method tackles challenges
by decomposing audio features into several semantic tokens. We
employ product quantization (with a shared codebook for each decomposed feature) as an information bottleneck to achieve a compact and informative representation.

prompts that describe objects discriminatively at a video
clip level. However, employing audio prompts for activesounding objects in audiovisual segmentation (AVS) [81,
82] introduces unique challenges. First, multiple audio
sources could entangle at any timestamp, meaning that audio in a single frame could correspond to multiple segmentation masks of different classes, as shown in Frame C of
Fig. 1 (a). This creates ambiguity in aligning mixed-source

3402

