This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Realigning Confidence with Temporal Saliency Information for Point-Level
Weakly-Supervised Temporal Action Localization
Ziying Xia1 , Jian Cheng1 , Siyu Liu1 , Yongxiang Hu1 , Shiguang Wang1 , Yijie Zhang1 , Liwan Dang1,2
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
The Second Research Institute of Civil Aviation Administration of China
chengjian@uestc.edu.cn {zyxia, syliu, huyongx}@std.uestc.edu.cn
{xiaohu wyyx, zhangyijieuestc, caacsri dangwanli}@163.com

Abstract
Point-level weakly-supervised temporal action localization (P-TAL) aims to localize action instances in untrimmed
videos through the use of single-point annotations in each
instance. Existing methods predict the class activation sequences without any boundary information, and the unreliable sequences result in a significant misalignment between
the quality of proposals and their corresponding confidence.
In this paper, we surprisingly observe the most salient frame
tend to appear in the central region of the each instance
and is easily annotated by humans. Guided by the temporal saliency information, we present a novel proposallevel plug-in framework to relearn the aligned confidence
of proposals generated by the base locators. The proposed approach consists of Center Score Learning (CSL)
and Alignment-based Boundary Adaptation (ABA). In CSL,
we design a novel center label generated by the point annotations for predicting aligned center scores. During inference, we first fuse the center scores with the predicted action
probabilities to obtain the aligned confidence. ABA utilizes
the both aligned confidence and IoU information to enhance
localization completeness. Extensive experiments demonstrate the generalization and effectiveness of the proposed
framework, showcasing state-of-the-art or competitive performances across three benchmarks. Our code is available
at https://github.com/zyxia1009/CVPR2024-TSPNet.

1. Introduction
The recent spotlight on the utilization of single-point
timestamp annotations in each action instance for precise temporal action localization (P-TAL) [33] within
untrimmed videos has captured the attention of the research community. This approach holds considerable significance in real-world applications, including video retrieval [17, 44], security monitoring [36], and video ground-

Long jump!
It’s salient and I
should annotate it!

Long jump?
Running?

Point annotation
GT

CAS

CASbased
score

0.94
0.32

Proposal 1
Proposal 2

0.42
0.96

Center
score

Figure 1. Existing methods calculate the misaligned confidence
based on CAS information. Driven by human tendency during
annotating, we propose to predict the aligned center score based
on the offset between the proposal center and the annotation point.

ing [25, 31, 50]. In comparison to fully-supervised temporal action localization (TAL) [23, 28–30, 41, 47] and
weakly-supervised temporal action localization (W-TAL)
[12, 14, 15, 22, 39, 40, 42, 55, 56, 58, 59], which rely solely
on video-level annotations, P-TAL strikes a delicate balance between labor costs and localization precision. Consequently, the utilization of the additional point annotations
is crucial for achieving accurate localization.
Many existing P-TAL [11, 21, 26, 33, 52] methods follow a common framework known as multi-instance learning (MIL). This involves mapping the feature sequence extracted from the untrimmed video at the snippet level (spanning several frames) to a class activation sequence (CAS)
for each action category. The CAS indicates the probability
of the action occurrence. Subsequently, action proposals are
derived from the CAS using a manually set multi-threshold
strategy. These insightful techniques contribute to the generation of abundant high-quality proposals, facilitating effective localization for each action instance.
However, as depicted in Figure 1, the alignment between confidence and the most complete proposals is often
deficient (e.g., an average of 65.2% of the final proposals in
LAC[21] have better alternatives). We argue that this mis-

18440

