This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards General Robustness Verification of MaxPool-based Convolutional
Neural Networks via Tightening Linear Approximation
Yuan Xiao1 , Shiqing Ma2 , Juan Zhai2 , Chunrong Fang1 *, Jinyuan Jia3 , Zhenyu Chen1,4∗
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
2
University of Massachusetts Amherst, United States 3 Pennsylvania State University, United States
4
Shenzhen Research Institute, Nanjing University, China

Abstract
The robustness of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
is vital to modern AI-driven systems. It can be quantified by formal verification by providing a certified lower
bound, within which any perturbation does not alter the
original input’s classification result. It is challenging due
to nonlinear components, such as MaxPool. At present,
many verification methods are sound but risk losing some
precision to enhance efficiency and scalability, and thus,
a certified lower bound is a crucial criterion for evaluating the performance of verification tools. In this paper,
we present MaxLin, a robustness verifier for Maxpoolbased CNNs with tight Linear approximation. By tightening the linear approximation of the MaxPool function,
we can certify larger certified lower bounds of CNNs. We
evaluate MaxLin with open-sourced benchmarks, including LeNet and networks trained on the MNIST, CIFAR-10,
and Tiny ImageNet datasets. The results show that MaxLin
outperforms state-of-the-art tools with up to 110.60% improvement regarding the certified lower bound and 5.13 ×
speedup for the same neural networks. Our code is available at https://github.com/xiaoyuanpigo/maxlin.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable success in various applications, such as speech
recognition [47] and image classification [34]. However,
accompanied by outstanding effectiveness, neural networks
are often vulnerable to environmental perturbation and adversarial attacks [31, 39]. Such fragility will lead to disastrous consequences in safety-critical domains, e.g., selfdriving [16] and face recognition [17]. Therefore, a formal
and deterministic robustness guarantee is indispensable before a network is deployed [3].
* Chunrong Fang and Zhenyu Chen are the corresponding authors.

The methodology of robustness verification can be divided into two categories: complete verifiers and incomplete verifiers. Complete methods [20, 21] can verify the
robustness of piece-wise linear networks without losing
any precision but fail to work on more complex network
structures [25]. Incomplete but sound verification [19, 38,
43, 51] aims to scale to different types of CNNs. The
major challenge of robustness verification of CNNs stems
from their non-linear properties. Most incomplete verifiers [19, 28, 41, 43, 48] focus on the ReLU- and Sigmoidbased networks whose activations are uni-variate functions
and are simple to verify, ignoring multi-variate functions
like MaxPool. Multi-variate function MaxPool is widely
adopted in CNNs [18, 26, 46] yet is far more complex
to verify. Until recently, some attempts [4, 27, 37, 45]
have been made to certify the robustness of MaxPool-based
CNNs. Unfortunately, many of these verification frameworks [37, 41, 48] can only certify l∞ perturbation form.
Furthermore, these existing methods are limited in terms of
(1) efficiency: multi-neuron relaxation [33] fail to scale to
larger models due to long calculation time; (2) precision:
single-neuron relaxation [4, 27, 37, 45] has loose certified
lower bounds because of imprecise approximation.
To address the above challenges, in this work, we propose MaxLin, an efficient and tight verification framework
for MaxPool-based networks via tightening linear approximation. Specifically, to tighten linear approximation, we
minimize the maximum value of the upper linear bound
and minimize the average precision loss of the lower linear
bound of MaxPool. We also prove that our proposed upper bound is block-wise tightest. Compared with existing
neuron-wise tightness, our method acheives better certified
results. Further, based on single-neuron relaxation, MaxLin
gives the linear bounds directly after choosing the first and
second maximum values of the upper and lower bound of
the MaxPool’s input. Thus, MaxLin has high computation
efficiency. A simple example of MaxLin’s computation process is shown in Figure 1. Moreover, MaxLin easily integrates with state-of-the-art verifiers, e.g., CNN-Cert [4],

24766

