This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Face Reconstruction with the Geometric Guidance of
Facial Part Segmentation
Zidu Wang1,2 , Xiangyu Zhu1,2 *, Tianshuo Zhang1,2 , Baiqin Wang1,2 , Zhen Lei1,2,3
1
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences
{wangzidu2022, wangbaiqin2024}@ia.ac.cn, {xiangyu.zhu, tianshuo.zhang, zlei}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
3D Morphable Models (3DMMs) provide promising 3D
face reconstructions in various applications. However, existing methods struggle to reconstruct faces with extreme
expressions due to deficiencies in supervisory signals, such
as sparse or inaccurate landmarks. Segmentation information contains effective geometric contexts for face reconstruction. Certain attempts intuitively depend on differentiable renderers to compare the rendered silhouettes
of reconstruction with segmentation, which is prone to issues like local optima and gradient instability. In this paper, we fully utilize the facial part segmentation geometry
by introducing Part Re-projection Distance Loss (PRDL).
Specifically, PRDL transforms facial part segmentation into
2D points and re-projects the reconstruction onto the image plane. Subsequently, by introducing grid anchors and
computing different statistical distances from these anchors
to the point sets, PRDL establishes geometry descriptors
to optimize the distribution of the point sets for face reconstruction. PRDL exhibits a clear gradient compared
to the renderer-based methods and presents state-of-theart reconstruction performance in extensive quantitative
and qualitative experiments. Our project is available at
https://github.com/wang-zidu/3DDFA-V3.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D faces from 2D images is an essential
task in computer vision and graphics, finding diverse applications in fields such as Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented
Reality (AR), and Computer-generated Imagery (CGI), etc.
In applications like VR makeup and AR emoji, 3DMMs
* Corresponding author: Xiangyu Zhu

Segmentation

Target Points

3D Face

Source Points

Segmentation

Target Points

3D Face

Source Points

Matching

Input

Ours

Matching

Input

Ours

Figure 1. We introduce Part Re-projection Distance Loss (PRDL)
for 3D face reconstruction, leveraging the geometric guidance provided by facial part segmentation. PRDL enhances the alignment
of reconstructed facial features with the original image and excels
in capturing extreme expressions.

[5] are commonly employed for precise facial feature positioning and capturing expressions. One of the most critical
concerns is ensuring that the reconstructed facial components, including the eyes, eyebrows, lips, etc., seamlessly
align with their corresponding regions in the input image
with pixel-level accuracy, particularly when dealing with
extreme facial expressions, as shown in Fig. 1.
Although current methods [11, 14, 17, 19, 25] have made
notable strides in face reconstruction, some issues persist.
On the one hand, existing works often rely on landmarks
[17, 60] and photometric-texture [12, 45] to guide face reconstruction. In the case of extreme facial expressions,
landmarks are sparse or inaccurate and the gradient from
the texture loss cannot directly constrain the shape [59],
posing a challenge for existing methods to achieve precise
alignment of facial features in 3D face reconstruction, as
depicted in Fig. 2(a). On the other hand, many methods

1672

