This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProMark: Proactive Diffusion Watermarking for Causal Attribution
Vishal Asnani1,2
John Collomosse1,3
Tu Bui3
Xiaoming Liu2
Shruti Agarwal1
1
Adobe Research, 2 Michigan State University, 3 University of Surrey
{asnanivi,liuxm}@msu.edu

{collomos,shragarw}@adobe.com

t.v.bui@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Generative AI (GenAI) is transforming creative workflows through the capability to synthesize and manipulate
images via high-level prompts. Yet creatives are not well
supported to receive recognition or reward for the use of
their content in GenAI training. To this end, we propose
ProMark, a causal attribution technique to attribute a synthetically generated image to its training data concepts like
objects, motifs, templates, artists, or styles. The concept
information is proactively embedded into the input training images using imperceptible watermarks, and the diffusion models (unconditional or conditional) are trained to
retain the corresponding watermarks in generated images.
We show that we can embed as many as 216 unique watermarks into the training data, and each training image can
contain more than one watermark. ProMark can maintain
image quality whilst outperforming correlation-based attribution. Finally, several qualitative examples are presented,
providing the confidence that the presence of the watermark
conveys a causative relationship between training data and
synthetic images.

1. Introduction
GenAI is able to create high-fidelity synthetic images spanning diverse concepts, largely due to advances in diffusion
models, e.g. DDPM [18], DDIM [23], LDM [28]. GenAI
models, particularly diffusion models, have been shown to
closely adopt and sometimes directly memorize the style
and the content of different training images – defined as
“concepts” in the training data [11, 21]. This leads to concerns from creatives whose work has been used to train
GenAI. Concerns focus upon the lack of a means for attribution, e.g. recognition or citation, of synthetic images to the
training data used to create them and extend even to calls for
a compensation mechanism (financial, reputational, or otherwise) for GenAI’s derivative use of concepts in training
images contributed by creatives.
We refer to this problem as concept attribution – the ability to attribute generated images to the training concept/s
which have most directly influenced their creation. Several

Figure 1. Causative vs. correlation-based matching for concept
attribution. ProMark identifies the training data most responsible
for a synthetic image (‘attribution’). Correlation-based matching
doesn’t always perform the data attribution properly. We propose
ProMark, which is a proactive approach involving adding watermarks to training data and recovering them from the synthetic image to perform attribution in a causative way.

passive techniques have recently been proposed to solve the
attribution problem [5, 30, 34]. These approaches use visual correlation between the generated image and the training images for attribution. Whilst they vary in their method
and rationale for learning the similarity embedding – all use
some forms of contrastive training to learn a metric space
for visual correlation.
We argue that although correlation can provide visually
intuitive results, a measure of similarity is not a causative
answer to whether certain training data is responsible for the
generation of an image or not. Further, correlation-based
techniques can identify close matches with images that were
not even present in the training data.
Keeping this in mind, we explore an intriguing field

10802

