This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniMODE: Unified Monocular 3D Object Detection
Zhuoling Li1

Xiaogang Xu2,3 SerNam Lim4
1
2
3
HKU
CUHK
ZJU

Hengshuang Zhao1 *
4
UCF

Abstract
Realizing unified monocular 3D object detection, including both indoor and outdoor scenes, holds great importance
in applications like robot navigation. However, involving
various scenarios of data to train models poses challenges
due to their significantly different characteristics, e.g., diverse geometry properties and heterogeneous domain distributions. To address these challenges, we build a detector based on the bird’s-eye-view (BEV) detection paradigm,
where the explicit feature projection is beneficial to addressing the geometry learning ambiguity when employing multiple scenarios of data to train detectors. Then,
we split the classical BEV detection architecture into two
stages and propose an uneven BEV grid design to handle the
convergence instability caused by the aforementioned challenges. Moreover, we develop a sparse BEV feature projection strategy to reduce computational cost and a unified domain alignment method to handle heterogeneous domains.
Combining these techniques, a unified detector UniMODE
is derived, which surpasses the previous state-of-the-art on
the challenging Omni3D dataset (a large-scale dataset including both indoor and outdoor scenes) by 4.9% AP3D ,
revealing the first successful generalization of a BEV detector to unified 3D object detection.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D object detection aims to accurately determine the precise 3D bounding boxes of targets using only
single images captured by cameras [13, 16]. Compared to
3D object detection based on other modalities such as LiDAR point cloud, the monocular-based solution offers advantages in terms of cost-effectiveness and comprehensive
semantic features [17, 19]. Moreover, owing to the wideranging applications like autonomous driving [8], monocular 3D object detection has drawn much attention recently.
Thanks to the efforts paid by the research community,
numerous detectors have been developed. Some are designed for outdoor scenarios [9, 38] such as urban driving,
and the others focus on indoor detection [28]. Despite their
* Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Illustration of some challenges (e.g., diverse geometry
properties, heterogeneous domain distributions) in unified detection. (1) Comparing sub-figures (a) and (b), indoor objects are
small and close, while outdoor objects are far and sparse. Besides,
the camera parameters are highly varying. (2) Comparing subfigures (a), (b), and (c), which correspond to a real-world indoor
image, real-world outdoor image, and synthetic indoor image, the
image styles are different. (3) Although the category “Picture” is
labeled in sub-figure (c), it is not labeled in sub-figure (d), which
suggests label conflict among different sub-datasets. Unlabeled
objects are highlighted by red ellipses.

common goal of monocular 3D object detection, these detectors exhibit significant differences in their network architectures [5]. This divergence hinders researchers from
combining data of various scenarios to train a unified model
that performs well in diverse scenes, which is demanded by
many important applications like robot navigation [30].
The most critical challenge in unified 3D object detection lies in addressing the distinct characteristics of different scenarios. For example, indoor objects are smaller and
closer in proximity, while outdoor detection needs to cover a
vast perception range. Recently, Cube RCNN [5] has served
as a predecessor in studying this problem. It directly produces 3D box predictions in the camera view and adopts a
depth decoupling strategy to tackle the domain gap among
scenes. However, we observe that it suffers serious convergence difficulty and is prone to collapsing during training.
To overcome the unstable convergence of Cube RCNN,
we employ the recent popular bird’s-eye-view (BEV) de-

16561

