This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dr2 Net: Dynamic Reversible Dual-Residual Networks for
Memory-Efficient Finetuning
Chen Zhao1
Fatimah Zohra1
1

Shuming Liu1 Karttikeya Mangalam2 Guocheng Qian1
Abdulmohsen Alghannam1 Jitendra Malik2 Bernard Ghanem1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Saudi Arabia

2

UC Berkeley, US

Abstract
Large pretrained models are increasingly crucial in
modern computer vision tasks. These models are typically
used in downstream tasks by end-to-end finetuning, which
is highly memory-intensive for tasks with high-resolution
data, e.g., video understanding, small object detection, and
point cloud analysis. In this paper, we propose Dynamic
Reversible Dual-Residual Networks, or Dr2 Net, a novel
family of network architectures that acts as a surrogate network to finetune a pretrained model with substantially reduced memory consumption. Dr2 Net contains two types of
residual connections, one maintaining the residual structure in the pretrained models, and the other making the
network reversible. Due to its reversibility, intermediate
activations, which can be reconstructed from output, are
cleared from memory during training. We use two coefficients on either type of residual connections respectively, and introduce a dynamic training strategy that seamlessly transitions the pretrained model to a reversible network with much higher numerical precision. We evaluate
Dr2 Net on various pretrained models and various tasks,
and show that it can reach comparable performance to conventional finetuning but with significantly less memory usage. Code will be available at https://github.com/
coolbay/Dr2Net.

1. Introduction
Large pretrained models play an increasingly crucial role in
modern computer vision tasks. These large models, such as
ViTs [12] and Swin transformers [30, 31], are pretrained on
large-scale datasets [9, 47], by various means such as fullysupervised learning [12, 30], self-supervised learning [14,
20, 36, 41] or vision-language pretraining [38]. They have
strong representational capacity due to the large model scale
and the data scale, and therefore become indispensable for
various downstream tasks [1, 4, 18, 37, 40, 43, 46].
Although these pretrained large models have shown

Figure 1. Comparison of different ways of finetuning from pretrained non-reversible models. (a) Conventional finetuning uses
the same non-reversible architecture in the downstream task, initialized with the pretrained parameters. It consumes high GPU
memory. (b) Previous reversible methods (e.g., [16, 33, 46]) cannot finetune from pretrained non-reversible models on the downstream task due to architecture discrepancy. They show reduced
accuracy when training from scratch on the downstream. (c)
Our proposed Dr2 Net can directly finetune from pretrained nonreversible networks, significantly saving memory while preserving
accuracy. The top-right chart illustrates memory usage and accuracy for temporal action detection on ActivityNet-v1.3 [5] using
VSGN [44] and Video Swin [31].

good generality, they need to be end-to-end finetuned
on specific downstream tasks to reach an optimal performance [4, 8, 27, 28, 37, 43, 46]. End-to-end finetuning
refers to training the backbone, which is initialized with
a pretrained model, simultaneously with the task-specific
network during finetuning. For example, it is a common
practice in image object detection that the backbone is initialized from a model pretrained on ImageNet classification [9] and finetuned end-to-end on the object detection
datasets [43]. For the task of video temporal action localization, recent research has shown performance boost of
using end-to-end finetuning compared to frozen-backbone

15835

