This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompt3D: Random Prompt Assisted Weakly-Supervised 3D Object Detection
Xiaohong Zhang∗ , Huisheng Ye*, Jingwen Li, Qinyu Tang, Yuanqi Li, Yanwen Guo† and Jie Guo
Nanjing University
{zhangxiaohong,huishengye,jingwenli,tangqinyu,yuanqili}@smail.nju.edu.cn,
{ywguo,guojie}@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

3D object detection, crucial for scene understanding, involves identifying and classifying objects within sensory
data like images and point clouds. Advances in 3D sensing
and deep learning have fueled interest in detecting 3D objects from unstructured point clouds. State-of-the-art algorithms [26, 33, 35, 36, 48, 51] treat the task of 3D object de* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author.

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62032011) and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu
Province (No. BK20211147).

Strong Annotation
Construct

3D Shapes

Weak Annotation

Shap-E

Detection
Head

Virtual Scene
Transfer

Detection
Head

Predict
An antique wooden door
A high-back chair with an
elongated profile

…

1. Introduction

Real Scene

…

The prohibitive cost of annotations for fully supervised 3D
indoor object detection limits its practicality. In this work,
we propose Random Prompt Assisted Weakly-supervised
3D Object Detection, termed as Prompt3D, a weaklysupervised approach that leverages position-level labels to
overcome this challenge. Explicitly, our method focuses on
enhancing labeling using synthetic scenes crafted from 3D
shapes generated via random prompts. First, a Synthetic
Scene Generation (SSG) module is introduced to assemble
synthetic scenes with a curated collection of 3D shapes,
created via random prompts for each category. These
scenes are enriched with automatically generated pointlevel annotations, providing a robust supervisory framework for training the detection algorithm. To enhance
the transfer of knowledge from virtual to real datasets, we
then introduce a Prototypical Proposal Feature Alignment
(PPFA) module. This module effectively alleviates the domain gap by directly minimizing the distance between feature prototypes of the same class proposals across two domains. Compared with sota BR, our method improves by
5.4% and 8.7% on mAP with VoteNet and GroupFree3D
serving as detectors respectively, demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposed method. Code is available at:
https://github.com/huishengye/prompt3d.

An adjustable height table

Prompts

Figure 1. Illustration of the pipeline of the proposed Prompt3D.
Our method first converts random textual prompts into 3D shapes
using Shap-E [13]. These shapes are then matched with real scenes
using a coarse layout inferred from position-level annotations. The
resulting synthetic scenes, with pixel labels, enhance the training
of the detection head through domain adaptation.

tection as a supervised learning problem. However, strong
supervision using detailed annotations such as point-level
labels or 3D bounding boxes is resource-intensive, hindering the growth of 3D detection applications.
To address this limitation, recent studies [24, 37, 43]
explored model training with weak annotations. This has
led to the development of two primary methods: using
scene-level class tags [43] and employing detailed positionlevel labels [23, 24, 54], such as object centroids and class
tags. Position-level weak supervision, especially for outdoor detection [47], offers better time-accuracy balance and
has gained prominence. Some weakly supervised methods [20, 30] in outdoor scenarios have achieved results on
par with fully supervised techniques. However, adapting
position-level weak supervision to complex indoor scenes is
still challenging, with few precedents. To enhance weak labeling in indoor settings, recent advancements [39, 54] use
virtual scenes with freely available annotations from stan-

28046

