This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-World Mobile Image Denoising Dataset with Efficient Baselines
Roman Flepp^1
^1

Andrey Ignatov^{1,3}

Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zürich

^2

Radu Timofte^{1,2,3}

Computer Vision Laboratory, University of Würzburg

Luc Van Gool^{1,3}
^3

AI Witchlabs Ltd., Zollikerberg

r.flepp@hotmail.com, {andrey, timofter, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
The recently increased role of mobile photography has
raised the standards of on-device photo processing tremendously. Despite the latest advancements in camera hardware, the mobile camera sensor area cannot be increased
significantly due to physical constraints, leading to a pixel
size of 0.6–2.0 µm, which results in strong image noise even
in moderate lighting conditions. In the era of deep learning,
one can train a CNN model to perform robust image denoising. However, there is still a lack of a substantially diverse
dataset for this task. To address this problem, we introduce
a novel Mobile Image Denoising Dataset (MIDD) comprising over 400,000 noisy / noise-free image pairs captured
under various conditions by 20 different mobile camera sensors. Additionally, we propose a new DPreview test set consisting of data from 294 different cameras for precise model
evaluation. Furthermore, we present the efficient baseline
model SplitterNet for the considered mobile image denoising task that achieves high numerical and visual results,
while being able to process 8MP photos directly on smartphone GPUs in under one second. Thereby outperforming
models with similar runtimes. This model is also compatible with recent mobile NPUs, demonstrating an even higher
speed when deployed on them. The conducted experiments
demonstrate high robustness of the proposed solution when
applied to images from previously unseen sensors, showing
its high generalizability. The datasets, code and models can
be found on the official project website1,2 .

1. Introduction
In 2024, there are more than 7 billion smartphone users
[4], thus making mobile photography, and especially mobile
image denoising, an important research area. The smaller
the sensor, the less amount of light can be captured per
pixel, which in turn leads to elevated ISO levels or longer
exposure times for the image to have the correct exposure
1 https://people.ee.ethz.ch/ ihnatova/midd.html
˜

2 https://github.com/rflepp/Efficient_Mobile_Denoising_Models

Figure 1. Visual comparison of denoising results obtained with
the SplitterNet model trained on different datasets using the same
training pipeline. The image is part of the DPreview [2] test set and
is independent of all used training datasets, thus offering an optimal comparison ground. It can be clearly seen that the SplitterNet
trained on the SIDD [9] introduces a strong blur in the denoised
image, while the other denoised images show less blur, and the
model trained on the MIDD offers the best denoising capabilities.

settings. In DSLR photography, it is more common to use
longer exposure times to use lower ISO settings and effectively reduce the noise in the image. To keep the camera and
its sensor stable during enlarged periods of exposure time,
a tripod and a remote camera controller are mainly used.
Longer exposure times are often not practical in mobile
photography, because of moving subjects or movement of
the camera sensor while still not offering visually pleasing
results [16]. Hence, higher ISO levels are more desirable
when it comes to practicality. Those elevated ISO levels in
turn lead to increased noise in the captured image. Thus,
performing noise reduction on mobile devices is a crucial
factor in producing a visually pleasing output image, and
image denoising “on the go”, without spending extended
effort to capture a single image, is the goal.
Different classical approaches before the era of deep
learning have been proposed in the past [10, 11, 13, 22].
Those have been quantitatively outperformed since a few
years by convolutional neural networks-based deep learn-

22368

