This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One More Step: A Versatile Plug-and-Play Module for Rectifying Diffusion
Schedule Flaws and Enhancing Low-Frequency Controls
Minghui Hu† Jianbin Zheng⋆ Chuanxia Zheng‡ Chaoyue Wang§ Dacheng Tao† Tat-Jen Cham†
†
Nanyang Technological University, ‡ University of Oxford
⋆
South China University of Technology, § The University of Sydney
{e200008, astjcham}@ntu.edu.sg, jabir.zheng@outlook.com, cxzheng@robots.ox.ac.uk

0.56

0.37

0.49

0.27

0.32

0.75

0.10

0.77

0.06

0.07

A bald eagle against a white
background

A dark town square lit only by a
few torchlights

Solid black background

SDXL

Avg.

SDXL w/ One More Step

Avg.

Prompt

Majestic white angel sculpture inside a Close-up portrait of a man wearing
solemn cathedral, exquisite details and a
suit posing in a dark studio, rim
sacred ambiance, bright and pure visual
lighting, teal hue, octane, unreal
effects, extreme white background

(b)

(a)

(c)

Figure 1. Example results of our One More Step method on various sceceries. Traditional sampling methods (Top row) not only lead
to (a) generated images converging towards the mean value, but also cause (b) the structure of generated objects to be chaotic, or (c) the
theme to not follow prompts. Our proposed One More Step addresses these problems effectively without modifying any parameters in the
pre-trained models. Avg. denotes the average pixel value of the images, which are normalized to fall within the range of [0, 1].

Abstract
It is well known that many open-released foundational
diffusion models have difficulty in generating images that
substantially depart from average brightness, despite such
images being present in the training data. This is due to
an inconsistency: while denoising starts from pure Gaussian noise during inference, the training noise schedule
retains residual data even in the final timestep distribution, due to difficulties in numerical conditioning in mainstream formulation, leading to unintended bias during inference. To mitigate this issue, certain ϵ-prediction models are combined with an ad-hoc offset-noise methodology.
In parallel, some contemporary models have adopted zeroterminal SNR noise schedules together with v-prediction,

which necessitate major alterations to pre-trained models.
However, such changes risk destabilizing a large multitude
of community-driven applications anchored on these pretrained models. In light of this, our investigation revisits
the fundamental causes, leading to our proposal of an innovative and principled remedy, called One More Step (OMS).
By integrating a compact network and incorporating an additional simple yet effective step during inference, OMS elevates image fidelity and harmonizes the dichotomy between
training and inference, while preserving original model parameters. Once trained, various pre-trained diffusion models with the same latent domain can share the same OMS
module. Codes and models are released at here.

7331

