This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SuperSVG: Superpixel-based Scalable Vector Graphics Synthesis
Teng Hu1 , Ran Yi1 ,* Baihong Qian1 , Jiangning Zhang2 , Paul L. Rosin3 , Yu-Kun Lai3
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent, 3 Cardiff University
{hu-teng, ranyi, cherry qbh}@sjtu.edu.cn, vtzhang@tencent.com, {RosinPL, LaiY4}@cardiff.ac.uk
Superpixel
Superpixel-based
Coarse Paths Guided
Decomposition Coarse Reconstruction
Refinement

Abstract

Scalable Vector Graphics, commonly known as SVG, is a
widely used vector image format that has a wide range of
applications and advantages within the domains of web design, graphic design, mobile applications, data visualization, and various other contexts. Compared with raster images that represent content by pixels, SVG describes images by parameterized vectors and benefits from its scalability and editability where it can be resized to any resolution without losing quality and can be easily manipulated
by its layer-wise topological information.
Given the superior capabilities of Scalable Vector Graph* Corresponding author.

Refinement-stage Model

1. Introduction

Coarse-stage Model

SVG (Scalable Vector Graphics) is a widely used graphics format that possesses excellent scalability and editability. Image vectorization, which aims to convert raster images to SVGs, is an important yet challenging problem in
computer vision and graphics. Existing image vectorization
methods either suffer from low reconstruction accuracy for
complex images or require long computation time. To address this issue, we propose SuperSVG, a superpixel-based
vectorization model that achieves fast and high-precision
image vectorization. Specifically, we decompose the input
image into superpixels to help the model focus on areas with
similar colors and textures. Then, we propose a two-stage
self-training framework, where a coarse-stage model is employed to reconstruct the main structure and a refinementstage model is used for enriching the details. Moreover,
we propose a novel dynamic path warping loss to help
the refinement-stage model to inherit knowledge from the
coarse-stage model. Extensive qualitative and quantitative
experiments demonstrate the superior performance of our
method in terms of reconstruction accuracy and inference
time compared to state-of-the-art approaches. The code is
available in https://github.com/sjtuplayer/
SuperSVG.

Input Image

Output SVG

Knowledge
Transfer

Method

Algorithm-based

Model-based

Optimization-based

Our SuperSVG

Vectorization
Accuracy
Computation
Speed

Figure 1. Overview of our SuperSVG: our model first decomposes
the image to be vectorized into superpixels, each containing pixels sharing similar colors and contents. The coarse-stage model
predicts the path parameters to reconstruct the main structure, and
then the coarse paths guided refinement model enriches the details
by learning the knowledge from the coarse-stage model. Compared to the previous methods, our SuperSVG achieves both a high
vectorization accuracy and fast computation speed.

ics (SVG) in image representation and editing, there is
much research on the topic of image vectorization, which
aims to convert rasterized images into SVG. The existing
methods can be categorized into three classes: 1) Traditional algorithm-based methods [15, 18, 24, 28, 33, 37],
where conventional algorithms are employed to fit images,
but they usually suffer from a lower vectorization quality. 2)
Deep-learning-based methods [9, 10, 12, 19, 21, 22], which
parameterize raster images using deep neural networks for
reconstruction. They are efficient and can handle the vectorization of simple graphics or characters (e.g., icons and
emojis), but struggle to vectorize complex images. 3)
Optimization-based methods [17, 20, 26, 38], which optimize SVG parameters to fit the target image, yielding relatively superior reconstruction quality. However, these methods entail a substantial amount of time and computational
resources, making them impractical for timely processing of
large-scale data. In summary, previous image vectorization
methods either suffer from low reconstruction quality for
complex images, or demand extensive computation time,
imposing significant constraints on their practical utility.
To achieve good vectorization quality with high ef-

24892

