This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoSh: Long-Short Text Joint Prediction Network for Referring Video Object
Segmentation
Linfeng Yuan, Miaojing Shi*, Zijie Yue, Qijun Chen
College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University
linfengyuan1997@gmail.com, {mshi,zijie,qjchen}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Referring video object segmentation (RVOS) aims to segment the target instance referred by a given text expression
in a video clip. The text expression normally contains sophisticated description of the instance’s appearance, action, and relation with others. It is therefore rather difficult for a RVOS model to capture all these attributes correspondingly in the video; in fact, the model often favours
more on the action- and relation-related visual attributes
of the instance. This can end up with partial or even incorrect mask prediction of the target instance. We tackle
this problem by taking a subject-centric short text expression from the original long text expression. The short one
retains only the appearance-related information of the target instance so that we can use it to focus the model’s attention on the instance’s appearance. We let the model
make joint predictions using both long and short text expressions; and insert a long-short cross-attention module
to interact the joint features and a long-short predictions
intersection loss to regulate the joint predictions. Besides
the improvement on the linguistic part, we also introduce
a forward-backward visual consistency loss, which utilizes
optical flows to warp visual features between the annotated
frames and their temporal neighbors for consistency. We
build our method on top of two state of the art pipelines.
Extensive experiments on A2D-Sentences, Refer-YouTubeVOS, JHMDB-Sentences and Refer-DAVIS17 show impressive improvements of our method. Code is available here.

1. Introduction
Referring video object segmentation (RVOS) [10] aims to
segment the target instance in a video given a text expression, which can potentially benefit many video applications
such as video editing and surveillance. For the research
community, RVOS is a challenging and interesting multi* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison between our LoSh-M and
MTTR [3]. The text expression for the target instance is ‘a man in
white t-shirt is walking’. LoSh-M generates an accurate prediction
while MTTR predicts a wrong mask compared to ground truth.

modal task: videos provide dense visual information while
text expressions provide symbolic and structured linguistic
information. This makes the alignment of the two modalities very challenging, especially for the segmentation task.
A similar task to RVOS is the referring image segmentation (RIS) [25, 47, 51], which aims to segment the target
instance in an image given a text expression. Compared to
RIS, RVOS is significantly harder due to the difficulties to
tackle the motion blur and occlusion in video frames. It is
essential to build the data association across multiple frames
and track the target instance in the video. Besides the visual
difference between RIS and RVOS, the text expressions in
them are also different: those in RIS mainly describe the appearance of the target instances in static images while those
in RVOS describe both the appearance and action of the target instances over several frames in videos. Therefore, a
robust RVOS model is expected to capture complex textual
information from the input text expression and correspondingly align it with visual features in video frames.
Recently, the development of transformer in video feature extraction [23] and instance segmentation [41] benefits
RVOS a lot. Especially, MTTR [3] and ReferFormer [44]
are pioneering works to adapt query-based transformer
models [5, 41, 52] to RVOS and have achieved significant improvements compared with previous methods. The
performance gains in most query-based RVOS frameworks

14001

