This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MGMap: Mask-Guided Learning for Online Vectorized HD Map Construction
Xiaolu Liu1 , Song Wang1 , Wentong Li1 , Ruizi Yang1 , Junbo Chen2 ,* Jianke Zhu1 *
1
Zhejiang University 2 Udeer.ai
{xiaoluliu, songw, liwentong, ruiziyang, jkzhu}@zju.edu.cn, junbo@udeer.ai

Front View Image

Abstract
Currently, high-definition (HD) map construction leans
towards a lightweight online generation tendency, which
aims to preserve timely and reliable road scene information. However, map elements contain strong shape priors. Subtle and sparse annotations make current detectionbased frameworks ambiguous in locating relevant feature
scopes and cause the loss of detailed structures in prediction. To alleviate these problems, we propose MGMap,
a mask-guided approach that effectively highlights the informative regions and achieves precise map element localization by introducing the learned masks. Specifically,
MGMap employs learned masks based on the enhanced
multi-scale BEV features from two perspectives. At the instance level, we propose the Mask-activated instance (MAI)
decoder, which incorporates global instance and structural information into instance queries by the activation
of instance masks. At the point level, a novel positionguided mask patch refinement (PG-MPR) module is designed to refine point locations from a finer-grained perspective, enabling the extraction of point-specific patch
information. Compared to the baselines, our proposed
MGMap achieves a notable improvement of around 10 mAP
for different input modalities. Extensive experiments also
demonstrate that our approach showcases strong robustness and generalization capabilities. Our code can be found
at https://github.com/xiaolul2/MGMap.

1. Introduction
High-definition (HD) map plays an important role in autonomous driving [19], as it provides centimeter-level road
information for self-positioning [18], path planning [7, 11]
and other downstream tasks [14, 15, 17]. Typically, offline
HD map constructions rely on manual annotations on global
LiDAR point clouds, which usually require tedious financial and manual investments. Moreover, it is challenging
for offline maps to reflect the ever-changing road conditions
due to the lack of real-time updates. To tackle the above is* Corresponding authors

w/o Mask

Ours

GT Label

Learned
Mask

Figure 1. For some detailed structures, our proposed MGMap
achieves effective map element localization by highlighting the informative regions through the learned masks.

sues, a lightweight and real-time online map construction
paradigm [19] has gradually become a promising approach
by incorporating information from onboard sensors.
Some existing approaches [10, 19, 36, 43, 50] consider
online map construction as a segmentation task, where
pixel-level rasterized maps are learned in bird’s-eye-view
(BEV) space. Nevertheless, for vectorized expression, an
additional step of post-processing is required to cluster
and fit lane instances. Recently, efficient and straightforward approaches like VectorMapNet [26] and MapTR [23]
have been proposed for vectorized map construction, in
which map elements are represented by sparse point sets.
Transformer-based architectures are directly employed to
update instance queries and regress point locations.
Despite having achieved promising results, current map
vectorization frameworks are still constrained by inherent
issues. As shown in Figure 1, map elements, such as road
edges, dividing lines, and pedestrian crossings, always have
strong shape priors. Obscure features and coarse locations
can easily lead to the loss of detailed expressions in prediction, especially for irregular boundaries and sudden changes
in corner angles. Besides, subtle and sparse annotations
pose significant challenges for deformable attention [51],
which is known as a sparse and local feature extraction strategy employed in current vectorization frameworks. Considering the sparsity of detection targets, such under-sampling
techniques can readily lead to coarse localization and the
loss of effective information. These issues intensify the difficulties in determining the relevant feature scopes, confirm-

14812

