This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Backdoor Defense via Test-Time Detecting and Repairing
Jiyang Guan1,2 , Jian Liang1,2 , Ran He1,2 *
MAIS&CRIPAC, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
1

guanjiyang2020@ia.ac.cn, liangjian92@gmail.com, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks have played a crucial part in
many critical domains, such as autonomous driving, face
recognition, and medical diagnosis. However, deep neural
networks are facing security threats from backdoor attacks
and can be manipulated into attacker-decided behaviors by
the backdoor attacker. To defend the backdoor, prior research has focused on using clean data to remove backdoor
attacks before model deployment. In this paper, we investigate the possibility of defending against backdoor attacks
by utilizing test-time partially poisoned data to remove the
backdoor from the model. To address the problem, a twostage method TTBD is proposed. In the ﬁrst stage, we propose a backdoor sample detection method DDP to identify poisoned samples from a batch of mixed, partially poisoned samples. Once the poisoned samples are detected,
we employ Shapley estimation to calculate the contribution of each neuron’s signiﬁcance in the network, locate the
poisoned neurons, and prune them to remove backdoor in
the models. Our experiments demonstrate that TTBD removes the backdoor successfully with only a batch of partially poisoned data across different model architectures
and datasets against different types of backdoor attacks.

1. Introduction
Over the past years, deep neural networks have played a crucial part in many critical domains, such as autonomous driving [36], face recognition [35], graph learning [43, 44] and
remote sensing [6, 9]. Despite their widespread use, deep
neural networks lack transparency, making them vulnerable
to different attacks [41]. This vulnerability leads to serious mistakes in security-related areas, causing signiﬁcant
threats and concerns. Recent studies have proven that backdoor attacks [26, 46] pose a severe security threat to deep
neural networks. Backdoor attacks [8], taking advantage of
the overﬁtting of the deep neural networks, inject the back* Corresponding Author

24564

door poisoned data with the small invisible triggers into the
model’s training dataset, and cause the model trained on that
to behave normally on clean samples but predict the wrong,
attacker-decided labels on the backdoor poisoned samples.
A wide variety of backdoor attacks [1, 4, 8, 28, 45] have
been proposed, and recent works such as WaNet [28] and
LF [45] add invisible backdoor triggers onto clean samples,
leading to more serious security threats.
To reduce the threats of backdoor attacks, numerous
backdoor defense methods have been proposed, which can
generally be classiﬁed into two categories: the trainingstage backdoor defense and the post-training backdoor defense (model repairing backdoor defense). Because training deep neural networks is an expensive process that requires signiﬁcant data collection and computational resources, training on the cloud and directly using third-party
well-trained models have become increasingly popular, and
thus, in this paper, we mainly focus on the model repairing
backdoor defense. The model repairing backdoor defense
usually involves retraining [37] or pruning [25, 40] to remove backdoor based on the clean data, for example, by using 5% of clean samples from the training dataset. Previous
works have mainly focused on repairing poisoned models
before model deployment with certiﬁed clean data, while in
this work, we investigate whether the backdoor defense can
be performed with partially-poisoned test-time data by the
defender.
In this setting, the defenders have access to the mixture
of both the clean samples and the backdoor poisoned samples, or in other words, the partially poisoned data. While
the poisoned samples in the mixed, partially poisoned data
can help remove backdoor, detecting them accurately poses
a signiﬁcant challenge. Moreover, since poisoned sample
detection can not be entirely accurate, there may be some
clean samples mixed with the detected poisoned samples,
which presents another challenge for backdoor removal. As
for the backdoor poisoned sample detection, TeCo [26] is
a state-of-the-art backdoor sample detection method that
leverages sample corruption robustness consistency to distinguish between poisoned and clean samples. However,

