This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Pedestrian is Worth One Prompt: Towards Language Guidance Person
Re-Identification
Dayan Wu1 * Chenming Wu3 Zheng Lin1 Jingzi Gu1 Weiping Wang1,2
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Baidu Inc

Zexian Yang1,2

1

{yangzexian,wudayan,linzheng,gujingzi,wangweiping}@iie.ac.cn,wuchenming@baidu.com

Abstract
Extensive advancements have been made in person ReID
through the mining of semantic information. Nevertheless,
existing methods that utilize semantic-parts from a single
image modality do not explicitly achieve this goal. Whiteness the impressive capabilities in multimodal understanding of Vision Language Foundation Model CLIP, a recent
two-stage CLIP-based method employs automated prompt
engineering to obtain specific textual labels for classifying pedestrians. However, we note that the predefined soft
prompts may be inadequate in expressing the entire visual context and struggle to generalize to unseen classes.
This paper presents an end-to-end Prompt-driven Semantic
Guidance (PromptSG) framework that harnesses the rich
semantics inherent in CLIP. Specifically, we guide the model
to attend to regions that are semantically faithful to the
prompt. To provide personalized language descriptions
for specific individuals, we propose learning pseudo tokens that represent specific visual contexts. This design
not only facilitates learning fine-grained attribute information but also can inherently leverage language prompts during inference. Without requiring additional labeling efforts,
our PromptSG achieves state-of-the-art by over 10% on
MSMT17 and nearly 5% on the Market-1501 benchmark.
The codes will be available at https://github.com/
YzXian16/PromptSG

1. Introduction
Person Re-Identification (ReID) is a crucial research area
in computer vision that focuses on identifying individuals
across different camera views or time instances [4, 44, 45,
57], which is a sub-task of image-based retrieval. Features
of the same individual, as captured by various cameras, are
prone to alterations due to changes in lighting, background,
and body posture. Consequently, the effectiveness of a so* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Transformer visualization [2] of attention maps. (a)
Original images, (b) CLIP-ReID, (c) Our method w/o inversion,
and (d) Our method guided by the composed prompts captures
both the exact semantic parts and the external appearance details.

Visual
Encoder
Input image inversion 𝑺∗

Patch Token

reweight

Cross Attention

“A photo of a 𝑺∗ person”
Composed Text Prompt

Text
Encoder

Cross-attention
Map

CLS Token

Figure 2. The core idea of our method. Our method inverts input images into pseudo-word tokens S∗ , which are then composed
into a textual prompt to describe the specific visual context. The
attention map of patch tokens is further controlled by the semantics of the textual prompt.

phisticated ReID model fundamentally depends on its capability to learn discriminative features that are impervious to
camera-specific variations, thereby enhancing the model’s
capacity to generalize to previously unseen classes.
Modern ReID models, constructed upon uni-modal architectures such as the Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) [22] or Vision Transformer (ViT) [14, 19, 35, 40],
have made significant advancements within the field. A
substantial portion of these solutions focus on the extraction of pertinent regions to rectify misalignment issues.
These strategies are dedicated to the extraction of semantic

17343

