This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Continual Compatible Representation
for Re-indexing Free Lifelong Person Re-identiﬁcation

1

Zhenyu Cui1 , Jiahuan Zhou1 , Xun Wang2 , Manyu Zhu2 , Yuxin Peng1 *
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University 2 ByteDance Inc

cuizhenyu@stu.pku.edu.cn, {jiahuanzhou,pengyuxin}@pku.edu.cn, {wangxun.2,zhumanyu}@bytedance.com

Abstract

Person re-identiﬁcation (ReID) aims to identify the same
person across different areas at different times [42]. Exist* Corresponding author.

ReID w/o Re-indexing

ID:1 ID:2
Old Gallery Images

Old Gallery Features

ID:1
ID:5
Re-indexed
Gallery Features

Ɍ
Re-indexing

Ɂ

Query Features

Query Images

(a) Traditionial Lifelong ReID

ID:1 ID:2
Old Gallery Images

Ɂ

Data
Privacy

×

Ɂ

ID:3
ID:5
Old Gallery Features
New Model

1. Introduction

ReID w/ Re-indexing

New Model

Lifelong Person Re-identiﬁcation (L-ReID) aims to learn
from sequentially collected data to match a person across
different scenes. Once an L-ReID model is updated using
new data, all historical images in the gallery are required to
be re-calculated to obtain new features for testing, known as
“re-indexing”. However, it is infeasible when raw images
in the gallery are unavailable due to data privacy concerns,
resulting in incompatible retrieval between the query and
the gallery features calculated by different models, which
causes signiﬁcant performance degradation. In this paper, we focus on a new task called Re-indexing Free Lifelong Person Re-identiﬁcation (RFL-ReID), which requires
achieving effective L-ReID without re-indexing raw images
in the gallery. To this end, we propose a Continual Compatible Representation (C2 R) method, which facilitates the
query feature calculated by the continuously updated model
to effectively retrieve the gallery feature calculated by the
old model in a compatible manner. Speciﬁcally, we design
a Continual Compatible Transfer (CCT) network to continuously transfer and consolidate the old gallery feature
into the new feature space. Besides, a Balanced Compatible Distillation module is introduced to achieve compatibility by aligning the transferred feature space with the new
feature space. Finally, a Balanced Anti-forgetting Distillation module is proposed to eliminate the accumulated forgetting of old knowledge during the continual compatible
transfer. Extensive experiments on several benchmark LReID datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our method
against state-of-the-art methods for both RFL-ReID and LReID tasks. The source code of this paper is available at
https://github.com/PKU-ICST-MIPL/C2R CVPR2024.

Feature Replacing

Query Features

Query Images

(b) Re-indexing Free Lifelong ReID

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) the traditional Lifelong Person Re-identiﬁcation (L-ReID) task and (b) the Re-indexing Free
Lifelong Person Re-identiﬁcation (RFL-ReID) task.

ing methods [26, 32, 44] have made remarkable progress
based on deep learning methods [37] and large-scale
datasets [34, 41, 43]. However, their performance is often
limited when training data are continuously collected from
a series of different scenarios due to the well-known catastrophic forgetting challenge [3].
Recently, Lifelong person ReID (L-ReID) has aroused
great concerns involving acquiring knowledge from streaming data and performing well across all data [5, 18, 19, 38].
Its challenge is to balance the anti-forgetting of old knowledge with the acquisition of new knowledge. To this end,
existing L-ReID methods usually adopt the exemplar replay [38] and the knowledge distillation [27] to preserve

16614

