This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Control4D: Efficient 4D Portrait Editing with Text
Ruizhi Shao1 , Jingxiang Sun1 , Cheng Peng1 , Zerong Zheng1,2 ,
Boyao Zhou1 , Hongwen Zhang1 , Yebin Liu1,∗
1

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 2 NNKosmos Technology

Figure 1. We propose Control4D, an approach to high-fidelity and spatiotemporal-consistent 4D portrait editing with only text instructions.
Given the multi-view videos as shown in the left and text instructions ”Jensen Huang is roasting steak”, Control4D generates realistic and
4D consistent editing results presented in the middle and right.

Abstract
We introduce Control4D, an innovative framework for
editing dynamic 4D portraits using text instructions. Our
method addresses the prevalent challenges in 4D editing,
notably the inefficiencies of existing 4D representations and
the inconsistent editing effect caused by diffusion-based editors. We first propose GaussianPlanes, a novel 4D representation that makes Gaussian Splatting more structured by
applying plane-based decomposition in 3D space and time.
This enhances both efficiency and robustness in 4D editing. Furthermore, we propose to leverage a 4D generator to
learn a more continuous generation space from inconsistent
edited images produced by the diffusion-based editor, which
effectively improves the consistency and quality of 4D editing. Comprehensive evaluation demonstrates the superiority of Control4D, including significantly reduced training
time, high-quality rendering, and spatial-temporal consistency in 4D portrait editing. The link to our project website
is: https://control4darxiv.github.io/

1. Introduction
The realm of 4D scene reconstruction has witnessed advancements with the advent of dynamic neural 3D representation [12, 36, 47, 51, 57]. These innovations have
∗ Corresponding author.

significantly enhanced our ability to capture and represent dynamic scenes. Despite these advances, the interactive editing of these 4D scenes still poses substantial
challenges. The primary challenge involves ensuring both
spatial-temporal consistency and high quality in 4D editing.
Available 4D editing techniques [26, 52], while effective
for fundamental tasks like object removal or color modification, often fall short in delivering interactive and advanced
editing functionalities. Recently, a groundbreaking framework based on text-to-image (T2I) diffusion model [50] has
emerged for 3D generation and editing. It integrates a neural 3D representation such as NeRF with an image diffusion
model and achieves text-to-3D generation [8, 35, 40, 50] or
editing [18] by iteratively aligning images rendered from
the 3D representation with those generated by the diffusion
model. This diffusion-based framework allows for more
flexible and enhanced editing through textual control.
Building on this framework, a straightforward approach
to 4D editing involves transitioning from a 3D to a 4D
representation. However, it faces two primary challenges:
First, 4D representations such as dynamic NeRFs require
dense sampling along the rays to render images, which is
slow and highly memory-intensive [12, 51, 57]. Such inefficiency significantly increases the time required for editing
in 4D scenarios. On the other hand, current T2I diffusion
models lack consistency in editing different images [18].
This inconsistency is more apparent in 4D editing, as the
results vary across different spatial perspectives and over

4556

