This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient 3D Implicit Head Avatar with Mesh-anchored Hash Table Blendshapes
Ziqian Bai1,2∗ Feitong Tan1 Sean Fanello1
Mingsong Dou1 Shichen Liu1 Ping Tan3
Google

2

Simon Fraser University

3

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

High Quality

1

Rohit Pandey1
Yinda Zhang1

Fast

Ours

NeRFBlendshape

INSTA

PointAvatar

MonoAvatar

Figure 1. Visual Quality vs. Rendering Speed comparisons between our monocular 3D head avatars and prior state-of-the-art methods
including NeRFBlendshape [14], INSTA [42], PointAvatar [41] and MonoAvatar [5]. Our approach achieves real-time rendering (i.e. > 30
mean FPS) with a 512 × 512 resolution, while produces comparable visual quality comparing to prior SOTAs [5], and gives significantly
better results on challenging expressions than prior efficient avatars [14, 41, 42]. Webpage augmentedperception.github.io/monoavatar-plus

Abstract
3D head avatars built with neural implicit volumetric
representations have achieved unprecedented levels of photorealism. However, the computational cost of these methods remains a significant barrier to their widespread adoption, particularly in real-time applications such as virtual
reality and teleconferencing. While attempts have been
made to develop fast neural rendering approaches for static
scenes, these methods cannot be simply employed to support realistic facial expressions, such as in the case of a dynamic facial performance. To address these challenges, we
propose a novel fast 3D neural implicit head avatar model
that achieves real-time rendering while maintaining finegrained controllability and high rendering quality. Our key
idea lies in the introduction of local hash table blendshapes,
which are learned and attached to the vertices of an underlying face parametric model. These per-vertex hash-tables
are linearly merged with weights predicted via a CNN, resulting in expression dependent embeddings. Our novel representation enables efficient density and color predictions
using a lightweight MLP, which is further accelerated by a
hierarchical nearest neighbor search method. Extensive experiments show that our approach runs in real-time while
achieving comparable rendering quality to state-of-the-arts
and decent results on challenging expressions.

1. Introduction
The demand of high performing photo-realistic human
avatars has dramatically increased with emerging VR/AR
applications, e.g. VR gaming [2, 33], virtual assistant [3],
tele-presence [28], and 3D videos [15, 26]. How to build
efficient high quality avatars from monocular RGB videos
becomes a promising direction due to the convenience of
monocular data acquisition. While early works mostly
adopt surface-based models for convenient controllability,
recent methods (e.g. MonoAvatar [5]) leverage a sophisticated pipeline to build human avatars on neural radiance
fields, which delivers vivid animations as well as significantly better rendering quality, especially over challenging
parts such as hairs and glasses. On the downside, these approaches tend to be prohibitively slow, and most of the computation is consumed by the neural radiance field inference
with large Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs).
Recently, fast approaches for neural radiance fields (e.g.
hash encoding in Instant NGPs [27]) have been proposed,
which are designed mostly for static scenes or pre-recorded
temporal sequences. Despite their great success, it is
not straightforward to extend these approaches for human
avatars, which requires real-time rendering of dynamic facial performances when controlling the avatar. NeRFBlend∗ Work was conducted while Ziqian Bai was an intern at Google.

1975

