This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SLICE: Stabilized LIME for Consistent Explanations for Image Classification
Revoti Prasad Bora † Philipp Terhörst‡ Raymond Veldhuis†
Raghavendra Ramachandra† Kiran Raja†
†
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, Norway
‡
University of Paderborn, Germany
{revoti.p.bora; raymond.veldhuis, raghavendra.ramachandra, kiran.raja} @ntnu.no

SLICE

LIME

philipp.terhoerst@uni-paderborn.de

Figure 1. Representative explanations of Inception v3 model’s prediction by LIME and SLICE(proposed) for a random image from OxfordIIIT pets dataset. The prediction class was Egyptian cat with a probability of 0.45. (Top 5 positive superpixels are marked in blue segments
and top 5 negative are marked in red). The ranks are indicated on the superpixels (lower number signifies higher importance). For LIME,
some of the superpixels identified as positive in one run are identified as negative in another run. In contrast, all superpixels marked as
positive or negative never change signs for SLICE. The relative importance ranks of superpixels in SLICE are stable across all the runs.

Abstract
Local Interpretable Model-agnostic Explanations
(LIME) - a widely used post-ad-hoc model agnostic explainable AI (XAI) technique. It works by training a simple
transparent (surrogate) model using random samples
drawn around the neighborhood of the instance (image)
to be explained (IE). Explanations are then extracted for
a black-box model and a given IE, using the surrogate
model. However, the explanations of LIME suffer from
inconsistency across different runs for the same model and
the same IE. We identify two main types of inconsistencies:
variance in the sign and importance ranks of the segments
(superpixels). These factors hinder LIME from obtaining
consistent explanations. We analyze these inconsistencies
and propose a new method, Stabilized LIME for Consistent
Explanations (SLICE). The proposed method handles the
stabilization problem in two aspects: using a novel feature
selection technique to eliminate spurious superpixels and
an adaptive perturbation technique to generate perturbed
images in the neighborhood of IE. Our results demonstrate
that the explanations from SLICE exhibit significantly

better consistency and fidelity than LIME (and its variant
BayLime).

1. Introduction
In the broad spectrum of post-ad-hoc explanation methods,
model-agnostic methods like LIME [13], SHAP [9] and
their variants have been popular for extracting explanations
from Black-Box models. While explanation methods such
as Grad-CAM [16], Grad-CAM++ [2], and Ablation-CAM
[12] require access to the intermediate layers of the model,
methods like LIME, and SHAP methods require access only
to the input and the output of the model.
In our paper, we focus on the category of post-adhoc methods that uses local surrogate models for explanations. While LIME has the advantages of being modelagnostic and being able to extract explanations in a postad-hoc manner, it is also inconsistent in the explanations
[5, 7, 8, 22, 23, 25, 26]. [23] observes three types of uncertainty: sampling variance in explaining a data point, sensitivity to the choice of parameters such as the size of the
neighborhood and sample size, and variation of model cred-

10988

