This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic LiDAR Re-simulation using Compositional Neural Fields
Hanfeng Wu1,2 Xingxing Zuo2, * Stefan Leutenegger2
Or Litany3,4 Konrad Schindler1 Shengyu Huang1, *
1

ETH Zurich

2

TU Munich

Abstract
We introduce DyNFL, a novel neural field-based approach for high-fidelity re-simulation of LiDAR scans in dynamic driving scenes. DyNFL processes LiDAR measurements from dynamic environments, accompanied by bounding boxes of moving objects, to construct an editable neural
field. This field, comprising separately reconstructed static
background and dynamic objects, allows users to modify
viewpoints, adjust object positions, and seamlessly add or
remove objects in the re-simulated scene. A key innovation of our method is the neural field composition technique, which effectively integrates reconstructed neural assets from various scenes through a ray drop test, accounting for occlusions and transparent surfaces. Our evaluation
with both synthetic and real-world environments demonstrates that DyNFL substantially improves dynamic scene
LiDAR simulation, offering a combination of physical fidelity and flexible editing capabilities. [project page]

1. Introduction
We introduce a neural representation for the purpose of reconstructing and manipulating LiDAR scans of dynamic
driving scenes. Counterfactual re-simulation is an emerging application in the realm of autonomous driving, offering
a unique approach to examining ”what if” scenarios. This
method involves creating a reconstruction of a real-world
event, termed as digital twin, and then applying various
modifications to it. These could include altering the environmental conditions, changing the actions of some agents,
or introducing additional scene elements. Analyzing the
outcomes of these edited scenarios provides insights into
the functioning of the perception system, moreover they can
be used to obtain training data for rare situations.
The essence of counterfactual re-simulation is the capability to authentically recreate variations of the original,
factual observation. We address this challenge in the context of LiDAR on autonomous vehicles (AV). Existing ap* Corresponding authors

3

Technion

4

NVIDIA

proaches to LiDAR re-simulation have important limitations. Conventional simulators such as CARLA [9] and
NVIDIA DRIVE Sim are capable of modeling LiDAR sensors. However, their reliance on manually designed 3D simulation assets requires significant human effort. LiDARsim [26] aims to remedy this by reconstructing vehicles
and scenes from real measurements. While producing encouraging results, its two-stage LiDAR modeling lacks realism, particularly in terms of physical effects like multireturns and reflected intensity, which were shown to matter
for downstream processing [15]. Following NeRF’s [27]
success in camera view synthesis, some works have applied neural fields for LiDAR modeling [19, 43, 58]. In
particular, Neural LiDAR Fields (NFL) [19] offer a physically inspired LiDAR volumetric rendering scheme that accounts for two-way transmittance and beam width, allowing faithful recovery of secondary returns, intensity, and ray
drops. These models are, however, limited to static scenes
that do not change while multiple input views are scanned,
and are thus of limited use for re-simulation in the presence
of moving traffic. Recently, UniSim [54] followed Neural
Scene Graph [31] in modeling road scenes as sets of movable NeRF instances on top of a static background. UniSim
introduced a unified synthesis approach for camera and LiDAR sensors, but ignored physical sensor properties like
two-way transmittance and beam width [19].
We present DyNFL, a novel approach for re-simulating
LiDAR views of driving scenarios. Our method builds
upon a neural SDF that enables an accurate representation of scene geometry, while at the same time enforcing physical accuracy by modeling two-way transmittance,
like NFL [19]. Our primary contribution is a method for
compositing neural fields that accurately integrates LiDAR
measurements from individual fields representing different
scene assets. With the help of a ray drop test, we effectively manage occlusions and transparent surfaces. This not
only ensures physical accuracy, but also facilitates the inclusion of assets reconstructed from a variety of static and
dynamic scenes, thereby enhancing control over the simulated content. Our method bridges the gap between the
physical fidelity of the re-simulation and the flexible editing

19988

