This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Accurate and Robust Architectures via Neural Architecture Search
Yuwei Ou,* Yuqi Feng* , Yanan Sun†
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University.

Abstract
To defend deep neural networks from adversarial attacks, adversarial training has been drawing increasing attention for its effectiveness. However, the accuracy and robustness resulting from the adversarial training are limited
by the architecture, because adversarial training improves
accuracy and robustness by adjusting the weight connection affiliated to the architecture. In this work, we propose
ARNAS to search for accurate and robust architectures for
adversarial training. First we design an accurate and robust search space, in which the placement of the cells and
the proportional relationship of the filter numbers are carefully determined. With the design, the architectures can
obtain both accuracy and robustness by deploying accurate and robust structures to their sensitive positions, respectively. Then we propose a differentiable multi-objective
search strategy, performing gradient descent towards directions that are beneficial for both natural loss and adversarial loss, thus the accuracy and robustness can be guaranteed at the same time. We conduct comprehensive experiments in terms of white-box attacks, black-box attacks, and
transferability. Experimental results show that the searched
architecture has the strongest robustness with the competitive accuracy, and breaks the traditional idea that NASbased architectures cannot transfer well to complex tasks
in robustness scenarios. By analyzing outstanding architectures searched, we also conclude that accurate and robust
neural architectures tend to deploy different structures near
the input and output, which has great practical significance
on both hand-crafting and automatically designing of accurate and robust architectures.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown remarkable performance in various real-world applications [2, 21, 24].
However, DNNs are found to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks [38]. The phenomenon limits the application
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Adversarial Accuracy under AutoAttack (%)

ouyuwei@stu.scu.edu.cn; feng770623@gmail.com; ysun@scu.edu.cn

53
ARNAS (Ours)

52

Better

51

NADAR (Li et al., 2021)
AdvRush (Mok et al., 2021)

50
49

RobNet-free (Guo et al., 2020)

48

PDARTS (Chen et al., 2019)

RACL (Dong et al., 2020)

47
DARTS (Liu et al., 2018)

46
83

83.5

84

84.5

85

85.5

86

86.5

Natural Accuracy (%)

Figure 1. Natural and adversarial accuracy on CIFAR-10. All the
architectures are adversarially trained using 7-step PGD, and the
adversarial accuracy is evaluated under AutoAttack.

of DNNs in security-critical systems such as self-driving
cars [14] and face recognition [37]. After the discovery of
this intriguing weakness of DNNs, various methods have
been proposed to defend DNNs from adversarial attacks.
Among them, adversarial training [16, 28] has been widely
used for its excellent ability to enhance robustness [29, 46].
Different from the standard training that trains with natural data directly, the adversarial training trains the network
with adversarial examples. However, the problem is that
the accuracy and robustness resulting from the adversarial
training are limited if the architecture is not well designed in
advance [18], because the adversarial training improves the
accuracy and robustness by adjusting the weight connection
that is affiliated to the architecture.
Recently, an advanced research topic, known as robust
NAS [12, 18, 29], has been widely investigated to solve
this problem. Specifically, robust NAS designs intrinsically accurate and robust neural architectures utilizing neural architecture search (NAS) [48]. These architectures have
been validated to show strong accuracy and robustness after adversarial training. For example, RobNet [18] adopts
the one-shot NAS [3] method, adversarially trains a supernetwork for once and then finds out the robust sub-networks

5967

