This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TASeg: Temporal Aggregation Network for LiDAR Semantic Segmentation
Xiaopei Wu1, 2 , Yuenan Hou2∗ , Xiaoshui Huang2∗ , Binbin Lin3, 4 , Tong He2 ,
Xinge Zhu5 , Yuexin Ma6 , Boxi Wu4 , Haifeng Liu1 *, Deng Cai1 , Wanli Ouyang2
1
4

2

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University

School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University

5

The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Training deep models for LiDAR semantic segmentation
is challenging due to the inherent sparsity of point clouds.
Utilizing temporal data is a natural remedy against the sparsity problem as it makes the input signal denser. However,
previous multi-frame fusion algorithms fall short in utilizing
sufficient temporal information due to the memory constraint,
and they also ignore the informative temporal images. To
fully exploit rich information hidden in long-term temporal
point clouds and images, we present the Temporal Aggregation Network, termed TASeg. Specifically, we propose
a Temporal LiDAR Aggregation and Distillation (TLAD)
algorithm, which leverages historical priors to assign different aggregation steps for different classes. It can largely
reduce memory and time overhead while achieving higher
accuracy. Besides, TLAD trains a teacher injected with
gt priors to distill the model, further boosting the performance. To make full use of temporal images, we design a
Temporal Image Aggregation and Fusion (TIAF) module,
which can greatly expand the camera FOV and enhance the
present features. Temporal LiDAR points in the camera FOV
are used as mediums to transform temporal image features
to the present coordinate for temporal multi-modal fusion.
Moreover, we develop a Static-Moving Switch Augmentation (SMSA) algorithm, which utilizes sufficient temporal
information to enable objects to switch their motion states
freely, thus greatly increasing static and moving training
samples. Our TASeg ranks 1st † on three challenging tracks,
i.e., SemanticKITTI single-scan track, multi-scan track and
nuScenes LiDAR segmentation track, strongly demonstrating the superiority of our method. Codes are available at
https://github.com/LittlePey/TASeg.

1. Introduction
LiDAR segmentation aims to infer the semantic information
of each point in point clouds and plays an indispensable role
* Corresponding authors.
† On the date of CVPR deadline, i.e., 2023-11-18 07:59 AM UTC.

Shanghai AI Laboratory

3

Fullong Inc.
6

ShanghaiTech University

in the autonomous driving [3, 21, 34, 42]. With the advent
of deep learning, a large quantity of LiDAR segmentation algorithms [14, 19, 24, 39, 46] have been put forward. Despite
their impressive results, the segmentation performance is still
constrained by the inherent sparsity of point clouds. To alleviate this, it is desirable to aggregate temporal data. Previous
multi-frame models [4, 9, 22] can only fuse a few LiDAR
frames due to the GPU memory constraint, which restricts
them from utilizing rich information hidden in the longterm temporal point clouds. Although MSeg3D [20] stacks
dozens of LiDAR frames, the memory and time overhead
are intolerable. Moreover, previous attempts concentrate
on utilizing temporal point clouds, ignoring the valuable
information hidden in temporal images.
To better leverage long-term temporal information, we
propose a Temporal LiDAR Aggregation and Distillation
(TLAD) algorithm. It can perform efficient multi-frame aggregation while achieving higher accuracy. TLAD consists
of Flexible Step Aggregation (FSA) and Mask Distillation.
FSA is based on the observation that the model needs different amounts of temporal points for different classes. For
difficult classes, such as bicyclists, more points are needed to
yield accurate predictions. However, for easy classes, such
as cars and roads, it is unnecessary to aggregate too many
point cloud frames for them. Therefore, we propose to assign different aggregation steps for different classes in point
cloud sequences, which can significantly save memory and
computation overhead on easy classes while providing sufficient temporal points for difficult classes. To identify classes
of temporal point clouds, historical predictions are used,
considering the temporal data is processed in chronological
order, which is consistent with practical applications.
Interestingly, by assigning different classes with different
steps, FSA actually injects historical priors into the aggregated point clouds. For classes with different steps, their
patterns can be more discriminative due to their different
densities. This makes the point cloud frames accumulated by
FSA more conducive for segmentation. Experimental results
show that FSA can not only reduce memory and time costs
but also enhance overall performance. To further verify our

15311

