This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InfLoRA: Interference-Free Low-Rank Adaptation for Continual Learning
Yan-Shuo Liang and Wu-Jun Li*
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, P. R. China
liangys@smail.nju.edu.cn,liwujun@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Continual learning requires the model to learn multiple tasks sequentially. In continual learning, the model
should possess the ability to maintain its performance on
old tasks (stability) and the ability to adapt to new tasks
continuously (plasticity). Recently, parameter-efficient finetuning (PEFT), which involves freezing a pre-trained model
and injecting a small number of learnable parameters to
adapt to downstream tasks, has gained increasing popularity in continual learning. Although existing continual learning methods based on PEFT have demonstrated superior
performance compared to those not based on PEFT, most
of them do not consider how to eliminate the interference
of the new task on the old tasks, which inhibits the model
from making a good trade-off between stability and plasticity. In this work, we propose a new PEFT method, called
interference-free low-rank adaptation (InfLoRA), for continual learning. InfLoRA injects a small number of parameters to reparameterize the pre-trained weights and shows
that fine-tuning these injected parameters is equivalent to
fine-tuning the pre-trained weights within a subspace. Furthermore, InfLoRA designs this subspace to eliminate the
interference of the new task on the old tasks, making a good
trade-off between stability and plasticity. Experimental results show that InfLoRA outperforms existing state-of-theart continual learning methods on multiple datasets. Code
is available at https://github.com/liangyanshuo/
InfLoRA.

1. Introduction
Continual learning requires the model to learn multiple
tasks sequentially [33]. To achieve continual learning,
the model should possess two essential abilities, including
the ability to keep its performance on the old tasks (stability) and the ability to adapt to the new tasks continuously (plasticity) [33]. Furthermore, two different scenar* Wu-Jun Li is the corresponding author.

ios are often considered in continual learning, including
task-incremental scenario [32] and class-incremental scenario [41]. Task-incremental scenario allows the model to
get task identities during inference. On the contrary, classincremental scenario does not allow the model to get task
identities during inference, making the model learn to distinguish all the classes across all the tasks.
Recently, parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) [15, 16,
18], which involves freezing a pre-trained model and injecting a small number of learnable parameters to adapt
to downstream tasks, has gained increasing popularity in
continual learning [12, 38, 44], especially in the classincremental scenario. More specifically, existing continual learning methods based on PEFT [21, 43] inject the
learnable parameters into a pre-trained model using some
popular PEFT methods such as prompt-tuning [25] or lowrank adaptation (LoRA) [16]. Subsequently, these methods
freeze the pre-trained weights and sequentially fine-tune the
injected parameters on multiple tasks throughout the continual learning process.
Although continual learning methods based on PEFT
have demonstrated superior performance compared to those
not based on PEFT [44], most of them do not consider how
to eliminate the interference of the new task on the old tasks,
which inhibits the model from making a good trade-off
between stability and plasticity. Specifically, when learning a new task, existing continual learning methods based
on PEFT either reuse the previously learned parameters to
adapt to the new task [12, 44] or randomly expand some parameters first and then adapt to the new task [38, 42, 43].
During this process, the interference of the new task on the
old tasks exists due to the shared parameters between new
and old tasks, which means fine-tuning a pre-trained model
on a new task may interfere with the model’s performance
on the old tasks. As a result, it is hard for the model to make
a good trade-off between stability and plasticity.
In this work, we propose a new PEFT method, called
interference-free low-rank adaptation (InfLoRA), for continual learning. The contributions of this work are listed as
follows:

23638

