This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C OSAL P URE: Learning Concept from Group Images for
Robust Co-Saliency Detection
Jiayi Zhu1 ,

Qing Guo3† ,

Felix Juefei-Xu2 ,

Yihao Huang4 ,

Yang Liu4 ,

Geguang Pu1,5†

1

3

East China Normal University, China 2 New York University, USA
IHPC & CFAR, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
4
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
5
Shanghai Industrial Control Safety Innovation Tech. Co., Ltd, China

Detection Results

Co-salient Object Detectors

Detection Results

Concept-guided Purification
Group Images Containing some Adv. Examples

Purified Group Images

c

Concept Learning
CosalPure

T2I Diffusion

Learned concept

Validation of c

Figure 1. Examples of our method C OSAL P URE and comparative results before and after purification. C OSAL P URE comprises two modules: group-image
concept learning and concept-guided purification. Firstly, the concept learning module inputs a group of images that contain some adversarial cases and
obtain their shared co-salient semantic information (i.e., the learned concept), denoted as c. We can validate the effectiveness of the learned c through
the visualization via a text-to-image (T2I) diffusion model. Secondly, steered by the previously learned concept, we employ certain diffusion generation
techniques to purify the entire group of images. Before our purification, the co-salient object detection results are poor, but after purification, the detection
results are satisfactory. Please enlarge to see more details.

Abstract
Co-salient object detection (CoSOD) aims to identify
the common and salient (usually in the foreground) regions
across a given group of images. Although achieving significant progress, state-of-the-art CoSODs could be easily
affected by some adversarial perturbations, leading to substantial accuracy reduction. The adversarial perturbations
can mislead CoSODs but do not change the high-level semantic information (e.g., concept) of the co-salient objects.
In this paper, we propose a novel robustness enhancement
framework by first learning the concept of the co-salient objects based on the input group images and then leveraging this concept to purify adversarial perturbations, which
are subsequently fed to CoSODs for robustness enhance-

ment. Specifically, we propose C OSAL P URE containing two
modules, i.e., group-image concept learning and conceptguided diffusion purification. For the first module, we adopt
a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model to learn the concept of co-salient objects within group images where the
learned concept is robust to adversarial examples. For the
second module, we map the adversarial image to the latent
space and then perform diffusion generation by embedding
the learned concept into the noise prediction function as an
extra condition. Our method can effectively alleviate the influence of the SOTA adversarial attack containing different
adversarial patterns, including exposure and noise. The extensive results demonstrate that our method could enhance
the robustness of CoSODs significantly. The project is available at https://v1len.github.io/CosalPure/.

† Geguang Pu (ggpu@sei.ecnu.edu.cn) and Qing Guo (tsingqguo@ieee.org) are corresponding authors.

3669

