This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Occupancy for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Liang Peng3

Junkai Xu1,3 Haoran Cheng1,3 Zheng Yang3 Xiaopei Wu1
Wei Qian3 Wenxiao Wang2 Boxi Wu2 * Deng Cai1
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
3
FABU Inc.
{pengliang, xujunkai, haorancheng}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Monocular 3D detection is a challenging task due to the
lack of accurate 3D information. Existing approaches typically rely on geometry constraints and dense depth estimates to facilitate the learning, but often fail to fully exploit the benefits of three-dimensional feature extraction in
frustum and 3D space. In this paper, we propose OccupancyM3D, a method of learning occupancy for monocular 3D detection. It directly learns occupancy in frustum
and 3D space, leading to more discriminative and informative 3D features and representations. Specifically, by using
synchronized raw sparse LiDAR point clouds, we define the
space status and generate voxel-based occupancy labels.
We formulate occupancy prediction as a simple classification problem and design associated occupancy losses. Resulting occupancy estimates are employed to enhance original frustum/3D features. As a result, experiments on KITTI
and Waymo open datasets demonstrate that the proposed
method achieves a new state of the art and surpasses other
methods by a significant margin.

1. Introduction
Three dimensional object detection is a critical task in many
real-world applications, such as self-driving and robot navigation. Early methods [52, 58, 78] typically rely on LiDAR sensors because they can produce sparse yet accurate 3D point measurements. In contrast, cameras provide
dense texture features but lack 3D information. Recently,
monocular-based methods [36, 39, 49, 53] for 3D detection,
also known as monocular 3D detection, have gained significant attention from both industry and academia due to their
cost-effectiveness and deployment-friendly nature.
Recovering accurate 3D information from a single RGB
image poses a challenge. While previous researches have
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Overall design. We introduce occupancy learning for
monocular 3D detection. Best viewed in color.

employed geometry constraints [7, 27, 36, 45] and dense
depth estimates [38, 53, 67] to facilitate 3D reasoning, they
often overlook the importance of discriminative and informative 3D features in 3D space, which are essential for effective 3D detection. They mainly focus on improving features in 2D space, with little attention paid to better feature
encoding and representation in the frustum and 3D space.
Towards this goal, in this paper we propose to learn occupancy in frustum and 3D space, to obtain more discriminative and informative 3D features/representations for monocular 3D detection. Specifically, we employ synchronized
raw sparse LiDAR point clouds to generate voxel-based occupancy labels in frustum and 3D space during the training
stage. Concerning the sparsity of LiDAR points, we define three occupancy statuses: free, occupied, and unknown.
Based on this, we voxelize the 3D space and use ray tracing
on each LiDAR point to obtain occupancy labels. With the
occupancy labels, we can enforce explicit 3D supervision
on intermediate 3D features. It allows the network to learn
voxelized occupancy for current 3D space, which enhances
the original 3D features. This process is also performed in
the frustum space, enabling a more fine-grained manner in
extracting three-dimensional features for near objects due to
the perspective nature of camera imagery. Overall, we call
the proposed occupancy learning method OccupancyM3D,
and illustrate the framework overview in Figure 1.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, we conduct experiments on the competitive KITTI and Waymo
open datasets. As a result, the proposed method achieves

10281

