This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreGS: 3D Gaussian Splatting with Progressive Frequency Regularization
Jiahui Zhang1 Fangneng Zhan2 Muyu Xu1 Shijian Lu1 Eric Xing3, 4
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics
3
Carnegie Mellon University 4 MBZUAI
jiahui003@e.ntu.edu.sg

fzhan@mpi-inf.mpg.de

shijian.lu@ntu.edu.sg

Gaussian Visualization

Rendered Images

Gaussian Visualization

muyu001@e.ntu.edu.sg

epxing@cs.cmu.edu

Rendered Images
Large

Spectrum

Small

Large

Spectrum

Small

(a) 3D-GS

(b) FreGS

(c) GT

Figure 1. The proposed FreGS mitigates the over-reconstruction of Gaussian densification and renders images with much less blur and
artifact as compared with the 3D Gaussian splatting (3D-GS). For the two sample images from Mip-NeRF360 [2], (a) and (b) show the
Rendered Image and the Gaussian Visualization of the highlighted regions, as well as the Spectra of over-reconstructed areas in the rendered
image by 3D-GS and corresponding areas in FreGS. The Gaussian Visualization shows how the learnt rasterized 3D Gaussians compose
images (all Gaussians are rasterized with full opacity). The Spectra are generated via image Fourier transformation, where the colour
changes from blue to green as the spectrum amplitude changes from small to large.

Abstract
3D Gaussian splatting has achieved very impressive performance in real-time novel view synthesis. However, it often suffers from over-reconstruction during Gaussian densification where high-variance image regions are covered
by a few large Gaussians only, leading to blur and artifacts in the rendered images. We design a progressive frequency regularization (FreGS) technique to tackle the overreconstruction issue within the frequency space. Specifically, FreGS performs coarse-to-fine Gaussian densification by exploiting low-to-high frequency components that
can be easily extracted with low-pass and high-pass filters
in the Fourier space. By minimizing the discrepancy between the frequency spectrum of the rendered image and the
corresponding ground truth, it achieves high-quality Gaussian densification and alleviates the over-reconstruction of
* Shijian Lu is the corresponding author.

Gaussian splatting effectively. Experiments over multiple
widely adopted benchmarks (e.g., Mip-NeRF360, Tanksand-Temples and Deep Blending) show that FreGS achieves
superior novel view synthesis and outperforms the state-ofthe-art consistently.

1. Introduction
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) has been a pivotal task in the
realm of 3D computer vision which holds immense significance in various applications such as virtual reality, image editing, etc. It aims for generating images from arbitrary viewpoints of a scene, often necessitating precise
modelling of the scene from multiple scene images. Leveraging implicit scene representation and differentiable volume rendering, NeRF [21] and its extension [1, 2] have recently achieved remarkable progress in novel view synthesis. However, NeRF is inherently plagued by long train-

21424

