This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Composed Video Retrieval via Enriched Context and Discriminative Embeddings
Omkar Thawakar1 Muzammal Naseer1 Rao Muhammad Anwer1,2 Salman Khan1,3
Michael Felsberg4 Mubarak Shah5 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,4
1
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI 2 Aalto University 3 Australian National University
4
Linköping University 5 University of Central Florida

Abstract
Composed video retrieval (CoVR) is a challenging problem in computer vision which has recently highlighted the integration of modification text with visual queries for more sophisticated video search in large databases. Existing works
predominantly rely on visual queries combined with modification text to distinguish relevant videos. However, such
a strategy struggles to fully preserve the rich query-specific
context in retrieved target videos and only represents the
target video using visual embedding. We introduce a novel
CoVR framework that leverages detailed language descriptions to explicitly encode query-specific contextual information and learns discriminative embeddings of vision only,
text only and vision-text for better alignment to accurately
retrieve matched target videos. Our proposed framework
can be flexibly employed for both composed video (CoVR)
and image (CoIR) retrieval tasks. Experiments on three
datasets show that our approach obtains state-of-the-art performance for both CovR and zero-shot CoIR tasks, achieving gains as high as around 7% in terms of recall@K=1
score. Our code, detailed language descriptions for WebViDCoVR dataset are available at https://github.com/
OmkarThawakar/composed-video-retrieval.

1. Introduction
Composed image retrieval (CoIR) is the task of retrieving
matching images, given a query composed of an image along
with natural language description (text). Compared to the
classical problem of content-based image retrieval that utilizes a single (visual) modality, composed image retrieval
(CoIR) uses multi-modal information (query comprising image and text) that aids in alleviating miss-interpretations by
incorporating user’s intent specified in the form of language
descriptions (e.g., text-based modification to the query image). Following CoIR, composed video retrieval (CoVR) has
been recently explored in the literature [43] where the multimodal search is performed to retrieve videos that display

almost identical visual characteristics with the desired user
intent, given a query image of a specific visual theme along
with the modifier (change) text. CoVR is a challenging problem with various real-world applications, e.g., e-commerce
and fashion, internet video search, finding live events in
specific locations, and retrieving sports videos of particular players. In this work, we investigate the problem of
composed video retrieval (CoVR).
The problem of CoVR poses two unique challenges: a)
bridging the domain gap between the input query and the
modification text, and b) simultaneously aligning the multimodal feature embedding with the feature embedding of the
target videos that are inherently dynamic. Further, their context can also vary across different video frames. To address
the problem of CoVR, the recent work [43] introduces an annotation pipeline to generate video-text-video triplets from
existing video-caption datasets. The curated triplets contain the source and target video along with the change text
describing the differences between the two videos. These
triplets are then used to train a CoVR model, where a multimodal encoder encodes the image query to obtain visual
features which are passed along with the change text to an
image-grounded text encoder, thereby generating the feature
embedding. In this way, a correspondence is established
between the latent embedding of input visual query’s and
the desired change text to retrieve a target video.
We note that the aforementioned framework [43] struggles (see Fig. 1) since the latent embedding of a query visual
input (image/video) is likely to be insufficient to provide necessary semantic details about the query image/video due to
the following reasons: a) visual inputs are high-dimensional
and offer details, most of which are not related to the given
context, b) the visual depiction often shows a part of the
broader context and there exist non-visual contextual cues
that play a crucial role in understanding the given inputs.
This motivates us to look into an alternative approach that
explicitly encodes contextual information beyond what is
apparent through only the visual input.
In this work, we argue that the detailed language descriptions of the visual content is likely to provide complementary

26896

