This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CGI-DM: Digital Copyright Authentication for Diffusion Models via Contrasting
Gradient Inversion
Xiaoyu Wu1 , Yang Hua2 , Chumeng Liang3 , Jiaru Zhang1 , Hao Wang4 , Tao Song1 *, Haibing Guan1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University1 , Queen’s University Belfast2 ,
University of Southern California3 , Louisiana State University4
{wuxiaoyu2000, jiaruzhang, songt333, hbguan}@sjtu.edu.cn
Y.Hua@qub.ac.uk , chumengl@usc.edu, haowang@lsu.edu

Abstract
Diffusion Models (DMs) have evolved into advanced image generation tools, especially for few-shot generation
where a pre-trained model is fine-tuned on a small set of
images to capture a specific style or object. Despite their
success, concerns exist about potential copyright violations
stemming from the use of unauthorized data in this process. In response, we present Contrasting Gradient Inversion for Diffusion Models (CGI-DM), a novel method featuring vivid visual representations for digital copyright authentication. Our approach involves removing partial information of an image and recovering missing details by
exploiting conceptual differences between the pre-trained
and fine-tuned models. We formulate the differences as
KL divergence between latent variables of the two models
when given the same input image, which can be maximized
through Monte Carlo sampling and Projected Gradient Descent (PGD). The similarity between original and recovered
images serves as a strong indicator of potential infringements. Extensive experiments on the WikiArt and Dreambooth datasets demonstrate the high accuracy of CGI-DM
in digital copyright authentication, surpassing alternative
validation techniques. Code implementation is available at
https://github.com/Nicholas0228/Revelio.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the advancement of Diffusion
Models (DMs) in computer vision. These models demonstrate exceptional capabilities across a diverse array of
tasks, including image editing [14], and video editing [35],
among others. Particularly, the emergence of few-shot generation techniques, exemplified by Dreambooth [24] and
Lora [13], has considerably reduced the costs associated
1 Correspondence to Tao Song (songt333@sjtu.edu.cn).

Few-Shot generation
Training Samples

Generated Images

Infringement
(Without Authorization)
Input
Pretrained Model

Input

Output
Fine-tuning

Fine-tuned Model

CGI-DM for Copyright Authentication

Input Sample

High Similarity
Infringement!
Partial Representation
Masking

Input

Pretrained Model

Recovered Sample

CGI-DM

Output

Input

Fine-tuned Model

Masking

Input Sample

Input

Partial Representation

CGI-DM

Output

Recovered Sample

Low Similarity
No Infringement

Figure 1. Top: Infringements brought by few-shot generation.
A small set of images is used to fine-tune the pre-trained model.
The fine-tuned model is then capable of high-quality generation,
which, if performed without proper authorization, may lead to infringements. Bottom: Our method CGI-DM for copyright authentication. CGI-DM recovers the missing details from partial
representation of an input sample. Then the the similarity between
recovered samples and input samples can be used to validate infringements.

with replicating artwork and transferring art styles, all the
while maintaining an exceedingly high standard of quality. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (Top), these methods focus on
swiftly capturing the style or primary objects by fine-tuning

10812

