This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Targeted Representation Alignment for Open-World Semi-Supervised Learning
Ruixuan Xiao1 , Lei Feng2 , Kai Tang1 , Junbo Zhao1 , Yixuan Li3 , Gang Chen1 , Haobo Wang1 *
1
Zhejiang University, China
2
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
3
University of Wisconsin-Madison, USA
{xiaoruixuan,tk0819,j.zhao,cg,wanghaobo}@zju.edu.cn, lfengqaq@gmail.com, sharonli@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Open-world Semi-Supervised Learning aims to classify
unlabeled samples utilizing information from labeled data,
while unlabeled samples are not only from the labeled
known categories but also from novel categories previously
unseen. Despite the promise, current approaches solely rely
on hazardous similarity-based clustering algorithms and
give unlabeled samples free rein to spontaneously group
into distinct novel class clusters. Nevertheless, due to the
absence of novel class supervision, these methods typically
suffer from the representation collapse dilemma—features
of different novel categories can get closely intertwined and
indistinguishable, even collapsing into the same cluster and
leading to degraded performance. To alleviate this, we propose a novel framework TRAILER which targets to attain
an optimal feature arrangement revealed by the recently
uncovered neural collapse phenomenon. To fulfill this, we
adopt targeted prototypes that are pre-assigned uniformly
with maximum separation and then progressively align the
representations to them. To further tackle the potential
downsides of such stringent alignment, we encapsulate a
sample-target allocation mechanism with coarse-to-fine refinery that is able to infer label assignments with high quality. Extensive experiments demonstrate that TRAILER outperforms current state-of-the-art methods on generic and
fine-grained benchmarks. The code is available at https:
//github.com/Justherozen/TRAILER.

1. Introduction
The resounding achievements of deep learning heavily rely
on large-scale and accurately-annotated training data, which
is labor-intensive and time-consuming. To alleviate this,
semi-supervised learning (SSL) has emerged as a prominent alternative [4, 55, 60], which exploits unlabeled data
for boosted performance. Despite the success, current SSL
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Left: Scenario of open-world SSL where unlabeled samples are from known and novel classes. Right: Visualization without and with our targeted calibration mechanism. Without calibration, representations tend to get jumbled and inseparable, as in the
left where dog and cat categories converge into the same cluster.

methods are primarily based on the closed-world assumption that labeled and unlabeled data share the same predefined label space. Nevertheless, this assumption rarely
holds in real-world applications, where the model may encounter novel classes previously unseen in unlabeled data.
To relax this assumption, novel category discovery (NCD)
was first proposed [15, 21, 22] which assumes all unlabeled data strictly belong to disjoint novel classes. Recently, a more practical setting, open-world semi-supervised
learning (open-world SSL), also referred to as generalized category discovery (GCD), has received huge attention
[5, 46, 50] by generalizing standard SSL and NCD. It assumes that unlabeled data contain both known classes from
the labeled data and similar yet distinct novel classes.
The goal of open-world SSL is to classify the alreadyknown classes from the labeled data, as well as to discover
new classes in unlabeled data without annotations and assign instances to them. Nascent efforts have been made to
address this practical yet under-investigated task [20, 33,
41, 50]. The essence of these recent works is to rashly
rely on the similarity-based [5, 41] or contrastive-based
[46] clustering algorithm in feature space to spontaneously

23072

