This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OVFoodSeg: Elevating Open-Vocabulary Food Image Segmentation via
Image-Informed Textual Representation
Xiongwei Wu

Sicheng Yu

Ee-Peng Lim

Chong-Wah Ngo

Singapore Management University
{xwwu.2015, scyu.2018}@phdcs.smu.edu.sg, {eplim, cwngo}@smu.edu.sg

Abstract
In the realm of food computing, segmenting ingredients
from images poses substantial challenges due to the large
intra-class variance among the same ingredients, the emergence of new ingredients, and the high annotation costs associated with large food segmentation datasets. Existing
approaches primarily utilize a closed-vocabulary and static
text embeddings setting. These methods often fall short in
effectively handling the ingredients, particularly new and
diverse ones. In response to these limitations, we introduce
OVFoodSeg, a framework that adopts an open-vocabulary
setting and enhances text embeddings with visual context.
By integrating vision-language models (VLMs), our approach enriches text embedding with image-specific information through two innovative modules, e.g., an image-totext learner FoodLearner and an Image-Informed Text Encoder. The training process of OVFoodSeg is divided into
two stages: the pre-training of FoodLearner and the subsequent learning phase for segmentation. The pre-training
phase equips FoodLearner with the capability to align visual information with corresponding textual representations
that are specifically related to food, while the second phase
adapts both the FoodLearner and the Image-Informed Text
Encoder for the segmentation task. By addressing the deficiencies of previous models, OVFoodSeg demonstrates a
significant improvement, achieving an 4.9% increase in
mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) on the FoodSeg103
dataset, setting a new milestone for food image segmentation.

1. Introduction
Food computing has garnered significant attention as a research focus due to its widespread application [1, 5, 20, 28]:
it integrates computer science with the analysis of food
and dietary patterns that have a direct impact on people’s
healthy eating habits [21]. At the core of food computing is the task of food image segmentation [8, 24, 31]. It

SAN

SMU Classification:
Restricted

A Photo of cabbage
…
A Photo of beef
…
A Photo of egg

Pr(Egg)

CLIP Text
Encoder

OVFoodSeg

OVFoodSeg

SAN

Pr(Egg)

…

𝐸$%&'()

OVFoodSeg

FoodLearner
Image-Informed
Text Encoder

(a)

0.89

boiled egg

CLIP Image
Encoder

A Photo of cabbage
…
A Photo of beef
…
A Photo of egg

0.95

𝐸!"#!

SAN
𝐸!"#!

0.76

0.34

scrambled egg

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Top: Conventional open-vocabulary segmentation
framework Side Adaptive Network (SAN) [34], predicts mask category logits by raw text embeddings from CLIP; Bottom: Proposed OVFoodSeg, constructs image-informed text embeddings
through FoodLearner and the Image-Informed Text Encoder for
mask classification. (b) This example illustrates the use of both
SAN and the proposed OVFoodSeg in identifying egg masks
cooked using different methods.

aims to identify the ingredients in a food image and locate
them with pixel-level masks. This task can be easily found
in many practical applications, e.g., analysis of caloric and
nutritional content of food intake [22, 23], hence, making it
very important in food computing research.
The standard food image segmentation follows a
pipeline [31] that begins with the annotation of a large image dataset with pixel-wise masks followed by the training of image segmentation models [3, 35]. However, the
pixel mask annotation of images is not only time consuming but also complex. The complexity is further exacerbated in the domain of food as the ingredients can look very
small in food images, and they may interact with one another to form obscuring boundaries. While publicly available annotated image datasets for semantic segmentation
exist [8, 20], there is only one ingredient-level food segmentation dataset [31] that provides the human annotated
masks of 103 ingredient labels across 7,000 images. Even
such a small dataset took one year to construct. The set of
103 ingredient labels is also too small to cover all the ingre-

4144

