This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bootstrapping Autonomous Driving Radars with Self-Supervised Learning
Yiduo Hao* †
University of Cambridge

Sohrab Madani†
UIUC

Junfeng Guan
EPFL

Mohammed Alloulah‡
RadarEye

Saurabh Gupta
UIUC

Haitham Hassanieh
EPFL

Abstract
The perception of autonomous vehicles using radars has
attracted increased research interest due its ability to operate in fog and bad weather. However, training radar models
is hindered by the cost and difficulty of annotating largescale radar data. To overcome this bottleneck, we propose a self-supervised learning framework to leverage the
large amount of unlabeled radar data to pre-train radaronly embeddings for self-driving perception tasks. The proposed method combines radar-to-radar and radar-to-vision
contrastive losses to learn a general representation from
unlabeled radar heatmaps paired with their corresponding camera images. When used for downstream object detection, we demonstrate that the proposed self-supervision
framework can improve the accuracy of state-of-the-art supervised baselines by 5.8% in mAP. Code is available at
https://github.com/yiduohao/Radical.

1. Introduction
Millimeter-wave (mmWave) radars have received increased
interest from the self-driving cars industry owing to its
cost-effectiveness and its ability to operate in adverse
weather conditions where cameras and lidar fail like in fog,
smog, snowstorms, and sandstorms [47, 48, 75]. As such,
there has been a significant amount of work, from both
academia [14, 27, 63, 67] and industry [45, 46, 52, 60],
on developing data-driven methods for semantic scene understanding on top of radar signals. Moreover, the advent
of standard commercial automotive radars has made realworld deployments and large-scale data collection campaigns possible and several automotive radar datasets have
recently been curated [14, 15, 43, 45, 49, 52, 63, 67, 77].
However, compared to de facto computer vision datasets
like ImageNet, the volume of annotated open radar datasets
* Work done during internship at EPFL.
† denotes co-primary first authors.
‡ Work done whilst at Nokia Bell Labs.

(a) Scene

(b) BEV
Radar Heatmap

(c) Zoomed
Into Car Area

(d) Annoatation of (c)

Figure 1. Millimeter wave radar heatmaps are uninterpretable
to humans and are hence difficult to annotate.

remains very limited. This is because radar images are especially challenging for humans to interpret and thus annotate. Figure 1 shows an example of bird’s eye view (BEV)
radar heatmaps and the corresponding camera images. Unlike camera images, radar heatmaps appear as blobs with
no sharp boundaries or well-defined shapes for the objects
present in the scene. These blobs carry little to no contextual or perceptual information and, as such, are hard to interpret by humans. Furthermore, mmWave radar signals are
highly specular; meaning, mmWave signals exhibit mirrorlike reflections on cars [12]. As a result, not all reflections
from the car propagate back to the radar receiver, and most
of the car does not appear in the image. These effects compound making it difficult even for well-trained radar imaging experts to draw precise bounding boxes of objects [27].
As a result, only a tiny fraction of radar data is typically labeled (e.g. 10%) of the hundreds of thousands of raw radar
frames in open radar datasets [43]. Hence, building accurate supervised radar object detection models is extremely
difficult.
To address the challenge of annotating radar data, prior
work leverages other sensing modalities like cameras and lidar to derive labels for radar heatmaps and use these labels
as groundtruth to train radar-based models [23, 38, 39, 51,
64, 66, 68]. However, different sensory modalities have different viewpoints and projection planes of the scene. For
example, camera-based labels suffer from depth-unaware
perspective projection onto the image plane, so they can-

15012

