This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty-aware Action Decoupling Transformer for Action Anticipation
Shao-Yuan Lo2
Kwonjoon Lee2
Qiang Ji1
Hongji Guo1 * Nakul Agarwal2
1
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 2 Honda Research Institute, USA
{guoh11, jiq}@rpi.edu, {nakul agarwal, shao-yuan lo, kwonjoon lee}@honda-ri.com

Abstract

...

Verb Encoder

Human action anticipation aims at predicting what people will do in the future based on past observations. In this
paper, we introduce Uncertainty-aware Action Decoupling
Transformer (UADT) for action anticipation. Unlike existing methods that directly predict action in a verb-noun pair
format, we decouple the action anticipation task into verb
and noun anticipations separately. The objective is to make
the two decoupled tasks assist each other and eventually improve the action anticipation task. Specifically, we propose
a two-stream Transformer-based architecture which is composed of a verb-to-noun model and a noun-to-verb model.
The verb-to-noun model leverages the verb information to
improve the noun prediction and the other way around. We
extend the model in a probabilistic manner and quantify the
predictive uncertainty of each decoupled task to select features. In this way, the noun prediction leverages the most informative and redundancy-free verb features and verb prediction works similarly. Finally, the two streams are combined dynamically based on their uncertainties to make the
joint action anticipation. We demonstrate the efficacy of our
method by achieving state-of-the-art performance on action anticipation benchmarks including EPIC-KITCHENS,
EGTEA Gaze+, and 50-Salads.

1. Introduction
Human action anticipation aims at predicting the future action before it happens based on the current observation. It is
an important research topic for intelligent systems since it
is widely applied for autonomous driving [44], human-robot
interaction [31], and smart homes [19].
The task is very challenging as the future observation is
unavailable and the anticipation needs to be made timely
for real-time purposes [25]. Under most anticipation task
settings [13, 28, 36, 38], the actions are represented as
(verb, noun) pairs, which means both verbs and nouns
needed to be predicted correctly. Most existing methods [20, 25, 26, 40, 48, 61] for action anticipation tackle
* Work done during internship at Honda Research Institute, USA.

verb embedding

...

Noun Decoder
noun prediction

verb uncertainty

“wash dishes”

...

Noun Encoder

noun embedding

...
noun uncertainty

Verb Decoder
verb prediction

Input

Figure 1. An illustration of uncertainty-aware action decoupling transformer (UADT). UADT is composed of a verb-tonoun model (VtN) and a noun-to-verb model (NtV), which aims at
anticipating noun and verb respectively. VtN anticipates the noun
with the assistance of verb information and NtV anticipates the
verb with the assistance of noun information. VtN and NtV are
dynamically combined based on the predictive uncertainty.

the task as an one-class action classification problem without considering the underlying dynamics and dependencies
between verbs and nouns. These models directly output
the action prediction, which is later decomposed into verb
and noun predictions in a post-processing. However, this
mechanism has a critical drawback. If either the verb or
noun of the action is difficult to predict due to the limited visual cues, the action can be very difficult to predict
correctly since it requires both verb and noun to be correct [59, 60]. On the other hand, if either verb or noun is
known, the remaining part is much easier to predict. For example, the verb of “drinking coffee” can be easier predicted
when knowing the “coffee” and the noun of “stretch dough”
is easier to predict when knowing “stretch”. In addition,
the predictive uncertainty can be greatly reduced because
the p((verb, noun)|X) is converted to p(verb|X, noun) or
p(noun|X, verb), where X is the input. The verb/noun information serves as a prior for the complementary part so
the anticipation is simplified.
To address the above issue of verb-noun modeling,
we introduce Uncertainty-aware Action Decoupling Transformer (UADT), which decouples the action anticipation
into verb and noun anticipations. Specifically, UADT is
composed of a verb-to-noun model and a noun-to-verb

18644

