This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRF On-the-go: Exploiting Uncertainty for Distractor-free NeRFs in the Wild
Weining Ren1∗ Zihan Zhu1 * Boyang Sun1 Jiaqi Chen1 Marc Pollefeys1,2 Songyou Peng1,3
1
2
3
ETH Zürich
Microsoft
MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
nerf-on-the-go.github.io
Input

Input

Uncertainty

…

NeRF-W

RobustNeRF

Ours

Ours

Input

NeRF-W

RobustNeRF

Ours

Figure 1. NeRF On-the-go. Given casually captured image sequences or videos in the wild as inputs, the goal of this paper is to train a
NeRF for static scenes and effectively remove all dynamic elements in the scenes (cars, trams, pedestrians, etc), i.e. distractors. Unlike
existing methods such as NeRF-W [23] and RobustNeRF [35], which produce imperfect results, our method leverages the predicted
uncertainty maps to effectively remove those distractors. This results in high-fidelity novel view synthesis on challenging dynamic scenes.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have shown remarkable success in synthesizing photorealistic views from multiview images of static scenes, but face challenges in dynamic, real-world environments with distractors like moving objects, shadows, and lighting changes. Existing methods manage controlled environments and low occlusion ratios but fall short in render quality, especially under high
occlusion scenarios. In this paper, we introduce NeRF Onthe-go, a simple yet effective approach that enables the robust synthesis of novel views in complex, in-the-wild scenes
from only casually captured image sequences. Delving into
uncertainty, our method not only efficiently eliminates distractors, even when they are predominant in captures, but
also achieves a notably faster convergence speed. Through
comprehensive experiments on various scenes, our method
demonstrates a significant improvement over state-of-theart techniques. This advancement opens new avenues for
NeRF in diverse and dynamic real-world applications.

1. Introduction
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) tackles the challenge of rendering a scene from previously unobserved viewpoints.
* Equal contribution.

Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) [26] have emerged as a
groundbreaking paradigm for this task. This is because a
NeRF can produce geometrically consistent and photorealistic renderings, even for complex scenarios with thin structures and semi-transparent objects.
Training a NeRF model requires a set of RGB images
with given camera poses, and demands manual adjustments
of camera settings, such as focal length, exposure, and white
balance. More crucially, vanilla NeRFs operate under the
assumption that the scene should remain completely static
during the capture process, without any distractors such as
moving objects, shadows, or other dynamic elements [35].
Nevertheless, the real world is inherently dynamic, making
this distractor-free requirement often unrealistic to meet.
Additionally, removing distractors from the captured data
is non-trivial. The process involves per-pixel annotation for
each image, a procedure that is very labor-intensive, especially for lengthy captures of large scenes. This underscores
a key limitation in the practical application of NeRFs in dynamic, real-world environments.
Recently, several works [22, 34, 42, 47] have attempted
to address the challenges. [34] and [42] use pre-trained semantic segmentation models for specific moving objects,
but the model fails to segment undefined object classes.

8931

