This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards High-fidelity Artistic Image Vectorization via Texture-Encapsulated
Shape Parameterization
Ye Chen1

Bingbing Ni1,2∗ Jinfan Liu1 Xiaoyang Huang1 Xuanhong Chen1,2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
USC-SJTU Institute of Cultural and Creative Industry
{chenye123, nibingbing, chen19910528}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
We develop a novel vectorized image representation
scheme accommodating both shape/geometry and texture
in a decoupled way, particularly tailored for reconstruction
and editing tasks of artistic/design images such as Emojis
and Cliparts. In the heart of this representation is a set
of sparsely and unevenly located 2D control points. On
one hand, these points constitute a collection of parametric/vectorized geometric primitives (e.g., curves and closed
shapes) describing the shape characteristics of the target
image. On the other hand, local texture codes, in terms
of implicit neural network parameters, are spatially distributed into each control point, yielding local coordinateto-RGB mappings within the anchored region of each control point. In the meantime, a zero-shot learning algorithm
is developed to decompose an arbitrary raster image into
the above representation, for the sake of high-fidelity image vectorization with convenient editing ability. Extensive
experiments on a series of image vectorization and editing
tasks well demonstrate the high accuracy offered by our
proposed method, with a significantly higher image compression ratio over prior art.

1. Introduction
How to represent images is a fundamental problem in the
field of computer vision. Traditionally, images are represented by pixels stored on fixed and discrete grids (i.e.,
raster images). One main advantage of such representation
is that, there is virtually no limit to its ability to express image details with enough pixels. Nevertheless, pixel-based
representation is plagued by numerous limitations. On one
hand, it suffers from excessive redundancy due to its storage on fixed grids, which inherently constrains image resolution, along with inevitable information loss during image re-scaling. On the other hand, most importantly, pixel∗ Corresponding author: Bingbing Ni

Lossy Pixel Editing

Redundant Parameters

"×$×3

Lossy Texture Details

Raster

3145728
(1024×1024×3)

Compact Parameters Vector
!" …… !# , -

!!

!!

!"

……

!#

, -

……

!!

!"

……

!#

, -

&ℎ(!)_+,-×(2- + 4)
256×(2×12 + 4)=7168

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. Raster images that
store pixel values on fixed and discrete grids suffer from excessive
parameter redundancy and a high coupling between image geometry and texture, resulting in challenging image editing. Vector
images represent visual concepts with vectorized geometric primitives in a very compact parameter format, endowed with great
editability. However, vector images are not suitable for expressing image texture details. This work explores a compact vectorized image representation that decouples images in geometric
and texture space, tailored for high-fidelity texture-rich image vectorization, facilitating easy image editing.

based representation stores all the information of an image
in the RGB values of the pixels, resulting in a high coupling
between the representation of image geometry and texture.
Hence, it is challenging to edit the shape/geometry and texture of a raster image separately.
Vector images embody an alternative paradigm for representing visual information, which describe images with
a collection of parametric/vectorized geometric primitives
(e.g., curves and closed shapes), defined as control points
in the continuous space. Compared to representing images
with fixed discrete grids, vector images present many advantages. 1) Resolution-Agnostic: Pixel-based image rescaling often introduces unexpected noise/artifact that is
hard to identify and remove. In contrast, modeling images with continuous parameters enables the storage and
generation of images in arbitrary resolutions without in-

15877

