This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Coupled Dictionaries from Unpaired Data for Image Super-Resolution
Longguang Wang1 , Juncheng Li2 , Yingqian Wang3 , Qingyong Hu4 , Yulan Guo3∗
1
Aviation University of Air Force 2 Shanghai University
3
National University of Defense Technology 4 Independent Researcher
minimize
gap

Abstract
The difficulty of acquiring high-resolution (HR) and lowresolution (LR) image pairs in real scenarios limits the performance of existing learning-based image super-resolution
(SR) methods in the real world. To conduct training on realworld unpaired data, current methods focus on synthesizing
pseudo LR images to associate unpaired images. However,
the realness and diversity of pseudo LR images are vulnerable due to the large image space. In this paper, we circumvent the difficulty of image generation and propose an
alternative to build the connection between unpaired images in a compact proxy space. Specifically, we first construct coupled HR and LR dictionaries, and then encode
HR and LR images into a common latent code space using
these dictionaries. In addition, we develop an autoencoderbased framework to couple these dictionaries during optimization by reconstructing input HR and LR images. The
coupled dictionaries enable our method to employ a shallow network architecture with only 18 layers to achieve
efficient image SR. Extensive experiments show that our
method (DictSR) can effectively model the LR-to-HR mapping in coupled dictionaries and produces state-of-the-art
performance on benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) aims at reconstructing a highresolution (HR) image from low-resolution (LR) observations. To this end, most existing learning-based methods
[1–4] rely on paired training data to build an LR-to-HR
mapping. Since paired data is difficult to acquire in the real
world, manually designed degradations are commonly employed to synthesize paired data for training [5, 6]. Nevertheless, as pre-defined degradations are empirical, synthetic
images cannot meet the diversity of real-world images and
limit the performance of previous methods in real scenarios
[7, 8].
To remedy this problem, numerous efforts have been
made to directly conduct training on unpaired data [7–9]. To
enable the learning of LR-to-HR mapping, existing meth-

G

HR images

pseudo LR images

LR images

(a) Previous Approaches

EHR

HR images

ELR

latent code

LR images

(b) Our Approach

Figure 1. Comparison between previous approaches and our approach. Instead of synthesizing pseudo LR images and minimizing
the gap in the image space (a), we encode HR and LR images into a
common latent code space using coupled dictionaries to associate
unpaired HR and LR images (b).

ods focus on synthesizing pseudo paired data for training.
Given HR images x ∼ px (target domain) and LR images
y ∼ py (source domain), pseudo LR images are generated by
learning an HR-to-LR mapping. Then, HR images and the
resultant pseudo LR images are adopted to learn the LR-toHR mapping. Early methods [7, 9] commonly use generative adversarial networks (GANs) with cycle-consistency or
adversarial loss to synthesize pseudo LR images. However,
these GAN-based methods usually suffer mode collapse and
require elaborate fine-tuning. Recently, more powerful diffusion model [10] is introduced for pseudo LR image synthesis. The large latent space in the diffusion model improves the diversity of synthesized images at the cost of
lower content fidelity, which hinders further performance
improvements.
Due to the low rank characteristic of natural images,
an image can be represented as a spare code on an overcomplete dictionary [11, 12]. On top of this perspective,
we seek to associate unpaired LR and HR images in a compact space without relying on synthesizing pseudo LR im-

25712

