This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fast ODE-based Sampling for Diffusion Models in Around 5 Steps
Zhenyu Zhou
Defang Chen†
Can Wang
Chun Chen
The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security,
Zhejiang University, China
{zhyzhou, defchern, wcan, chenc}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Sampling from diffusion models can be treated as solving
the corresponding ordinary differential equations (ODEs),
with the aim of obtaining an accurate solution with as few
number of function evaluations (NFE) as possible. Recently, various fast samplers utilizing higher-order ODE
solvers have emerged and achieved better performance than
the initial first-order one. However, these numerical methods inherently result in certain approximation errors, which
significantly degrades sample quality with extremely small
NFE (e.g., around 5). In contrast, based on the geometric
observation that each sampling trajectory almost lies in a
two-dimensional subspace embedded in the ambient space,
we propose Approximate MEan-Direction Solver (AMEDSolver) that eliminates truncation errors by directly learning the mean direction for fast diffusion sampling. Besides, our method can be easily used as a plugin to further
improve existing ODE-based samplers. Extensive experiments on image synthesis with the resolution ranging from
32 to 512 demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. With
only 5 NFE, we achieve 6.61 FID on CIFAR-10, 10.74 FID
on ImageNet 64×64, and 13.20 FID on LSUN Bedroom.
Our code is available at https://github.com/zjupi/diff-sampler.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have been attracting growing attentions
in recent years due to their impressive generative capability [9, 34, 36, 38]. Given a noise input, they are able to
generate a realistic output by performing iterative denoising
steps with the score function [15, 42, 45]. This process can
be interpreted as applying a certain numerical discretization
on a stochastic differential equation (SDE), or more commonly, its corresponding probability flow ordinary differential equation (PF-ODE) [45]. Comparing to other generative
models such as GANs [12] and VAEs [19], diffusion mod† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Synthesized images by Stable-Diffusion [34] with a default classifier-free guidance scale 7.5 and a text prompt “A Corgi
on the grass surrounded by a cluster of colorful balloons”. Our
method improves DPM-Solver++(2M) [26] in sample quality.

els have the advantages in high sample quality and stable
training, but suffer from slow sampling speed, which poses
a great challenge to their applications.
Existing methods for accelerating diffusion sampling fall
into two main streams. One is designing faster numerical
solvers to increase step size while maintaining small truncation errors [10, 18, 23, 25, 43, 51]. They can be further
categorized as single-step solvers and multi-step solvers [2].
The former computes the next step solution only using information from the current time step, while the latter uses
multiple past time steps. These methods have successfully
reduced the number of function evaluations (NFE) from
1000 to less than 20, almost without affecting the sample
quality. Another kind of methods aim to build a one-to-one
mapping between the data distribution and the pre-specified
noise distribution [4, 24, 27, 39, 46], based on the idea of
knowledge distillation. With a well-trained student model
in hand, high-quality generation can be achieved with only
one NFE. However, training such a student model either

7777

