This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Depth Anything: Unleashing the Power of Large-Scale Unlabeled Data
Lihe Yang1

Bingyi Kang2 †
1

Zilong Huang2

Xiaogang Xu3,4

Jiashi Feng2

2

3

4

HKU

TikTok

† project lead

CUHK

Hengshuang Zhao1‡

ZJU

‡ corresponding author

https://depth-anything.github.io

Figure 1. Our model exhibits impressive generalization ability across extensive unseen scenes. Left two columns: COCO [35]. Middle two:
SA-1B [26] (a hold-out unseen set). Right two: photos captured by ourselves. Our model works robustly in low-light environments (1st and
3rd column), complex scenes (2nd and 5th column), foggy weather (5th column), and ultra-remote distance (5th and 6th column), etc.

Abstract
This work presents Depth Anything1 , a highly practical
solution for robust monocular depth estimation. Without pursuing novel technical modules, we aim to build a simple yet
powerful foundation model dealing with any images under
any circumstances. To this end, we scale up the dataset by
designing a data engine to collect and automatically annotate large-scale unlabeled data (∼62M), which significantly
enlarges the data coverage and thus is able to reduce the
generalization error. We investigate two simple yet effective
strategies that make data scaling-up promising. First, a more
challenging optimization target is created by leveraging data
augmentation tools. It compels the model to actively seek
extra visual knowledge and acquire robust representations.
Second, an auxiliary supervision is developed to enforce
the model to inherit rich semantic priors from pre-trained
encoders. We evaluate its zero-shot capabilities extensively,
including six public datasets and randomly captured photos.
It demonstrates impressive generalization ability (Figure 1).
Further, through fine-tuning it with metric depth information
from NYUv2 and KITTI, new SOTAs are set. Our better depth
model also results in a better depth-conditioned ControlNet.
Our models are released here.
Work was done during an internship at TikTok.
1While the grammatical soundness of this name may be questionable,

we treat it as a whole and pay homage to Segment Anything [26].

1. Introduction
The field of computer vision and natural language processing
is currently experiencing a revolution with the emergence of
“foundation models” [6] that demonstrate strong zero-/fewshot performance in various downstream scenarios [44, 58].
These successes primarily rely on large-scale training data
that can effectively cover the data distribution. Monocular
Depth Estimation (MDE), which is a fundamental problem
with broad applications in robotics [65], autonomous driving [63, 79], virtual reality [47], etc., also requires a foundation model to estimate depth information from a single
image. However, this has been underexplored due to the
difficulty of building datasets with tens of millions of depth
labels. MiDaS [45] made a pioneering study along this direction by training an MDE model on a collection of mixed
labeled datasets. Despite demonstrating a certain level of
zero-shot ability, MiDaS is limited by its data coverage, thus
suffering disastrous performance in some scenarios.
In this work, our goal is to build a foundation model for
MDE capable of producing high-quality depth information
for any images under any circumstances. We approach this
target from the perspective of dataset scaling-up. Traditionally, depth datasets are created mainly by acquiring depth
data from sensors [17, 54], stereo matching [14], or SfM [32],
which is costly, time-consuming, or even intractable in particular situations. We instead, for the first time, pay attention to
large-scale unlabeled data. Compared with stereo images or

10371

