This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IS-F USION: Instance-Scene Collaborative Fusion for Multimodal 3D Object Detection
Junbo Yin1 , Jianbing Shen2 , Runnan Chen3 , Wei Li4* , Ruigang Yang4 , Pascal Frossard5 , Wenguan Wang6 *
1
3

School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology

The University of Hong Kong

4

Inceptio

5

2

SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau

École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)

6

ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University

{yinjunbocn,wenguanwang.ai}@gmail.com

Abstract
Bird’s eye view (BEV) representation has emerged as a
dominant solution for describing 3D space in autonomous
driving scenarios. However, objects in the BEV representation typically exhibit small sizes, and the associated
point cloud context is inherently sparse, which leads to
great challenges for reliable 3D perception. In this paper,
we propose IS-F USION, an innovative multimodal fusion
framework that jointly captures the Instance- and Scenelevel contextual information. IS-F USION essentially differs
from existing approaches that only focus on the BEV scenelevel fusion by explicitly incorporating instance-level multimodal information, thus facilitating the instance-centric
tasks like 3D object detection. It comprises a Hierarchical
Scene Fusion (HSF) module and an Instance-Guided Fusion (IGF) module. HSF applies Point-to-Grid and Grid-toRegion transformers to capture the multimodal scene context at different granularities. IGF mines instance candidates, explores their relationships, and aggregates the local
multimodal context for each instance. These instances then
serve as guidance to enhance the scene feature and yield
an instance-aware BEV representation. On the challenging nuScenes benchmark, IS-F USION outperforms all the
published multimodal works to date. Code is available at:
https://github.com/yinjunbo/IS-Fusion.

1. Introduction
3D object detection [23, 49, 53, 82, 88, 93] is a critical task in various applications such as autonomous driving and robotics. Over the past few years, tremendous
progress has been achieved in point cloud-based 3D object detection, due to the effective 3D neural network models [5, 17, 18, 19, 55, 87]. While point clouds, typically
captured by depth-aware sensors such as LiDAR, provide
valuable geometric information about the 3D space, they
often lack detailed texture descriptions and are sparsely dis* Corresponding author.

Multimodal Feature

Multimodal Feature
Scene-Level
Fusion

Image
Feature

Scene-Level
Fusion

Image
Feature
Merge

Point Cloud Feature
(a) Scene-only Fusion

Instance-guided
Fusion

Select

Instance
Features

Point Cloud Feature
(b) Instance-Scene Collaborative Fusion

Figure 1. Motivation of IS-F USION. (a) Previous approaches
typically focus on fusion at the entire scene level during multimodal encoding. (b) In contrast, IS-F USION places additional emphasis on the fusion at the instance level and explores the instanceto-scene collaboration to enhance the overall representation.

tributed over long distances, e.g., beyond 100 meters in outdoor scenarios like nuScenes [2]. To tackle these limitations, a recent trend is to perform multimodal 3D object detection [33, 34, 40, 46, 77] by fusing information from both
point clouds and synchronized multi-view images. The image modality provides detailed texture and dense semantic
information [20, 70], which complements the sparse point
cloud and thus enhances the 3D perception capacity.
To handle heterogeneous data from different modalities,
existing approaches [40, 42, 46] typically pre-define a unified space that is compatible with both modalities (i.e., the
bird’s eye view (BEV) in the ego-vehicle coordinate system), and then perform feature alignment and fusion on this
shared space. BEV representation simplifies the complex
3D space into a 2D plane, making it easier to understand
the scene. However, performing fusion from the entire BEV
scene level ignores the inherent difference between the foreground instances and background regions, which may undermine the performance. For example, object instances
represented in the BEV often exhibit smaller sizes compared to those observed in natural images. Additionally,
the number of BEV grid cells occupied by foreground instances is significantly lower than those occupied by back-

14905

