This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ChatScene: Knowledge-Enabled Safety-Critical Scenario Generation for
Autonomous Vehicles
Jiawei Zhang
UIUC

Chejian Xu
UIUC

Bo Li
UChicago & UIUC

jiaweiz7@illinois.edu

chejian2@illinois.edu

bol@uchicago.edu

Abstract
We present ChatScene, a Large Language Model (LLM)based agent that leverages the capabilities of LLMs to generate safety-critical scenarios for autonomous vehicles. Given
unstructured language instructions, the agent first generates
textually described traffic scenarios using LLMs. These scenario descriptions are subsequently broken down into several
sub-descriptions for specified details such as behaviors and
locations of vehicles. The agent then distinctively transforms
the textually described sub-scenarios into domain-specific
languages, which then generate actual code for prediction
and control in simulators, facilitating the creation of diverse
and complex scenarios within the CARLA simulation environment. A key part of our agent is a comprehensive knowledge retrieval component, which efficiently translates specific textual descriptions into corresponding domain-specific
code snippets by training a knowledge database containing the scenario description and code pairs. Extensive experimental results underscore the efficacy of ChatScene
in improving the safety of autonomous vehicles. For instance, the scenarios generated by ChatScene show a
15% increase in collision rates compared to state-of-theart baselines when tested against different reinforcement
learning-based ego vehicles. Furthermore, we show that
by using our generated safety-critical scenarios to fine-tune
different RL-based autonomous driving models, they can
achieve a 9% reduction in collision rates, surpassing current SOTA methods. ChatScene effectively bridges the
gap between textual descriptions of traffic scenarios and
practical CARLA simulations, providing a unified way to
conveniently generate safety-critical scenarios for safety
testing and improvement for AVs. The code is available
at https://github.com/javyduck/ChatScene.

1. Introduction
Although machine learning (ML), particularly deep neural networks (DNNs), has shown remarkable performance
across a myriad of applications such as image recognition [24], natural language processing [12], and health-

care [16], they also exhibit a surprising susceptibility to
subtle and adversarial perturbations. These perturbations
can yield erroneous predictions [3, 39], posing potentially
fatal consequences in safety-critical applications like Autonomous Driving (AD) [6, 28]. For example, by attaching
seemingly innocuous stickers to a Stop Sign in the real world,
an autonomous vehicle (AV) can readily misinterpret it as a
Speed Limit 80 Sign [17], which can lead to some hazardous
driving behaviors and potential accidents.
Therefore, given the potential for such adversarial manipulations, it is crucial that AVs undergo exhaustive testing across all conceivable safety-critical scenarios to ensure
their safe and reliable operation before large-scale deployment. However, traditional real-world testing is not only
prohibitively expensive but also demands extensive data collection, often requiring vehicles to be driven hundreds of
millions of miles to accumulate sufficient safety-critical scenarios. Consequently, the generation of simulated scenarios
for testing has been increasingly adopted as a cost-effective
and efficient alternative.
For instance, Wachi et al. [43] employ multi-agent reinforcement learning to train adversarial vehicles, aiming to
expose the vulnerabilities in rule-based driving algorithms
within the CARLA platform [15]. Chen et al. [8] instead
focus on generating adversarial scenarios for lane-changing
maneuvers using ensemble deep reinforcement learning techniques, and Feng et al. [18] further offer a highway-driving
simulation that incorporates further scenarios such as Cut
Following and Cut-in. Nevertheless, a key challenge remains:
these methods are limited to only a narrow range of safetycritical scenarios, which may still fall short of encompassing
the complexity of real-world situations.
Meanwhile, the emergence of LLMs, trained with vast
amounts of data from the internet and encompassing billions
of parameters, has demonstrated a remarkable aptitude for
capturing human knowledge [4, 9, 41, 52]. These models
have established themselves as effective tools for the extraction of knowledge. For instance, LLMs begin to play
a pivotal role in pedagogical processes [26], and they are
becoming instrumental in synthesizing clinical knowledge to

15459

