This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SD4Match: Learning to Prompt Stable Diffusion Model for Semantic Matching
Xinghui Li†
Jingyi Lu‡
Kai Han‡*
Victor Adrian Prisacariu†
†
‡
University of Oxford
University of Hong Kong
xinghui@robots.ox.ac.uk
jingyi@connect.hku.hk
kaihanx@hku.hk
victor@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we address the challenge of matching semantically similar keypoints across image pairs. Existing
research indicates that the intermediate output of the UNet
within the Stable Diffusion (SD) can serve as robust image
feature maps for such a matching task. We demonstrate that
by employing a basic prompt tuning technique, the inherent potential of Stable Diffusion can be harnessed, resulting in a significant enhancement in accuracy over previous approaches. We further introduce a novel conditional
prompting module that conditions the prompt on the local
details of the input image pairs, leading to a further improvement in performance. We designate our approach as
SD4Match, short for Stable Diffusion for Semantic Matching. Comprehensive evaluations of SD4Match on the PFPascal, PF-Willow, and SPair-71k datasets show that it sets
new benchmarks in accuracy across all these datasets. Particularly, SD4Match outperforms the previous state-of-theart by a margin of 12 percentage points on the challenging
SPair-71k dataset. Code is available at the project website:
https://sd4match.active.vision/.

1. Introduction
Matching keypoints between two semantically similar objects is one of the challenges in computer vision. The difficulties arise from the fact that semantic correspondences
may exhibit significant visual dissimilarity due to occlusion, different viewpoints, and intra-category appearance
differences. Although significant progress has been made
[4, 14, 26, 30, 37, 44], the problem is far from being completely solved. Recently, Stable Diffusion (SD) [46] has
demonstrated a remarkable ability to generate high-quality
images based on input textual prompts. Looking specifically at semantic matching, follow-up studies [50, 55, 56]
have further revealed that SD is not only proficient in generative tasks but also applicable to feature extraction. Ex* Corresponding author.

periments demonstrate that SD can perform on par with
methods especially designed for semantic matching, paving
a new direction in this field. This brings up a yet unanswered question: Have we fully explored the capacity of
SD in matching? Or, how should we harness the information gathered from billions of images stored within SD to
further improve its performance?
Engineering the textual prompt has already been extensively utilized in numerous computer vision tasks, including image generation using Stable Diffusion. In these applications, prompts are meticulously handcrafted to achieve
the desired output. Prompt tuning, or direct optimization
of prompt embedding, has also been utilized to adapt pretrained vision-language models, such as CLIP [43], to new
data domains in tasks like image classification, especially
when faced with limited data resources [21, 59]. Inspired by
the latter strategy, and given that the accuracy of matching
is quantifiable and limiting the prompt to the textual domain
is unnecessary, we can directly optimize the prompt on the
latent space to exploit SD’s potential for semantic matching.
In spite of its straightforward nature, we find that learning a
single, universal prompt applicable to all images is already
highly effective in adapting SD to semantic matching, and
not only improves previous SD-based semantic matchers
[50, 55] but also leads to the state-of-the-art performance
over all types of methods.
Current works that explore SD for visual perception
tasks mimic the textual prompt input of standard image generation SD, by either handcrafting a text input [50] or by
using an implicit captioner [54]. Novel to our work, we find
that the choice for prompt, text, or otherwise, particularly
when including prior information, significantly influences
the overall matching performance. We then introduce two
additional prompt tuning schemes tailored specifically for
semantic matching: one that leverages explicit prior semantic knowledge and learns a distinct prompt for each object
category, and a novel conditional prompting module that
conditions the prompt on the local feature patches of both
images in the image pair to be matched, instead of global
descriptors of each individual image. Experiments show

27558

