This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Harnessing Meta-Learning
for Improving Full-Frame Video Stabilization
Muhammad Kashif Ali1
Eun Woo Im2
Dongjin Kim1
Tae Hyun Kim1†
{kashifali, iameuandyou, dongjinkim, taehyunkim}@hanyang.ac.kr
1
Dept. of Computer Science, 2 Dept. of Artificial Intelligence, Hanyang University

Abstract
Video stabilization is a longstanding computer vision
problem, particularly pixel-level synthesis solutions for
video stabilization which synthesize full frames add to the
complexity of this task. These techniques aim to stabilize
videos by synthesizing full frames while enhancing the stability of the considered video. This intensifies the complexity
of the task due to the distinct mix of unique motion profiles
and visual content present in each video sequence, making
robust generalization with fixed parameters difficult. In our
study, we introduce a novel approach to enhance the performance of pixel-level synthesis solutions for video stabilization by adapting these models to individual input video sequences. The proposed adaptation exploits low-level visual
cues accessible during test-time to improve both the stability and quality of resulting videos. We highlight the efficacy
of our methodology of “test-time adaptation” through simple fine-tuning of one of these models, followed by significant stability gain via the integration of meta-learning techniques. Notably, significant improvement is achieved with
only a single adaptation step. The versatility of the proposed algorithm is demonstrated by consistently improving
the performance of various pixel-level synthesis models for
video stabilization in real-world scenarios.

1. Introduction
Today, the act of capturing and sharing visual content is
deeply ingrained in our daily lives. Millions of users rely on
social networking platforms like YouTube and Facebook to
document and share their favorite experiences with others.
However, the lack of specialized stabilization equipment,
such as gimbals, often results in noticeably shaky and unstable videos. This jitter affects the overall user experience and
hinders effective visual communication. Consequently, the
field of video stabilization has attracted considerable attention from both videographers and researchers alike, offering
† : Corresponding author.

the potential to enhance the visual experience and support
various downstream vision tasks.
Traditionally, video stabilization methods have followed
a straightforward pipeline of motion estimation, smoothing,
and compensation techniques involving spatial transformations. Despite significant efforts to improve these transformation methods, the restoration process often comes at
the expense of losing valuable visual content due to pixel
projection, leading to irregular boundaries near the edges
of stabilized videos. To mitigate this issue, cropping is
commonly employed, resulting in loss of visual resolution. However, recent advances in deep learning methodologies have brought new possibilities for content preservation on the cropped region. Approaches such as inpainting the missing regions [9, 43] or defining an end-toend pipeline that simultaneously stabilizes and synthesizes
missing regions [1, 7, 31] offer promising solutions. However, achieving end-to-end feed-forward pixel-level stabilization remains challenging due to the inherent difficulty
of this task and the diverse scenarios in real-world video.
Notably, the pioneering works of Choi et al. [7] and
Ali et al. [1] have initiated the exploration of end-to-end
full-frame video stabilization methods. Choi et al. [7] introduced an optical flow-based frame interpolation method
(termed DIFRINT) that stabilizes videos through multiple temporal interpolations. On the other hand, Ali et
al. [1] proposed Deep Motion-Blind Video Stabilization
(DMBVS), a feed-forward method, which is trained on a
dataset that consists of stable and unstable videos with similar perspectives. Despite their contributions, both methods
face certain limitation, for instance, DIFRINT encounters
challenges in preserving perceptual quality over multiple interpolation iterations and is prone to temporal artifacts near
the motion boundaries where occlusion and dis-occlusion
occur. Conversely, DMBVS generates visually appealing
frames but lacks a mechanism to control the level of stability in the resulting videos.
To overcome these limitations, one potential approach is
to make these models adaptive and leverage the spatiotemporal cues present in specific scenes, similar to the strategies

12605

