This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Powers of Ten
Xiaojuan Wang1 Janne Kontkanen2 Brian Curless1, 2 Steven M. Seitz1, 2 Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman 1, 2
Ben Mildenhall2 Pratul Srinivasan2 Dor Verbin2 Aleksander Holynski2, 3
1
2
3
University of Washington
Google Research
UC Berkeley
powers-of-ten.github.io

Figure 1. Given a series of prompts describing a scene at varying zoom levels, e.g., from a distant galaxy to the surface of an alien planet,
our method uses a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model to generate a continuously zooming video sequence.

Abstract
We present a method that uses a text-to-image model to
generate consistent content across multiple image scales,
enabling extreme semantic zooms into a scene, e.g. ranging from a wide-angle landscape view of a forest to a
macro shot of an insect sitting on one of the tree branches.
We achieve this through a joint multi-scale diffusion sampling approach that encourages consistency across different scales while preserving the integrity of each individual
sampling process. Since each generated scale is guided by
a different text prompt, our method enables deeper levels
of zoom than traditional super-resolution methods that may
struggle to create new contextual structure at vastly different scales. We compare our method qualitatively with alternative techniques in image super-resolution and outpainting, and show that our method is most effective at generating consistent multi-scale content.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in text-to-image models [3, 6, 7, 15, 18,
19, 29] have been transformative in enabling applications

like image generation from a single text prompt. But while
digital images exist at a fixed resolution, the real world can
be experienced at many different levels of scale. Few things
exemplify this better than the classic 1977 short film “Powers of Ten”, shown in Figure 2, which showcases the sheer
magnitudes of scale that exist in the universe by visualizing a continuous zoom from the outermost depths of the
galaxy to the cells inside our bodies1 . Unfortunately, producing animations or interactive experiences like these has
traditionally required trained artists and many hours of tedious labor—and although we might want to replace this
process with a generative model, existing methods have not
yet demonstrated the ability to generate consistent content
across multiple zoom levels.
Unlike traditional super-resolution methods, which generate higher-resolution content conditioned on the pixels
of the original image, extreme zooms expose entirely new
structures, e.g., magnifying a hand to reveal its underlying skin cells. Generating such a zoom requires semantic knowledge of human anatomy. In this paper, we focus
on solving this semantic zoom problem, i.e., enabling text1 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=0fKBhvDjuy0

7173

