This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-TPrune: Zero-Shot Token Pruning through Leveraging of the Attention
Graph in Pre-Trained Transformers
Hongjie Wang, Bhishma Dedhia, Niraj K. Jha
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08540, USA
{hongjiewang, bdedhia, jha}@princeton.edu

Abstract
Deployment of Transformer models on edge devices is
becoming increasingly challenging due to the exponentially
growing inference cost that scales quadratically with the
number of tokens in the input sequence. Token pruning is an
emerging solution to address this challenge due to its ease
of deployment on various Transformer backbones. However, most token pruning methods require computationally
expensive fine-tuning, which is undesirable in many edge
deployment cases. In this work, we propose Zero-TPrune,
the first zero-shot method that considers both the importance and similarity of tokens in performing token pruning. It leverages the attention graph of pre-trained Transformer models to produce an importance distribution for
tokens via our proposed Weighted Page Rank (WPR) algorithm. This distribution further guides token partitioning
for efficient similarity-based pruning. Due to the elimination of the fine-tuning overhead, Zero-TPrune can prune
large models at negligible computational cost, switch between different pruning configurations at no computational
cost, and perform hyperparameter tuning efficiently. We
evaluate the performance of Zero-TPrune on vision tasks
by applying it to various vision Transformer backbones and
testing them on ImageNet. Without any fine-tuning, ZeroTPrune reduces the FLOPs cost of DeiT-S by 34.7% and
improves its throughput by 45.3% with only 0.4% accuracy loss. Compared with state-of-the-art pruning methods that require fine-tuning, Zero-TPrune not only eliminates the need for fine-tuning after pruning but also does so
with only 0.1% accuracy loss. Compared with state-of-theart fine-tuning-free pruning methods, Zero-TPrune reduces
accuracy loss by up to 49% with similar FLOPs budgets.
Project webpage: https://jha-lab.github.io/zerotprune.

1. Introduction
The Transformer [37] architecture has emerged as a de facto
workhorse of contemporary machine learning paradigms,

showing impressive generalization across a swath of tasks
including Computer Vision (CV) [34], natural language
processing (NLP) [10], robotics [31], and games [26]. At
the heart of the architecture lies the multi-headed selfattention that dynamically aggregates parallel-processed tokens, yielding a highly effective general-purpose computing framework. The implications are particularly apparent
in the case of CV where the Transformer’s ability to assimilate rich abstractions from large-scale data facilitates strong
transfer to downstream tasks, outperforming state-of-the-art
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [12].
Studies on empirical scaling laws for Vision Transformers (ViTs) [41] point to the possibility of improvement in
model performance with model capacity; recent models
have indeed been scaled to billions of parameters. While
model scaling brings with it the promise of remarkable generalization, it poses serious obstacles to deploying such architectures on compute-constrained devices like the edge
and executing real-time inference workloads under limited
energy and memory. How does one reduce the computational complexity of the forward pass while still maintaining the richness of learned representations? To this
end, Token Pruning opens up a promising avenue. Drawing a simple analogy to the human vision system, when
trying to identify an exotic bird perched on the window
on an idyllic afternoon, we tend to prune away inconsequential visual details like the cup of piping hot tea lying
nearby, the ambling pedestrians on the walkway or the sunlit foliage in the background. The attention heads induce
quadratic computational complexity with respect to the input sequence length. Thus, pruning unimportant tokens
can result in significant speedups, especially in the case of
longer sequences. Since token pruning only prunes the information that passes through the sequential layers of the
Transformer and does not necessitate architectural modifications to the backbone, it can be widely deployed on
most Transformer backbones and any computational hardware can fully exploit the resultant sparsity. However, most
existing token pruning methods rely on token scoring mod16070

