This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probing the 3D Awareness of Visual Foundation Models
Mohamed El Banani1 Amit Raj2 Kevis-Kokitsi Maninis2 Abhishek Kar2 Yuanzhen Li2
Michael Rubinstein2 Deqing Sun2 Leonidas Guibas2 Justin Johnson1 Varun Jampani 2⇤
University of Michigan

Evaluated Models
Multiview Consistency

Recent advances in large-scale pretraining have yielded
visual foundation models with strong capabilities. Not only
can recent models generalize to arbitrary images for their
training task, their intermediate representations are useful
for other visual tasks such as detection and segmentation.
Given that such models can classify, delineate, and localize objects in 2D, we ask whether they also represent their
3D structure? In this work, we analyze the 3D awareness
of visual foundation models. We posit that 3D awareness
implies that representations (1) encode the 3D structure of
the scene and (2) consistently represent the surface across
views. We conduct a series of experiments using task-specific
probes and zero-shot inference procedures on frozen features. Our experiments reveal several limitations of the
current models. Our code and analysis can be found at
https://github.com/mbanani/probe3d.

Google Research

Single-Image 3D

Large-scale pretraining on image datasets has yielded visual
foundation models with impressive generalization capabilities. Such models can classify [46, 65], segment [36], and
generate [10, 69, 70] arbitrary images. Furthermore, the
dense representations learned by such models extend beyond
their training tasks and exhibit strong zero-shot capabilities
in other tasks such as segmentation [56, 95] and part discovery [1, 27]. This suggests that models are learning strong
image representations, but how well do they represent the
3D world that images depict?
Recent work suggests that visual foundation models are
useful for some 3D tasks despite being trained with 2D
data. For instance, models implicitly represent depth and
surface normals when generating images of scenes and
faces [6, 12]. Furthermore, the intermediate representations
of self-supervised and generative models can be used to estimate semantic correspondence [1, 27, 30, 83, 99] and object
pose [25]. However, when reconstructing 3D objects, they
generate artifacts that suggest a lack of 3D consistency [50];
* Current affiliation is Stability AI.

DINO

iBOT

DINOv2

DeiT III

StableDiffusion

CLIP

SigLIP

MiDaS

SAM

Evaluation Tasks

Single-Image 3D

1. Introduction

MAE

Objects

Abstract

2

Scenes

1

Multiview Consistency

Figure 1. Are current visual foundation models 3D aware? We
probe the 3D awareness of the learned representations by evaluating
their ability to encode the 3D structure of the visible surface and
their consistency across views.

e.g., animals with multiple faces. Therefore, it remains unclear how those modes represent or understand the 3D world.
The goal of this paper is to study the 3D awareness of
visual foundation models. Previous benchmarks evaluate
visual models on semantic tasks [24, 26, 87], but their 3D
understanding remains understudied. Representations can
vary from having no 3D awareness (e.g., class label or bag
of words) to accurately representing the 3D geometry of
the scene (e.g., 3D surface map or mesh). We posit that
3D awareness can be evaluated through two distinct capabilities: single-view surface reconstruction and multiview
consistency. If a model is 3D aware, we expect that its representations would encode the geometry of the surfaces visible
in the image; i.e., how far is each point in the scene? what
is the orientation of the surface? Moreover, the representations should be consistent for different views of the scene;
allowing them to establish accurate correspondence.
1
21795

