This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ElasticDiffusion: Training-free Arbitrary Size Image Generation
through Global-Local Content Separation
Moayed Haji-Ali

Guha Balakrishnan
Rice University

Vicente Ordonez

{mh155, guha, vicenteor}@rice.edu

𝟓𝟏𝟐 × 𝟓𝟏𝟐

Figure 1. ElasticDiffusion generates high quality images at arbitrary sizes using a pretrained diffusion model trained on a single image
size, with equivalent memory footprint and no further training. These results are based on Stable Diffusion1.4 , which was trained to
generate 512 × 512 images. The examples shown in this collage are presented without any image cropping, stretching, or post-processing.

Abstract
Diffusion models have revolutionized image generation in
recent years, yet they are still limited to a few sizes and aspect ratios. We propose ElasticDiffusion, a novel trainingfree decoding method that enables pretrained text-to-image
diffusion models to generate images with various sizes.
ElasticDiffusion attempts to decouple the generation trajectory of a pretrained model into local and global signals. The local signal controls low-level pixel information and can be estimated on local patches, while the
global signal is used to maintain overall structural consistency and is estimated with a reference image. We test
our method on CelebA-HQ (faces) and LAION-COCO (objects/indoor/outdoor scenes). Our experiments and qualita-

tive results show superior image coherence quality across
aspect ratios compared to MultiDiffusion and the standard
decoding strategy of Stable Diffusion. Project Webpage:
https://elasticdiffusion.github.io/

1. Introduction
Diffusion models are a powerful family of algorithms that
achieve remarkable quality and obtain the current state-ofthe-art performance on various image synthesis tasks. As is
the case with most deep neural networks, diffusion models
are typically trained on one or a few image resolutions. For
instance, Stable Diffusion (SD) [39], one of the most widely
adopted diffusion models, is trained on a square images of
size 512 x 512, yet fails to maintain its performance at dif-

6603

