This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GigaPose: Fast and Robust Novel Object Pose Estimation via One Correspondence
Van Nguyen Nguyen1 Thibault Groueix2 Mathieu Salzmann3 Vincent Lepetit1
1
LIGM, École des Ponts 2 Adobe 3 EPFL
Ground-truth &
Input segmentation

MegaPose [24]

GigaPose

(1.68 s / detection)

(0.048 s / detection)

Reconstruction &
Input segmentation

MegaPose [24]

GigaPose

(1.68 s / detection)

(0.048 s / detection)

Using ground-truth 3D models
Using 3D models predicted from a single image
Figure 1. Comparison of our method GigaPose with MegaPose [24]. GigaPose is (i) more robust to noisy segmentation, often due to
occlusions, (ii) more accurate with 3.5 % average precision improvement on the BOP benchmark [54], and (iii) significantly faster with a
speed up factor of 35× per detection for coarse object pose estimation stage (0.048 s vs 1.68 s). Left example compares the results using
accurate 3D models, while the right example shows the results with 3D models predicted from a single image by Wonder3D [34]. The
bottom row shows the input segmentation, and the depth error heatmap of each detected object with respect to the ground truth pose, i.e the
distance between each 3D point in the ground-truth depth map and its position with the predicted pose (legend: 0 cm
10 cm).

Abstract
We present GigaPose, a fast, robust, and accurate method
for CAD-based novel object pose estimation in RGB images.
GigaPose first leverages discriminative “templates”, rendered images of the CAD models, to recover the out-of-plane
rotation and then uses patch correspondences to estimate
the four remaining parameters. Our approach samples templates in only a two-degrees-of-freedom space instead of the
usual three and matches the input image to the templates using fast nearest-neighbor search in feature space, results in a
speedup factor of 35× compared to the state of the art. Moreover, GigaPose is significantly more robust to segmentation
errors. Our extensive evaluation on the seven core datasets
of the BOP challenge demonstrates that it achieves stateof-the-art accuracy and can be seamlessly integrated with
existing refinement methods. Additionally, we show the potential of GigaPose with 3D models predicted by recent work
on 3D reconstruction from a single image, relaxing the need
for CAD models and making 6D pose object estimation much
more convenient. Our source code and trained models are
publicly available at https://github.com/nv-nguyen/gigaPose.

1. Introduction
6D object pose estimation has significantly improved over
the past decade [22,23,27,32,52,55,57,61]. However, supervised deep learning methods, despite remarkable accuracy,
are cumbersome to deploy to an industrial setting. Indeed,
for each novel object, the pose estimation model needs to be
retrained using newly-acquired data, which is impractical:
Retraining typically takes several hours or days [23, 32], and
the end users might not have the skills to retrain the model.
To fulfill the needs of such industrial settings, CAD-based
novel object pose estimation, which focuses on estimating
the 6D pose of novel objects (i.e., objects only available at
inference time, not during training), has garnered attention
and was introduced in the latest BOP challenge [16]. Current approaches involve three main steps: object detection
and segmentation, coarse pose estimation, and refinement.
While object detection and segmentation has been recently
addressed by CNOS [41], refinement has been also addressed
effectively with render-and-compare approaches [24, 56].
However, existing solutions to coarse pose estimation still

9903

