This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FaceChain-ImagineID: Freely Crafting High-Fidelity Diverse Talking Faces
from Disentangled Audio
Chao Xu1∗ Yang Liu1∗ Jiazheng Xing2 Weida Wang2 Mingze Sun2
Jun Dan2 Tianxin Huang3 Siyuan Li2 Zhi-Qi Cheng4 Ying Tai5 Baigui Sun1†
1

Alibaba Group 2 FaceChain Community 3 National University of Singapore
4
Carnegie Mellon University 5 Nanjing University
{xc264362, ly261666, baigui.sbg}@alibaba-inc.com

Angry

+ Beard

Imagining

+ Short hair

Emotion

Happy

Content

Surprised

+ Blue eyes

Identity

Listening
Virtual portrait with real audio (Sample 1)

Input Audios

Sample 2

Figure 1. We propose an intuitive new paradigm, Listening and Imagining. Listening refers to the progressive disentanglement of identity,
content, and emotion from the audio. Imagining involves generating diverse videos that align with the given decoupled audio cues while
maintaining high consistency within each video. Notably, audio-unrelated attributes, e.g., beard, hairstyle, and pupil color, can be freely
changed by specified prompts according to personal preferences (Sample 2). Other head pose and eye blink are copied from the reference
videos. The audio is the only input to the model, while the left three images are just shown for facial geometry and semantic reference.

Abstract
In this paper, we abstract the process of people hearing speech, extracting meaningful cues, and creating various dynamically audio-consistent talking faces, termed Listening and Imagining, into the task of high-fidelity diverse
talking faces generation from a single audio. Specifically,
it involves two critical challenges: one is to effectively decouple identity, content, and emotion from entangled audio, and the other is to maintain intra-video diversity and
inter-video consistency. To tackle the issues, we first dig
out the intricate relationships among facial factors and simplify the decoupling process, tailoring a Progressive Audio
Disentanglement for accurate facial geometry and semantics learning, where each stage incorporates a customized
training module responsible for a specific factor. Secondly,
to achieve visually diverse and audio-synchronized animation solely from input audio within a single model, we introduce the Controllable Coherent Frame generation, which
involves the flexible integration of three trainable adapters
with frozen Latent Diffusion Models (LDMs) to focus on
maintaining facial geometry and semantics, as well as tex-

ture and temporal coherence between frames. In this way,
we inherit high-quality diverse generation from LDMs while
significantly improving their controllability at a low training cost. Extensive experiments demonstrate the flexibility
and effectiveness of our method in handling this paradigm.
The codes will be released at FaceChain.

1. Introduction
Talking face generation [14, 51, 52, 55, 56, 63, 67] is a challenging task that aims to synthesize video based on provided
audio and image. This technique finds wide application
in various practical scenarios, especially virtual interaction.
However, users encountered a dilemma during the process.
They are concerned about privacy breaches when using real
facial images, while the virtual avatars generated by off-theshelf methods often fail to align well with their own voices.
Thus, we envision a new paradigm if it is possible to liberate
the specified source face and directly infer the synchronized
virtual portrait that matches the real audio input.

1292

