This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeISF: Neural Incident Stokes Field for Geometry and Material Estimation
∗

Chenhao Li1 ,3 , Taishi Ono2 , Takeshi Uemori1 , Hajime Mihara1 ,
Alexander Gatto2 , Hajime Nagahara3 , Yusuke Moriuchi1
Sony Europe B.V.2 ,

Osaka University3

PANDORA

Sony Semiconductor Solutions Corporation1 ,

NeISF (Ours)

Not Available

Reference Intensity / DoLP

Normal

Specular

Diffuse

DoLP

Roughness / Albedo

Figure 1. NeISF reconstructs highly accurate shapes and materials using polarization cues. The inter-reflection between the teapot and
the book is clearly observed in our specular intensity, while PANDORA [17] is heavily affected by the textures and does not correctly
reconstruct the inter-reflection because it only assumes single-bounced illumination. DoLP denotes the degree of linear polarization.

Abstract
Multi-view inverse rendering is the problem of estimating the scene parameters such as shapes, materials, or illuminations from a sequence of images captured under different viewpoints. Many approaches, however, assume single light bounce and thus fail to recover challenging scenarios like inter-reflections. On the other hand, simply extending those methods to consider multi-bounced light requires more assumptions to alleviate the ambiguity. To
address this problem, we propose Neural Incident Stokes
Fields (NeISF), a multi-view inverse rendering framework
that reduces ambiguities using polarization cues. The primary motivation for using polarization cues is that it is the
accumulation of multi-bounced light, providing rich information about geometry and material. Based on this knowledge, the proposed incident Stokes field efficiently models
the accumulated polarization effect with the aid of an original physically-based differentiable polarimetric renderer.
Lastly, experimental results show that our method outperforms the existing works in synthetic and real scenarios.

* Work done during an internship at Sony Semiconductor Solutions Corporation

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering aims at decomposing the target scene
into parameters such as geometry, material, and lighting. It
is a long-standing task for computer vision and computer
graphics and has many downstream tasks, such as relighting, material editing, and novel-view synthesis. The main
challenge of inverse rendering is that many combinations
of the scene parameters can express the same appearance,
called the ambiguity problem. Solutions to the ambiguity can be roughly divided into two categories: simplifying the scene and utilizing more information. For the first
group, some studies assume a Lambertian Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) [71], a single point
light source [18], or a near-planar geometry [46]. For the
second group, additional information such as multiple viewpoints [33], additional illuminations [11], multi-spectral images [40], depth information [36], and polarization cues
[94] has been extensively explored.
Most of the aforementioned methods use explicit representations of scene parameters. On the other hand, Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [58] shows the successful use of
implicit representations. Although NeRF achieves remarkable performance on novel-view synthesis, it does not decompose the scene into the parameters. Thus, many approaches try to extend the NeRF representation to solve

21434

