This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Diffusion Models with Moving Average Sampling in Frequency Domain*
Yurui Qian† , Qi Cai‡ , Yingwei Pan‡ , Yehao Li‡ , Ting Yao‡ , Qibin Sun† , and Tao Mei‡
†
University of Science and Technology of China ‡ HiDream.ai Inc.
qyr123@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {cqcaiqi, pandy, liyehao, tiyao}@hidream.ai,
qibinsun@ustc.edu.cn, tmei@hidream.ai

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently brought a powerful revolution in image generation. Despite showing impressive
generative capabilities, most of these models rely on the
current sample to denoise the next one, possibly resulting in denoising instability. In this paper, we reinterpret
the iterative denoising process as model optimization and
leverage a moving average mechanism to ensemble all the
prior samples. Instead of simply applying moving average
to the denoised samples at different timesteps, we first map
the denoised samples to data space and then perform moving average to avoid distribution shift across timesteps. In
view that diffusion models evolve the recovery from lowfrequency components to high-frequency details, we further decompose the samples into different frequency components and execute moving average separately on each component. We name the complete approach “Moving Average Sampling in Frequency domain (MASF)”. MASF could
be seamlessly integrated into mainstream pre-trained diffusion models and sampling schedules. Extensive experiments on both unconditional and conditional diffusion models demonstrate that our MASF leads to superior performances compared to the baselines, with almost negligible
additional complexity cost.

1. Introduction
Diffusion model is an increasingly appealing direction
to improve the state-of-the-art innovations for generative
tasks. In the regime of computer vision, multiple milestones
under diffusion models have been established on unconditional and conditional image synthesis [5, 18, 37, 41], image restoration [10, 32, 48], inpainting [1, 23, 30], captioning [31], video generation [9, 19, 52], 3D/audio synthesis
[6, 22, 40, 49]. In general, the diffusion model consists
of a forward process that progressively introduces Gaussian noise into an image, and a denoising network that
* This work was performed at HiDream.ai.

Figure 1. We utilize a diffusion model from ADM [8] pre-trained
on ImageNet-64 to sample from white noise and capture the intermediate output as denoised sample xt . Subsequently, we plot the
pixel value of xt with respect to generative timesteps. The starting point and ending point of the trajectory of xt are regarded as
the ground truth for the noisy image and clean image, respectively.
With that we calculate the ground truth of xt at any timestep t using the formulation defined in forward process.

approximates the reverse of the forward process to produce an image from noise. Compared to generative adversarial networks (GAN) [13, 21, 34], diffusion models are
shown capable of better training stability and less sensitivity to hyperparameters, leading to high-quality and coherent samples and alleviating mode collapse. The representative works are DDPM [18] and DDIM [41], which generate
samples from white noise by a Markov chain and a “short”
generative Markov chain corresponding to non-Markovian
forward process, respectively. Despite accelerating sampling several orders of magnitude by DDIM, both DDPM
and DDIM capitalize only on the current sample to produce
the next one, introducing discretization errors [29]. The
stochastic nature of these errors brings instability into denoising. As illustrated in Figure 1, the denoised sample thus
tends to oscillate around the ground truth value and the denoising process necessitates lengthy timesteps to converge.
To mitigate this issue, some high-order solvers including
DPM-Solver [28, 29] and UniPC [60], exploit the resulting
samples of the previous K (usually 1 to 3) timesteps to refine the prediction of the current sample. Nevertheless, the

8911

