This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Class-Agnostic Motion Prediction with Spatial and Temporal
Consistency Regularizations
Kewei Wang1,2 , Yizheng Wu1,2 , Jun CEN2 , Zhiyu Pan1 , Xingyi Li1,2 , Zhe Wang3 , Zhiguo Cao1 , Guosheng Lin2 *
1
School of AIA, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 3 SenseTime Research

Abstract

Mean Errors (m)
0.16

Mean Errors (m)
0.7
0.6

0.12

The perception of motion behavior in a dynamic environment holds significant importance for autonomous driving
systems, wherein class-agnostic motion prediction methods
directly predict the motion of the entire point cloud. While
most existing methods rely on fully-supervised learning, the
manual labeling of point cloud data is laborious and timeconsuming. Therefore, several annotation-efficient methods have been proposed to address this challenge. Although effective, these methods rely on weak annotations
or additional multi-modal data like images, and the potential benefits inherent in the point cloud sequence are still
underexplored. To this end, we explore the feasibility of
self-supervised motion prediction with only unlabeled LiDAR point clouds. Initially, we employ an optimal transport solver to establish coarse correspondences between
current and future point clouds as the coarse pseudo motion labels. Training models directly using such coarse labels leads to noticeable spatial and temporal prediction inconsistencies. To mitigate these issues, we introduce three
simple spatial and temporal regularization losses, which facilitate the self-supervised training process effectively. Experimental results demonstrate the significant superiority of
our approach over the state-of-the-art self-supervised methods. Code will be available at https://github.com/
kwwcv/SelfMotion.

1. Introduction
Motion perception provides key information for autonomous driving. Classical approaches formulate the
motion perception task as object-level trajectory prediction [3, 5, 7, 17, 34]. However, these approaches may fail
if agents are not successfully detected by the detectors, especially when encountering unseen categories in open-set
scenarios [31]. To compensate for trajectory prediction and
* Corresponding author.
gslin@ntu.edu.sg, {wangkewei, zgcao}@hust.edu.cn,

Mean Errors (m)
3.6

3

0.5

2.4

0.4

0.08

1.8
0.3

Full.

1.2

0.04

0.2

Full.

Full.

0.1

0.6

0

0

PillarMotion

Ours

(a) Static

0

PillarMotion

Ours

(b) Slow

PillarMotion

Ours

(c) Fast

Figure 1. Performance comparison over static, slow, and fast speed
levels between self-supervised PillarMotion [19] and our approach
on the nuScenes dataset. The dashed line represents the performance of fully-supervised MotionNet [31]. Our proposed selfsupervised approach outperforms the PillarMotion which uses additional image data by a large margin and substantially narrows
the performance gap with fully-supervised results.

provide backup, class-agnostic motion prediction was studied [15, 25, 29–31]. Currently, these approaches predict
the motions of the entire environment from point clouds directly instead of for each agent.
While fully-supervised class-agnostic motion prediction
methods have shown success, they typically require a vast
amount of annotated point cloud data, which can be both
costly and time-consuming to acquire. To overcome this
limitation, WeakMotionNet [15] proposes a weakly supervised approach using only a limited number of foregroundbackground semantic annotations. WeakMotionNet also introduces a consistency-aware chamfer loss that uses the difference between correspondences from different frames as
loss weights. Although effective, it requires establishing
correspondences multiple times and is still based on matching results between individual frames, rather than taking
advantage of the temporal information within the input sequences. Without using any annotations, PillarMotion [19]
introduces a self-supervised training approach that incorporates regularization of 2D and 3D flows derived from paired
image and point cloud data. However, PillarMotion relies on multi-modality pairs to regularize motion learning,
making the training process less flexible, and a considerable performance gap still exists between self-supervised

14638

