This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EmbodiedScan: A Holistic Multi-Modal 3D Perception Suite
Towards Embodied AI
Tai Wang1∗ , Xiaohan Mao1,2∗ , Chenming Zhu1,3∗ , Runsen Xu1,4 , Ruiyuan Lyu1,5 , Peisen Li1,5 ,
Xiao Chen1,4 , Wenwei Zhang1 , Kai Chen1 , Tianfan Xue4 , Xihui Liu3 , Cewu Lu2 ,
Dahua Lin1,4 , Jiangmiao Pang1
1

Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3 The University of Hong Kong
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 5 Tsinghua University
∗
Equal contribution
Corresponding author

Figure 1. EmbodiedScan provides a multi-modal, ego-centric 3D perception dataset with massive real-scanned data and rich annotations
for indoor scenes. It benchmarks language-grounded holistic 3D scene understanding capabilities for real-world embodied agents.

Abstract
In the realm of computer vision and robotics, embodied
agents are expected to explore their environment and carry
out human instructions. This necessitates the ability to fully
understand 3D scenes given their first-person observations
and contextualize them into language for interaction. However, traditional research focuses more on scene-level input
and output setups from a global view. To address the gap,
we introduce EmbodiedScan, a multi-modal, ego-centric 3D
perception dataset and benchmark for holistic 3D scene understanding. It encompasses over 5k scans encapsulating
1M ego-centric RGB-D views, 1M language prompts, 160k
3D-oriented boxes spanning over 760 categories, some of
which partially align with LVIS, and dense semantic occupancy with 80 common categories. Building upon this
database, we introduce a baseline framework named Embodied Perceptron. It is capable of processing an arbitrary
number of multi-modal inputs and demonstrates remarkable 3D perception capabilities, both within the two series
of benchmarks we set up, i.e., fundamental 3D perception
tasks and language-grounded tasks, and in the wild.

1. Introduction
Consider an embodied agent operating in an indoor environment. It commences its journey devoid of any prior knowledge about the scene, guided only by an initial instruction.
As it begins to explore, it recognizes objects in context and
acts with goals along with language interaction. In this process, a commonly needed, fundamental perception capability is to establish a holistic 3D scene understanding given
ego-centric observations. This understanding operates at
the scene level, covers both object semantics and scene geometry, and can be grounded in language descriptions.
Nonetheless, subtle but significant discrepancies exist
between this expectation and research problems examined
within the computer vision community. Most previous
studies have primarily revolved around scene-level input
and output problems from a global view [13, 34, 40], i.e.,
taking reconstructed 3D point clouds or meshes as inputs
and predicting 3D object bounding boxes or segmenting
point clouds. Regarding data, earlier datasets targeting egocentric RGB-D inputs are either too small [12, 45] or lack
comprehensive annotations [6, 51] to support the aforemen-

19757

