This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OPERA: Alleviating Hallucination in Multi-Modal Large Language Models
via Over-Trust Penalty and Retrospection-Allocation
Qidong Huang1,2, *, Xiaoyi Dong2,3,†, Pan Zhang2 , Bin Wang2 , Conghui He2 , Jiaqi Wang2 ,
Dahua Lin2 , Weiming Zhang1,†, Nenghai Yu1
1
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Digital Security, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{hqd0037@mail., zhangwm@, ynh@}ustc.edu.cn

{xydong@, dhlin@}ie.cuhk.edu.hk

{zhangpan@, wangbin@, heconghui@}pjlab.org.cn

wjqdev@gmail.com

Abstract
Hallucination, posed as a pervasive challenge of multimodal large language models (MLLMs), has significantly
impeded their real-world usage that demands precise judgment. Existing methods mitigate this issue with either
training with specific designed data or inferencing with external knowledge from other sources, incurring inevitable
additional costs. In this paper, we present OPERA, a
novel MLLM decoding method grounded in an Over-trust
Penalty and a Retrospection-Allocation strategy, serving as
a nearly free lunch to alleviate the hallucination issue without additional data, knowledge, or training. Our approach
begins with an interesting observation that, most hallucinations are closely tied to the knowledge aggregation patterns manifested in the self-attention matrix, i.e., MLLMs
tend to generate new tokens by focusing on a few summary
tokens, but not all the previous tokens. Such partial overtrust inclination results in the neglecting of image tokens
and describes the image content with hallucination. Based
on the observation, OPERA introduces a penalty term on
the model logits during the beam-search decoding to mitigate the over-trust issue, along with a rollback strategy that
retrospects the presence of summary tokens in the previously generated tokens, and re-allocate the token selection
if necessary. With extensive experiments, OPERA shows
significant hallucination-mitigating performance on different MLLMs and metrics, proving its effectiveness and generality. Our code is at: https://github.com/shikiw/OPERA.

Please describe this image in detail.

Beam Search
LLaVA-1.5

/mnt/p

Human

The image features a blue bowl filled with a
delicious mixture of bananas, nuts, and oatmeal.
The bowl is placed on a dining table, and a spoon
is resting inside the bowl, ready to be used for
enjoying the meal. In addition to the bowl of food,
there are a few other items on the table. A bottle
can be seen on the left side of the table, while a
cup is positioned towards the top right corner. A
book is also present on the right side of the table,
adding to the cozy atmosphere of the scene.

Hallucination!
Our OPERA
LLaVA-1.5

The image features a blue bowl filled with a
delicious mixture of bananas, nuts, and oatmeal.
The bowl is placed on a dining table, and a spoon
is resting inside the bowl, ready to be used. The
bananas are scattered throughout the bowl, with
some closer to the top and others near the bottom.
The nuts and oatmeal complement the bananas,
creating a visually appealing and appetizing dish.

Figure 1. OPERA’s performance on reducing hallucinations.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) [1, 5, 9, 10, 30, 31, 44, 48] has greatly ele* Work done during an internship in Shanghai AI Laboratory.
† Corresponding authors.

vated general-purpose foundation models to unprecedented
levels. These models enable users to interact using images
as input, facilitating free-flowing communication based on
the content of these images. The impressive abilities of

13418

