This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video-Based Human Pose Regression via Decoupled Space-Time Aggregation
Jijie He, Wenwu Yang*
Zhejiang Gongshang University, China

Abstract
By leveraging temporal dependency in video sequences, multi-frame human pose estimation algorithms
have demonstrated remarkable results in complicated situations, such as occlusion, motion blur, and video defocus.
These algorithms are predominantly based on heatmaps, resulting in high computation and storage requirements per
frame, which limits their flexibility and real-time application in video scenarios, particularly on edge devices. In this
paper, we develop an efficient and effective video-based human pose regression method, which bypasses intermediate
representations such as heatmaps and instead directly maps
the input to the output joint coordinates. Despite the inherent spatial correlation among adjacent joints of the human
pose, the temporal trajectory of each individual joint exhibits relative independence. In light of this, we propose a
novel Decoupled Space-Time Aggregation network (DSTA)
to separately capture the spatial contexts between adjacent joints and the temporal cues of each individual joint,
thereby avoiding the conflation of spatiotemporal dimensions. Concretely, DSTA learns a dedicated feature token
for each joint to facilitate the modeling of their spatiotemporal dependencies. With the proposed joint-wise localawareness attention mechanism, our method is capable of
efficiently and flexibly utilizing the spatial dependency of
adjacent joints and the temporal dependency of each joint
itself. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of
our method. Compared to previous regression-based singleframe human pose estimation methods, DSTA significantly
enhances performance, achieving an 8.9 mAP improvement
on PoseTrack2017. Furthermore, our approach either surpasses or is on par with the state-of-the-art heatmap-based
multi-frame human pose estimation methods. Project page:
https://github.com/zgspose/DSTA.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation, which aims at identifying anatomical keypoints (e.g., elbow, knee, etc.) of human bodies
from images or videos, has been extensively studied in the
* Correspondence Author (wwyang@zjgsu.edu.cn)

Figure 1. (a) Compared to our proposed video-based regression
method, previous image-based regression methods of RLE [18]
and Poseur [23] have a substantial performance decline when processing video input, e.g., the dataset of PoseTrack2017 [14]. (b)
Despite the intrinsic spatial correlations among human body joints,
each joint exhibits independent motion trajectories temporally.

computer vision community [8, 31, 37, 41]. It plays a
crucial role in a variety of human-centric tasks, including
motion capture, activity analysis, surveillance, and humanrobot interaction [43]. Recently, significant progress has
been made in the field of human pose estimation, particularly with the advent of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [11, 25, 26] and Transformer networks [30, 36].
While the majority of recent methods focus on estimating
human poses in static images, it has been demonstrated
in [2, 7, 20] that the significance of dynamic cues (i.e., temporal dependency and geometric consistency) across video
frames cannot be overlooked. To address inherent challenges in human motion images, such as motion blur, video
defocus, and pose occlusions, it is essential to sufficiently
exploit the temporal cues in video sequences.
Existing methods of human pose estimation can be divided into two categories: heatmap-based [8, 20, 26, 28,
31, 34, 37, 41], and regression-based [18, 19, 23, 29, 40].
Heatmap-based methods generate a likelihood heatmap for
each joint, whereas regression-based methods directly map
the input to the output joint coordinates. Owing to their
superior performance, heatmap-based methods dominate
in the field of human pose estimation, particularly among
video-based approaches [2, 7, 15, 20]. The high computation and storage requirements of heatmap-based methods, however, make them expensive in 3D contexts (tem-

1022

