This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

End-to-End Temporal Action Detection with 1B Parameters Across 1000 Frames
Shuming Liu1 Chen-Lin Zhang2 Chen Zhao1 * Bernard Ghanem1
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST) 2 4Paradigm Inc
Abstract
Recently, temporal action detection (TAD) has seen significant performance improvement with end-to-end training. However, due to the memory bottleneck, only models with limited scales and limited data volumes can afford
end-to-end training, which inevitably restricts TAD performance. In this paper, we reduce the memory consumption
for end-to-end training, and manage to scale up the TAD
backbone to 1 billion parameters and the input video to
1,536 frames, leading to significant detection performance.
The key to our approach lies in our proposed temporalinformative adapter (TIA), which is a novel lightweight
module that reduces training memory. Using TIA, we free
the humongous backbone from learning to adapt to the
TAD task by only updating the parameters in TIA. TIA also
leads to better TAD representation by temporally aggregating context from adjacent frames throughout the backbone.
We evaluate our model across four representative datasets.
Owing to our efficient design, we are able to train endto-end on VideoMAEv2-giant and achieve 75.4% mAP on
THUMOS14, being the first end-to-end model to outperform the best feature-based methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/sming256/AdaTAD.

1. Introduction
Temporal Action Detection (TAD) plays a vital role in the
understanding of long-form videos. Its objective is to pinpoint specific action instances within untrimmed videos,
identifying their start and end times, along with their respective categories [15, 20, 44, 60, 62, 67, 71]. This task is
crucial for various applications, including highlight detection [36, 64], video-language grounding [38, 48], and action spotting [3]. Though innovations in the detector design
have made profound progress in the past years [30, 66, 67],
recent research highlights two new trends: end-to-end training [10, 32, 69], and scaling up [56, 57].
End-to-end training in TAD refers to jointly training the
video encoder and action detector [10, 29, 62, 70]. Compared to feature-based methods, end-to-end training offers
* Corresponding author.

AdaTAD † VideoMAEv2-giant
AdaTAD VideoMAE-H

AdaTADVideoMAE-L
AdaTADVideoMAE-B

Current Feature-based Best Result

AdaTADVideoMAE-S
AdaTADSlowFast-R50

BasicTADSlowOnly-R50

Re2TALRevVideoSwin-T
TALLFormerVideoSwin-B

TadTRI3D
E2E-TADSlowFast-R50

Ours
End-to-End

BMNI3D
GTADI3D

Feature-based

Figure 1. AdaTAD enjoys the benefit of end-to-end training
and scaling up with efficient memory usage. The bubble size
represents the number of the model’s learnable parameters. Using
SlowFast-R50, AdaTAD achieves better performance compared to
E2E-TAD [33] with less memory. When further scaling up the
model to VideoMAEv2-gaint and data to 1536 frames, we achieve
an impressive avg. mAP of 75.4% on THUMOS14.

distinct advantages. First, it can effectively bridge the gap
commonly found between pretraining and fine-tuning, such
as data and task discrepancy. Second, video spatial augmentations can be utilized in the end-to-end setting, leading to
further performance gain.
Scaling up refers to improving performance by increasing the model size or the input data volume, and has demonstrated its effectiveness in various domains [14, 19, 39, 53].
In TAD, offline methods have attempted to scale up the
feature extraction network to reach a higher performance.
A notable example includes the work by Wang et al.[56],
which reports a 10% increase in mean Average Precision
(mAP) by scaling from VideoMAE-S to VideoMAEv2giant, using ActionFormer [66] on THUMOS14 [25].
Intuitively, combining the strengths of end-to-end training and scaling up is expected to be most beneficial for improving TAD performance. However, both strategies demand substantial GPU memory, which restricts end-to-end
training to a small model [29, 62, 69], or a small input volume [10, 33]. As shown in Fig. 1, the performance of previous end-to-end methods still significantly lags behind the

18591

