This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FISBe: A real-world benchmark dataset for instance segmentation of
long-range thin filamentous structures
Lisa Mais1,2,4,∗, , Peter Hirsch1,2,∗ , Claire Managan3 , Ramya Kandarpa3 ,
Josef Lorenz Rumberger1,2 , Annika Reinke2,5 , Lena Maier-Hein2,5 ,
Gudrun Ihrke3 , Dagmar Kainmueller1,2,4,
1
Max-Delbrueck-Center for Molecular Medicine in the Helmholtz Association (MDC) 2 Helmholtz Imaging
3
HHMI Janelia Research Campus 4 University of Potsdam 5 German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ)
{firstname.lastname}@mdc-berlin.de ∗ shared first authors

Figure 1. We release the FlyLight Instance Segmentation Benchmark (FISBe) dataset, a 3d multi-color light microscopy dataset of neuronal morphologies in the brain of the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, together with high-quality pixel-wise instance segmentations of
individual neurons. To the best of our knowledge, FISBe constitutes the first publicly available real-world benchmark dataset for instance
segmentation of wide-spanning, thin filamentous and tightly interweaving objects. Top row: Exemplary FISBe images (3d) visualized in
2d via maximum intensity projection (MIP). Bottom row: Corresponding 2d projections of ground truth instance segmentation masks (3d).

Abstract
Instance segmentation of neurons in volumetric light
microscopy images of nervous systems enables groundbreaking research in neuroscience by facilitating joint functional and morphological analyses of neural circuits at cellular resolution. Yet said multi-neuron light microscopy
data exhibits extremely challenging properties for the task
of instance segmentation: Individual neurons have longranging, thin filamentous and widely branching morphologies, multiple neurons are tightly inter-weaved, and partial volume effects, uneven illumination and noise inherent to light microscopy severely impede local disentangling as well as long-range tracing of individual neurons.
These properties reflect a current key challenge in ma-

chine learning research, namely to effectively capture longrange dependencies in the data. While respective methodological research is buzzing, to date methods are typically
benchmarked on synthetic datasets. To address this gap,
we release the FlyLight Instance Segmentation Benchmark
(FISBe) dataset, the first publicly available multi-neuron
light microscopy dataset with pixel-wise annotations. In
addition, we define a set of instance segmentation metrics
for benchmarking that we designed to be meaningful with
regard to downstream analyses. Lastly, we provide three
baselines to kick off a competition that we envision to both
advance the field of machine learning regarding methodology for capturing long-range data dependencies, and facilitate scientific discovery in basic neuroscience. Project
page: https://kainmueller-lab.github.io/fisbe

22249

