This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PIGEON: Predicting Image Geolocations
Lukas Haas

Michal Skreta

Silas Alberti

Chelsea Finn

Stanford University
Abstract
Planet-scale image geolocalization remains a challenging problem due to the diversity of images originating from
anywhere in the world. Although approaches based on
vision transformers have made significant progress in geolocalization accuracy, success in prior literature is constrained to narrow distributions of images of landmarks,
and performance has not generalized to unseen places. We
present a new geolocalization system that combines semantic geocell creation, multi-task contrastive pretraining, and
a novel loss function. Additionally, our work is the first
to perform retrieval over location clusters for guess refinements. We train two models for evaluations on street-level
data and general-purpose image geolocalization; the first
model, PIGEON, is trained on data from the game of GeoGuessr and is capable of placing over 40% of its guesses
within 25 kilometers of the target location globally. We also
develop a bot and deploy PIGEON in a blind experiment
against humans, ranking in the top 0.01% of players. We
further challenge one of the world’s foremost professional
GeoGuessr players to a series of six matches with millions
of viewers, winning all six games. Our second model, PIGEOTTO, differs in that it is trained on a dataset of images
from Flickr and Wikipedia, achieving state-of-the-art results on a wide range of image geolocalization benchmarks,
outperforming the previous SOTA by up to 7.7 percentage
points on the city accuracy level and up to 38.8 percentage points on the country level. Our findings suggest that
PIGEOTTO is the first image geolocalization model that effectively generalizes to unseen places and that our approach
can pave the way for highly accurate, planet-scale image
geolocalization systems. Our code is available on GitHub.1

1. Introduction
The online game GeoGuessr has recently reached 65 million players [22], attracting a worldwide crowd of users try1 https://github.com/LukasHaas/PIGEON.

ing to solve a single problem: given a Street View image
taken somewhere in the world, identify its location. The
problem of uncovering geographical coordinates from visual data is more formally known in computer vision as image geolocalization, and, just like the game of GeoGuessr,
remains notoriously challenging. The scale and diversity
of our planet, seasonal appearance disturbance, and climate
change impacts are some among the many reasons why image geolocalization remains an unsolved problem.
Over the past decade, researchers have advanced the
field by casting image geolocalization as a classification
task [38], developing hierarchical approaches to problem
modeling [7, 25, 27], as well as leveraging vision transformers [7, 27] and contrastive pretraining [23]. Yet despite this
progress, the most capable models have been highly dependent on distributional alignments between training and testing data, failing to generalize to more diverse datasets that
predominantly include unseen locations [7].
In this work, we present a two-pronged multi-task modeling approach that both exhibits world-leading performance in the game of GeoGuessr and achieves state-of-theart performance on a wide range of image geolocalization
benchmark datasets. First, we present PIGEON, a model
trained exclusively on planet-scale Street View data, taking a four-image panorama as input. PIGEON is the first
computer vision model to reliably beat the most experienced players in the game GeoGuessr, comfortably ranking
within the top 0.01% of players while also beating one of
the world’s best professional players in six out of six games
with millions of viewers. Our model achieves impressive
image geolocalization results on outdoor street-level images
globally, placing 40.4% of its geographic coordinate predictions within a 25-kilometer radius of the correct location.
Subsequently, we evolve our model to PIGEOTTO
which differs from PIGEON in that it takes a single image
as input and is trained on a larger, highly diverse dataset of
over 4 million photos derived from Flickr and Wikipedia
and no Street View data. PIGEOTTO achieves state-ofthe-art results across a wide range of benchmark datasets,
including IM2GPS [14], IM2GPS3k [37], YFCC4k [37],
YFCC26k [25], and GWS15k [7]. The model slashes the

12893

