This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Relation Rectification in Diffusion Model
Yinwei Wu
Xingyi Yang
Xinchao Wang*
National University of Singapore
wuyinwei@u.nus.edu, xyang@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

Figure 1. Results Visualization of Relation Rectification. (a) Our approach enables diffusion model to successfully generate images with
the correct directional relation in response to the textual prompt, which they originally failed. (b) Our method can synthesize relation of
diverse and unseen objects in zero-shot manner.

Abstract
Despite their exceptional generative abilities, large T2I
diffusion models, much like skilled but careless artists, often struggle with accurately depicting visual relationships
between objects. This issue, as we uncover through careful
analysis, arises from a misaligned text encoder that struggles to interpret specific relationships and differentiate the
logical order of associated objects. To resolve this, we introduce a novel task termed Relation Rectification, aiming
to refine the model to accurately represent a given relationship it initially fails to generate. To address this, we
propose an innovative solution utilizing a Heterogeneous
Graph Convolutional Network (HGCN). It models the directional relationships between relation terms and corresponding objects within the input prompts. Specifically, we
optimize the HGCN on a pair of prompts with identical relational words but reversed object orders, supplemented by
a few reference images. The lightweight HGCN adjusts
the text embeddings generated by the text encoder, ensur* Corresponding Author

ing accurate reflection of the textual relation in the embedding space. Crucially, our method retains the parameters of the text encoder and diffusion model, preserving the
model’s robust performance on unrelated descriptions. We
validated our approach on a newly curated dataset of diverse relational data, demonstrating both quantitative and
qualitative enhancements in generating images with precise
visual relations. Project page: https://wuyinweihah.github.io/rrnet.github.io/ .

1. Introduction
Diffusion-based text-to-image (T2I) models [14, 32]
have set new benchmarks in the synthesis of images from
textual descriptions, achieving remarkable fidelity and detail. Nevertheless, a nontrivial gap persists in their ability to interpret and visually articulate the interacting objects within a given prompt, especially when the description includes directional or relational terms. For instance,
a prompt such as “a book is placed on a bowl”
frequently leads to a visual representation where the in-

7685

