This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video-P2P: Video Editing with Cross-attention Control
Shaoteng Liu1
Yuechen Zhang1
Wenbo Li1
Zhe Lin3
Jiaya Jia1,2
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 SmartMore 3 Adobe

Figure 1. Video-P2P generates new characters while optimally maintaining the pose and environment in videos.

Abstract
Video-P2P is the first framework for real-world video
editing with cross-attention control. While attention control has proven effective for image editing with pre-trained
image generation models, there are currently no large-scale
video generation models publicly available. Video-P2P addresses this limitation by adapting an image generation
diffusion model to complete various video editing tasks.
Specifically, we propose to first tune a Text-to-Set (T2S)
model to complete an approximate inversion and then optimize a shared unconditional embedding to achieve accurate
video inversion with a small memory cost. We further prove
that it is crucial for consistent video editing. For attention
control, we introduce a novel decoupled-guidance strategy,
which uses different guidance strategies for the source and
target prompts. The optimized unconditional embedding for

the source prompt improves reconstruction ability, while an
initialized unconditional embedding for the target prompt
enhances editability. Incorporating the attention maps of
these two branches enables detailed editing. These technical designs enable various text-driven editing applications,
including word swap, prompt refinement, and attention reweighting. Video-P2P works well on real-world videos for
generating new characters while optimally preserving their
original poses and scenes. It significantly outperforms previous approaches.

1. Introduction
Video creation and editing are key tasks [16, 17, 25, 37, 42].
Text-driven editing becomes one promising pipeline. Several methods have demonstrated the ability to edit generated or real-world images with text prompts [13, 19, 24].

8599

