This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DragDiffusion: Harnessing Diffusion Models
for Interactive Point-based Image Editing
Chuhui Xue2
Jun Hao Liew2
Jiachun Pan1
Yujun Shi1 *
2
2
1
Hanshu Yan
Wenqing Zhang
Vincent Y. F. Tan
Song Bai2
1
2
National University of Singapore
ByteDance Inc.
shi.yujun@u.nus.edu

User Edit

DragGAN

vtan@nus.edu.sg

DragDiffusion

songbai.site@gmail.com

User Edit

DragGAN

DragDiffusion

Figure 1. D RAG D IFFUSION greatly improves the applicability of interactive point-based editing. Given an input image, the user clicks
handle points (red), target points (blue), and draws a mask specifying the editable region (brighter area). All results are obtained under the
same user edit for fair comparisons. Project page: https://yujun-shi.github.io/projects/dragdiffusion.html

.

Abstract
Accurate and controllable image editing is a challenging
task that has attracted significant attention recently. Notably, D RAG GAN developed by Pan et al. (2023) [33] is
an interactive point-based image editing framework that
achieves impressive editing results with pixel-level precision. However, due to its reliance on generative adversarial
networks (GANs), its generality is limited by the capacity of
pretrained GAN models. In this work, we extend this editing framework to diffusion models and propose a novel approach D RAG D IFFUSION. By harnessing large-scale pretrained diffusion models, we greatly enhance the applicability of interactive point-based editing on both real and
diffusion-generated images. Unlike other diffusion-based
editing methods that provide guidance on diffusion latents
of multiple time steps, our approach achieves efficient yet
accurate spatial control by optimizing the latent of only one
time step. This novel design is motivated by our obser* Work done when interning with Song Bai.

vations that UNet features at a specific time step provides
sufficient semantic and geometric information to support
the drag-based editing. Moreover, we introduce two additional techniques, namely identity-preserving fine-tuning
and reference-latent-control, to further preserve the identity of the original image. Lastly, we present a challenging
benchmark dataset called D RAG B ENCH—the first benchmark to evaluate the performance of interactive point-based
image editing methods. Experiments across a wide range of
challenging cases (e.g., images with multiple objects, diverse object categories, various styles, etc.) demonstrate
the versatility and generality of D RAG D IFFUSION. Code
and the D RAG B ENCH dataset: https://github.com/YujunShi/DragDiffusion.

1. Introduction
Image editing with generative models [9, 15, 22, 31, 34, 37]
has attracted extensive attention recently. One landmark
work is D RAG GAN [33], which enables interactive point-

8839

