This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Long-Tailed Anomaly Detection with Learnable Class Names
Chih-Hui Ho1 Kuan-Chuan Peng2 Nuno Vasconcelos1
1
University of California, San Diego 2Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL)
chh279@ucsd.edu

kpeng@merl.com

nvasconcelos@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Anomaly detection (AD) aims to identify defective images
and localize their defects (if any). Ideally, AD models should
be able to detect defects over many image classes; without
relying on hard-coded class names that can be uninformative or
inconsistent across datasets; learn without anomaly supervision;
and be robust to the long-tailed distributions of real-world
applications. To address these challenges, we formulate the
problem of long-tailed AD by introducing several datasets with
different levels of class imbalance and metrics for performance
evaluation. We then propose a novel method, LTAD, to detect
defects from multiple and long-tailed classes, without relying on
dataset class names. LTAD combines AD by reconstruction and
semantic AD modules. AD by reconstruction is implemented
with a transformer-based reconstruction module. Semantic
AD is implemented with a binary classifier, which relies on
learned pseudo class names and a pretrained foundation
model. These modules are learned over two phases. Phase 1
learns the pseudo-class names and a variational autoencoder
(VAE) for feature synthesis that augments the training data to
combat long-tails. Phase 2 then learns the parameters of the
reconstruction and classification modules of LTAD. Extensive
experiments using the proposed long-tailed datasets show that
LTAD substantially outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
for most forms of dataset imbalance. The long-tailed dataset
split is available at https://zenodo.org/records/10854201.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) is an important problem for many
manufacturing settings [23, 50, 60, 63]. To reflect practical
manufacturing constraints, most datasets [5, 83, 89] are curated
under the unsupervised AD setting, where no defect images
are available for training. Various methods [19, 20, 43, 60, 69]
have shown that this problem can be solved with high accuracy;
e.g., [3, 20, 31, 36, 41, 44, 69, 77, 79, 84] have success rates
>95% for anomaly detection and localization on the MVTec
dataset [5]. However, as illustrated in Fig. 1, these methods
require a different model per image category. which compromises scalability to many classes. Recently, there has been
interest in more efficient methods that use a single model to

Figure 1. Challenges of long-tailed AD include (Left) designing a
single model to detect anomalies over multiple image classes, (Middle)
uninformative class names, and (Right) long-tailed data distributions.

detect anomalies in all object classes [9, 14, 26, 30, 32, 76, 87].
These methods can be grouped according to the level of image
semantics where they operate. On one hand, AD by reconstruction methods [76, 87] use a reconstruction module to project the
input image into the manifold of normal images. The difference
between the image and its projection is then used to detect
possible defects. On the other hand, semantic AD methods
[9, 26, 32] build explicit models of normal/abnormal images.
Given the absence of abnormal training data, this is done
by leveraging the knowledge of visual-language foundation
models [25, 39, 57, 67]. Abnormal regions are detected using
the predefined text prompts for normal and abnormal plus an
image class name, e.g., “a normal photo of a [CLASS]” and
“an abnormal photo of a [CLASS],” where [CLASS] is a class
name in the dataset, e.g., “bottle” in the MVTec dataset.
The two types of methods have limitations. Reconstruction
methods require modeling the complex manifold, especially for
problems requiring many classes. Even when trained on large
datasets, the distance between the input image and this manifold
can be smaller for certain anomalies. The foundation model used
by semantic AD methods can provide additional clarity, because
it enables framing AD as a binary classification problem. However, this is difficult when the dataset class names are ambiguous
or unknown to the foundation model. Fig. 1 shows an example
of ambiguity due to the fact that the class name “bottle” refers to
visually different concepts in MVTec [5] (where it means “bottle
bottom”) and the GoodsAD dataset [83] (where it means “bottle
side”). Hence, in MVTec, the “bottle” label may not be the most

12435

