This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Can Biases in ImageNet Models Explain Generalization?
Paul Gavrikov
IMLA, Offenburg University

Janis Keuper
IMLA, Offenburg University and University of Mannheim

paul.gavrikov@hs-offenburg.de

keuper@imla.ai

Abstract
The robust generalization of models to rare, indistribution (ID) samples drawn from the long tail of
the training distribution and to out-of-training-distribution
(OOD) samples is one of the major challenges of current
deep learning methods. For image classification, this manifests in the existence of adversarial attacks, the performance drops on distorted images, and a lack of generalization to concepts such as sketches. The current understanding of generalization in neural networks is very limited, but some biases that differentiate models from human
vision have been identified and might be causing these limitations. Consequently, several attempts with varying success have been made to reduce these biases during training
to improve generalization. We take a step back and sanitycheck these attempts. Fixing the architecture to the wellestablished ResNet-50, we perform a large-scale study on
48 ImageNet models obtained via different training methods to understand how and if these biases - including shape
bias, spectral biases, and critical bands - interact with generalization. Our extensive study results reveal that contrary
to previous findings, these biases are insufficient to accurately predict the generalization of a model holistically.
We provide access to all checkpoints and evaluation code at
https://github.com/paulgavrikov/biases_
vs_generalization/

1. Introduction
Artificial neural networks have achieved outstanding performance in various tasks, particularly excelling in vision
tasks like image classification - commonly benchmarked on
ImageNet [45]. While accuracy on ImageNet has dramatically improved in the last 15 years [11, 19, 30], with models nearly matching human performance, a critical issue remains: these models often fail to generalize beyond the specific data distribution they were trained on. This fragility
becomes evident when faced with distribution shifts, such
as changes in weather conditions [55], digital artifacts [21],
or even replacing photos objects with artistic renditions

Figure 1. We study the influence of three selected biases that
separate models from humans on the generalization of ImageNet models. Our study suggests that no single bias correlates with generalization in a holistic sense. We measure the
texture/shape bias [17], critical band [52], and low/high-frequency
spectral biases [61] on 48 models and correlate these biases against
generalization that we measure on several benchmarks belonging
to four categories: in distribution, robustness, conceptual changes,
and adversarial robustness.

[23]. On an abstract level this can be unified by the vulnerability to adversarial attacks [3, 53], where carefully crafted
image perturbations can fool models while remaining imperceptible to humans. This raises serious concerns about
deploying such models in safety-critical applications where
human lives are at stake [4, 13].
Seeking explanations for this lack of generalization, researchers have identified various biases that differentiate
model from human perception. Three recent examples
that have received significant attention are the texture/shape
bias (models rely heavily on texture for object recognition,
whereas humans prioritize shape information) [17], critical band bias (models utilize wider critical bands than humans for recognizing ImageNet objects) [52], and highfrequency bias (models exhibit a strong dependence on
high-frequency information and perform poorly on low-

22184

