This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

H-ViT: A Hierarchical Vision Transformer for Deformable Image Registration
Morteza Ghahremani1,2 Mohammad Khateri3 Bailiang Jian1,2 Benedikt Wiestler1
Ehsan Adeli4 Christian Wachinger1,2
1
Technical University of Munich 2 Munich Center for Machine Learning
3
University of Eastern Finland 4 Stanford University
{morteza.ghahremani, bailiang.jian, b.wiestler, christian.wachinger}@tum.de
mohammad.khateri@uef.fi
eadeli@stanford.edu

Abstract
This paper introduces a novel top-down representation
approach for deformable image registration, which estimates the deformation field by capturing various shortand long-range flow features at different scale levels. As
a Hierarchical Vision Transformer (H-ViT), we propose a
dual self-attention and cross-attention mechanism that uses
high-level features in the deformation field to represent lowlevel ones, enabling information streams in the deformation field across all voxel patch embeddings irrespective of
their spatial proximity. Since high-level features contain
abstract flow patterns, such patterns are expected to effectively contribute to the representation of the deformation
field in lower scales. When the self-attention module utilizes within-scale short-range patterns for representation,
the cross-attention modules dynamically look for the key tokens across different scales to further interact with the local query voxel patches. Our method shows superior accuracy and visual quality over the state-of-the-art registration methods in five publicly available datasets, highlighting a substantial enhancement in the performance of medical imaging registration. The project link is available at
https://mogvision.github.io/hvit.

1. Introduction
Image registration facilitates the comparison or integration of mono- or multi-modal visual data in the same field
of view. The image registration techniques are generally
split into rigid/affine and non-rigid/deformable categories.
Deformable image registration aims to find the underlying
non-linear mapping between a pair of images. The displacement between a moving image and a target, commonly regarded as a continuous deformation field, can be modeled in
various ways that have introduced many methods. The progressive optimization for gradually estimating a deforma-

Figure 1. H-ViT has achieved state-of-the-art performance on five
publicly available databases (four reported above), thanks to the
integration of a dual attention mechanism. Under identical training conditions, our H-ViT consistently outperforms compared to
the state-of-the-art registration methods, yielding an average Dice
score ∼2.5% higher.

tion field demands substantial computational time. Moreover, modeling the deformation field often requires a higher
degree of freedom, which is difficult to fix and tune by conventional algorithms with limited parameters. Either affine
or deformable registration finds numerous applications in
computer vision and medical image analysis, such as image diagnosis [9, 57, 63], image-guided surgical navigation [43, 53], and has been under active research for several
decades.
Deformable registration techniques incorporating convolutional neural networks (CNN) [5, 6, 17, 18, 20, 21, 24, 29,
30, 32, 50, 59, 62, 66, 73, 74] have demonstrated remarkable advancements in terms of both inference time and accuracy when compared to conventional methods [41], and
there has been a rapid growth of deep learning-based approaches in recent years. More recently, deformable image
registration methods have incorporated Vision Transformers (ViTs) into their architecture to address the limitations
associated with the constrained receptive fields often encountered in CNN-based approaches [8, 10–12, 72]. Despite the advances in Transformer-based registration tech-

11513

