This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Object Dynamics Modeling with Hierarchical Point Cloud-based
Representations
Chanho Kim
Oregon State University

Li Fuxin
Oregon State University

kimchanh@oregonstate.edu

lif@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
Modeling object dynamics with a neural network is an
important problem with numerous applications. Most recent work has been based on graph neural networks. However, physics happens in 3D space, where geometric information potentially plays an important role in modeling
physical phenomena. In this work, we propose a novel
U-net architecture based on continuous point convolution
which naturally embeds information from 3D coordinates
and allows for multi-scale feature representations with established downsampling and upsampling procedures. Bottleneck layers in the downsampled point clouds lead to better long-range interaction modeling. Besides, the flexibility of point convolutions allows our approach to generalize to sparsely sampled points from mesh vertices and dynamically generate features on important interaction points
on mesh faces. Experimental results demonstrate that our
approach significantly improves the state-of-the-art, especially in scenarios that require accurate gravity or collision
reasoning.

1. Introduction
Comprehending physics constitutes a fundamental facet of
common sense knowledge. Humans naturally acquire this
understanding early in life, predicting the outcome of collisions and nonlinear motions without the need to understand
how to solve partial differential equations. Such capabilities of fast and intuitive physical predictions would also be
crucial for enabling robots to plan actions effectively. For
instance, when stacking boxes, a robot needs to understand
how to arrange them to prevent the boxes from collapsing.
Similarly, when a robot manipulates objects on a table to
achieve a goal, it must comprehend the configuration of objects resulting from its actions. While traditional physics
simulators [8, 31] can be employed to grant robots such reasoning abilities, it is hard for them to generalize to planning
tasks with realistic sensory inputs.

Early attempts for developing a learning-based approach
for simulation aimed to learn object dynamics directly in
the image pixel space [20, 23, 24, 34], which have difficulty
reasoning through complex object interactions and collisions. Recently, more promising approaches have been proposed, aiming to directly learn object dynamics in 3D space.
The most popular approaches in this direction have utilized
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) [3, 10]. These models
represent objects using dense particles or meshes in threedimensional space, constructing graphs with nodes corresponding to these particles or mesh vertices, and edges linking nearby particles or representing mesh edges. Message
passing networks are then learned to simulate the multi-step
propagation of forces over graph nodes.
Early GNNs embed all the relational information into
edge weights. However, people have increasingly realized
that physics happens in the three-dimensional world and
that ignoring geometry is not ideal, not to mention there
is also gravity, which strongly depends on the relationship
in the z (vertical) direction in 3D space. Hence, later GNNs
for physics and collision modeling have increasingly started
to embed Euclidean space coordinates as part of the features [14, 17]. More recently, as people have started to
discover the importance of long-range interaction modeling, U-Net-like structures have also emerged in the form of
multi-scale GNNs, which employ different types of message passing between nodes at different levels [6, 9, 13].
Rather than forcing GNNs to embed themselves into the
3D space, an alternative would be to directly employ a network that has already been designed for unordered 3D point
clouds. Such networks have undergone significant improvements in the past few years with impressive capabilities to
solve complex real-world recognition tasks [25, 26, 28, 37].
They have also received many engineering updates to be
able to handle hundreds of thousands of points as input simultaneously. Point-based approaches naturally employ the
xyz coordinates, and their neighborhood structure based
on Euclidean distances is natural for modeling collisions
in the 3D world. Besides, the spatial topology can still
be modified by changing the neighborhood structure, sim-

20977

