This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Anatomically Constrained Implicit Face Models
Prashanth Chandran
DisneyResearch|Studios

Gaspard Zoss
DisneyResearch|Studios

prashanth.chandran@disneyresearch.com

gaspard.zoss@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
Coordinate based implicit neural representations have
gained rapid popularity in recent years as they have been
successfully used in image, geometry and scene modeling
tasks. In this work, we present a novel use case for such
implicit representations in the context of learning anatomically constrained face models. Actor specific anatomically
constrained face models are the state of the art in both facial
performance capture and performance retargeting. Despite
their practical success, these anatomical models are slow to
evaluate and often require extensive data capture to be built.
We propose the anatomical implicit face model; an ensemble of implicit neural networks that jointly learn to model
the facial anatomy and the skin surface with high-fidelity,
and can readily be used as a drop in replacement to conventional blendshape models. Given an arbitrary set of skin
surface meshes of an actor and only a neutral shape with
estimated skull and jaw bones, our method can recover a
dense anatomical substructure which constrains every point
on the facial surface. We demonstrate the usefulness of our
approach in several tasks ranging from shape fitting, shape
editing, and performance retargeting.

1. Introduction
Deformable face models are an important tool in the arsenal of visual effects artists dealing with facial animation.
As they are ubiquitously used both in high-end production
workflows and lightweight consumer applications, building expressive face models for various applications continues to remain an active area of research [17]. Face models today can range from simple linear global shape models [4, 27, 29] to highly complex local models that incorporate the underlying facial anatomy through physical simulation [15, 44, 48] or through anatomical constraints [47].
In this work, we concern ourselves primarily with the
high-quality facial animation workflow where actor specific linear blendshape models [27] continue to remain
the most commonly used tool for creating facial animations [10, 33, 47]. We propose a new class of actor specific

shape models named the Anatomical Implicit face Model
(AIM) which provides several unique advantages over the
existing actor specific face models, and can be used as a
drop-in replacement for traditional blendshape models.
An actor specific blendshape model is a collection of
3D shapes of the given actor performing a number of facial expressions, usually created by face scanning [2] or by
an artist. While the user-friendliness of such actor specific
blendshape models contributes to their wide adoption, it is
a well known limitation that such models often require hundreds of shapes to accurately model complex facial deformation [27]. To address these shortcomings, local blendshape models [10, 42, 47] were proposed. By splitting the
face into regions, and allowing the individual regions to deform independently, local shape models are able to capture
complex deformations with a limited number of shapes.
While local models address the lack of expressivity in
global shape models, state-of-the-art methods in facial performance capture [47] and retargeting [10] often incorporate anatomical constraints on the facial surface to plausibly
restrict the range of the skin deformations. The anatomical constraints employed by these models [10, 47] provide a few hidden advantages that end up contributing towards their practical success. For example, in the context
of facial performance capture, Wu et al. [47] demonstrated
that including anatomical constraints derived from the relationship between the facial skin and underlying bones
(skull and mandible) helps to separate the rigid and nonrigid components of facial deformation, leading to better
face performance capture. In the context of facial performance retargeting, Chandran et al. [10] made use of such an
anatomically constrained local face model to restrict a retargeted shape to lie within the space of anatomically plausible
shapes of the target actor.
Despite their practical success, anatomical constraints
are often formulated in practice as regularization terms that
have to be satisfied as part of complex optimization problems involving several objectives. As a result, fitting these
anatomical face models to a target scan or an image for instance, is a computationally intensive procedure taking several minutes per frame on a CPU, or requires hand crafted

2220

