This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PKU-DyMVHumans: A Multi-View Video Benchmark for
High-Fidelity Dynamic Human Modeling
Xiaoyun Zheng 1,2 Liwei Liao 1,2 Xufeng Li 3 Jianbo Jiao 4
Rongjie Wang 2 Feng Gao 5 Shiqi Wang 3 Ronggang Wang 1†
1
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
City University of Hong Kong 4 University of Birmingham 5 Peking University
xyun z@stu.pku.edu.cn
j.jiao@bham.ac.uk

{levio, gaof}@pku.edu.cn

wangrj@pcl.ac.cn

xufengli2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk

shiqwang@cityu.edu.hk

rgwang@pkusz.edu.cn

Figure 1. We present PKU-DyMVHumans, a versatile human-centric dataset designed for high-fidelity reconstruction and rendering of
dynamic human performances from dense multi-view videos. It comprises 32 humans across 45 different dynamic scenarios, each featuring
highly detailed appearances and complex human motions.

Abstract
High-quality human reconstruction and photo-realistic
rendering of a dynamic scene is a long-standing problem
in computer vision and graphics. Despite considerable efforts invested in developing various capture systems and reconstruction algorithms, recent advancements still struggle
with loose or oversized clothing and overly complex poses.
In part, this is due to the challenges of acquiring highquality human datasets. To facilitate the development of
these fields, in this paper, we present PKU-DyMVHumans,
a versatile human-centric dataset for high-fidelity reconstruction and rendering of dynamic human scenarios from
dense multi-view videos. It comprises 8.2 million frames
captured by more than 56 synchronized cameras across
diverse scenarios. These sequences comprise 32 human
subjects across 45 different scenarios, each with a highdetailed appearance and realistic human motion. Inspired
by recent advancements in neural radiance field (NeRF)based scene representations, we carefully set up an off-theshelf framework that is easy to provide those state-of-theart NeRF-based implementations and benchmark on PKU-

DyMVHumans dataset. It is paving the way for various
applications like fine-grained foreground/background decomposition, high-quality human reconstruction and photorealistic novel view synthesis of a dynamic scene. Extensive studies are performed on the benchmark, demonstrating new observations and challenges that emerge from using such high-fidelity dynamic data. The project page and
data is available at: https://pku- dymvhumans.
github.io.

1. Introduction
We are entering an era in which the distinction between
virtual and real worlds is becoming increasingly blurred.
High-quality reconstruction and photo-realistic rendering of
human activities are crucial for many immersive applications, including AR/VR, 3D content production, and entertainment. However, the process of reconstructing human
activities and providing photo-realistic rendering from multiple viewpoints is currently a cutting-edge but challenging
technique. The limited availability of real-world datasets is
impeding progress in this critical task.

22530

