This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

H ALLUSION B ENCH: An Advanced Diagnostic Suite for Entangled Language
Hallucination and Visual Illusion in Large Vision-Language Models
Tianrui Guan* Fuxiao Liu* Xiyang Wu Ruiqi Xian Zongxia Li Xiaoyu Liu Xijun Wang
Lichang Chen Furong Huang Yaser Yacoob Dinesh Manocha Tianyi Zhou
University of Maryland, College Park
{rayguan, fl3es, wuxiyang, rxian, zli12321, xliu1231, xijun
bobchen, furongh, yaser, dmanocha, tianyi}@umd.edu

Abstract
We introduce “H ALLUSION B ENCH1 ,” a comprehensive
benchmark designed for the evaluation of image-context reasoning. This benchmark presents significant challenges to
advanced large visual-language models (LVLMs), such as
GPT-4V(ision), Gemini Pro Vision, Claude 3, and LLaVA1.5, by emphasizing nuanced understanding and interpretation of visual data. The benchmark comprises 346 images paired with 1129 questions, all meticulously crafted
by human experts. We introduce a novel structure for these
visual questions designed to establish control groups. This
structure enables us to conduct a quantitative analysis of
the models’ response tendencies, logical consistency, and
various failure modes. In our evaluation on H ALLUSION B ENCH, we benchmarked 15 different models, highlighting
a 31.42% question-pair accuracy achieved by the state-ofthe-art GPT-4V. Notably, all other evaluated models achieve
accuracy below 16%. Moreover, our analysis not only highlights the observed failure modes, including language hallucination and visual illusion but also deepens an understanding of these pitfalls. Our comprehensive case studies
within H ALLUSION B ENCH shed light on the challenges of
hallucination and illusion in LVLMs. Based on these insights, we suggest potential pathways for their future improvement. The benchmark and codebase can be accessed
at https://github.com/tianyi-lab/HallusionBench.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Large Language Models (LLMs) [9, 10,
26, 40, 45, 46, 61] have revolutionized the field of machine learning with the ability of language understanding and content generation, offering unprecedented ca* Equal contribution.
1“Hallusion” is a portmanteau of “hallucination” and “illusion.”

pabilities and potentials across a multitude of applications. The integration of LLMs with computer vision
systems has given rise to Large Vision-Language Models
(LVLMs) [6, 8, 22, 27, 28, 33, 40, 41, 49, 50, 55, 63]. These
models have demonstrated profound capabilities in various
applications and significantly enhance the performance in
image reasoning tasks [5, 18, 20, 30, 31, 36, 38, 42, 47].
However, the hallucination issue of LLMs [58] is regarded
as a challenging and unsolved problem, which leads to many
issues when we integrate LLMs with vision techniques.
While LVLMs like GPT-4V(ision) [48] and LLaVA1.5 [32] excel in various applications, they are hindered
by a pronounced language bias. This bias stems from instances where knowledge priors conflict with the visual context [24, 29, 57]. Similarly, models such as LLaVA-1.5 [32]
and mPLUG-Owl [50] are prone to giving affirmative answers regardless of the actual content of questions [24]. The
distinct failure modes of different VLMs highlight the need
for specific improvements. Recognizing and understanding
these limitations and failure types is imperative for advancing these models and striking a delicate balance between
knowledge priors and contextual understanding.
When exploring those LVLMs, we observe that their
strong language bias often overshadows visual information,
leading to an overreliance on language priors rather than
the visual context. To study this phenomenon, we use the
term “Language Hallucination,” which refers to conclusions drawn without visual input. On the other hand, the
vision components within the limited ability in LVLMs can
give rise to “Visual Illusion”, where visual inputs can be misinterpreted, leading to overconfident yet erroneous assertions
by the model.
Main Contributions: Recognizing the need to comprehend why an LVLM fails and address these issues, we
present H ALLUSION B ENCH, a carefully crafted benchmark
designed to explore the complexities of image-context rea-

14375

