This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distraction is All You Need: Memory-Efficient Image Immunization against
Diffusion-Based Image Editing
Ling Lo
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

Cheng Yu Yeo
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

linglo.ee08@nycu.edu.tw

boyyeo123.ee12@nycu.edu.tw

Hong-Han Shuai
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University

Wen-Huang Cheng
National Taiwan University

hhshuai@nycu.edu.tw

wenhuang@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Recent text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have revolutionized image editing by empowering users to control outcomes using natural language. However, the ease of image
manipulation has raised ethical concerns, with the potential for malicious use in generating deceptive or harmful
content. To address the concerns, we propose an image immunization approach named semantic attack to protect our
images from being manipulated by malicious agents using
diffusion models. Our approach focuses on disrupting the
semantic understanding of T2I diffusion models regarding
specific content. By attacking the cross-attention mechanism that encodes image features with text messages during
editing, we distract the model’s attention regarding the content of our concern. Our semantic attack renders the model
uncertain about the areas to edit, resulting in poorly edited
images and contradicting the malicious editing attempts. In
addition, by shifting the attack target towards intermediate attention maps from the final generated image, our approach substantially diminishes computational burden and
alleviates GPU memory constraints in comparison to previous methods. Moreover, we introduce timestep universal
gradient updating to create timestep-agnostic perturbations
effective across different input noise levels. By treating the
full diffusion process as discrete denoising timesteps during
the attack, we achieve equivalent or even superior immunization efficacy with nearly half the memory consumption
of the previous method. Our contributions include a practical and effective approach to safeguard images against
malicious editing, and the proposed method offers robust
immunization against various image inpainting and editing
approaches, showcasing its potential for real-world applications.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been an exponential surge in the
development and deployment of diffusion models [7, 9,

Figure 1. An illustration of our semantic attack. We aim to immunize the image by corrupting the semantic understanding of T2I
diffusion models regarding specific content (in this case, ”woman”
as shown in the figure). Subsequently, the editing process is compromised, as the model cannot accurately identify the proper region for editing a certain concept.

27].These models exhibit the ability to generate highly realistic images conditioned on various inputs such as text,
layouts, and scene graphs [8, 11, 38, 45]. Among them,

24462

