This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GenNBV: Generalizable Next-Best-View Policy for Active 3D Reconstruction
Xiao Chen1,2 Quanyi Li1 Tai Wang1 Tianfan Xue2,† Jiangmiao Pang1,†
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{cx123,tfxue}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

quanyili0057@gmail.com

NeRF
Ungeneralizable

{wangtai,pangjiangmiao}@pjlab.org.cn

yaw z

...

y
x
pitch

self-occlusion

Object-Centric Capturing

Per-scene Training

Train on Hundreds of Objects

Free-space Capturing

Previous NBV Policies

Cross-dataset Generalization on Novel Objects

Our Generalizable Free-space NBV Policy

Figure 1. To determine the best view for 3D reconstruction, previous methods only chose from hand-crafted action space or based on
object-centric capturing, lacking the ability to generalize to unforeseen scenes (Left). With our end-to-end trained, generalized free-space
policy, it can generalize to unseen objects, enabling the captured drone to image from any viewpoint (Right).

Abstract
While recent advances in neural radiance field enable
realistic digitization for large-scale scenes, the imagecapturing process is still time-consuming and laborintensive. Previous works attempt to automate this process using the Next-Best-View (NBV) policy for active 3D
reconstruction. However, the existing NBV policies heavily
rely on hand-crafted criteria, limited action space, or perscene optimized representations. These constraints limit
their cross-dataset generalizability. To overcome them, we
propose GenNBV, an end-to-end generalizable NBV policy. Our policy adopts a reinforcement learning (RL)-based
framework and extends typical limited action space to 5D
free space. It empowers our agent drone to scan from any
viewpoint, and even interact with unseen geometries during training. To boost the cross-dataset generalizability,
we also propose a novel multi-source state embedding, including geometric, semantic, and action representations.
We establish a benchmark using the Isaac Gym simulator
with the Houses3K and OmniObject3D datasets to evaluate
this NBV policy. Experiments demonstrate that our policy
achieves a 98.26% and 97.12% coverage ratio on unseen
building-scale objects from these datasets, respectively, outperforming prior solutions.

* Project website: gennbv.tech
† Corresponding authors.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in 3D reconstruction [23, 38, 39] and neural rendering [20, 37, 48] have significantly enhanced the
quality of 3D digitization of large scenes, such as buildings
and city landmarks [11, 17, 18, 43, 47]. However, imagecapturing process still remains time-consuming and laborintensive. To scan a building-scale scene using a drone,
it may take several days’ effort of a professional team to
ensure a full coverage. Moreover, even professional pilots
may miss some areas at the first scan, leading to multiple
rounds for rescanning.
To alleviate the effort in manual scanning, active 3D
reconstruction algorithms, especially the Next-Best-View
(NBV) policy, have emerged as a promising approach to
automate view planning. However, typical rule-based NBV
policies [9, 14, 22, 26, 28, 46] heavily rely on empirically
designed view-selection criteria and hand-crafted action
space, such as a hemisphere as shown in Fig. 1, which limit
their generalizability to unseen scenes. To enhance generalization capacity, pioneering works on learning-based NBV
policy have been proposed [3, 4, 26, 46]. Nevertheless, they
are constrained into impractical setups in real-world scenarios, such as object-centric capturing and limited action
space for ground robots, resulting in incomplete 3D reconstruction because of significant self-occlusion.
Therefore, in this work, we study this problem: “How
to design an NBV policy that supports exploration in any

16436

