This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Supervised Facial Representation Learning with Facial Region Awareness
Zheng Gao

Ioannis Patras

Queen Mary University of London, Mile End Road, London, E1 4NS
{z.gao, i.patras}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract

the impressive progress, these methods require large-scale
well-annotated training data, which is expensive to collect.

Self-supervised pre-training has been proved to be effective in learning transferable representations that beneﬁt
various visual tasks. This paper asks this question: can
self-supervised pre-training learn general facial representations for various facial analysis tasks? Recent efforts toward this goal are limited to treating each face image as
a whole, i.e., learning consistent facial representations at
the image-level, which overlooks the “consistency of local
facial representations” (i.e., facial regions like eyes, nose,
etc). In this work, we make a ﬁrst attempt to propose a
novel self-supervised facial representation learning framework to learn consistent global and local facial representations, Facial Region Awareness (FRA). Speciﬁcally, we
explicitly enforce the consistency of facial regions by matching the local facial representations across views, which are
extracted with learned heatmaps highlighting the facial regions. Inspired by the mask prediction in supervised semantic segmentation, we obtain the heatmaps via cosine similarity between the per-pixel projection of feature maps and
“facial mask embeddings” computed from learnable positional embeddings, which leverage the attention mechanism
to globally look up the facial image for facial regions. To
learn such heatmaps, we formulate the learning of facial
mask embeddings as a deep clustering problem by assigning
the pixel features from the feature maps to them. The transfer learning results on facial classiﬁcation and regression
tasks show that our FRA outperforms previous pre-trained
models and more importantly, using ResNet as the uniﬁed
backbone for various tasks, our FRA achieves comparable
or even better performance compared with SOTA methods
in facial analysis tasks.

Recent works in self-supervised representation learning for visual images have shown that self-supervised pretraining is effective in improving the performance on various downstream tasks such as image classiﬁcation, object
detection and segmentation as it can learn general representations from unlabeled data that could be transferred to
downstream visual tasks, especially tasks with limited labeled data [18, 24, 28, 30, 58, 62, 65]. Among them, instance discrimination (including contrastive learning [10,
22, 36] and non-contrastive learning [11, 20] paradigms)
has been shown to be effective in learning generalizable
self-supervised features. Instance discrimination aims to
learn view-invariant representations by matching the global
representations between the augmented views generated
by aggressive image augmentations, i.e., the image-level
representations of the augmented views should be similar [10–12, 20, 22, 36]. Another self-supervised learning
paradigm, masked image modeling (MIM) [23, 54] learns
visual representations by reconstructing image content from
a masked image, achieving excellent performance in full
model ﬁne-tuning. This leads to the question: can selfsupervised pre-training learn general facial representations which beneﬁt downstream facial analysis tasks?

1. Introduction
Human face understanding is an important and challenging
topic in computer vision [41, 72] and supervised learning
algorithms have shown promising results on a wide range
of facial analysis tasks recently [5, 31, 55, 71]. Despite

Several attempts have been made to learn general facial
representations for facial analysis tasks [3, 41, 72]. For example, Bulat et al. [3] directly applies the contrastive objective to facial features. FaRL [72] and MCF [59] combine contrastive learning and mask image modeling [23].
PCL [41] proposes to disentangle the pose-related and poseunrelated features, achieving strong performance on both
pose-related (regression) and pose-unrelated (classiﬁcation)
tasks. However, it runs the model forward and backward three times for each training step, which is timeconsuming. Despite different techniques, these methods
commonly treats each face image as a whole to learn consistent global representations at the image-level and overlook
the “spatial consistency of local representations”, i.e., local facial regions (e.g., eyes, nose and mouth) should also be
2081

