This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C3: High-performance and low-complexity neural compression
from a single image or video
Hyunjik Kim*, Matthias Bauer*, Lucas Theis, Jonathan Richard Schwarz, Emilien Dupont*
Google DeepMind

Abstract
Most neural compression models are trained on large
datasets of images or videos in order to generalize to unseen data. Such generalization typically requires large and
expressive architectures with a high decoding complexity.
Here we introduce C3, a neural compression method with
strong rate-distortion (RD) performance that instead overfits
a small model to each image or video separately. The resulting decoding complexity of C3 can be an order of magnitude
lower than neural baselines with similar RD performance.
C3 builds on Cool-chic [43] and makes several simple and
effective improvements for images. We further develop new
methodology to apply C3 to videos. On the CLIC2020 image benchmark, we match the RD performance of VTM, the
reference implementation of the H.266 codec, with less than
3k MACs/pixel for decoding. On the UVG video benchmark,
we match the RD performance of the Video Compression
Transformer [60], a well-established neural video codec,
with less than 5k MACs/pixel for decoding.

1. Introduction
Most neural compression models are based on autoencoders
[5, 79], with an encoder mapping an image to a quantized
latent vector and a decoder mapping the latent vector back
to an approximate reconstruction of the image. To be practically useful as codecs, these models must generalize, i.e.,
the decoder should be able to approximately reconstruct any
natural image. Such a decoding function is likely to be comJRS is now at Harvard University.
Code: https://github.com/google-deepmind/c3 neural compression
Author contributions: ED conceived the project and wrote the initial codebase with the help of HK and MB. HK, MB, ED, LT developed and refined
the project vision with the help of JRS. MB, LT, HK, ED implemented
and refined the general methodology. HK designed and implemented the
video-specific methodology and evaluation with help from ED and MB.
MB, HK, LT worked on scaling, evaluating and improving the efficiency of
experiments. MB, ED, HK, LT wrote the paper.

BD-rate vs VTM in % (↓)

*Equal contribution
Corresponding authors: {hyunjikk, msbauer, edupont}@google.com

COOL-CHIC
40

COOL-CHICv2

BMS

20

C3 (Ours)
0

EVC-S

C3 adapt.
(Ours)
Better
103

CST

EVC-M

EVC-L
MLIC
104

105

MLIC+
106

Decoding complexity in MACs/pixel (↓)
Figure 1. Rate-distortion performance (BD-rate) vs. decoding
complexity on the Kodak image benchmark. Our method, C3,
achieves a better trade-off than existing neural codecs.

plex and expensive to compute. Indeed, while most neural
codecs enjoy very strong rate-distortion (RD) performance
[16, 31, 38], their decoding complexity can make them impractical for many use cases, particularly when hardware
is constrained, e.g., on mobile devices [45, 83]. As a result, designing low complexity codecs that offer strong RD
performance is one of the major open problems in neural
compression [89].
Recently, an alternative approach to neural compression
called COIN was proposed [20]. Instead of generalizing
across images, COIN overfits a neural network to a single
image. The quantized weights of this neural network (often
referred to as a neural field [86]) are then transmitted as a
compressed code for the image. As the decoder only needs
to reconstruct a single image, the resulting network is significantly smaller than traditional neural decoders [6, 16, 64],
reducing the decoding complexity by orders of magnitude.
However, while the decoding complexity of COIN is low,
its RD performance is poor, and it is therefore not a viable
alternative to other codecs.

9347

