This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adversarial Distillation Based on Slack Matching and Attribution Region
Alignment
Shenglin Yin1 , Zhen Xiao1* , Mingxuan Song1 , Jieyi Long2
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Theta Labs, Inc.
{yinsl, songmingxuan}@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial distillation (AD) is a highly effective method
for enhancing the robustness of small models. Contrary to
expectations, a high-performing teacher model does not always result in a more robust student model. This is due
to two main reasons. First, when there are significant differences in predictions between the teacher model and the
student model, exact matching of predicted values using KL
divergence interferes with training, leading to poor performance of existing methods. Second, matching solely based
on the output prevents the student model from fully understanding the behavior of the teacher model. To address
these challenges, this paper proposes a novel AD method
named SmaraAD. During the training process, we facilitate the student model in better understanding the teacher
model’s behavior by aligning the attribution region that the
student model focuses on with that of the teacher model.
Concurrently, we relax the condition of exact matching in
KL divergence and replace it with a more flexible matching criterion, thereby enhancing the model’s robustness.
Extensive experiments substantiate the effectiveness of our
method in improving the robustness of small models, outperforming previous SOTA methods.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved significant
success in both academic and industrial applications, including image classification [8], face recognition [18], time
series forecast [23] and resource scheduling [24, 25]. In
pursuit of enhanced performance, present-day deep learning models are frequently designed to be increasingly deep
and wide [22]. However, constraints in computational and
memory resources pose a challenge to the deployment of
these large models, particularly in real-time applications
where there is a demand for deploying lightweight mod* Corresponding author.

xiaozhen@pku.edu.cn

jieyi@thetalabs.org

els in resource-limited mobile devices for swift inference
results. Given the budget limitations inherent in edge deployment, smaller models often lack sufficient protective
mechanisms. This deficiency renders them more susceptible to potential threats such as well-orchestrated adversarial
attacks [7, 12, 17] for malevolent purposes, in comparison
to large models. Consequently, bolstering the robustness of
small models against malicious attacks is of critical importance when integrating them into practical applications.
Among the myriad of existing defensive strategies, adversarial training (AT) has been substantiated as one of
the most effective approaches [7, 12, 13, 19, 27], garnering significant attention from the research community.
Despite its proven reliability in promoting model robustness, AT approaches are not devoid of limitations. Numerous studies illustrate that AT is more proficient with highvolume over-parameterised models as opposed to smaller
models [14, 21, 28], implying a direct correlation between
model size and robustness. Recently, adversarial distillation (AD) has been put forth as an alternative to augment
the robustness of smaller models [6, 32, 33]. Analogous
to AT, AD can be framed as a min-max optimisation problem. Its objective is to ensure the student model inherits not
only the predictive accuracy but also the adversarial robustness of the robust teacher model within the robust optimisation framework. A summary of the approaches utilised in
various state-of-the-art AD approaches is presented in Table 1. Ideally, higher performing teachers should impart
more knowledge to their students. However, several studies [3, 29, 33] have observed a lack of direct correlation between the performance of teachers and students, with highperforming teachers not necessarily producing better performing students, and in some cases, even contributing to a
decline in student model robustness. We ascribe this phenomenon to the approach of knowledge transfer between
teachers and students.
Firstly, the conventional approach that employs
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence to match predictions
precisely proves counterproductive when substantial dis-

24605

