This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly Supervised Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation via Artificial Oracle
Hyeokjun Kweon∗
KAIST

Jihun Kim∗
KAIST

Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST

0327june@kaist.ac.kr

jihun1998@kaist.ac.kr

kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Manual annotation of every point in a point cloud is a
costly and labor-intensive process. While weakly supervised point cloud semantic segmentation (WSPCSS) with
sparse annotation shows promise, the limited information
from initial sparse labels can place an upper bound on performance. As a new research direction for WSPCSS, we
propose a novel Region Exploration via Artificial Labeling (REAL) framework. It leverages a foundational image model as an artificial oracle within the active learning context, eliminating the need for manual annotation
by a human oracle. To integrate the 2D model into the
3D domain, we first introduce a Projection-based Point-toSegment (PP2S) module, designed to enable prompt segmentation of 3D data without additional training. The
REAL framework samples query points based on model
predictions and requests annotations from PP2S, dynamically refining labels and improving model training. Furthermore, to overcome several challenges of employing an
artificial model as an oracle, we formulate effective query
sampling and label updating strategies. Our comprehensive experiments and comparisons demonstrate that the
REAL framework significantly outperforms existing methods across various benchmarks. The code is available at
https://github.com/jihun1998/AO.

1. Introduction
Point cloud semantic segmentation has been extensively
researched for robotics or autonomous driving applications. While fully supervised approaches [7, 10, 14, 28, 29,
35] utilizing deep learning have demonstrated remarkable
progress, the densely annotated point-wise labels required
for these methods pose a significant challenge due to the
labor-intensive and expensive annotation process. This obstacle hinders the practical application of existing methods.
In response to this challenge, Weakly Supervised Point
Cloud Semantic Segmentation (WSPCSS) has gained attention, leveraging more affordable weak labels [15, 23, 24, 26,
40, 42, 47, 48]. Among various types of weak labels, sparse
annotations have become a widely adopted setting, where
only a tiny subset (e.g., 0.02%) of the entire point cloud is

Figure 1. Visualization of the proposed REAL framework. We
tackle the challenge of WSPCSS, leveraging a foundational imagery model as an artificial oracle within the context of active
learning. The below examples illustrate the evolving labels as
training proceeds.

labeled. Existing WSPCSS works have proposed remedies
focusing on two key aspects: 1) fully utilizing the limited
information from sparse labels and 2) learning the features
beneficial for segmentation from the data. The methods
based on self-labeling use the regions confidently predicted
by the model as pseudo-labels for training the model itself.
Meanwhile, various studies have proposed self-supervised
learning methods, such as consistency against data augmentation, contrastive learning, or masked modeling.
While these approaches have shown substantial results,
the overall amount of information provided is constrained
by the initial sparse annotation, potentially placing an upper limit on performance. In this paper, instead of solely
focusing on how to exploit the given limited information,
we embark on a new and more challenging research direction. Specifically, we propose a novel WSPCSS method
using an additional publicly available source of information—leveraging advancements in the 2D domain with the
Segment Anything Model (SAM) [19].
We begin by utilizing the promptable segmentation capability of SAM to enhance initially provided sparse annotations. To bridge the gap between the 2D model and 3D

3721

