This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On Exact Inversion of DPM-Solvers
Seongmin Hong1 , Kyeonghyun Lee1 , Suh Yoon Jeon1 , Hyewon Bae1 , Se Young Chun1,2, *
1
Dept. of ECE, 2 INMC & IPAI, Seoul National University, Republic of Korea
{smhongok, litiphysics, euniejeon, hyewon0309, sychun}@snu.ac.kr
Project page: https://smhongok.github.io/inv-dpm.html

Abstract
Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) are a key component in modern generative models. DPM-solvers have
achieved reduced latency and enhanced quality significantly, but have posed challenges to find the exact inverse
(i.e., finding the initial noise from the given image). Here we
investigate the exact inversions for DPM-solvers and propose algorithms to perform them when samples are generated by the first-order as well as higher-order DPM-solvers.
For each explicit denoising step in DPM-solvers, we formulated the inversions using implicit methods such as gradient descent or forward step method to ensure the robustness
to large classifier-free guidance unlike the prior approach
using fixed-point iteration. Experimental results demonstrated that our proposed exact inversion methods significantly reduced the error of both image and noise reconstructions, greatly enhanced the ability to distinguish invisible watermarks and well prevented unintended background
changes consistently during image editing.

1. Introduction
Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) are rapidly advancing as a key component in modern generative models for
various applications such as unconditional image generation [8, 26, 31, 32], conditional image synthesis [7, 26]
including text-guided image generation [24, 26, 27] and
solving inverse problems in imaging [13, 16]. DPMs create (or sample) diverse and high-quality images by gradually denoising random initial noises either in the image domain [39] or in the latent space [26] (called latent diffusion
model or LDM). However, this iterative denoising in DPMs
usually takes a long sampling time [39].
There have been a considerable amount of studies to
speed up the sampling time or the generative process in
DPMs [14, 15, 17, 19, 29, 31, 43]. For example, denoising diffusion implicit model (DDIM) [31] has attempted to
* Corresponding author

reduce the iterations (or steps) by formulating the denoising
process of DPM as an ordinary differential equation (ODE),
namely the diffusion ODE, and then by using the forward
Euler method to sample a high-quality image with much
fewer denoising steps (e.g., 50) than the diffusion steps
(e.g., 1000) that were used in training. High-order DPMsolvers [14, 15] leverage fast ODE solvers such as exponential integrators to further reduce the number of denoising
steps (e.g., 10), leading to significantly decreased sampling
time compared to DDIM (first-order DPM-solver). However, fast DPM-solvers make it challenging to trace back
the generative process and find the initial noise for a given
image.
There have been great interests in tracing the generative
process back, or inversion, which is a key component in a
number of applications such as image editing [6, 11, 23, 34],
style transfer [42], image-to-image translation [33], model
attacks [4], watermark detection [36] and image restoration [10]. For example, image editing using DPM involves
finding the latent vector for a given image through inversion
and then using a different prompt in the generation process from that latent noise [6, 33, 34]. Unfortunately, the
exact inversion of DPM-solvers is challenging. The naı̈ve
DDIM inversion does not subtract the estimated Gaussian
noise, but adds it to the clean image to find the corresponding initial noise. As DDIM solves the diffusion ODE using the forward Euler method, the naı̈ve DDIM inversion
uses the same method in reverse order along the time axis.
This inversion is valid under the assumption that the estimated noises are almost the same in both t and t + dt,
where dt is the time step. While this assumption approximately holds for the methods with many (small) diffusion
steps, DPM-solvers with fewer denoising steps will break
this assumption so that the naı̈ve DDIM inversion will not
properly work anymore, leading to distortions [34].
Recently, several exact inversion methods have been proposed to achieve smaller reconstruction errors compared
to the naı̈ve DDIM inversion. One approach is to replace
the standard DDIM with new invertible generation methods for image editing so that the initial noise for the gen-

7069

