This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Prototype Attention for Unsupervised Video Object Segmentation
Suhwan Cho1,∗ Minhyeok Lee1,∗ Seunghoon Lee1 Dogyoon Lee1
Heeseung Choi2 Ig-Jae Kim2 Sangyoun Lee1
1

2

Yonsei University
Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)

Abstract
Unsupervised video object segmentation (VOS) aims to
detect and segment the most salient object in videos. The
primary techniques used in unsupervised VOS are 1) the
collaboration of appearance and motion information; and
2) temporal fusion between different frames. This paper
proposes two novel prototype-based attention mechanisms,
inter-modality attention (IMA) and inter-frame attention
(IFA), to incorporate these techniques via dense propagation across different modalities and frames. IMA densely integrates context information from different modalities based
on a mutual refinement. IFA injects global context of a video
to the query frame, enabling a full utilization of useful properties from multiple frames. Experimental results on public benchmark datasets demonstrate that our proposed approach outperforms all existing methods by a substantial
margin. The proposed two components are also thoroughly
validated via ablative study. Code and models are available
at https://github.com/Hydragon516/DPA.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) is a fundamental task in
computer vision. Given a video sequence as input, the objective is to segment objects for the entire frames. It can
be divided into several categories depending on how the objects to be detected are defined. In this study, we deal with
the unsupervised setting, i.e., detecting and segmenting the
most salient object in a video sequence without any external
guidance such as target mask or reference text.
In unsupervised VOS, collaboration of different modalities and different frames is widely adopted. As salient object usually shows distinctive movements compared to the
background, existing approaches including MATNet [34],
FSNet [4], and HFAN [14] leverage motion cues in addition
to appearance cues. For each video frame, an RGB image
* These authors contribute equally to this work.

Base

After IMA

After IFA

After IMA and IFA

Figure 1. Visualized feature maps after applying IMA and IFA.

and an optical flow map generated by pre-trained optical
flow estimation models are used as input to exploit appearance and motion information simultaneously. In order to
fuse the multi-modal cues, they mainly focus on designing
a reciprocity framework that blends the embedded features
obtained from each modality. On the other hand, there are
also studies, such as COSNet [11], AGNN [25], and ADNet [29], that focus on exploiting temporal coherence of a
video. They transfer information of the initial frame to each
query frame or iteratively refines each frame via temporally
connecting different frames.
However, existing modality fusion methods and temporal aggregation methods have significant limitations. First,
conventional multi-modality solutions are not carefully designed to be robust against various situations. As they fuse
multi-modal cues via a direct summation, concatenation,
or modulating channel weights, respective cues can act as
noise if their quality is not reliable. Second, existing temporal fusion methods do not fully consider global context
of a video or require high computational cost. They only
consider the initial frame as an anchor frame that provides
external guidance or perform iterative refinement over all
frames, which severely degrades their efficiency.

19238

