This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HPL-ESS: Hybrid Pseudo-Labeling for Unsupervised
Event-based Semantic Segmentation
Linglin Jing1,2 *, Yiming Ding1∗ , Yunpeng Gao1,4 , Zhigang Wang1†, Xu Yan3 ,
Dong Wang1 , Gerald Schaefer2 ,Hui Fang2† , Bin Zhao1,4 , Xuelong Li1,5
1
Shanghai AI Laboratory, 2 Loughborough University, 3 SSE & FNII, CUHK-Shenzhen,
4
Northwestern Polytechnical University, 5 Institute of Artificial Intelligence (TeleAI)
l.jing@lboro.ac.uk, wangzhigang@pjlab.org.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Event cameras are bio-inspired vision sensors that respond
to changes in pixel intensity, generating a stream of asyn* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Ours
HALISE [4]

mIoU (%)

Event-based semantic segmentation has gained popularity due to its capability to deal with scenarios under highspeed motion and extreme lighting conditions, which cannot be addressed by conventional RGB cameras. Since it
is hard to annotate event data, previous approaches rely
on event-to-image reconstruction to obtain pseudo labels
for training. However, this will inevitably introduce noise,
and learning from noisy pseudo labels, especially when
generated from a single source, may reinforce the errors.
This drawback is also called confirmation bias in pseudolabeling. In this paper, we propose a novel hybrid pseudolabeling framework for unsupervised event-based semantic
segmentation, HPL-ESS, to alleviate the influence of noisy
pseudo labels. Specifically, we first employ a plain unsupervised domain adaptation framework as our baseline,
which can generate a set of pseudo labels through selftraining. Then, we incorporate offline event-to-image reconstruction into the framework, and obtain another set of
pseudo labels by predicting segmentation maps on the reconstructed images. A noisy label learning strategy is designed to mix the two sets of pseudo labels and enhance the
quality. Moreover, we propose a soft prototypical alignment
(SPA) module to further improve the consistency of target
domain features. Extensive experiments show that the proposed method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods
by a large margin on benchmarks (e.g., +5.88% accuracy,
+10.32% mIoU on DSEC-Semantic dataset), and even surpasses several supervised methods.

ESS [25]

EV-SegNet [1]
ESS [25]
E2VID [23]

Accuracy (%)
Figure 1. Comparison on the DSEC-Semantic dataset. Our
method outperforms other UDA works by a large margin and even
surpasses fully supervised methods.

chronous events characterized by exceptionally high temporal resolution. This technology enables the capture of
dynamic scenes, providing features of high dynamic range
(HDR) and reduced motion blur. Event cameras have been
extensively applied in various applications, including object
recognition [15, 23], SLAM [8], and autonomous driving
systems [19], effectively addressing challenges such as motion blur and overexposure.
However, event data significantly differ from images,
making it difficult to annotate in dense pixel prediction tasks
such as semantic segmentation. Previous works [1, 31, 32]
require per-pixel paired events and images, and then leverage pre-trained networks on images to generate labels for
event data. Although a more precisely paired and sharper
image would naturally yield improved results, these methods increase the demands on capture devices. Other methods rely on event-to-image conversion to get rid of the need
for ground-truth labels. E2VID [25] is an event-to-image

23128

