This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Time-step Curriculum for One Image to 3D Generation
Xuanyu Yi1,4 , Zike Wu1 , Qingshan Xu1 , Pan Zhou3* ,
Joo-Hwee Lim4 , Hanwang Zhang2,1
1
3

Nanyang Technological University, 2 Skywork AI

Singapore Management University, 4 Institute for Infocomm Research

xuanyu001@e.ntu.edu.sg, zike001@e.ntu.edu.sg, qingshan.xu@ntu.edu.sg,
panzhou@smu.edu.sg, joohwee@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg
Reference Image

SDS

Annealing time-step

Magic123

Time-step Curriculum (Ours)

Figure 1. DTC123 can generate high-fidelity and multiview-consistent 3D assets from a single arbitrary image, significantly enhancing the
original SDS pipeline through the diffusion time-step curriculum.

Abstract
Score distillation sampling (SDS) has been widely
adopted to overcome the absence of unseen views in reconstructing 3D objects from a single image. It leverages pretrained 2D diffusion models as teacher to guide the reconstruction of student 3D models. Despite their remarkable
success, SDS-based methods often encounter geometric artifacts and texture saturation. We find out the crux is the
overlooked indiscriminate treatment of diffusion time-steps
during optimization: it unreasonably treats the studentteacher knowledge distillation to be equal at all time-steps
and thus entangles coarse-grained and fine-grained modeling. Therefore, we propose the Diffusion Time-step Curriculum one-image-to-3D pipeline (DTC123), which involves
∗ Corresponding author.

both the teacher and student models collaborating with the
time-step curriculum in a coarse-to-fine manner. Extensive
experiments on NeRF4, RealFusion15, GSO and Level50
benchmark demonstrate that DTC123 can produce multiview consistent, high-quality, and diverse 3D assets. Codes
and more generation demos will be released in https:
//github.com/yxymessi/DTC123.

1. Introduction
We consider the problem of obtaining a 3D asset from a
single image. This endeavor holds tremendous industrial
promise, notably in realms such as AR/VR content creation
from a single snapshot and enhancing robotic navigation
through individual captures [9, 42]. However, reconstructing 3D models (e.g., NeRF [2, 28, 29] and mesh [14, 23])

9948

