This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fusing Personal and Environmental Cues for Identification and Segmentation of
First-Person Camera Wearers in Third-Person Views
Ziwei Zhao*, Yuchen Wang*, Chuhua Wang
Indiana University Bloomington
{zz47,wang617,cw234}@iu.edu

Abstract
As wearable cameras become more popular, an important question emerges: how to identify camera wearers within the perspective of conventional static cameras.
The drastic difference between first-person (egocentric) and
third-person (exocentric) camera views makes this a challenging task. We present PersonEnvironmentNet (PEN), a
framework designed to integrate information from both the
individuals in the two views and geometric cues inferred
from the background environment. To facilitate research in
this direction, we also present TF2023, a novel dataset comprising synchronized first-person and third-person views,
along with masks of camera wearers and labels associating these masks with the respective first-person views.
In addition, we propose a novel quantitative metric designed to measure a model’s ability to comprehend the relationship between the two views. Our experiments reveal that PEN outperforms existing methods. The code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
ziweizhao1993/PEN .

1. Introduction
Egocentric (first-person) computer vision has received increased attention in the last few years, propelled by new
large-scale datasets [16, 41] and expanding capabilities of
Augmented Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR) technologies [1, 26, 51], including devices such as headmounted displays and smart glasses. Egocentric vision research includes a wide variety of problems such as action
recognition [43, 48], view synthesis [13, 29, 30], and temporal alignment [43, 53].
In this work, we consider a relatively underexplored
task: identifying and segmenting people wearing firstperson (egocentric) cameras. Specifically, our objective is
to identify and segment camera wearers given a third-person
view of a scene and several first-person views indicating
* These authors contributed equally.

Figure 1. Problem definition: Given a third-person (exo) view
and one or more first-person (ego) views synchronized with the
third-person view, the objective is to predict the segmentation
masks of the camera wearers associated with the egocentric views.

their identity, synchronized with the third-person view, as
depicted in Fig. 1. This task is important for many applications in which multiple first- and third-person cameras are
in the same environment. For example, in immersive teaching environments using virtual reality, a teacher may need to
promptly identify a student encountering a question within
their view. Similarly, in security scenarios, identifying a police officer in a surveillance camera becomes crucial when
their body camera detects anomalies.
This task poses unique challenges compared to conventional identification or re-identification tasks, where a person’s appearance is usually the key evidence [7, 54, 57].
First, the camera wearer’s appearance is not visible within
their own field of view (FOV). Second, the camera wearer’s
limited, forward-facing viewpoint may not align with the
exocentric camera’s FOV. In addition, the presence of the
camera wearer in the third-person view introduces occlusions, further complicating the extraction of shared visual
cues.
While prior studies [14, 52] have explored related topics, our task is different from them in several ways. First,
we do not rely on any information from previous frames.
Prior research [52] necessitates the use of such information
in two forms: the ground truth mask of the camera wearer in

16477

