This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UFORecon: Generalizable Sparse-View Surface Reconstruction
from Arbitrary and Unfavorable Sets
Youngju Na

Woo Jae Kim

Kyu Beom Han
KAIST

Suhyeon Ha

Sung-Eui Yoon

{yjna2907,wkim97,qbhan,suhyeon.ha,sungeui}@kaist.ac.kr

Sparse-view Images

Abstract
Generalizable neural implicit surface reconstruction
aims to obtain an accurate underlying geometry given a
limited number of multi-view images from unseen scenes.
However, existing methods select only informative and relevant views using predefined scores for training and testing phases. This constraint makes the model impractical
because we cannot always ensure the availability of favorable combinations in real-world scenarios. We observe that
previous methods output degenerate solutions under arbitrary and unfavorable sets. Building upon this finding, we
propose UFORecon, a robust view-combination generalizable surface reconstruction framework. To this end, we
apply cross-view matching transformers to model interactions between source images and build correlation frustums
to capture global correlations. In addition, we explicitly
encode pairwise feature similarities as view-consistent priors. Our proposed framework largely outperforms previous methods not only in view-combination generalizability but also in the existing generalizable protocol trained
with favorable view-combinations. The code is available at
https://github.com/Youngju-Na/UFORecon.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D geometries from images of multiple
camera viewpoints is a fundamental problem in the computer vision field, also applicable to robotics [6, 28, 49], autonomous driving [13, 22], and AR/VR applications [7, 26].
Multi-view stereo (MVS) is a widely used technique for reconstructing 3D geometry from multi-view images. Conventional MVS methods [2, 10, 19, 34] find correspondences across input images taken from different viewpoints.
With the recent advances in deep learning, learning-based
MVS methods [3, 8, 11, 44] leverage differentiable homography warping with 3D Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) to effectively search correspondences in feature
space. Recent progress in 3D reconstruction [15, 30, 45]

Favorable Set

Unfavorable Set
Favorable Set

VolRecon

Ours

Unfavorable Set

VolRecon

Ours

Figure 1. Reconstruction results from different view combinations. Both are trained only with the best-selected training protocol and tested with favorable (Blue) and unfavorable sets (Red),
respectively. VolRecon [32] leads to a degenerate geometry in the
unfavorable set while achieving accurate geometry in the favorable
set. Our approach produces reasonable geometry on both sets.

increasingly emphasizes the use of implicit neural representation [27]. This trend is notable in the field of neural
surface reconstruction [29, 38, 46, 48]. Unlike Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [27], which employs a volume density to infer 3D geometry implicitly, the use of Signed Distance Function (SDF) field has proven to be effective for
learning surfaces because of their universal zero level-set
definition of surfaces. However, as these approaches optimize on a single scene with dense camera viewpoints, there
is an increasing effort to learn a generalizable representation that can adaptively reconstruct geometry from unseen
scenes with sparse camera viewpoints [23, 25, 32, 43].
Despite the remarkable achievements, existing generalizable implicit surface reconstruction methods use the
fixed, best combination for each camera based on the viewselection scores [44]. This score is predefined for each
camera pair via a matching-based reconstruction, such as

5094

