This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Anomaly Score: Evaluating Generative Models and Individual Generated
Images based on Complexity and Vulnerability
Jaehui Hwang∗ , Junghyuk Lee∗ , Jong-Seok Lee
School of Integrated Technology / BK21 Graduate Program in Intelligent Semiconductor Technology
Yonsei University, Korea ∗ Equal contribution
{jaehui.hwang, junghyuklee, jong-seok.lee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Anomaly Score (⇓)

Abstract
With the advancement of generative models, the assessment of generated images becomes increasingly more important. Previous methods measure distances between features of reference and generated images from trained vision models. In this paper, we conduct an extensive investigation into the relationship between the representation
space and input space around generated images. We first
propose two measures related to the presence of unnatural
elements within images: complexity, which indicates how
non-linear the representation space is, and vulnerability,
which is related to how easily the extracted feature changes
by adversarial input changes. Based on these, we introduce a new metric to evaluating image-generative models called anomaly score (AS). Moreover, we propose AS-i
(anomaly score for individual images) that can effectively
evaluate generated images individually. Experimental results demonstrate the validity of the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
The advancement of deep learning has significantly fostered
the development of generative AI, particularly in the domain of image generation. Initially, the focus was primarily
on generative adversarial networks (GANs) [19, 28, 30, 52],
which employed a generator and a discriminator. Recently,
various generative models have been suggested, including autoencoder-based models [22, 32] and diffusion-based
models [5, 16, 25, 53]. Simultaneously, evaluating the performance of generative models has become more critical.
The performance of generative models can be evaluated
in various ways [7]. Assessing how similar generated images are to real images (i.e., fidelity) is one of the most
important and challenging aspects of evaluating the performance. An accurate approach is conducting subjective
tests, where human subjects are asked to judge the naturalness of generated images, but this is resource-intensive.

0.6

Efficient-vdVAE
LDM

0.4

StyleSwin

StyleGan2-ada
InsGen

Unleashing Transformer
0.2
Projected-GAN

StyleNAT

StyleGan-XL

0.0
0.1

0.2

0.15

0.25

0.3

Human perception (⇑)

AS-i (⇓)

1471.68

906.51

300.92

71.26

Rarity (⇓)

24.52

12.48

Outlier

17.51

Realism (⇑)

1.10

1.06

0.97

1.02

Human (⇑)

0%

14.29%

78.57%

92.85%

Figure 1. Proposed AS for evaluating generative models and
AS-i for individual images. The graph on the top shows the proposed AS aligns well with the human perception of evaluating various generative models trained on the FFHQ dataset. On the bottom, several generated images are shown with our AS-i score, rarity score [21], realism score [34], and human evaluation. A value
of the human evaluation indicates the proportion of participants
who assess that the image is a natural image in our subjective test.
The best score for each metric, indicating an image to be the most
natural image is highlighted in blue. In terms of naturalness, ASi shows the best alignment with human evaluation. On the other
hand, the rarity score prefers the second image, which is unnatural, as the most common in real images. The realism score also
overestimates the leftmost image to be the most realistic.

To efficiently evaluate generative models in various aspects,
several objective metrics have been proposed [2, 4, 12, 21,
24, 34, 40, 49, 50, 59]. Most existing metrics involve comparing sample statistics between the sets of real and generated images after extracting features from pre-trained vision

8754

