This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InNeRF360: Text-Guided 3D-Consistent Object Inpainting
on 360 Neural Radiance Fields
Dongqing Wang Tong Zhang* Alaa Abboud Sabine Süsstrunk
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL
Lausanne, Switzerland
Abstract

“Remove the flowerpot and flowers”

We propose InNeRF360, an automatic system that accurately removes text-specified objects from 360 Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF). The challenge is to effectively remove
objects while inpainting perceptually consistent content for
the missing regions, which is particularly demanding for
existing NeRF models due to their implicit volumetric representation. Moreover, unbounded scenes are more prone to
floater artifacts in the inpainted region than frontal-facing
scenes, as the change of object appearance and background
across views is more sensitive to inaccurate segmentations
and inconsistent inpainting. With a trained NeRF and a text
description, our method efficiently removes specified objects and inpaints visually consistent content without artifacts. We apply depth-space warping to enforce consistency
across multiview text-encoded segmentations, and then refine the inpainted NeRF model using perceptual priors and
3D diffusion-based geometric priors to ensure visual plausibility. Through extensive experiments in segmentation
and inpainting on 360 and frontal-facing NeRFs, we show
that our approach is effective and enhances NeRF’s editability. Project page: https://ivrl.github.io/
InNeRF360/.

1. Introduction
Recreating and manipulating real-world scenarios is one
of the main focuses of Virtual and Augmented Reality
(VR/AR) applications. Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) and
its variants [2, 23, 28] can efficiently model 360 real-world
scenes for photorealistic novel view synthesis. Consequently, they have the potential to become widely accessible
tools for representing the 3D world.
A desired feature of such applications is the ability to
modify the content of the created scene, including object
removal. However, direct inpainting in the NeRF framework is intractable due to the implicit representation of the
captured scenes encoded through the weights of multilayer
* Corresponding author.

InNeRF360

Figure 1. Given a pre-trained NeRF and a text to remove specific
objects (e.g.“Remove the flowerpot and flowers”), InNeRF360
produces accurate multiview object segmentations, and outputs an
inpainted NeRF with visually consistent content.

perceptrons (MLP), which hinders explicit user control of
scene contents. For explicit NeRF variants, the scene representation of radiance fields contains ambiguous surface that
is hard to segment with a bounding region.
Existing works on selecting [35] or removing [18, 26,
43] objects in a trained NeRF tackle the 3D problem by
utilizing 2D input. These methods begin with sparse user
inputs, then use 2D image/video segmentation [7, 10] for
multiview segmentation and inpaint on RGB-D sequence.
They are restricted to frontal-facing viewing angles, as the
input scribbles or masks cannot extrapolate across differ-

12677

