This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VoCo: A Simple-yet-Effective Volume Contrastive Learning Framework for 3D
Medical Image Analysis
Linshan Wu

Jiaxin Zhuang
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Hao Chen *

Abstract
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has demonstrated
promising results in 3D medical image analysis. However,
the lack of high-level semantics in pre-training still heavily hinders the performance of downstream tasks. We observe that 3D medical images contain relatively consistent
contextual position information, i.e., consistent geometric
relations between different organs, which leads to a potential way for us to learn consistent semantic representations in pre-training. In this paper, we propose a simpleyet-effective Volume Contrast (VoCo) framework to leverage the contextual position priors for pre-training. Specifically, we first generate a group of base crops from different regions while enforcing feature discrepancy among
them, where we employ them as class assignments of different regions. Then, we randomly crop sub-volumes and
predict them belonging to which class (located at which region) by contrasting their similarity to different base crops,
which can be seen as predicting contextual positions of different sub-volumes. Through this pretext task, VoCo implicitly encodes the contextual position priors into model representations without the guidance of annotations, enabling
us to effectively improve the performance of downstream
tasks that require high-level semantics. Extensive experimental results on six downstream tasks demonstrate the
superior effectiveness of VoCo. Code will be available at
https://github.com/Luffy03/VoCo.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has demonstrated outstanding achievements in 3D medical image analysis [53, 21, 40, 33, 39],
yet is heavily hampered by the expensive cost of the required expert annotations [50, 23]. To address this problem,
Self-Supervised Learning (SSL) has received significant attention due to its promising ability to learn representations
without annotations [10, 11, 6, 28, 20], which has become
* Corresponding author: jhc@cse.ust.hk

(a) Relatively consistent contextual positions in 3D medical images
randomly crop
Volume
Contrast
Similarity logits

Position prediction

base crops

(b) Volume Contrast (VoCo) for 3D Medical Image Analysis

Figure 1. (a) In 3D medical images, the contextual positions, i.e.,
the geometric relations between different organs are relatively consistent. (b) Aiming to leverage contextual position priors for pretraining, we proposed a Volume Contrast (VoCo) framework for
3D Medical Image Analysis.

an important label-efficient solution in 3D medical image
analysis [71, 51, 32, 2, 34, 36].
Existing methods [50, 75, 71, 13] are mostly based on information reconstructions to learn augment-invariant representations of 3D medical images, which first employ strong
data augmentation to the images and then reconstruct the
raw information. Specifically, rotate-and-reconstruct [50,
51, 75, 52] proposed to randomly rotate the 3D volumetric images and learn to recover them, which encourages
models to learn rotational invariant features. Recent methods [70, 71, 32, 25, 62] further proposed to restore information among different views of the image. PCRL [70, 71]
cropped global and local patches then conducted multiscale restorations. GVSL [32] further explored the geometric similarity between multi-scans by affine augmentation
and matching. Mask-reconstruct methods [13, 73, 55] are
also widely used, which are introduced from MAE [28]
and aim to learn representations by masking images and
reconstructing the missing pixels. Although promising results have been demonstrated, previous works [52, 32] have

22873

