This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to navigate efficiently and precisely in real environments
Guillaume Bono, Hervé Poirier, Leonid Antsfeld, Gianluca Monaci, Boris Chidlovskii, Christian Wolf
NAVER LABS Europe, Meylan, France
{firstname}.{lastname}@naverlabs.com

Test/real

Abstract
In the context of autonomous navigation of terrestrial robots,
the creation of realistic models for agent dynamics and sensing is a widespread habit in the robotics literature and in
commercial applications, where they are used for model
based control and/or for localization and mapping. The
more recent Embodied AI literature, on the other hand, focuses on modular or end-to-end agents trained in simulators
like Habitat or AI-Thor, where the emphasis is put on photorealistic rendering and scene diversity, but high-fidelity robot
motion is assigned a less privileged role. The resulting
sim2real gap significantly impacts transfer of the trained
models to real robotic platforms. In this work we explore
end-to-end training of agents in simulation in settings which
minimize the sim2real gap both, in sensing and in actuation.
Our agent directly predicts (discretized) velocity commands,
which are maintained through closed-loop control in the real
robot. The behavior of the real robot (including the underlying low-level controller) is identified and simulated in a
modified Habitat simulator. Noise models for odometry and
localization further contribute in lowering the sim2real gap.
We evaluate on real navigation scenarios, explore different
localization and point goal calculation methods and report
significant gains in performance and robustness compared
to prior work.

1. Introduction
Point goal navigation of terrestrial robots in indoor buildings
has traditionally been addressed in the robotics community
with mapping and planning [6, 30, 50], which led to solutions capable of operating on robots in real environments.
The field of computer vision and embodied AI has addressed
this problem through large-scale machine learning in simulated 3D environments from reward with RL [24, 34] or
with imitation learning [14]. Learning from large-scale data
allows the agent to pick up more complex regularities, to
process more subtle cues and therefore (in principle) to be
more robust, to exploit data regularities to infer hidden and
occluded information, and generally to learn more powerful

Training/sim (ours)

1x

1

π
∆
Policy:

∆φ

1x

t
2x

2

∆π

Training/sim (classical)

t
2x

t+1

∆φ

Onboard ctrl Policy:
Dyn. model
333ms/3 Hz (Unknown)
333ms/3 Hz 33ms/30 Hz

t+1

π
∆
Policy:

Piecewise
constant
333ms/3 Hz velocities

Figure 1. Efficient navigation with policies end-to-end trained in
3D photorealistic simulators requires closing the sim2real gap in
sensing and actuation. Efficiency demands that the robot continues
to move during decision taking (as opposed to stopping for each
sensing operation), and this requires a realistic motion model in
simulation allowing the agent to internally anticipate its future state.
This requirement is exacerbated by the delay between sensing
① and actuation ② caused by the computational complexity of
high-capacity deep networks (visual encoders, policy). To model
realistic motion while training in simulation, we create a 2nd order
dynamical model running with higher frequency, which models
the robot and its low-level closed-loop controller. We identify the
model from real data and add it to the Habitat [44] Simulator.

decision rules. In this context, the specific task of point goal
navigation (navigation to coordinates) is now sometimes
considered “solved” in the literature [38], incorrectly, as we
argue. While the machine learning and computer vision
community turns its attention towards the exciting goal of
integrating language models into navigation [15, 23], we
think that further improvements are required to make trained
agents perform reliably in real environments with sufficient
speed.
Experiments and evaluations of trained models in real
environments and the impact of the sim2real gap do exist in
the Embodied AI literature [11, 20, 43], but they are rare and
were performed in restricted environments. Known models

17837

