This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pre-trained Vision and Language Transformers Are
Few-Shot Incremental Learners
Keon-Hee Park1
1

Kyungwoo Song2†

Kyung Hee University, Republic of Korea
2
Yonsei University, Republic of Korea

{pgh2874, gmpark}@khu.ac.kr

kyungwoo.song@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract

and incremental sessions. During the base session, a network learns numerous classes with sufficient training data,
while in the incremental sessions, it trains novel classes
with few-shot training data per each class. Given the restricted amount of data in incremental sessions, an effective
transfer of diverse knowledge learned in the base session is
crucial in FSCIL.
In FSCIL, there are two significant challenges: catastrophic forgetting [20] and overfitting [33]. Catastrophic
forgetting occurs while the network learns new classes sequentially, i.e., the network severely forgets the previously
learned knowledge. On the other hand, overfitting arises
when the network overly focuses on a limited set of training data, resulting in a degradation of overall performance.
To address these challenges, previous studies mainly have
utilized shallow models like Resnet-18 [12, 39, 40]. The
advantage of adopting a shallow model lies in its limited
number of learnable parameters, making it effective for mitigating forgetting through partial freezing and curbing overfitting. However, the limited capacity of the shallow model
hinders capturing and transferring sufficient domain knowledge from the base session to the incremental sessions.
Recently, large pre-trained models like Vision Transformer (ViT) [3] and Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) [26] are widely used in computer vision
due to their promising adaptability and performance. In
that sense, large pre-trained models can effectively learn
and transfer domain knowledge from the base session, overcoming limitations in transferability associated with shallow models. However, finetuning large pre-trained models
is prone to forget the useful pre-trained knowledge, while
freezing the models hinders the acquisition of domainspecific knowledge during the base session. This inherent
trade-off between preserving the pre-trained knowledge and
acquiring new domain-specific knowledge hinders their use
in FSCIL.
To investigate the challenges and applicability of large
models in FSCIL, we conducted 5-way 5-shot experiments

Few-Shot Class Incremental Learning (FSCIL) is a task
that requires a model to learn new classes incrementally
without forgetting when only a few samples for each class
are given. FSCIL encounters two significant challenges:
catastrophic forgetting and overfitting, and these challenges
have driven prior studies to primarily rely on shallow models, such as ResNet-18. Even though their limited capacity can mitigate both forgetting and overfitting issues, it
leads to inadequate knowledge transfer during few-shot incremental sessions. In this paper, we argue that large models such as vision and language transformers pre-trained on
large datasets can be excellent few-shot incremental learners. To this end, we propose a novel FSCIL framework
called PriViLege, Pre-trained Vision and Language transformers with prompting functions and knowledge distillation. Our framework effectively addresses the challenges
of catastrophic forgetting and overfitting in large models
through new pre-trained knowledge tuning (PKT) and two
losses: entropy-based divergence loss and semantic knowledge distillation loss. Experimental results show that the
proposed PriViLege significantly outperforms the existing
state-of-the-art methods with a large margin, e.g., +9.38%
in CUB200, +20.58% in CIFAR-100, and +13.36% in
miniImageNet. Our implementation code is available at
https://github.com/KHU-AGI/PriViLege.

1. Introduction
We humans have an exceptional ability to quickly comprehend novel concepts from only a small amount of data. To
grant this ability for deep neural networks, Few-Shot Class
Incremental Learning (FSCIL), introduced in [33] first, imitates a way of learning that closely resembles that of human learning. FSCIL typically comprises a base session
† Corresponding authors

Gyeong-Moon Park1†

23881

