This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Driving-Video Dehazing with Non-Aligned Regularization for Safety Assistance
Junkai Fan1 , Jiangwei Weng1 , Kun, Wang1 , Yijun Yang2 , Jianjun Qian1 , Jun Li1 ,* and Jian Yang1 *
1
PCA Lab†, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
{junkai.fan, wengjiangwei, kunwang, csjqian, junli, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn
yang018@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn

Hazy weather

Abstract

Clear weather
Ending

Real driving-video dehazing poses a significant challenge due to the inherent difficulty in acquiring precisely
aligned hazy/clear video pairs for effective model training,
especially in dynamic driving scenarios with unpredictable
weather conditions. In this paper, we propose a pioneering approach that addresses this challenge through a nonaligned regularization strategy. Our core concept involves
identifying clear frames that closely match hazy frames,
serving as references to supervise a video dehazing network. Our approach comprises two key components: reference matching and video dehazing. Firstly, we introduce
a non-aligned reference frame matching module, leveraging an adaptive sliding window to match high-quality reference frames from clear videos. Video dehazing incorporates flow-guided cosine attention sampler and deformable
cosine attention fusion modules to enhance spatial multiframe alignment and fuse their improved information. To
validate our approach, we collect a GoProHazy dataset
captured effortlessly with GoPro cameras in diverse rural and urban road environments. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method over
current state-of-the-art methods in the challenging task of
real driving-video dehazing. Project page.

1. Introduction
Haze significantly degrades visual quality, leading to challenges such as limited visibility and low contrast. This deterioration adversely affects high-level visual tasks crucial
for safety in autonomous driving [28], including object detection [19], semantic segmentation [50], and depth estimation [54]. The degradation of haze effect can be expressed
* Corresponding authors
† PCA Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-

Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab
of Image and Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Sci. & Tech.

Ending
trajectory

trajectory

Starting

Starting
Collection
vehicle

(i) Collecting scenes in hazy weather

Collection
vehicle
(ii) Collecting scenes in clear weather

(a) Temporal-spatial misalignment due to avoiding pedestrians and vehicles.
frame 81

frame 82

frame 83

frame 81

frame 82

frame 83

frame 81

frame 82

frame 83

frame 109

frame 110

frame 112

W/o Matched video frame pairs

We matched video frame pairs

(b) Temporal misalignment in real-world scene hazy video pairs
Hazy (frame 82)

Clear (frame 110)

(c) Non-aligned video frame pairs (i.e., spatial misalignment)

Figure 1. Spatial and temporal misalignments in real driving
hazy/clear video pairs due to inconsistent driving speeds, different driving paths and moving objects.

through an atmospheric scattering model [39, 43] :
  I(x) = J(x)t(x)+A_{\infty }(\lambda )(1-t(x)), \label {eq.1} 

(1)

where I(x) and J(x) represent the hazy image and the
clear image at a pixel position x, respectively. A∞ denotes the infinite airlight. The transmission map is defined as t(x) = e−β(λ)d(x) , where d(x) and β(λ) signify
the scene depth and the scattering coefficient associated
with the wavelength of light λ, respectively. Although image/video dehazing [20, 59] has been extensively studied

26109

