This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Feature Learning with Emergent Data-Driven Prototypicality
Yunhui Guo1
Youren Zhang2
Yubei Chen3
Stella X. Yu2,4
1
2
3
4
The University of Texas at Dallas
University of Michigan
UC Davis
UC Berkeley
Abstract
Given a set of images, our goal is to map each image to a
point in a feature space such that, not only point proximity
indicates visual similarity, but where it is located directly encodes how prototypical the image is according to the dataset.
Our key insight is to perform unsupervised feature learning in hyperbolic instead of Euclidean space, where the
distance between points still reflects image similarity, yet
we gain additional capacity for representing prototypicality
with the location of the point: The closer it is to the origin,
the more prototypical it is. The latter property is simply
emergent from optimizing the metric learning objective: The
image similar to many training instances is best placed at
the center of corresponding points in Euclidean space, but
closer to the origin in hyperbolic space.
We propose an unsupervised feature learning algorithm
in Hyperbolic space with sphere pACKing. HACK first generates uniformly packed particles in the Poincaré ball of
hyperbolic space and then assigns each image uniquely to a
particle. With our feature mapper simply trained to spread
out training instances in hyperbolic space, we observe that
images move closer to the origin with congealing - a warping
process that aligns all the images and makes them appear
more common and similar to each other, validating our idea
of unsupervised prototypicality discovery. We demonstrate
that our data-driven prototypicality provides an easy and
superior unsupervised instance selection to reduce sample
complexity, increase model generalization with atypical instances and robustness with typical ones.

1. Introduction
Not all instances are created equal. For example, the MNIST
dataset of handwritten digits contain almost 6,000 samples
of 2’s; some are close to textbook versions that we are taught
to follow, whereas others have idiosyncratic cursive styles,
varying in proportions and stroke weights (Fig. 1). Given
such a set of natural data, we are interested in dataset summarization and organization such that we can automatically
discover which instances are more representative and which
ones are anomalies. In other words, we aim to computation-

MNIST 2’s (samples)

=)

our image embedding

Figure 1. Given a dataset (left), we aim to learn an image feature that encodes not only visual similarity between instances but
also data-driven prototypicality (right). Additionally, the angular
arrangement of the features can naturally serve as a measure of
diversity. Our feature encoder (in 2D hyperbolic space) is learned
without any labels. We can then learn a decoder to map each point
in the feature space back to an image. The right plot visualizes
images located at the origin and those moving away in different
directions, automatically revealing that 2’s with loops are most
common and the whole dataset can be grasped as the cursive style
systematically varies.

ally rationalize graded membership [8, 36] of a category in a
purely data-driven manner, putting each instance on a feature
map that reflects not only their prototypicality in a particular
dataset but also their visual similarity with each other.
Such unsupervised feature learning is useful for not only
data organization, but those discovered representative instances or prototypes can be used for interpretable machine
learning [4], curriculum learning [3], and learning better
decision boundaries [5]. Prototypes also allow us to classify
with as few as or even one example [31].
If the image feature is given, it is relatively easy to find
prototypes: We just need to identify density peaks of the
feature distribution of the image set. Otherwise, discovering prototypical instances without supervision is difficult:
There is no universal definition or simple metric to assess
the prototypicality of the examples.
One way to address this problem is to examine the gradient magnitude [5]. However, this approach is shown to have
a high variance which results from different training setups
[5]. Some methods address this problem using adversarial

23199

