This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

General Object Foundation Model for Images and Videos at Scale
Junfeng Wu1* , Yi Jiang2* , Qihao Liu3 , Zehuan Yuan2 , Xiang Bai1† , Song Bai2†
1

Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 ByteDance Inc., 3 Johns Hopkins University

Object
Detection(COCO)

Abstract
We present GLEE in this work, an object-level foundation model for locating and identifying objects in images
and videos. Through a unified framework, GLEE accomplishes detection, segmentation, tracking, grounding, and
identification of arbitrary objects in the open world scenario for various object perception tasks. Adopting a cohesive learning strategy, GLEE acquires knowledge from diverse data sources with varying supervision levels to formulate general object representations, excelling in zero-shot
transfer to new data and tasks. Specifically, we employ an
image encoder, text encoder, and visual prompter to handle multi-modal inputs, enabling to simultaneously solve
various object-centric downstream tasks while maintaining state-of-the-art performance. Demonstrated through
extensive training on over five million images from diverse benchmarks, GLEE exhibits remarkable versatility
and improved generalization performance, efficiently tackling downstream tasks without the need for task-specific
adaptation. By integrating large volumes of automatically
labeled data, we further enhance its zero-shot generalization capabilities. Additionally, GLEE is capable of being
integrated into Large Language Models, serving as a foundational model to provide universal object-level information for multi-modal tasks. We hope that the versatility and
universality of our method will mark a significant step in
the development of efficient visual foundation models for
AGI systems. The models and code are released at https:
//github.com/FoundationVision/GLEE.

1. Introduction
Foundation model [7] is an emerging paradigm for building artificial general intelligence (AGI) systems, signifying a model trained on broad data that is capable of being adapted to a wide range of downstream tasks in an
general paradigm. Recently, NLP foundation models such
as BERT [21], GPT-3 [9], T5 [70] developed with unified
* Equal Contribution. This work was done when Junfeng Wu and Qihao
Liu were interns at ByteDance. † Correspondence to Xiang Bai <xbai@
hust.edu.cn> and Song Bai <songbai.site@gmail.com>.

Instance
Segmentation
(COCO)

OV Detection
(OmniLabel)

62.5

26.75
OV VIS (LV-VIS)

24.5

30.0

50.0

54.75
OpenWorld (UVO)

46.5

66.5

25.0

22.2537.538.25 61.0
20.0
55.5
18.75 12.5 6.25 N/A 70.5 81.0 91.5 REC (RefCOCO)
OV MOTS (BURST)
34.25
53.25
73.2546.7562.25 66.5
40.5
46.75
79.75
76.5
64.5
48.5
OV MOT (TAO)
RES (RefCOCO)
79.75
66.75
50.25
VIS
(YouTubeVIS19)

VOS (YouTubeVOS)
OVIS (OVIS)

GLEE (This Work)
UNINEXT
OV2Seg
Florence-2
Previous SOTA

Figure 1. The performance of GLEE on a broad range of objectlevel tasks compared with existing models.

input-output paradigms and large-scale pre-training, have
achieved remarkable generalization capabilities to address
nearly all NLP tasks.
In computer vision, the diversity of task types and the
lack of a unified form make visual foundation models only
serve specific subdomains, such as CLIP [69] for multimodal visual model, MAE [32] for visual representations
model, SAM [39] for segmentation model. Despite being
widely studied, current visual foundation models are still
focusing on establishing correlations between global image
features and language descriptions or learning image-level
feature representations. However, locating and identifying
objects constitute foundational capabilities in computer vision systems, serves as a basis for solving complex or high
level vision tasks such as segmentation, scene understanding, object tracking, event detection, and activity recognition and support a wide range of applications.
In this work, we advance the development of object-level
foundation models within the visual domain. To address the
aforementioned limitation, providing general and accurate
object-level information, we introduce a general object visual foundation model, coined as GLEE, which simultaneously solve a wide range of object-centric tasks while ensuring SOTA performance, including object detection, instance
segmentation, grounding, object tracking, interactive segmentation and tracking, etc., as shown in Figure 1. Through

3783

