This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ODM: A Text-Image Further Alignment Pre-training Approach for Scene Text
Detection and Spotting
Chen Duan*

Pei Fu*

Shan Guo †

duanchen02@meituan.com

fupei@meituan.com

guoshan05@meituan.com

Qianyi Jiang

Xiaoming Wei

jiangqianyi02@meituan.com

weixiaoming@meituan.com

Abstract
In recent years, text-image joint pre-training techniques
have shown promising results in various tasks. However, in
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) tasks, aligning text
instances with their corresponding text regions in images
poses a challenge, as it requires effective alignment between
text and OCR-Text (referring to the text in images as OCRText to distinguish from the text in natural language) rather
than a holistic understanding of the overall image content.
In this paper, we propose a new pre-training method called
OCR-Text Destylization Modeling (ODM) that transfers diverse styles of text found in images to a uniform style based
on the text prompt. With ODM, we achieve better alignment
between text and OCR-Text and enable pre-trained models
to adapt to the complex and diverse styles of scene text detection and spotting tasks. Additionally, we have designed a
new labeling generation method specifically for ODM and
combined it with our proposed Text-Controller module to
address the challenge of annotation costs in OCR tasks, allowing a larger amount of unlabeled data to participate
in pre-training. Extensive experiments on multiple public datasets demonstrate that our method significantly improves performance and outperforms current pre-training
methods in scene text detection and spotting tasks. Code is
available at ODM.

1. Introduction
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) has garnered significant attention in the field of computer vision for its remarkable performance in automated data entry, document
analysis, instant translation, and more. Most existing methods for obtaining OCR results involve a two-stage process, including a text detection model and a text recogni* First Author and Second Author contribute equally to this work.
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparisons of different pre-training strategies. (a)
Obtain the pre-trained model through mask image modeling, taking only image embeddings as inputs. (b) Obtain the pre-trained
model through mask language modeling, which simultaneously
takes both OCR-Text and image as inputs. (c) Our approach obtains the pre-trained model through OCR-Text destylization modeling.

tion model, or directly utilizing an end-to-end text spotting
model. Furthermore, many of these methods initialize the
model through pre-training on the ImageNet dataset [37].
Pre-training techniques have recently gained significant
attention for their outstanding performance across a wide
range of computer vision tasks. Two commonly used pretraining methods in computer vision are: (1) Masked Image Modeling (MIM) pre-training [1, 3, 10, 49], which

15587

