This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GAFusion: Adaptive Fusing LiDAR and Camera with Multiple Guidance for
3D Object Detection
Xiaotian Li1∗ Baojie Fan1 *† Jiandong Tian 2 Huijie Fan2
1
Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Shenyang Institute of Automation Chinese Academy of Science
{xiaotianli981, jobfbj}@gmail.com

{tianjd, fanhuijie}@sia.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D object detection is a crucial task in autonomous driving.
To cope with the complex road scenarios, multiple sensors
(LiDARs or cameras) are usually employed for scene understanding. LiDAR can generate accurate but sparse 3D point
clouds, which contains precise spatial information. Images
have rich semantic and texture information, but lack depth
information. Therefore, a natural operation is to extensively
fuse LiDAR and camera to leverage the complementarity
of multi-modality information, which can enable the autonomous driving system to achieve higher accuracy and
robustness.
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

(a) BEVFusion

Cat.

Detection
Head

LiDAR Point Clouds

Backbone

VT
Camera BEV

Multi-view Images

LGAFT

Backbone
LOG

SDG
Backbone

MSDPT

Temporal

LiDAR BEV

(b) GAFusion

Recent years have witnessed the remarkable progress of
3D multi-modality object detection methods based on the
Bird’s-Eye-View (BEV) perspective. However, most of them
overlook the complementary interaction and guidance between LiDAR and camera. In this work, we propose a novel
multi-modality 3D objection detection method, named GAFusion, with LiDAR-guided global interaction and adaptive
fusion. Specifically, we introduce sparse depth guidance
(SDG) and LiDAR occupancy guidance (LOG) to generate
3D features with sufficient depth information. In the following, LiDAR-guided adaptive fusion transformer (LGAFT) is
developed to adaptively enhance the interaction of different
modal BEV features from a global perspective. Meanwhile,
additional downsampling with sparse height compression
and multi-scale dual-path transformer (MSDPT) are designed to enlarge the receptive fields of different modal features. Finally, a temporal fusion module is introduced to aggregate features from previous frames. GAFusion achieves
state-of-the-art 3D object detection results with 73.6% mAP
and 74.9% NDS on the nuScenes test set.

LiDAR BEV

Backbone

Detection
Head

VT
Camera 3D Features

Figure 1. Comparison between BEVFusion and the proposed GAFusion. (a) In BEVFusion, the camera stream and the LiDAR
stream separately generate BEV features, which are then concatenated together. (b) In GAFusion, the camera modality BEV features are generated by multiple guidance from the LiDAR stream,
and the receptive fields are enhanced by MSDPT. The BEV features are fused by LGAFT. “VT” is view transformer.

Recently, fusing LiDAR and camera has achieved some
progress. Early methods [4, 14, 35, 45] achieve LiDARcamera fusion by projecting 3D LiDAR point clouds (or
region proposals) onto 2D images. But these methods
overlook the information gap between the two modalities.
Recent works [1, 3, 13, 22, 26, 39, 40, 42] adopt different query generation strategies or create a unified Bird’sEye-View (BEV) [28] intermediate feature to fuse multimodality features. For instance, TransFusion [1] applies
a two-stage pipeline to fuse the camera and LiDAR features, but its performance relies on the query initialization
strategy. BEVFusion [22, 26] explores a unified representation for BEV features through view transformation, which
not only preserves the spatial information of sparse LiDAR
point clouds, but also lifts the 2D images to the 3D features,
effectively maintaining the consistency between the two
modalities. However, the camera modality still struggles

21209

