This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpenESS: Event-based Semantic Scene Understanding with Open Vocabularies
Lingdong Kong1,2 Youquan Liu3 Lai Xing Ng4,5 Benoit R. Cottereau5,6 Wei Tsang Ooi1,5
1
National University of Singapore 2 CNRS@CREATE 3 Hochschule Bremerhaven
4
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR 5 IPAL, CNRS IRL 2955, Singapore
6
CerCo, CNRS UMR 5549, Université Toulouse III
https://github.com/ldkong1205/OpenESS

Input Event Stream

“driveable” (Adjective)

“car” (Fine-Grained)

“manmade” (Coarse)

Zero-Shot Semantic Segmentation

“walkable” (Adjective)

“barrier” (Fine-Grained)

“flat” (Coarse)

Back
Build
Road
Car
Pole
Veg
Wall

Figure 1. Open-vocabulary event-based semantic segmentation (OpenESS). Our framework is capable of performing zero-shot semantic segmentation of event data streams with open vocabularies. Given raw events and text prompts as inputs, OpenESS outputs semantically
coherent open-world predictions across various adjective, fine-grained, and coarse categories. The last three columns show the languageguided attention maps where regions of a high similarity score to the given text prompts are highlighted. Best viewed in colors.

Abstract
Event-based semantic segmentation (ESS) is a fundamental yet challenging task for event camera sensing. The
difficulties in interpreting and annotating event data limit
its scalability. While domain adaptation from images to
event data can help to mitigate this issue, there exist data
representational differences that require additional effort to
resolve. In this work, for the first time, we synergize information from image, text, and event-data domains and introduce OpenESS to enable scalable ESS in an open-world,
annotation-efficient manner. We achieve this goal by transferring the semantically rich CLIP knowledge from imagetext pairs to event streams. To pursue better cross-modality
adaptation, we propose a frame-to-event contrastive distillation and a text-to-event semantic consistency regularization. Experimental results on popular ESS benchmarks
showed our approach outperforms existing methods. No-

tably, we achieve 53.93% and 43.31% mIoU on DDD17 and
DSEC-Semantic without using either event or frame labels.

1. Introduction
Event cameras, often termed bio-inspired vision sensors,
stand distinctively apart from traditional frame-based cameras and are often merited by their low latency, high dynamic range, and low power consumption [27, 43, 76]. The
realm of event-based vision perception, though nascent, has
rapidly evolved into a focal point of contemporary research
[99]. Drawing parallels with frame-based perception and
recognition methodologies, a plethora of task-specific applications leveraging event cameras have burgeoned [24].
Event-based semantic segmentation (ESS) emerges as
one of the core event perception tasks and has gained increasing attention [2, 6, 37, 78]. ESS inherits the challenges
of traditional image segmentation [10, 11, 18, 38, 58], while

15686

