This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Entity-NeRF: Detecting and Removing Moving Entities in Urban Scenes
Takashi Otonari1 Satoshi Ikehata2,3,1 Kiyoharu Aizawa1
1
The University of Tokyo 2 National Institute of Informatics (NII) 3 Tokyo Institute of Technology
{otonari,aizawa}@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

sikehata@nii.ac.jp

Original image

Rendered
Entity Seg. [17] RobustNeRF [33] RobustNeRF [33]
Entity-NeRF
Entity-NeRF
ground-truth
weights
weights
Figure 1. In urban scenes, statistical approach [33] mistakes complex backgrounds for moving objects (top) and fails to remove small
moving objects (bottom). On the other hand, Entity-NeRF can reconstruct complex backgrounds and remove small moving objects.

Abstract
Recent advancements in the study of Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) for dynamic scenes often involve explicit
modeling of scene dynamics. However, this approach faces
challenges in modeling scene dynamics in urban environments, where moving objects of various categories and
scales are present. In such settings, it becomes crucial to effectively eliminate moving objects to accurately reconstruct
static backgrounds. Our research introduces an innovative method, termed here as Entity-NeRF, which combines
the strengths of knowledge-based and statistical strategies. This approach utilizes entity-wise statistics, leveraging entity segmentation and stationary entity classification
through thing/stuff segmentation. To assess our methodology, we created an urban scene dataset masked with moving objects. Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate
that Entity-NeRF notably outperforms existing techniques
in removing moving objects and reconstructing static urban
backgrounds, both quantitatively and qualitatively. 1

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis is rapidly evolving, which enables
the creation of new visual content such as the immersive
1 Our project page is available at https://otonari726.github.io/entitynerf/

views found in Google Maps and the free-viewpoint visualizations in sports broadcasts. However, a key innovation in
this field, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [19], faces challenges when dealing with urban scenes whose complexity
is inherently high due to a large number of dynamic elements present, such as moving vehicles, pedestrians, changing lighting conditions, and varying shadows. The ability
to accurately render and reconstruct such scenes is crucial
for several applications including autonomous navigation,
surveillance, and virtual urban exploration among others.
The challenge of handling dynamic scenes has been a notable point of extension within the domain of Neural Radiance Fields, and two major approaches prevail. The first involves explicit modeling of scene dynamics, which concurrently encodes both static and dynamic information, exemplified by methods such as D-NeRF [27], HyperNeRF [24],
and RoDynRF [16]. The second approach adopts a more
statistical perspective, treating scene dynamics as outliers
in relation to the static elements [33]. The elimination of
dynamic elements in the scene contributes to a reduction in
clutter, enhances the comprehension of the scene, and improves visual fidelity.
Despite the progress in research on novel-view synthesis of dynamic scenes, to our knowledge, there is no effective method for unbounded scenes like urban environments,
where a multitude of moving objects of various categories
and scales, such as people, cars, and bicycles, coexist. For

20892

