This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiLiGenRT: A Photometric Stereo Dataset with Quantified
Roughness and Translucency
Heng Guo1,†

Jieji Ren2,†
1

Feishi Wang3,4,5†

∗

Mingjun Ren2

Yasuyuki Matsushita6

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2

3

Boxin Shi3,4,5*

School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
4

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
5
6

AI Innovation Center, School of Computer Science, Peking University

Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, Osaka University

Abstract
Photometric stereo faces challenges from non-Lambertian
reflectance in real-world scenarios. Systematically measuring the reliability of photometric stereo methods in handling
such complex reflectance necessitates a real-world dataset
with quantitatively controlled reflectances. This paper introduces DiLiGenRT, the first real-world dataset for evaluating
photometric stereo methods under quantified reflectances
by manufacturing 54 hemispheres with varying degrees of
two reflectance properties: Roughness and Transluency.
Unlike qualitative and semantic labels, such as “diffuse”
and “specular,” that have been used in previous datasets,
our quantified dataset allows comprehensive and systematic
benchmark evaluations. In addition, it facilitates selecting
best-fit photometric stereo methods based on the quantitative reflectance properties. Our dataset and benchmark results are available at https://photometricstereo.
github.io/diligentrt.html.

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo [53] aims at recovering detailed surface normals and reflectances from images captured under
varying illuminations from a fixed camera. To measure
the applicability of photometric stereo methods in the real
world, comprehensive benchmark evaluations on real captured datasets are desired. General reflectance is one of the
key challenges for photometric stereo, making it a central
consideration when building real-world photometric stereo
datasets. By evaluating a photometric stereo method on a
real-world dataset, we seek to know the exact reflectance
* labels corresponding authors (Email address: shiboxin@pku.edu.cn,
renmj@sjtu.edu.cn). † denotes equally contributed authors.

conditions where the method would become trustworthy.
Achieving this necessitates a dedicated design of the realworld dataset with quantitatively controlled reflectances.
Previous datasets for photometric stereo are constructed
with reflectances defined in a qualitative and semantic
manner. Datasets like DiLiGenT [48], LUCES [36, 40],
DiLiGenT102 [44], and DiLiGenT-Π [52] categorize reflectances using a set of semantic labels, such as specular,
metallic, steel, and wood. These semantic labels are
intuitive but at the same time ambiguous. For example, a
steel surface can exhibit a rough or mirror-like reflectance
depending on the manufacturing process. Furthermore, these
semantic labels are not explicitly ordered and non-metric;
therefore, it is difficult to predict the accuracy of photometric
stereo for “in-between” reflectances, e.g., predicting accuracy for the paper reflectance from the evaluations based
on steel and wood reflectances. In addition, existing realworld datasets [34, 36, 44, 48, 52] primarily focus on opaque
surfaces, like plaster and ceramic. Since a wide range of
real-world objects exhibit significant translucency, such as
human skin and plant leaves, it is desired to have a dataset
with thorough coverage of varying levels of translucency.
To address these problems, we build a new real-world
dataset, DiLiGenRT1 , with reflectances controlled in a quantified manner by carefully manufacturing materials. DiLiGenRT consists of 54 hemispheres made of materials having
9 levels of roughness and 6 levels of translucency2 , as shown
in Fig. 1. The design of the shared geometry allows us to
isolate the error source from shape variations and solely attribute normal estimation errors to varying reflectances. At
the same time, for the test purpose on shape diversity, we fur1 DiLiGenRT = Directional Lighting with Generalized Roughness and
Transluency
2 Transluency is related to object shape, index of refraction (IOR), and
absorptive ratio. DiLiGenRT is built with the same sphere shape and IOR.
We refer to “absorptive ratio” as “translucency” in this paper.

11810

