This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DriveWorld: 4D Pre-trained Scene Understanding via World Models for
Autonomous Driving
Chen Min1,2 , Dawei Zhao2 *, Liang Xiao2 *, Jian Zhao3 , Xinli Xu4 , Zheng Zhu5
Lei Jin6 , Jianshu Li7 , Yulan Guo8 , Junliang Xing9 , Liping Jing10 , Yiming Nie2 , Bin Dai2
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Unmanned Systems Technology Research Center, Defense Innovation Institute
3
China Telecom Institute of AI & NPU 4 HKUST 5 GigaAI 6 BUPT 7 Ant Group 8 SYSU 9 THU 10 BJTU
minchen@stu.pku.edu.cn, adamzdw@163.com, xiaoliang@nudt.edu.cn

2D Pre-text Task

Abstract

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving is a complex undertaking that relies
on comprehensive 4D scene understanding [1, 75]. This

(a) Monocular 2D Pre-training
3D Pre-text Task
2D to 3D
View Transform
(b) Multi-camera 3D Pre-training
4D Pre-text Task
...

Vision-centric autonomous driving has recently raised
wide attention due to its lower cost. Pre-training is essential
for extracting a universal representation. However, current
vision-centric pre-training typically relies on either 2D or
3D pre-text tasks, overlooking the temporal characteristics
of autonomous driving as a 4D scene understanding task. In
this paper, we address this challenge by introducing a world
model-based autonomous driving 4D representation learning framework, dubbed DriveWorld, which is capable of
pre-training from multi-camera driving videos in a spatiotemporal fashion. Specifically, we propose a Memory StateSpace Model for spatio-temporal modelling, which consists
of a Dynamic Memory Bank module for learning temporalaware latent dynamics to predict future changes and a Static
Scene Propagation module for learning spatial-aware latent statics to offer comprehensive scene contexts. We additionally introduce a Task Prompt to decouple task-aware
features for various downstream tasks. The experiments
demonstrate that DriveWorld delivers promising results on
various autonomous driving tasks. When pre-trained with
the OpenScene dataset, DriveWorld achieves a 7.5% increase in mAP for 3D object detection, a 3.0% increase in
IoU for online mapping, a 5.0% increase in AMOTA for
multi-object tracking, a 0.1m decrease in minADE for motion forecasting, a 3.0% increase in IoU for occupancy prediction, and a 0.34m reduction in average L2 error for planning.

Feature
Extraction

2D to 3D
View Transform
(c) Multi-camera 4D Pre-training

Figure 1. Comparison on different pre-training methods for visioncentric autonomous driving. (a) Monocular 2D pre-training with
2D pre-text tasks (e.g., 2D classification and depth estimation). (b)
Multi-camera 3D pre-training via 3D scene reconstruction or 3D
object detection. (c) The proposed 4D pre-training based on world
models learns unified spatio-temporal representations.

demands the acquisition of a robust spatio-temporal representation that can address tasks involving perception, prediction, and planning [31]. Learning spatio-temporal representations is highly challenging due to the stochastic nature of natural scenes, the partial observability of the environment, and the diversity of downstream tasks [58, 84].
Pre-training plays a crucial role in acquiring a universal
representation from massive data, enabling the construction of a foundational model enriched with common knowledge [6, 35, 64, 70, 98]. However, research on pre-training
for spatio-temporal representation learning in autonomous
driving remains relatively limited.
Vision-centric autonomous driving has recently attracted

* Corresponding authors.

15522

