This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Purified and Unified Steganographic Network
Guobiao Li *, Sheng Li *, Zicong Luo, Zhenxing Qian †, Xinpeng Zhang†
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{gbli20, lisheng, zcluo21, zxqian, zhangxinpeng}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Steganography is the art of hiding secret data into the
cover media for covert communication. In recent years,
more and more deep neural network (DNN)-based steganographic schemes are proposed to train steganographic networks for secret embedding and recovery, which are shown
to be promising. Compared with the handcrafted steganographic tools, steganographic networks tend to be large in
size. It raises concerns on how to imperceptibly and effectively transmit these networks to the sender and receiver to
facilitate the covert communication. To address this issue,
we propose in this paper a Purified and Unified Steganographic Network (PUSNet). It performs an ordinary machine learning task in a purified network, which could be
triggered into steganographic networks for secret embedding or recovery using different keys. We formulate the construction of the PUSNet into a sparse weight filling problem to flexibly switch between the purified and steganographic networks. We further instantiate our PUSNet as
an image denoising network with two steganographic networks concealed for secret image embedding and recovery.
Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our PUSNet
achieves good performance on secret image embedding, secret image recovery, and image denoising in a single architecture. It is also shown to be capable of imperceptibly carrying the steganographic networks in a purified network. Code is available at https://github.com/
albblgb/PUSNet

1. Introduction
Steganography aims to conceal secret data into a cover media, e.g., image[15], video [23] or text [21], which is one
of the main techniques for covert communication through
public channels. To conceal the presence of the covert communication, the stego media (i.e., the media with hidden
data) is required to be indistinguishable from the cover media. Early steganographic approaches [5, 32, 35] are con* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors

GAN

VGG

Agent1

LeNet-5

Secret encoding
network

ResNet
Administrator

DnCNN

Upload

PUSNet

Agent2

Download

Bert

Secret decoding
network
Other users

GitHub, Google Drive…

Ordinary
task

Figure 1. Administrator covertly transmits the secret steganographic networks to agents using the proposed PUSNet.

Agent1
Sender

Secret
Cover

Stego Transmission
Secret encoding
network

Secret

Secret decoding
network

Agent2
Receiver

Figure 2. The agents (i.e., sender and receiver) perform the covert
communication task using the received steganographic networks.

ducted under a handcrafted and adaptive coding strategy to
minimize the distortion caused by data embedding.
In recent years, more and more deep neural network
(DNN)-based steganographic schemes [3, 14, 31, 34, 38]
are proposed to improve the steganographic performance.
A DNN-based steganographic scheme usually contains two
main components, including a secret encoding (embedding)
network and a secret decoding (recovery) network. The encoding network takes the cover media and the secret data as
inputs to generate the stego media, while the decoding network retrieves the secrets from the stego media. These two
networks are jointly learnt for optimized steganographic
performance, which are shown to be superior to handcrafted
steganographic tools.
Regardless of the steganographic schemes, we have to
transmit the steganographic tools to the sender and receiver
for secret embedding and recovery. This is not a trivial problem, especially for the DNN-based steganographic
schemes which significantly increase the size of steganographic tools. A typical encoding or decoding network
would occupy over 100MB of storage, which is much larger
than handcrafted steganographic tools. It raises concerns on

27569

