This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MACE: Mass Concept Erasure in Diffusion Models
Shilin Lu1 Zilan Wang1 Leyang Li1 Yanzhu Liu2 Adams Wai-Kin Kong1
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R) & Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore
{shilin002, wang1982, lile0005}@e.ntu.edu.sg, liu yanzhu@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, adamskong@ntu.edu.sg
MACE

SD v1.4

MACE

SD v1.4

Better
Efficacy

Efficacy

‘a photo of the airplane’ (erased)

‘a photo of Paul Walker’ (erased)

Generality

Specificity

‘a photo of the aircraft’ (synonymous)

‘a photo of Paul Wesley’ (unrelated)

(a) Object Erasure

(b) Celebrity Erasure

(c) Scaling Erasure up to 100 Concepts

Figure 1. Our proposed method, MACE, can erase a large number of concepts from text-to-image diffusion models. This can safeguard
celebrity portrait rights, respect copyrights on artworks, and prevent explicit content creation. (a) MACE demonstrates good efﬁcacy and
generality by preventing the generation of images reﬂecting the target concept and its synonyms. (b) MACE maintains excellent speciﬁcity,
ensuring that the unintended concepts remain intact, even when they share common terms with the target concept. (c) MACE exhibits
a signiﬁcantly enhanced ability to erase 100 concepts, outperforming previous methods. The overall score indicates the comprehensive
erasing capability, as detailed in Section 4.3.

Abstract
The rapid expansion of large-scale text-to-image diffusion models has raised growing concerns regarding their
potential misuse in creating harmful or misleading content.
In this paper, we introduce MACE, a ﬁnetuning framework
for the task of MAss Concept Erasure. This task aims to prevent models from generating images that embody unwanted
concepts when prompted. Existing concept erasure methods are typically restricted to handling fewer than ﬁve concepts simultaneously and struggle to ﬁnd a balance between
erasing concept synonyms (generality) and maintaining unrelated concepts (speciﬁcity). In contrast, MACE differs by
successfully scaling the erasure scope up to 100 concepts
and by achieving an effective balance between generality
and speciﬁcity. This is achieved by leveraging closed-form
cross-attention reﬁnement along with LoRA ﬁnetuning, collectively eliminating the information of undesirable concepts. Furthermore, MACE integrates multiple LoRAs without mutual interference. We conduct extensive evaluations
of MACE against prior methods across four different tasks:
object erasure, celebrity erasure, explicit content erasure,
and artistic style erasure. Our results reveal that MACE surpasses prior methods in all evaluated tasks. Code is available at https://github.com/Shilin-LU/MACE.

1. Introduction
In large-scale text-to-image (T2I) models [9, 14, 34, 40, 49,
54, 57, 73, 74, 76, 77], the task of concept erasure aims
to remove concepts that may be harmful, copyrighted, or
offensive. This ensures that when a model is prompted with
any phrase related to deleted concepts, it will not generate
images reﬂecting those concepts.
The drive behind concept erasure is rooted in the signiﬁcant risks posed by T2I models. These models can generate inappropriate content, such as copyrighted artworks
[23, 24, 55, 61], explicit content [22, 59, 72], and deepfakes
[38, 70]. These issues are largely caused by the unﬁltered,
web-scraped training data [60]. While researchers have put
efforts to mitigate these risks through reﬁning datasets and
retraining models, these methods are not only costly but
also can lead to unforeseen outcomes [7, 44]. For example,
despite being trained on a sanitized dataset, Stable Diffusion (SD) v2.0 [52] still produces explicit content. Moreover, it exhibits a diminished generative quality for regular
content when compared to its earlier versions [44]. Alternative methods, such as post-generation ﬁltering [41, 50] and
inference guiding [3, 59], are effective when models are accessed only via APIs. Yet, these safeguards can be easily

6430

