This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Illustrated Instructions
Sachit Menon1,2 *
Ishan Misra1
Rohit Girdhar1
1
2
GenAI, Meta
Columbia University
https://facebookresearch.github.io/IllustratedInstructions

Abstract

How can I bake a cake to celebrate an event in Seattle?
One great way could be to make a coﬀee-infused cake to honor
Seattle’s coﬀee culture, with teal coloring for the Seattle flag.

We introduce a new task of generating “Illustrated Instructions”, i.e. visual instructions customized to a user’s
needs. We identify desiderata unique to this task, and formalize it through a suite of automatic and human evaluation metrics, designed to measure the validity, consistency,
and efficacy of the generations. We combine the power of
large language models (LLMs) together with strong textto-image generation diffusion models to propose a simple
approach called StackedDiffusion, which generates such illustrated instructions given text as input. The resulting
model strongly outperforms baseline approaches and stateof-the-art multimodal LLMs; and in 30% of cases, users
even prefer it to human-generated articles. Most notably,
it enables various new and exciting applications far beyond
what static articles on the web can provide, such as personalized instructions complete with intermediate steps and
pictures in response to a user’s individual situation.

1. Introduction
The internet is a vast resource to find answers to all types
of questions. It is often easy to find a webpage or a video
that walks through the exact steps to achieve a user’s goal.
With the rise of Large Language Models (LLMs) trained on
internet-scale data, users can just ask the LLM for instructions to achieve a goal. This allows the users to get answers
for specific personalized queries for which there may not be
an existing webpage on the internet, e.g., modifying cooking recipes with user specific dietary restrictions. Moreover,
if the users make a mistake when following the instructions,
simple follow-up questions to the LLM can generate alternate instructions, a major advantage over static web search.
In spite of such advantages, LLMs still have one major
limitation – they cannot generate visuals, which are critical for users to learn from and follow instructions for a
wide range of tasks [6]. Consider, for instance, instructions
that require visual inspection, e.g., a recipe that requires
* Work done during an internship at Meta.

Step 1: Brew strong
coﬀee; let cool.

Step 2: Preheat the
oven to 350F.

Step 3: Prepare cake
batter as usual.

Step 4: Mix in the
coﬀee; fold in coﬀee
grounds for texture.

Step 5: Bake for 2530 minutes.

Step 6: Cover the
cake in teal fondant
for the Seattle flag.

Figure 1. StackedDiffusion generating Illustrated Instructions.
Given a goal (or any textual user input), StackedDiffusion produces a customized instructional article complete with illustrations
that not only tells the user how to achieve the goal in words, but
also shows the user by providing illustrations.

the user to stir fry onions until golden brown, or searching
for bubbles when a flat tire is submerged under water. An
image accompanying such instructions can make following
them significantly easier. Can we develop methods with the
strengths of LLMs that can also generate such visuals?
In this work, we tackle this challenge, developing models that can not only tell a user how to accomplish their task,
but also show them how. We define the novel task of Illustrated Instructions: creating a set of steps with visualizations that showcase an approach to solve the user’s task. We
carefully consider the different dimensions of the problem,
laying out three desiderata unique to this setting. To measure these desiderata, we develop automated metrics based
on prior work in instructional article assessment [67] and
image generation [50].

6274

