This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SonicVisionLM: Playing Sound with Vision Language Models
Zhifeng Xie1,2 , Shengye Yu1 , Qile He1 , Mengtian Li1,2†
1
Shanghai University
2
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Motion Picture Special Effects
{zhifeng xie,yussisy,shu hql,mtli}@shu.edu.cn

Abstract

Video

Text

Video

MiniGPT-v2

There has been a growing interest in the task of generating sound for silent videos, primarily because of its practicality in streamlining video post-production. However,
existing methods for video-sound generation attempt to directly create sound from visual representations, which can
be challenging due to the difficulty of aligning visual representations with audio representations. In this paper, we
present SonicVisionLM, a novel framework aimed at generating a wide range of sound effects by leveraging visionlanguage models(VLMs). Instead of generating audio directly from video, we use the capabilities of powerful VLMs.
When provided with a silent video, our approach first identifies events within the video using a VLM to suggest possible sounds that match the video content. This shift in approach transforms the challenging task of aligning image
and audio into more well-studied sub-problems of aligning
image-to-text and text-to-audio through the popular diffusion models. To improve the quality of audio recommendations with LLMs, we have collected an extensive dataset
that maps text descriptions to specific sound effects and developed a time-controlled audio adapter. Our approach
surpasses current state-of-the-art methods for converting
video to audio, enhancing synchronization with the visuals,
and improving alignment between audio and video components. Project page: https://yusiissy.github.
io/SonicVisionLM.github.io/

1. Introduction
The sound effects artists work with various types of
sounds, including those visible on-screen (like footsteps or
a car passing) and those audible but not visible (like background noises and heartbeats can enhance the video’s authenticity and narrative). On-screen sounds match what is
happening in the video, while off-screen sounds establish
the ambience and provide additional information. Creating soundtracks for videos is a vital aspect of video produc† Corresponding author.

Timestamp
Detection

Time
On-screen Sound

Text
User

Time

Time
Controllable
Tango

Off-screen Sound

Figure 1. A model implements the automatic detection of onscreen sound generation and accepts the user’s editing of text and
time in the off-screen section. On-screen sound refers to audio that
originates from visible actions within the video frame. Off-screen
sound is not directly observable on the screen.

tion, but it can be labour-intensive for artists. Therefore, the
video-sound generation task has gained notable attention.
Although the recent approaches have made great efforts,
the video-sound generation task is still challenging. For onscreen sounds, achieving semantic relevance and maintaining temporal synchronization continues to be a complex issue. It is hard to edit off-screen sounds. Current methods
[14, 25, 32] primarily focus on the visual content to generate the corresponding sound, a subset of these methods
[7, 9] considers editability. Nonetheless, the alignment between video and audio features is tricky, leading to deficiencies including 1) incorrect sound meanings and mismatched
timing, 2) monotonous sound effects, and a lack of complex
scenarios. Both lead to unsatisfactory results in the videosound generation task.
We propose a novel framework named SonicVisionLM
to solve the above deficiency, as shown in Fig. 1. SonicVisionLM is proposed by introducing three key components:
video-to-text, text-based interaction, and text-to-audio generation. First, the video-to-text component focuses on generating sound effects for on-screen events. This step uses
a VLM to identify appropriate sound descriptions from the
input silent video. Following this, a timestamp detection
network is trained to extract specific temporal information

26866

