This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Multi-view Representation Learning via Distilled Disentangling
Guanzhou Ke1, *, Bo Wang2,†, Xiaoli Wang3 , Shengfeng He4,†
1
Beijing Jiaotong University,
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 4 Singapore Management University
guanzhouk@gmail.com, wangbo@ia.ac.cn, xiaoliwang@njust.edu.cn, shengfenghe@smu.edu.sg

Abstract

1. Introduction
Multi-view representation learning (MvRL) [46] forms
the cornerstone of various multi-view applications, such as
video understanding [7, 17], 3D rendering [62], and cross* This work was done while interning at the Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences.
† Corresponding authors.

I(Consistency; Specificity)

Multi-view representation learning aims to derive robust representations that are both view-consistent and viewspecific from diverse data sources. This paper presents an
in-depth analysis of existing approaches in this domain,
highlighting a commonly overlooked aspect: the redundancy between view-consistent and view-specific representations. To this end, we propose an innovative framework for multi-view representation learning, which incorporates a technique we term ‘distilled disentangling’. Our
method introduces the concept of masked cross-view prediction, enabling the extraction of compact, high-quality
view-consistent representations from various sources without incurring extra computational overhead. Additionally,
we develop a distilled disentangling module that efficiently
filters out consistency-related information from multi-view
representations, resulting in purer view-specific representations. This approach significantly reduces redundancy
between view-consistent and view-specific representations,
enhancing the overall efficiency of the learning process.
Our empirical evaluations reveal that higher mask ratios
substantially improve the quality of view-consistent representations. Moreover, we find that reducing the dimensionality of view-consistent representations relative to that of
view-specific representations further refines the quality of
the combined representations. Our code is accessible at:
https://github.com/Guanzhou-Ke/MRDD.

10

DVIB [3]
CONAN [18]
Multi-VAE [56]
Ours

8
6
4
2
0

E-MNIST

E-FMNIST

COIL-20
COIL-100 Office-31
Dataset
Figure 1. Existing multi-view representation learning methods
show high inter-view correlations. We estimate the mutual information of multi-view consistency and specificity of three baseline
MvRL models DVIB [3], CONAN [18], Multi-VAE [56], and our
method using MINE [4] on the same settings across five datasets.

modal retrieval [35]. In the MvRL context, “views” commonly refer to distinct angles from which objects are captured by cameras or data descriptors, like the histogram of
oriented gradients (HOG) [9] and the scale-invariant feature transform (SIFT) [32]. The success of multi-view applications relies on effectively leveraging shared information (consistency) among views and distinctive information
(specificity) within each view. However, learning highquality view-consistent and view-specific representations
from multiple sources poses an open challenge.
Optimal view-consistent and view-specific representations should exhibit both robust representational abilities
and minimal redundancy. Reducing redundancy between
these two aspects not only improves the quality of combined representations but also decreases the computational
burden for subsequent tasks. However, prevailing state-ofthe-art methods [3, 11, 22, 56, 57] often neglect the critical aspect of minimizing redundancy between consistency
and specificity. As demonstrated in Fig. 1, there is a notable correlation among representations derived from exist-

26774

