This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Facial Expressions through Analysis-by-Neural-Synthesis
George Retsinas1† Panagiotis P. Filntisis1† Radek Daněček3 Victoria F. Abrevaya3
Anastasios Roussos4 Timo Bolkart3 * Petros Maragos1,2
1 Institute of Robotics, Athena Research Center, 15125 Maroussi, Greece
2 School of Electrical & Computer Engineering, National Technical University of Athens, Greece
3 MPI for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
4 Institute of Computer Science (ICS), Foundation for Research & Technology - Hellas (FORTH), Greece

Figure 1. SMIRK reconstructs 3D faces from monocular images with facial geometry that faithfully recover extreme, asymmetric, and
subtle expressions. Top: images of people with challenging expressions. Bottom: SMIRK reconstructions.

Abstract
While existing methods for 3D face reconstruction from
in-the-wild images excel at recovering the overall face
shape, they commonly miss subtle, extreme, asymmetric, or
rarely observed expressions. We improve upon these methods with SMIRK (Spatial Modeling for Image-based Reconstruction of Kinesics), which faithfully reconstructs expressive 3D faces from images. We identify two key limitations
in existing methods: shortcomings in their self-supervised
training formulation, and a lack of expression diversity in
the training images. For training, most methods employ
differentiable rendering to compare a predicted face mesh
with the input image, along with a plethora of additional
loss functions. This differentiable rendering loss not only
has to provide supervision to optimize for 3D face geometry, camera, albedo, and lighting, which is an ill-posed
optimization problem, but the domain gap between rendering and input image further hinders the learning process. Instead, SMIRK replaces the differentiable rendering with a neural rendering module that, given the rendered predicted mesh geometry, and sparsely sampled pixels of the input image, generates a face image. As the
neural rendering gets color information from sampled image pixels, supervising with neural rendering-based reconstruction loss can focus solely on the geometry. Further,

it enables us to generate images of the input identity with
varying expressions while training. These are then utilized
as input to the reconstruction model and used as supervision with ground truth geometry. This effectively augments
the training data and enhances the generalization for diverse expressions. Our qualitative, quantitative and particularly our perceptual evaluations demonstrate that SMIRK
achieves the new state-of-the art performance on accurate
expression reconstruction. For our method’s source code,
demo video and more, please visit our project webpage:
https://georgeretsi.github.io/smirk/.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D faces from single images in-the-wild has
been a central goal of computer vision for the last three
decades [98] with practical implications in various fields
including virtual and augmented reality, entertainment, and
telecommunication. Commonly, these methods estimate the
parameters of a 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) [12, 26], either through optimization [3, 6–8, 34, 67, 80] or regression
with deep learning [16, 18, 20, 28, 29, 33, 46, 65, 66, 70,
75, 82]. Due to the lack of large-scale paired 2D-3D data,
most learning-based methods follow a self-supervised train† Equal contributions.

2490

* Now at Google.

