This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OneTracker: Unifying Visual Object Tracking with
Foundation Models and Efficient Tuning
Lingyi Hong1 * Shilin Yan1 * Renrui Zhang2,3 Wanyun Li1 Xinyu Zhou1 Pinxue Guo4
Kaixun Jiang4 Yiting Chen1 Jinglun Li4 Zhaoyu Chen4 Wenqiang Zhang1,5†
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
CUHK MMLab, 3 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of AI & Robotics,
Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
5
Engineering Research Center of AI & Robotics, Ministry of Education,
Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China

Abstract
Visual object tracking aims to localize the target object of
each frame based on its initial appearance in the first frame.
Depending on the input modility, tracking tasks can be divided into RGB tracking and RGB+X (e.g. RGB+N, and
RGB+D) tracking. Despite the different input modalities,
the core aspect of tracking is the temporal matching. Based
on this common ground, we present a general framework to
unify various tracking tasks, termed as OneTracker. OneTracker first performs a large-scale pre-training on a RGB
tracker called Foundation Tracker. This pretraining phase
equips the Foundation Tracker with a stable ability to estimate the location of the target object. Then we regard other
modality information as prompt and build Prompt Tracker
upon Foundation Tracker. Through freezing the Foundation
Tracker and only adjusting some additional trainable parameters, Prompt Tracker inhibits the strong localization
ability from Foundation Tracker and achieves parameterefficient finetuning on downstream RGB+X tracking tasks.
To evaluate the effectiveness of our general framework
OneTracker, which is consisted of Foundation Tracker and
Prompt Tracker, we conduct extensive experiments on 6
popular tracking tasks across 11 benchmarks and our OneTracker outperforms other models and achieves state-ofthe-art performance.

1. Introduction
Object tracking [4, 13, 56, 91, 119, 120] is a foundation
visual task, that involves localizing a target object in each
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

video frame based on the initial bounding box in the first
frame. It has various applications, such as self-driving [10,
36, 117], visual surveillance [81, 94], and video compression [46]. In addition to the conventional RGB tracking (Figure 1 (a)), there are various downstream tracking
tasks that incorporate additional information and boost performance, including RGB+N, RGB+M, and RGB+D/T/E
tracking. In RGB+N tracking [28, 62, 89, 104], the natural
linguistic descriptions of target are additionally provided to
exclude the interference of similar objects and enhance the
localization. In RGB+M tracking [24, 41, 72, 95, 103], the
masks of the target in the first frame are offered instead
of bounding boxes. In RGB+D/T/E tracking, the depth,
thermal, and event maps are utilized as an extra to handle
with the vulnerability of RGB trackers to complex scenarios and improve the robustness. The goal of all these downstream tasks is to localize the target with the assistance of
multimodal information. Thus, we unify them as a whole,
terming them as RGB+X tracking (Figure 1 (b)). Despite
the diversity of tracking tasks, the core objective remains
the same: localizing the target in the search frame given
its initial appearance, similar to the underlying principles of
human attention mechanisms [8]. Cognitive scientists have
discovered that the human vision system builds the correspondence or motion [2] on the temporal dimension [48]
to determine the object’s position in the current frame [27],
regardless of the form of additional modalities in various
tracking tasks.
Currently, there is a prevailing trend where models are
designed and trained for specific tasks using data from certain domains, offering convenience and yielding competitive results on individual tasks. However, this design philosophy presents certain challenges. (1) Independent mod-

19079

