This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Object Detection with Zero-Shot Day-Night Domain Adaptation
Zhipeng Du*

Miaojing Shi†

Jiankang Deng

Department of Informatics

College of Electronic and Information Engineering

Department of Computing

King’s College London

Tongji University

Imperial College London

zhipeng.du@kcl.ac.uk

mshi@tongji.edu.cn

j.deng16@imperial.ac.uk

FS

Abstract
Detecting objects in low-light scenarios presents a persistent challenge, as detectors trained on well-lit data exhibit significant performance degradation on low-light data
due to low visibility. Previous methods mitigate this issue by exploring image enhancement or object detection
techniques with real low-light image datasets. However,
the progress is impeded by the inherent difficulties about
collecting and annotating low-light images. To address
this challenge, we propose to boost low-light object detection with zero-shot day-night domain adaptation, which
aims to generalize a detector from well-lit scenarios to
low-light ones without requiring real low-light data. Revisiting Retinex theory in the low-level vision, we first design a reflectance representation learning module to learn
Retinex-based illumination invariance in images with a
carefully designed illumination invariance reinforcement
strategy. Next, an interchange-redecomposition-coherence
procedure is introduced to improve over the vanilla Retinex
image decomposition process by performing two sequential image decompositions and introducing a redecomposition cohering loss. Extensive experiments on ExDark,
DARK FACE, and CODaN datasets show strong low-light
generalizability of our method. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ZPDu/DAI-Net.

1. Introduction
Object detection, aiming at identifying and localizing objects in an image, is a fundamental and well-investigated
task in computer vision. Advanced detectors have achieved
remarkable progress thanks to large-scale datasets such as
COCO [30] and Open Images [25] for general object detection as well as WIDER FACE [75] for human face detection [11, 17, 37, 38]. However, these methods encounter severe performance degradation on low-light images resulting
from dark environments, inadequate lighting, and exposure
* Work partially done during internship at Huawei London Research.
† Corresponding author

Well-lit Data: 32,203
Labels: 393,703

Low-light Data: 10,000
Labels: 81,560

DA
Adaptation

Dark Prior
ZSDA

Figure 1. Left and right are respective well-lit and low-light
datasets. FS: fully-supervised learning directly using low-light images and labels; DA: conventional domain adaptation with the access to low-light target domain data (and labels); ZSDA: zero-shot
day-night domain adaptation without the access of domain data
but only knowing the dark scenario as a prior.

time [72]. Issues such as low visibility, color distortion, and
noises arise in low-light images and impede the accuracy of
object detectors. To tackle this challenge, image enhancement methods are normally investigated to enhance the visibility of the scene under low light [4, 6, 16, 23, 44, 72–
74]. Object detectors can benefit either through retraining
or testing with light-enhanced images. Another direction is
that detectors trained from well-lit images are fine-tuned on
low-light images [58, 65–67].
Whilst existing image enhancement methods appear to
be effective, they rely on a significant amount of low-light
images collected from the real world. Many of them have to
be trained with paired low-light and well-lit images [69, 70].
On the other hand, for dark object detection methods, the
utilization of low-light images is also necessary [8, 65]. In
contrast to the well-lit data, low-light images in established
benchmarks [39, 77] are considerably sparser in amount
and limited in terms of collecting scenarios. At the same
time, annotating bounding boxes in low-light images is
also undesirable due to low visibility. For instance, there
are 32,203 images and 393,703 labelled faces in WIDER
FACE, but only 10,000 images and 81,560 faces in DARK
FACE. These difficulties in collecting and annotating low-

12666

