This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Alpha-CLIP: A CLIP Model Focusing on Wherever You Want
Zeyi Sun∗1,4 , Ye Fang∗2,4 , Tong Wu3 , Pan Zhang4 , Yuhang Zang4 ,
Shu Kong5 , Yuanjun Xiong6 , Dahua Lin3,4 , Jiaqi Wang†4
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Fudan University 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory 5 University of Macau 6 MThreads, Inc.

Alpha-CLIP+LLM

Alpha-CLIP+Diffusion
The image features a man standing
in the middle of a road, surrounded
by a forest of tall trees. The man

Blip Diffusion

Point•E

appears to be wearing a black

shirt and is positioned near the
center of the scene. The trees are
lush and green, creating a serene
and natural atmosphere.

What is in the bottle?
The bottle contains water.
But l want to drink beer
now, what should I do?

Who is carrying a ring?

The image depicts a man walking
down a path in a park, surrounded by
a beautiful forest filled with tall trees.

The man is carrying a ring.

The sky above him is clear
and blue, creating a serene
and peaceful atmosphere.

If you want to drink beer
instead of water, you can
replace the water bottle
with a beer bottle.

The man appears to be enjoying his
time in the park, possibly taking a
leisurely stroll or engaging in some
outdoor activity.

The image features a person walking
down a path in a park, surrounded by

Where is the beer?
The beer is in the beer bottle,
which is sitting on the table
next to the water bottle.

a forest of tall trees. The person

is wearing a backpack and

Who is carrying a ring?

appears to be enjoying his time in the
park. The scene i s capt ur ed i n a
vibrant, colorful painting that highlights
the beauty of the natural environment.

The woman is carrying a ring.

Alpha-CLIP+NeRF

Alpha-CLIP+SAM
seahorse

auto labeled fine-grained mask

auto
label
loss
Alpha-CLIP

Ori-CLIP

BackAug

Alpha-CLIP

Ori-CLIP

An exquisite two-tier birthday cake, with the upper layer decorated with a gorgeous sugar-carved crown and the lower layer decorated with gorgeous sugar flowers.

ImageNet

MaskImageNet

Figure 1. Usage of our proposed Alpha-CLIP. Our Alpha-CLIP can seamlessly replace the original CLIP in a wide range of tasks to
allow the whole system to focus on any specified region given by points, strokes or masks. Cases marked with are generated with the
original CLIP. Cases marked with are generated with our Alpha-CLIP. All cases shown here are made simply by replacing the original
CLIP of the system with a plug-in Alpha-CLIP without further tuning.

Abstract
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) plays
an essential role in extracting valuable content information
from images across diverse tasks. It aligns textual and visual modalities to comprehend the entire image, including
all the details, even those irrelevant to specific tasks. However, for a finer understanding and controlled editing of images, it becomes crucial to focus on specific regions of interest, which can be indicated as points, masks, or boxes
by humans or perception models. To fulfill the require-

ments, we introduce Alpha-CLIP, an enhanced version of
CLIP with an auxiliary alpha channel to suggest attentive
regions and fine-tuned with constructed millions of RGBA
region-text pairs. Alpha-CLIP not only preserves the visual
recognition ability of CLIP but also enables precise control over the emphasis of image contents. It demonstrates
effectiveness in various tasks, including but not limited to
open-world recognition, multimodal large language models, and conditional 2D / 3D generation. It has a strong potential to serve as a versatile tool for image-related tasks.
Our project is with codes and models available is linked to
https://aleafy.github.io/alpha-clip/ .

∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

13019

