This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Closer Look at the Few-Shot Adaptation of Large Vision-Language Models
Julio Silva-Rodrı́guezB

Sina Hajimiri
Ismail Ben Ayed
ÉTS Montreal

Jose Dolz

Bjulio-jose.silva-rodriguez@etsmtl.ca

(a) CLIP-Adapter [11]

(b) TIP-Adapter(f) [42]

(c) TaskRes [40]

(d) CLAP (Ours)

Figure 1. Pitfalls of few-shot adapters due to the absence of a model selection strategy. The cross-shift model selection matrices (i, j) depict the relative improvement w.r.t. a zero-shot initialized Linear Probing when using the optimal hyperparameters for the
dataset i (rows), for adapting in another task j (columns), for each SoTA method (first three plots) and our approach (last plot).

Abstract
Efficient transfer learning (ETL) is receiving increasing
attention to adapt large pre-trained language-vision models on downstream tasks with a few labeled samples. While
significant progress has been made, we reveal that stateof-the-art ETL approaches exhibit strong performance only
in narrowly-defined experimental setups, and with a careful adjustment of hyperparameters based on a large corpus
of labeled samples. In particular, we make two interesting, and surprising empirical observations. First, to outperform a simple Linear Probing baseline, these methods
require to optimize their hyper-parameters on each target
task. And second, they typically underperform –sometimes
dramatically– standard zero-shot predictions in the presence of distributional drifts. Motivated by the unrealistic assumptions made in the existing literature, i.e., access to a large validation set and case-specific grid-search
for optimal hyperparameters, we propose a novel approach
that meets the requirements of real-world scenarios. More
concretely, we introduce a CLass-Adaptive linear Probe
(CLAP) objective, whose balancing term is optimized via an
adaptation of the general Augmented Lagrangian method
tailored to this context. We comprehensively evaluate CLAP
on a broad span of datasets and scenarios, demonstrating
that it consistently outperforms SoTA approaches, while yet
being a much more efficient alternative. Code available at

https://github.com/jusiro/CLAP .

1. Introduction
Large vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP [30],
are reshaping the research landscape with their unprecedented performance. These models undergo training on
an extensive dataset consisting of hundreds of millions of
image-text pairs, which are leveraged via contrastive learning [30]. Once trained, VLMs offer a remarkable zero-shot
performance on a wide span of visual recognition problems
thanks to the rich learned representations [27, 30]. Nevertheless, the extensive hardware and data-driven resources
that such training demands [3] suggest that these models
can only be trained on singular occasions. Furthermore,
the large scale of these networks poses important challenges
when it comes to adjusting their parameters on small downstream tasks that involve only a few labeled samples, making the full fine-tuning of the entire model impractical.
An emerging alternative to alleviate this issue consists
in fine-tuning VLMs by adding a small set of learnable
parameters, whose values are optimized during the adaptation step [11, 19, 42, 45, 46]. These tunable weights
can be introduced in the input space as visual [19] or text
prompts [45, 46], or added in the form of adapters across
the network [11, 40, 42]. While both families of approaches
fit within the Efficient Transfer Learning (ETL) literature,

23681

