This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Observation-Guided Diffusion Probabilistic Models
Junoh Kang* 1
Jinyoung Choi* 1
Sungik Choi3
Bohyung Han1,2
3
Computer Vision Laboratory, 1 ECE & 2 IPAI, Seoul National University
LG AI Research
{junoh.kang, jin0.choi, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr, sungik.choi@lgresearch.ai

20

50

100

NFEs

10

20

50

100

OGDM +
S-PNDM

OGDM +
Euler

Baseline +
Euler

10

Figure 1. Comparisons of images generated by the ADM backbone on the CelebA dataset with deterministic samplers using the same
initial noise but different NFEs. The entries on the leftmost column of the figure denote the combinations of the training and inference
methods. (Left) The baseline model generates samples with inconsistent attributes, e.g., gender, hair, etc., by varying NFEs while our
approach preserves such properties. (Right) The samples generated by the baseline method with a small number of NFEs tend to be blurry
and unrealistic. Also, they have unnaturally bright and textureless areas around the chin of the person.

Abstract
We propose a novel diffusion-based image generation
method called the observation-guided diffusion probabilistic model (OGDM), which effectively addresses the tradeoff between quality control and fast sampling. Our approach reestablishes the training objective by integrating
the guidance of the observation process with the Markov
chain in a principled way. This is achieved by introducing an additional loss term derived from the observation
based on a conditional discriminator on noise level, which
employs a Bernoulli distribution indicating whether its input lies on the (noisy) real manifold or not. This strategy allows us to optimize the more accurate negative loglikelihood induced in the inference stage especially when
the number of function evaluations is limited. The proposed
* indicates equal contribution.

training scheme is also advantageous even when incorporated only into the fine-tuning process, and it is compatible with various fast inference strategies since our method
yields better denoising networks using the exactly the same
inference procedure without incurring extra computational
cost. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our training algorithm using diverse inference techniques on strong diffusion model baselines. Our implementation is available at
https://github.com/Junoh-Kang/OGDM_edm.

1. Introduction
Diffusion probabilistic models [7, 27] have shown impressive generation performance in various domains including image [3, 25], 3D shapes [38], point cloud [21],
speech [9, 15], graph [8, 24], and many others. The key idea

8323

