This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Investigating and Mitigating the Side Effects of Noisy Views for Self-Supervised
Clustering Algorithms in Practical Multi-View Scenarios
Jie Xu1 , Yazhou Ren1,2 , Xiaolong Wang1 , Lei Feng3 , Zheng Zhang4 , Gang Niu5 , Xiaofeng Zhu1,2,∗
1

University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China; 2 Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University

of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Shenzhen, China; 3 Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore;
4

Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China; 5 RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
Multi-view clustering (MVC) aims at exploring category
structures among multi-view data in self-supervised manners. Multiple views provide more information than single
views and thus existing MVC methods can achieve satisfactory performance. However, their performance might
seriously degenerate when the views are noisy in practical
multi-view scenarios. In this paper, we formally investigate
the drawback of noisy views and then propose a theoretically
grounded deep MVC method (namely MVCAN) to address
this issue. Specifically, we propose a novel MVC objective
that enables un-shared parameters and inconsistent clustering predictions across multiple views to reduce the side
effects of noisy views. Furthermore, a two-level multi-view
iterative optimization is designed to generate robust learning
targets for refining individual views’ representation learning.
Theoretical analysis reveals that MVCAN works by achieving the multi-view consistency, complementarity, and noise
robustness. Finally, experiments on extensive public datasets
demonstrate that MVCAN outperforms state-of-the-art methods and is robust against the existence of noisy views.

1. Introduction
Recently, real-world applications generate increasing multiview data where one sample is described from multiple
views, multiple modalities, or multiple groups of features. To
handle such multi-view data, multi-view clustering (MVC) is
an effective self-supervised clustering approach and has been
applied in many fields (e.g., industry [34], internet [6], and
medicine [9, 26]), which can recognize the category structures and patterns without label supervision. In addition to
traditional MVC [37, 41], deep learning based MVC is usually built on self-supervised methods like contrastive learning [23] and self-training [22], which has been attracting
researchers’ attention in recent years [4, 10, 27, 30, 45, 53]
∗ Corresponding Author.

and we conduct a review for related work in Appendix A.
The success of existing MVC methods lies in that they
are able to explore the consistency and complementarity
among multi-view data [13, 30, 52], thereby outperforming
single-view clustering (SVC) methods [17, 20, 25, 42]. The
consistency indicates that multiple views have the consistent
information which is helpful for recognizing the same category [2, 33, 49]. For example, multiple views with the consistent category information can enhance the recognition of
the category semantics, thereby eliminating the interference
of non-semantic information. The complementarity means
that different views contain the complementary information
which is conducive to reciprocally correcting and supplementing each other [12, 29, 44, 47]. In other words, the combination of multiple views can help discover category structures that cannot be discovered by individual views. However, a challenge is that consistency and complementarity of
multiple views are still abstract concepts. To conceptually
explore them, previous methods usually leverage different
views to supervise each other for learning their common representations, and build consistent clustering predictions for
all views’ agreement. For instance, some methods conduct
contrastive learning among multiple views for achieving consistency of representations/predictions [3, 8, 15, 46]. Some
methods integrate multiple views’ representations to explore
their complementarity and generate a unified cluster partition
for optimization as self-training manners [35, 40, 43, 45].
Despite important advances, experiments reveal that
MVC is not necessarily superior to SVC in some practical multi-view scenarios (see Sec. 4.2). This is because
features extracted from some views might be noise, which
could be not only useless but even detrimental for clustering.
For example, we consider a situation of observing animals at
night, where the view captured by infrared cameras is informative but the view from optical cameras is noisy. Contrary
to informative views, noisy views can play a negative role
in recognizing their common category such that many MVC
methods exhibit decreased performance compared to a SVC
method that is performed on the optimal single view. This

22957

