This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

T-VSL: Text-Guided Visual Sound Source Localization in Mixtures
Tanvir Mahmud
University of Texas at Austin

Yapeng Tian
University of Texas at Dallas

Diana Marculescu
University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Visual sound source localization poses a significant challenge in identifying the semantic region of each sounding
source within a video. Existing self-supervised and weakly
supervised source localization methods struggle to accurately distinguish the semantic regions of each sounding
object, particularly in multi-source mixtures. These methods often rely on audio-visual correspondence as guidance,
which can lead to substantial performance drops in complex multi-source localization scenarios. The lack of access to individual source sounds in multi-source mixtures
during training exacerbates the difficulty of learning effective audio-visual correspondence for localization. To address this limitation, in this paper, we propose incorporating the text modality as an intermediate feature guide
using tri-modal joint embedding models (e.g., AudioCLIP)
to disentangle the semantic audio-visual source correspondence in multi-source mixtures. Our framework, dubbed
T-VSL, begins by predicting the class of sounding entities in mixtures. Subsequently, the textual representation
of each sounding source is employed as guidance to disentangle fine-grained audio-visual source correspondence
from multi-source mixtures, leveraging the tri-modal AudioCLIP embedding. This approach enables our framework to
handle a flexible number of sources and exhibits promising zero-shot transferability to unseen classes during test
time. Extensive experiments conducted on the MUSIC, VGGSound, and VGGSound-Instruments datasets demonstrate
significant performance improvements over state-of-the-art
methods. Code is released at https://github.com/
enyac-group/T-VSL/tree/main.

1. Introduction
While observing a conversation between two individuals,
we can easily associate the audio signal with the corresponding speaking person in the visual scene. This remarkable ability to perceive audio-visual correspondence
stems from our extensive exposure to both single-source
sounds and multi-source mixtures in everyday life. Inspired by this human capability, significant research efforts [21, 30, 42, 43] have been dedicated to developing vi-

Figure 1. Comparison of our T-VSL with state-of-the-art methods on single-source (Top Row) and multi-source (Bottom Row)
sound localization on VGGSound Sources [7], VGGSoundInstruments [21], and MUSIC [49] benchmark datasets. We use
the same setup for the fair comparison.

sual sound source localization approaches in recent years.
Visual sound source localization aims to locate the visual
regions representing sound sources present in a video. Earlier methods on single-source localization [1, 7, 19, 28, 29,
40, 41] mostly used audio-visual correspondence as guidance for localizing sounding objects in each frame. These
approaches, developed for single sound source localization, suffer from significant performance drop in localizing
multi-source mixtures. Multi-source localization from mixtures is very challenging, as the model must learn to distinguish each sounding source within a mixture and establish their cross-modal relationships, without access to individual source sounds. Earlier methods [20, 21, 30, 36]
on multi-source localization attempt to infer fine-grained
cross-modal associations directly from noisy multi-source
mixtures, often leading to sub-optimal performance in practice for learning improper source correspondence. In this
paper, we tackle the problem by introducing a unified solution for localizing visual sound sources in both single and
multi-source mixtures.
The primary challenge of this task stems from the difficulty in disentangling the cross-modal correspondence of
each sounding object from natural mixtures, given the absence of one-to-one corresponding single-source pairs. Additionally, the presence of silent visual objects and noise
from invisible background sources further complicates this
alignment process. To solve this problem, our key idea is to

26742

