This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeLF-Pro: Neural Light Field Probes for Multi-Scale Novel View Synthesis
Zinuo You1
1
ETH Zürich

Andreas Geiger2
Anpei Chen†,1,2
2
University of Tübingen, Tübingen AI Center

zinyou@ethz.ch

{a.geiger,anpei.chen}@uni-tuebingen.de

Abstract
We present NeLF-Pro, a novel representation to model
and reconstruct light fields in diverse natural scenes that
vary in extent and spatial granularity. In contrast to previous fast reconstruction methods that represent the 3D
scene globally, we model the light field of a scene as a
set of local light field feature probes, parameterized with
position and multi-channel 2D feature maps. Our central
idea is to bake the scene’s light field into spatially varying learnable representations and to query point features by
weighted blending of probes close to the camera - allowing
for mipmap representation and rendering. We introduce a
novel vector-matrix-matrix (VMM) factorization technique
that effectively represents the light field feature probes as
products of core factors (i.e., VM) shared among local feature probes, and a basis factor (i.e., M) - efficiently encoding
internal relationships and patterns within the scene. Experimentally, we demonstrate that NeLF-Pro significantly
boosts the performance of feature grid-based representations, and achieves fast reconstruction with better rendering quality while maintaining compact modeling. Project
page: https://sinoyou.github.io/nelf-pro.

1. Introduction
Efficiently representing and reconstructing 3D scenes that
support high-fidelity novel view synthesis is critical for
computer vision and graphics applications, including virtual
and augmented reality, cinematography, robotics and autonomous navigation. Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [38]
have emerged as an effective representation to model realworld objects/scenes by incorporating density with viewdependent radiance.
Despite the high rendering quality, NeRF takes days
to reconstruct an object or scene. The follow-up works
demonstrated significant success in speeding up the training process by relaxing the input domain to optimizable feature grids [2, 12, 39, 48]. To fit an unbounded
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. NeLF-Pro represent a Scene as spatially distributed
Light Field Probes for faithful novel view synthesis in diverse
and spatially inhomogeneous natural scenes.

scene into bounded MLP and feature grids, scene contraction [6, 39, 58, 68] is commonly used to warp the
input domain within a ball or cube of fixed size. Despite their impressive performance, the basic representations they use, such as MLPs [6], VMGrids [12], and HashGrids [39, 58], are constrained to small-scale scenes (e.g.,
mip-NeRF360 and Free dataset), because these representations rely on a bounded centralized space. To represent
large-scale scenes, a common strategy is to subdivide the
target scene into cells, each endowed with individual representations [18, 35, 49, 54, 62]. However, determining the
ideal position and dimensions of the local bounding boxes
is not trivial. Employing bounding boxes with hard partitions can precipitate unstable optimization, giving rise to
“floater” artifacts as demonstrated in KiloNeRF [44]. To
solve this, regularization terms such as geometrical pixel
partition [54] or total variance loss [63] are usually needed
to stabilize the reconstruction. On the other hand, soft partitions with overlaps require smoothing filters, such as appearance matching [49] or per-frame blending [35] for the
colors predicted from different local representations, resulting in slow optimization.
In this work, we propose Neural Light Field Probes
(aka, NeLF-Pro), a novel representation that is compatible with small and large scale scenes, and at the same time
achieves on-par-with or better-than current state-of-the-art
novel view rendering quality. Unlike previous methods that

19833

