This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MedBN: Robust Test-Time Adaptation against Malicious Test Samples
Hyejin Park⇤
Jeongyeon Hwang⇤
Sunung Mun
Sangdon Park
Jungseul Ok†
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown noticeable
advances in benchmarks across diverse recognition tasks,
assuming virtually no distribution shift between training and
test data. However, distribution shifts are inevitable in practice mainly due to time-varying environments (e.g., lighting
variations and changing weather conditions), and severely
degenerate the model performance [25, 31]. It is infeasible
to forecast and prepare for every potential test domain in
advance. In response, test-time adaptation (TTA) has been
extensively studied [6, 14, 20, 21, 40, 51, 53], where TTA
aims at adapting a pre-trained model to test data, which is
unlabeled and from latent domain, in an online manner.
⇤ : Equal contribution; † : Correspondence to jungseul@postech.ac.kr

Vulnerability of Mean (1)

"!"#$%#

"&

Batch distribution

…

Output

Act. Function

Conv. Layer

…

Batch Norm.

Act. Function

Conv. Layer

Input

…

Test-time adaptation (TTA) has emerged as a promising
solution to address performance decay due to unforeseen distribution shifts between training and test data. While recent
TTA methods excel in adapting to test data variations, such
adaptability exposes a model to vulnerability against malicious examples. Indeed, previous studies have uncovered
security vulnerabilities within TTA even when a small proportion of the test batch is maliciously manipulated. In response
to the emerging threat, we propose median batch normalization (MedBN), leveraging the robustness of the median
for statistics estimation within the batch normalization layer
during test-time inference. Our method is algorithm-agnostic,
thus allowing seamless integration with existing TTA frameworks. Our experimental results on benchmark datasets, including CIFAR10-C, CIFAR100-C, and ImageNet-C, consistently demonstrate that MedBN outperforms existing approaches in maintaining robust performance across different
attack scenarios, encompassing both instant and cumulative
attacks. Through extensive experiments, we show that our
approach sustains the performance even in the absence of attacks, achieving a practical balance between robustness and
performance. Our code is available at https://github.com/mlpostech/MedBN-robust-test-time-adaptation.

(batch size !)

Abstract

Batch Norm.

{parkebbi2, jeongyeon.hwang, mtablo, sangdon, jungseul}@postech.ac.kr

Robustness of Median (2)

!!"#$%# ≈ !&
Benign distribution

Malicious distribution

Figure 1. An illustrative example of the vulnerability of mean in
a batch normalization layer to manipulation by malicious sample
(left), contrasted with the robustness of median such manipulation
(right), when dealing with malicious samples within the batch.

The major advantage of TTA stems from leveraging the
statistics of the test batch. A prominent technique is to use
test batch statistics in each batch normalization (BN) layer
[37, 44] before adjusting model parameters. Hence, it is
crucial to reliably estimate the test batch statistics and make
necessary adjustments. Most of the recent advances have
focused on robust estimations of the test batch statistics
in a variety of scenarios, including continual distribution
shifts [53], small test batches [30, 31], temporally correlated
stream of test data [19], and out-of-distribution test data [20],
where the exponential moving averaging (EMA) [20, 59]
or interpolating source and test statistics [29, 34, 54] are
proposed for robust statistics estimation.
Despite such efforts to build robust TTA methods, recent works [11, 54] have revealed the vulnerability of TTA
methods that use the test batch statistics. By injecting small
portions of malicious samples into the test batch, an adversary can easily manipulate the test batch statistics and also
predictions on other (benign) samples, constituting a data
poisoning attack. As we cannot presume the distribution of
test samples in the real world, verifying the robustness of
TTA methods against the data poisoning attack is essential
since it can be considered as a worst-case study. Although the
initial studies have proposed heuristics to partially address
the vulnerability, it still remains a potential threat, posing a

5997

