This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoCrafter2: Overcoming Data Limitations for High-Quality
Video Diffusion Models
Haoxin Chen
Yong Zhang*
Xiaodong Cun
Menghan Xia
Xintao Wang
Chao Weng
Ying Shan
Tencent AI Lab

In cyberpunk, neonpunk style,
Kung Fu Panda, jump and kick.

Cinematic photo melting pistachio ice
cream dripping down the cone.
35mm photograph, film, bokeh.

Large motion, surrounded by butterflies,
a girl walks through a lush garden.

Figure 1. Give a text prompt, our method can generate a video with high visual quality and accurate text-video alignment. Note that it is
trained with only low-quality videos and high-quality images. No high-quality videos are required. Best viewed with Acrobat Reader. Click
the images to play the video clips.

Abstract
Text-to-video generation aims to produce a video based
on a given prompt. Recently, several commercial video models have been able to generate plausible videos with minimal noise, excellent details, and high aesthetic scores. However, these models rely on large-scale, well-filtered, highquality videos that are not accessible to the community.
Many existing research works, which train models using
the low-quality WebVid-10M dataset, struggle to generate
high-quality videos because the models are optimized to fit
WebVid-10M. In this work, we explore the training scheme of
video models extended from Stable Diffusion and investigate
the feasibility of leveraging low-quality videos and synthesized high-quality images to obtain a high-quality video
model. We first analyze the connection between the spatial
* Corresponding author.

and temporal modules of video models and the distribution
shift to low-quality videos. We observe that full training of
all modules results in a stronger coupling between spatial
and temporal modules than only training temporal modules.
Based on this stronger coupling, we shift the distribution
to higher quality without motion degradation by finetuning spatial modules with high-quality images, resulting in a
generic high-quality video model. Evaluations are conducted
to demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method, particularly in picture quality, motion, and concept composition.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the development of diffusion models [25,
43], video generation has achieved breakthroughs, particularly in basic text-to-video (T2V) generation models. Most
existing methods [14, 23, 26, 30, 48, 63] follow a logic to

7310

