This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-Shot Open Affordance Learning with Foundation Models
Gen Li1
1

Deqing Sun2

University of Edinburgh

Laura Sevilla-Lara1
2

Google Research

Varun Jampani3
3

Stability AI

Abstract
We introduce One-shot Open Affordance Learning
(OOAL), where a model is trained with just one example per
base object category, but is expected to identify novel objects and affordances. While vision-language models excel
at recognizing novel objects and scenes, they often struggle to understand finer levels of granularity such as affordances. To handle this issue, we conduct a comprehensive
analysis of existing foundation models, to explore their inherent understanding of affordances and assess the potential for data-limited affordance learning. We then propose
a vision-language framework with simple and effective designs that boost the alignment between visual features and
affordance text embeddings. Experiments on two affordance
segmentation benchmarks show that the proposed method
outperforms state-of-the-art models with less than 1% of
the full training data, and exhibits reasonable generalization capability on unseen objects and affordances. Project
page: https://reagan1311.github.io/ooal.

1. Introduction
Affordances are the potential “action possibilities” regions of an object [20, 22], which play a pivotal role in
various applications, including robotic learning [19, 26, 42],
scene understanding [12, 32, 51], and human-object interaction [23, 41]. In particular, affordance is crucial for embodied intelligence, since it facilitates agents’ understanding of
the associations between objects, actions, and effects in dynamic environments, thus bridging the gap between passive
perception and active interaction [14, 38].
Learning to recognize object affordances across a variety
of scenarios is challenging, since different objects can vary
significantly in appearance, shape, and size, yet have the
same functionality. For instance, a chef’s knife and a pair
of office scissors share common affordances of cutting and
holding, but their blades and handles look different.
A large portion of the work [12, 16, 17, 39, 43, 44] has
focused on learning a mapping between visual features and
affordance labels, utilizing diverse resources as inputs, such

Figure 1. The pipeline of one-shot open affordance learning. It
uses one image per base object for training, and can perform zeroshot inference on novel objects and affordances.

as 2D images, RGB-D data, and 3D point clouds. This mapping can be established through a labeled dataset with predefined objects and affordances. However, large-scale affordance datasets are scarce, and most of them have a small
number of object categories, making it difficult to apply the
learned mapping to novel objects and scenes. To reduce
the reliance on costly annotation, some recent studies perform affordance learning from sparse key points [15,52,53],
videos of humans in action [18, 30, 41], or human-object interaction images [28, 35]. While alleviating the need for
dense pixel labeling, these methods still require a large
amount of training data. In addition, they often struggle
to generalize to unseen objects and cannot identify novel
affordances.
To tackle the above limitations, we are interested in
learning an affordance model that does not rely on extensive datasets, and can comprehend unseen object and affordance classes. For example, after a model is trained with the
knowledge that scissor blades afford cutting, it should generalize to related objects such as knives and axes, inferring
that their blades can cut objects too. Moreover, the model
should be able to reason about semantically similar vocabularies, e.g., “hold” and “grasp”, “cut” and “slice”, instead
of knowing only predefined affordance categories.
In this paper, we target the extreme case of using merely
one example from each base object category and term this

3086

