This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GP-NeRF: Generalized Perception NeRF for Context-Aware
3D Scene Understanding
Hao Li1 , Dingwen Zhang1,6,∗ , Yalun Dai4 , Nian Liu2,∗ , Lechao Cheng3 , Jingfeng Li1 ,
Jingdong Wang5 , Junwei Han1,6
1
Brain and Artificial Intelligence Lab, Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 MBZUAI
3
Hefei University of Technology 4 Nanyang Technological University 5 Baidu, Inc.
6
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
∗
Corresponding authors
GT

Reconstruction Segment

PCA

Generalized Semantic Segmentation
+6.94

50
mIOU

c Semantic
Generalized

Image

40
30
20
MVSNeRF+head

NeuRay+head

S-Ray

Ours

mIOU

Finetuning Semantic

Finetuning Semantic Segmentation
+11.76

90
80
70
60
50
MVSNeRF+head

NeuRay+head

S-NeRF

S-Ray

Ours

AP75

Instance

Instance Segmentation
+8.47

90
85
80
75
70
M-RCNN

Swin-T

DM-NeRF

Ours

Figure 1. Our method, called GP-NeRF, achieves remarkable performance improvements for instance and semantic segmentation in
both synthesis [35] and real-world [10] datasets, as shown in the right column of the figure. Here we showcase generalized semantic
segmentation, finetuning semantic segmentation, and instance segmentation) with their corresponding reconstruction results. For the left
column, the qualitative results of the visualization are presented, showing the effectiveness of our method for simultaneous segmentation
and reconstruction. What’s more, we visualize our rendered features via PCA in the novel view, demonstrating our method possesses the
capability to produce semantic-aware features that can distinguish between different classes and objects.

Abstract
Applying Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) to downstream
perception tasks for scene understanding and representation is becoming increasingly popular. Most existing methods treat semantic prediction as an additional rendering
task, i.e., the ”label rendering” task, to build semantic
NeRFs. However, by rendering semantic/instance labels per
pixel without considering the contextual information of the
rendered image, these methods usually suffer from unclear
boundary segmentation and abnormal segmentation of pix-

els within an object. To solve this problem, we propose
Generalized Perception NeRF (GP-NeRF), a novel pipeline
that makes the widely used segmentation model and NeRF
work compatibly under a unified framework, for facilitating context-aware 3D scene perception. To accomplish this
goal, we introduce transformers to aggregate radiance as
well as semantic embedding fields jointly for novel views
and facilitate the joint volumetric rendering of both fields.
In addition, we propose two self-distillation mechanisms,
i.e., the Semantic Distill Loss and the Depth-Guided Semantic Distill Loss, to enhance the discrimination and qual-

21708

