This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Communication-Efficient Collaborative Perception via
Information Filling with Codebook

1

Yue Hu1,4 Juntong Peng1,4 Sifei Liu1,4 Junhao Ge1,4 Si Liu3 Siheng Chen1,2,4
Cooperative Medianet Innovation Center, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Beihang University 4 Multi-Agent Governance & Intelligence Crew (MAGIC)

1

{18671129361,juntong.peng,hiraeth416,cancaries,sihengc}@sjtu.edu.cn

3

{liusi}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Collaborative perception empowers each agent to improve its perceptual ability through the exchange of perceptual messages with other agents. It inherently results in a fundamental trade-off between perception ability and communication cost. To address this bottleneck
issue, our core idea is to optimize the collaborative messages from two key aspects: representation and selection. The proposed codebook-based message representation enables the transmission of integer codes, rather than
high-dimensional feature maps. The proposed informationfilling-driven message selection optimizes local messages to
collectively fill each agent’s information demand, preventing information overflow among multiple agents. By integrating these two designs, we propose CodeFilling,
a novel communication-efficient collaborative perception system, which significantly advances the perceptioncommunication trade-off and is inclusive to both homogeneous and heterogeneous collaboration settings. We
evaluate CodeFilling in both a real-world dataset,
DAIR-V2X, and a new simulation dataset, OPV2VH+.
Results show that CodeFilling outperforms previous SOTA Where2comm on DAIR-V2X/OPV2VH+ with
1,333/1,206× lower communication volume. Our code
is available at https://github.com/PhyllisH/
CodeFilling.

1. Introduction
Collaborative perception aims to enhance the perceptual
ability of each individual agent by facilitating the exchange
of complementary perceptual information among multiple
agents [1, 10, 12, 15, 16, 19, 22, 24, 30, 31, 43]. It
fundamentally overcomes the occlusion and long-range issues in single-agent perception [4, 11, 13, 45]. As the
forefront of autonomous systems, collaborative perception
shows significant potential in enormous real-world appli-

Figure 1. CodeFilling avoids redundant messages and
achieves more complete detections by transmitting more critical
perceptual information with the compact code index message.

cations, particularly vehicle-to-everything-communicationaided autonomous driving [2, 3, 18, 26, 28–30, 33, 38, 39].
In this emerging field, a central challenge lies in optimizing the trade-off between perception performance and
communication cost inherent in agents sharing perceptual
data [10, 12, 16, 19, 20, 30, 41, 42]. Given inevitable practical constraints of communication systems, efficient utilization of communication resources is the prerequisite for collaborative perception. To minimize communication overhead, a straightforward solution is late collaboration, where
agents directly exchange the perception outputs. However,
numerous previous works indicate that late collaboration
yields marginal perception improvements and is vulnerable to various noises [10, 21]. To optimize the perceptioncommunication trade-off, most studies consider intermediate collaboration, where the collaborative messages are perceptual features [10, 12, 16, 19, 20, 29, 35, 37, 40]. For
example, When2com [19] proposed the handshake strategy
to limit the number of collaborators; and Where2comm [10]
proposed a pragmatic strategy that only transmits messages
about constrained spatial areas. While these methods mitigate certain communication costs, they still necessitate the
transmission of high-dimensional feature maps, which incurs substantial communication expenses.
To overcome the limitations of intermediate collabora-

15481

