This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UVEB: A Large-scale Benchmark and Baseline Towards Real-World
Underwater Video Enhancement
Yaofeng Xie1 Lingwei Kong2 Kai Chen2 Ziqiang Zheng3 Xiao Yu2 Zhibin Yu1,2, † Bing Zheng2
1
College of Electronic Engineering,Ocean University of China
2
Key Laboratory of Ocean Observation and Information of Hainan Province,
Sanya Oceanographic Institution, Ocean University of China
3
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
† corresponding author: yuzhibin@ouc.edu.cn; Project website: https://github.com/yzbouc/UVEB

Abstract
Learning-based underwater image enhancement (UIE)
methods have made great progress. However, the lack of
large-scale and high-quality paired training samples has
become the main bottleneck hindering the development of
UIE. The inter-frame information in underwater videos can
accelerate or optimize the UIE process. Thus, we constructed the first large-scale high-resolution underwater
video enhancement benchmark (UVEB) to promote the development of underwater vision. It contains 1,308 pairs
of video sequences and more than 453,000 high-resolution
with 38% Ultra-High-Definition (UHD) 4K frame pairs.
UVEB comes from multiple countries, containing various
scenes and video degradation types to adapt to diverse and
complex underwater environments. We also propose the first
supervised underwater video enhancement method, UVENet. UVE-Net converts the current frame information into
convolutional kernels and passes them to adjacent frames
for efficient inter-frame information exchange. By fully utilizing the redundant degraded information of underwater
videos, UVE-Net completes video enhancement better. Experiments show the effective network design and good performance of UVE-Net.

1. Introduction
Underwater images and videos are essential channels
representing various information, but they often suffer from
color deviation and blurring due to water scattering. Underwater Image Enhancement (UIE) can improve the color
deviation and blurring of underwater images, helping them
to be better applied in marine observation. However, UIE
is also full of challenges due to its higher ill-posedness
than video dehazing [1]. Current UIE methods often cannot
completely eliminate the effect of water scattering and can-

not be widely used in various real underwater scenes [2].
Collecting large-scale data to train deep neural networks
and utilizing the fitting ability of neural networks [3] can approximately solve these problems. The limited scale of existing datasets restricts the development of UIE [2]. These
factors motivate us to construct the first large-scale realworld paired underwater video enhancement dataset.
Before data-driven UIE methods became popular, people improved the quality of underwater images mainly by
estimating physical priors or adjusting image pixel values [4, 5]. The emergence of Generate adversarial network [6] (GAN) inspired people to explore synthetic paired
UIE datasets and UIE methods based on GAN [7, 8].
The first paired underwater image enhancement benchmark
UIEB [9] was proposed in 2019. Paired real-world UIE
datasets like UIEB [9] significantly boost the research on
supervised UIE methods [3, 10].
However, UIE research is still full of challenges. Although underwater images are not hard to collect, obtaining calibrated paired underwater images with sufficient variety is expensive and difficult [11]. It makes the existing
paired real underwater datasets relatively small in scale. A
small-scale UIE dataset [2] may increase the risk of overfitting the learned models. The requirements for large-scale,
real-world paired training samples have become the main
bottleneck hindering the development of UIE. Underwater
tasks use more videos than single images, and the redundant
information of adjacent frames in videos can accelerate or
optimize the image enhancement process.
Considering the above factors, we collect highresolution videos of diverse underwater scenes with video
quality scores to build the first large-scale underwater
video enhancement benchmark (UVEB). UVEB contains
1,308 underwater video pairs and 453,874 high-resolution
frame pairs. To our knowledge, UVEB is also the largest
Ultra-High-Definition (UHD) 4K video dataset (containing

22358

