This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedSelect: Personalized Federated Learning with Customized Selection of
Parameters for Fine-Tuning
Rishub Tamirisa† , Chulin Xie†,‡ , Wenxuan Bao†,‡ , Andy Zhou† , Ron Arel† , Aviv Shamsian§
†
Lapis Labs ‡ University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign § Bar-Ilan University
{rishubt2,chulinx2,wbao4,andyz3,ronarel2}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Standard federated learning approaches suffer when
client data distributions have sufficient heterogeneity. Recent methods addressed the client data heterogeneity issue
via personalized federated learning (PFL) - a class of FL
algorithms aiming to personalize learned global knowledge
to better suit the clients’ local data distributions. Existing PFL methods usually decouple global updates in deep
neural networks by performing personalization on particular layers (i.e. classifier heads) and global aggregation
for the rest of the network. However, preselecting network
layers for personalization may result in suboptimal storage of global knowledge. In this work, we propose F ED S ELECT, a novel PFL algorithm inspired by the iterative
subnetwork discovery procedure used for the Lottery Ticket
Hypothesis. F ED S ELECT incrementally expands subnetworks to personalize client parameters, concurrently conducting global aggregations on the remaining parameters.
This approach enables the personalization of both client
parameters and subnetwork structure during the training
process. Finally, we show that F ED S ELECT outperforms
recent state-of-the-art PFL algorithms under challenging
client data heterogeneity settings and demonstrates robustness to various real-world distributional shifts. Our code is
available at https://github.com/lapisrocks/fedselect.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) enables distributed clients or devices to jointly learn a shared global model while keeping
the training data local [31], which is particularly beneficial
for privacy-critical applications [37]. Despite its potential,
the efficacy of FL is challenged by the inherent heterogeneity of data across different clients. As the local updates of
clients can be remarkably diverse given their heterogeneous
local data, the aggregated global model can diverge under
the standard FL paradigms [23].
To address this issue, personalized federated learning

aviv.shamsian@live.biu.ac.il

(PFL) emerges as a promising approach. PFL allows individual clients to maintain their unique, personalized models, with parameters tailored to their local data distributions, while knowledge sharing across different clients. One
representative type of PFL algorithm is “parameter decoupling”. It decomposes the FL model into two distinct components: a global subnetwork shared among all clients
(e.g., the feature extractor), and a personalized subnetwork
adapted to each client’s local distribution (e.g., the prediction head). By personalizing a subset of parameters, parameter decoupling strikes a balance between knowledge sharing among clients and personalization to each client.
A natural follow-up question would be how to determine
which parameters to personalize. Previous works typically
selected specific layers for personalization, e.g., the prediction head [5, 7], and the feature extractor [27, 33]. However,
recent studies [11, 12, 35] suggest that even within the same
layer, the importance of parameters for prediction can vary
significantly. The coarse-grained layer-wise selection of
personalized subnetwork may not fully balance knowledge
sharing among clients and personalization to each client.
Furthermore, current methods typically pre-defining the architecture of the personalized subnetwork, i.e., which layers
to personalize, and the architecture of the personalized subnetwork is shared for all clients. These designs limit the performance of parameter decoupling, as the optimal personalized subnetwork often varies depending on each client’s
specific local data distribution.
In this paper, we delve into these challenges, exploring a
novel strategy named F ED S ELECT for parameter selection
and subnetwork personalization in PFL to unlock the full
potential of parameter decoupling. Our method in enlightened by the Lottery Ticket Hypothesis (LTH): deep neural networks contain subnetworks (i.e., winning tickets) that
can reach comparable accuracy as the original network. We
believe that FL model also contain a subnetwork that is crucial for personalization to a specific client’s local distribution, and personalizing that subnetwork can achieve optimal balance between global knowledge sharing and local
personalization. Specifically, we believe that parameters

23985

