This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Distilling Semantic Priors from SAM to Efficient Image Restoration Models
Quan Zhang1,3, * Xiaoyu Liu2,3, * Wei Li3 Hanting Chen3 Junchao Liu3
Zhiwei Xiong2 Chun Yuan1, † Yunhe Wang3, †

Jie Hu3

1

2

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School
University of Science and Technology of China 3 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
In image restoration (IR), leveraging semantic priors
from segmentation models has been a common approach to
improve performance. The recent segment anything model
(SAM) has emerged as a powerful tool for extracting advanced semantic priors to enhance IR tasks. However, the
computational cost of SAM is prohibitive for IR, compared
to existing smaller IR models. The incorporation of SAM for
extracting semantic priors considerably hampers the model
inference efficiency. To address this issue, we propose a
general framework to distill SAM’s semantic knowledge to
boost exiting IR models without interfering with their inference process. Specifically, our proposed framework consists of the semantic priors fusion (SPF) scheme and the
semantic priors distillation (SPD) scheme. SPF fuses two
kinds of information between the restored image predicted
by the original IR model and the semantic mask predicted by
SAM for the refined restored image. SPD leverages a selfdistillation manner to distill the fused semantic priors to
boost the performance of original IR models. Additionally,
we design a semantic-guided relation (SGR) module for
SPD, which ensures semantic feature representation space
consistency to fully distill the priors. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework across multiple IR models and
tasks, including deraining, deblurring, and denoising.

1. Introduction
Image restoration (IR) [7, 12, 20] is an essential computer
vision task that reconstructs high-quality (HQ) images from
degraded low-quality (LQ) inputs. These inputs are impaired by distortions like noise [21, 61], blurring [4, 24, 59],
and rain drops [9, 45]. To address this, IR methods incorporate explicit image priors and models of the distortion
process. These constraints help narrow the solution space
* Both authors contributed equally to this research, which was done during Quan Zhang and Xiaoyu Liu’s internship at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
† Corresponding authors: yunhe.wang@huawei.com

(a)

Training Stage

SAM

SAM

(b)

Inference Stage

Training Stage

Inference Stage

Distillation

SAM

Figure 1. Comparison of training and inference pipelines between
different manners of exploiting semantic priors from SAM. (a) Existing methods require the use of SAM at both the training and
inference stages. (b) Our method only uses SAM at the training
stage and preserves the same inference efficiency as the original
image restoration model at the inference stage.

for feasible reconstruction. With the advent of deep learning [3, 57, 61, 64], data-driven techniques have achieved superior performance in IR tasks by learning strong statistical
regularities. Previous studies [28, 47, 50, 51] have demonstrated the potential benefits of utilizing semantic priors obtained from segmentation for image restoration tasks. These
priors contain valuable information about the texture and
color characteristics of individual objects within an image.
By incorporating these priors, a deeper understanding of the
image content can be achieved, providing explicit instructions that guide the restoration process. This integration
of semantic priors enhances the restoration performance by
leveraging the rich knowledge encoded within the segmentation results.
In recent years, the emergence of the Segment Anything
Model (SAM) [19] has had a profound impact on various computer vision tasks [1, 8, 53, 55], including image
restoration [17, 26, 34, 52]. By scaling up datasets and
model capacity, this large foundation model exhibits capabilities beyond surface-level labeling and provides useful cues unavailable to mainstream networks. Specifically,
SAM can extract advanced semantic priors through a holistic understanding of image content. However, the compu-

25409

