This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompt Augmentation for Self-supervised Text-guided Image Manipulation
Rumeysa Bodur1 , Binod Bhattarai2 , Tae-Kyun Kim1,3
1
Imperial College London, UK, 2 University of Aberdeen, UK, 3 KAIST, South Korea
r.bodur18@imperial.ac.uk, binod.bhattarai@abdn.ac.uk, kimtaekyun@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Text-guided image editing finds applications in various
creative and practical fields. While recent studies in image generation have advanced the field, they often struggle
with the dual challenges of coherent image transformation
and context preservation. In response, our work introduces
prompt augmentation, a method amplifying a single input
prompt into several target prompts, strengthening textual
context and enabling localised image editing. Specifically,
we use the augmented prompts to delineate the intended manipulation area. We propose a Contrastive Loss tailored to
driving effective image editing by displacing edited areas
and drawing preserved regions closer. Acknowledging the
continuous nature of image manipulations, we further refine our approach by incorporating the similarity concept,
creating a Soft Contrastive Loss. The new losses are incorporated to the diffusion model, demonstrating improved
or competitive image editing results on public datasets and
generated images over state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
The field of text-guided image generation has made significant progress, particularly with the advent of diffusion
models [20, 31, 32, 37], ushering in a new era of content
creation. This progress extends to text-guided image manipulation, which offers a wide range of applications, spanning from artistic expression to the enhancement of image
interpretability. Text-guided image manipulation involves
altering an input image based on a user-provided textual
prompt, such as changing the appearance or shape of objects, modifying the background, and adding, removing or
replacing features. Some sample manipulations performed
by our method can be seen in Figure 1. In this context,
two intertwined challenges are present: the task of transforming image content in accordance with a provided textual description, and the need to preserve the salient aspects
of the original visual information that remain contextually
relevant. While recent methodologies [8, 16, 27] have excelled in the domain of image manipulation, they often encounter limitations in addressing both of these challenges

“a leopard”

“a wedding
cake”

“a penguin
walking on the beach”

Figure 1. Text-guided image manipulation. Illustrative examples generated by our method (bottom row) with localised manipulations based on given text prompts and input images (top row).

concurrently.
Many pioneering text-guided image editing methods rely
on text-guided image generation models [11, 16, 18, 27, 30,
41], which tend to be ill-equipped to address the nuanced
challenges of image manipulation. Additionally, methods
tailored specifically for image editing often require domainspecific training [2, 19]. These methods require training
for each instance or translation domain, limiting their scalability across diverse tasks. Despite excelling within their
trained domains, they often struggle with the broader generalisation needed for accommodating various editing scenarios. Although there exist generic methods, such as InstructPix2Pix [8], they often struggle to achieve both the faithful transformation of image content and the preservation
of contextual details. Some existing methods incorporate
masks at inference time [1, 11, 31] or during training [40].
Although these methods show a good performance at content preservation, Dall-E 2 [31] and Imagen Editor [40] fall
short as they treat it as an inpainting task without taking into
consideration the masked content and DiffEdit [11] shows
weaknesses as it relies on a pre-trained image generation
model that is not specifically trained for manipulation purposes and is sensitive to the mask detected at inference time.
Augmentation techniques have proven useful for enhancing image translation [5, 6, 9], but their application in
label space remains underexplored [3, 4, 25, 26]. Hence, to
overcome the aforementioned challenges, this paper intro-

8829

