This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Emotion Recognition in Context Debiasing
Dingkang Yang1,2
Kun Yang1
Mingcheng Li1,2 Shunli Wang1,2
1,2
Shuaibing Wang
Lihua Zhang1,2,3,4§
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University 2 Cognition and Intelligent Technology Laboratory (CIT Lab)
3

Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligence Science and Engineering, Changchun, China

4

Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China
dkyang20@fudan.edu.cn

Training samples for clustering

Abstract

Confidence
GT：
Excitement

Context-aware emotion recognition (CAER) has recently
boosted the practical applications of affective computing
techniques in unconstrained environments. Mainstream
CAER methods invariably extract ensemble representations
from diverse contexts and subject-centred characteristics to
perceive the target person’s emotional state. Despite advancements, the biggest challenge remains due to context
bias interference. The harmful bias forces the models to
rely on spurious correlations between background contexts
and emotion labels in likelihood estimation, causing severe
performance bottlenecks and confounding valuable context
priors. In this paper, we propose a counterfactual emotion
inference (CLEF) framework to address the above issue.
Specifically, we first formulate a generalized causal graph
to decouple the causal relationships among the variables
in CAER. Following the causal graph, CLEF introduces a
non-invasive context branch to capture the adverse direct
effect caused by the context bias. During the inference, we
eliminate the direct context effect from the total causal effect
by comparing factual and counterfactual outcomes, resulting in bias mitigation and robust prediction. As a modelagnostic framework, CLEF can be readily integrated into
existing methods, bringing consistent performance gains.

1. Introduction
“Context is the key to understanding, but it can also be the
key to misunderstanding.”
–Jonathan Lockwood Huie

As the spiritual grammar of human life, emotions play
an essential role in social communication and intelligent automation [21]. Accurately recognizing subjects’ emotional
§ Corresponding author.

Project lead.

GT：Anticipation

Testing sample for prediction
Similar
contexts

GT：

Disconnection
Disquietment

Waves
seaside

Anticipation
GT：Happiness

CAER model
+ CLEF (ours)

CAER model
Prediction

Prediction

Anticipation
Happiness
Confidence

(a)

Disconnection
Disquietment

(b)

inference
Figure 1. Illustration of the context bias in the CAER
task. GT
stands for the Ground Truth. Context-specific semanticsSimilar
easilycontext
yield spurious shortcuts with emotion labels during training to
confound the model [32], giving erroneous results. Conversely,
our CLEF effectively corrects biased predictions.

states from resource-efficient visual content has been extensively explored in various fields, including online education [15], driving monitoring [59], and human-computer interaction [1]. Conventional works have focused on extracting emotion-related information from subject attributes,
such as facial expressions [9], body postures [3], acoustic
behaviors [26], or multimodal combinations [22, 31, 54, 55,
57, 60]. Despite considerable advances in subject-oriented
efforts, their performance suffers from severe bottlenecks in
uncontrolled environments. As shown in Figure 1a, physical representations of subjects in wild-collected images are
usually indistinguishable (e.g., ambiguous faces) due to natural occlusions that fail to provide usable emotional signals.
Inspired by psychological research [2], context-aware
emotion recognition (CAER) [18] has been proposed to
seek additional affective semantics from situational contexts. The contexts [19] are typically considered to include
out-of-subject factors, such as background objects, place attributes, scene elements, and dynamic interactions of surrounding agents. These rich contextual stimuli promisingly

12447

