This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ACT-Diffusion: Efficient Adversarial Consistency Training for One-step
Diffusion Models
Fei Kong1 Jinhao Duan2 Lichao Sun3 Hao Cheng4 Renjing Xu4
Hengtao Shen1 Xiaofeng Zhu1 Xiaoshuang Shi1 * Kaidi Xu2 ∗
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Drexel University
3
Lehigh University
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
kong13661@outlook.com

xsshi2013@gmail.com

Abstract
Though diffusion models excel in image generation, their
step-by-step denoising leads to slow generation speeds.
Consistency training addresses this issue with single-step
sampling but often produces lower-quality generations and
requires high training costs. In this paper, we show that optimizing consistency training loss minimizes the Wasserstein
distance between target and generated distributions. As
timestep increases, the upper bound accumulates previous
consistency training losses. Therefore, larger batch sizes
are needed to reduce both current and accumulated losses.
We propose Adversarial Consistency Training (ACT), which
directly minimizes the Jensen-Shannon (JS) divergence between distributions at each timestep using a discriminator.
Theoretically, ACT enhances generation quality, and convergence. By incorporating a discriminator into the consistency training framework, our method achieves improved
FID scores on CIFAR10 and ImageNet 64×64 and LSUN
Cat 256×256 datasets, retains zero-shot image inpainting
capabilities, and uses less than 1/6 of the original batch
size and fewer than 1/2 of the model parameters and training steps compared to the baseline method, this leads to a
substantial reduction in resource consumption. Our code is
available: https://github.com/kong13661/ACT

1. Introduction
Diffusion models, known for their success in image generation [12, 19, 31, 43, 44, 53], utilize diffusion processes to
produce high-quality, diverse images. They also perform
tasks like zero-shot inpainting [32] and audio generation
[24, 25, 36]. However, they have a significant drawback:
* Equal corresponding author

kx46@drexel.edu

lengthy sampling times. These models generate target distribution samples by iterative denoising a Gaussian noise
input, a process that involves gradual noise reduction until
samples match the target distribution. This limitation affects their practicality and efficiency in real-world applications.
The lengthy sampling times of diffusion models have
spurred the creation of various strategies to tackle this issue. Several models and techniques have been suggested to
enhance the efficiency of diffusion-based image generation
[4, 29, 57]. Recently, consistency models [45] have been
introduced to speed up the diffusion models’ sampling process. A consistency function is one that consistently yields
the same output along a specific trajectory. To use consistency models, the trajectory from noise to the target sample
must be obtained. By fitting the consistency function, the
model can generate data within 1 or 2 steps.
The score-based model [44], an extension of the diffusion model in continuous time, gradually samples from a
normal distribution pT to the sample distribution p0 . In deterministic sampling, it essentially solves an Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE), with each sample representing
an ODE trajectory. Consistency models generate samples
using a consistency function that aligns every point on the
ODE trajectory with the ODE endpoint. However, deriving
the true ODE trajectory is complex. To tackle this, consistency models suggest two methods. The first, consistency
distillation, trains a score-based model to obtain the ODE
trajectory. The second, consistency training, approximates
the trajectory using a conditional one. Compared to distillation, consistency training has a larger error, leading to
lower sample quality. The consistency function is trained
by equating the model’s output at time tn+1 with its output
at time tn .
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [3, 15, 55],

8890

