This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-to-Image Diffusion Models are Great Sketch-Photo Matchmakers
Subhadeep Koley1,2

Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Aneeshan Sain1 Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1
Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.

{s.koley, a.bhunia, a.sain, p.chowdhury, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk
https://subhadeepkoley.github.io/DiffusionZSSBIR
Image

Image

e.g.,
VGG

e.g.,
ViT

Image

CLIP-V

Text

Image

Text

Encoder

CLIP-T

Input

Cross
Attention

CLIP-T

Denoising
UNet

ImageNet 1000
Class Classification

Self-supervised
Objective

N-pair
Constrastive Loss

Decoder
Text-to-Image

Intermediate
Features

Figure 1. Sketch-based image retrieval frameworks [12, 102, 103] usually employ ImageNet pre-trained CNNs [3, 15, 103], JFT-trained
vision transformers (ViT) [67, 78], or visual encoders of vision-language models like CLIP [77] as backbone feature extractors. Rich
knowledge from large-scale pre-training offers a good initialisation, which when further fine-tuned on sketch-photo datasets, performs
way better than training from random initialisation [62]. While one can extract features either by discarding the classification head for
ImageNet pre-trained models, auxiliary task head for self-supervised models, or by using CLIP’s visual encoder, text-to-image diffusion
models (e.g., stable diffusion) lack any specific feature embedding space. However, we find that its intermediate representations implicitly
hold robust cross-modal features at multiple granularities. Unlike prior SBIR backbones, pre-trained with discriminative tasks, we propose
to leverage denoising diffusion models pre-trained with text-to-image generative tasks to bridge the sketch-photo domain gap. Being a
text-to-image generation model trained on a large corpus of text-image pairs (LAION [82, 83]), it holds both semantic and shape prior [89].
PCA representation [89] (right) of intermediate UNet features (sketch/photo) from different upsampling blocks (details in Sec. 5) depict
that they share significant semantic similarity (denoted by similar colours).

Abstract
This paper, for the first time, explores text-to-image diffusion models for Zero-Shot Sketch-based Image Retrieval
(ZS-SBIR). We highlight a pivotal discovery: the capacity
of text-to-image diffusion models to seamlessly bridge the
gap between sketches and photos. This proficiency is underpinned by their robust cross-modal capabilities and shape
bias, findings that are substantiated through our pilot studies. In order to harness pre-trained diffusion models effectively, we introduce a straightforward yet powerful strategy
focused on two key aspects: selecting optimal feature layers
and utilising visual and textual prompts. For the former, we
identify which layers are most enriched with information
and are best suited for the specific retrieval requirements
(category-level or fine-grained). Then we employ visual and
textual prompts to guide the model’s feature extraction process, enabling it to generate more discriminative and contextually relevant cross-modal representations. Extensive
experiments on several benchmark datasets validate significant performance improvements.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [16, 30, 31, 68], celebrated for their
proficiency in generating photorealistic images, have witnessed remarkable advances in the field of computer vi-

sion. Ranging from image generation [16, 65, 68, 73] to
semantic segmentation [2, 99] and image-to-image translation [57, 92, 105], these models have ignited transformations across various domains within the computer vision
discipline [8, 13, 44, 89]. In this paper, we embark on an
uncharted journey, delving into the intrinsic feature representations of diffusion models, with a primary emphasis on
Zero-Shot Sketch-based Image Retrieval (ZS-SBIR).
At the heart of our exploration lies the assertion that
text-to-image diffusion models [16, 68] excel as “matchmakers”, seamlessly connecting the realms of sketches and
photos. We substantiate this claim through a series of pilot studies, unveiling two fundamental properties inherent
in diffusion models, which are pivotal for the success of
ZS-SBIR [77, 102]. First and foremost, these models naturally transcend modalities, imbued with the ability to bridge
the gap between different types of data, providing a robust foundation for cross-modal retrieval. Furthermore, we
unearth a pronounced shape bias nestled within their joint
embeddings, rendering them exquisitely well-suited for the
intricacies of SBIR. It is worth noting that zero-shot capabilities virtually come as an added bonus, thanks to the
open-vocab nature of large-scale pre-trained diffusion models [16, 68] (e.g., Stable Diffusion [68]).
Nonetheless, effectively harnessing pre-trained diffusion

16826

