This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-Driven Wavelets using Constrained Empirical Risk Minimization
Eric Marcus*,1, 2 , Ray Sheombarsing*,1 , Jan-Jakob Sonke1 , Jonas Teuwen1
1

Netherlands Cancer Institute, 2 University of Amsterdam

{e.marcus, r.sheombarsing, j.sonke, j.teuwen}@nki.nl

Abstract
rgN L( , ⇥)

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are widely used for their
ability to effectively approximate large classes of functions.
This flexibility, however, makes the strict enforcement of constraints on DNNs a difficult problem. In contexts where
it is critical to limit the function space to which certain
network components belong, such as wavelets employed in
Multi-Resolution Analysis (MRA), naive constraints via additional terms in the loss function are inadequate. To address
this, we introduce a Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
wherein the convolutional filters are strictly constrained to be
wavelets. This allows the filters to update to task-optimized
wavelets during the training procedure. Our primary contribution lies in the rigorous formulation of these filters via a
constrained empirical risk minimization framework, thereby
providing an exact mechanism to enforce these structural
constraints. While our work is grounded in theory, we investigate our approach empirically through applications in
medical imaging, particularly in the task of contour prediction around various organs, achieving superior performance
compared to baseline methods.

1. Introduction
Empirical risk minimization (ERM) is currently the most
prevalent framework for supervised learning. The goal is to
find a function to map inputs to associated targets for all representative (potentially unseen) observations. To find such
a mapping, one introduces a loss function to quantify the
discrepancy between observed and predicted targets. An optimal map is then found by minimizing the expected loss. In
large-scale settings, such as deep learning, the resulting minimization problem is solved using Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) and various variants thereof, see [15, 24, 25, 40]
for instance. As deep learning applications become more
specialized, domain-specific needs become increasingly vital. These are often formulated in terms of constraints on
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

0
1
f1 ( )
B
C
F ( ) = @ ... A
fq ( )

Pre-image

Rp̃
M=F

1

(0)

Figure 1. An overview of the Constrained Empirical Risk Minimization (CERM) framework: on the top left side, the full gradient
of the loss L is shown on the total space N (containing both the
constrained and unconstrained space), with ↵ are the unconstrained
parameters, and ✓ the constrained ones. The constraints can be written in the form F (✓) = 0; the solution set F 1 (0) is an embedded
submanifold M of Rp̃ . The constrained parameters are updated by
following a path on M in the direction of the negative gradient on
this manifold. This constrained part of the full gradient is contained
in the tangent space T✓ M of the submanifold. The color of the
manifold indicates the value of the loss function. By restricting the
relevant components of our descent trajectories to the embedded
submanifold, we always satisfy the constraints imposed by F . The
gradient and parameter updates for the unconstrained parameters
↵ are computed as usual using standard SGD for flat space (not
shown). In our wavelet scenario, the manifold thus consists of all
admissible wavelets of a certain dimension.

the permissible mappings. For instance, the constraint for
translation-equivariance led to the development and success
of convolution neural networks (CNNs) [17]. In general,
however, it is a highly non-trivial task to construct network
architectures that satisfy a set of constraints, if they exist

24098

