This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Projecting Trackable Thermal Patterns for Dynamic Computer Vision
Mark Sheinin, Aswin C. Sankaranarayanan, and Srinivasa G. Narasimhan
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA

Abstract
Adding artificial patterns to objects, like QR codes, can
ease tasks such as object tracking, robot navigation, and
conveying information (e.g., a label or a website link).
However, these patterns require a physical application and
they alter the object’s appearance. Conversely, projected
patterns can temporarily change the object’s appearance,
aiding tasks like 3D scanning and retrieving object textures
and shading. However, projected patterns impede dynamic
tasks like object tracking because they do not ‘stick’ to the
object’s surface. Or do they? This paper introduces a novel
approach combining the advantages of projected and persistent physical patterns. Our system projects heat patterns
using a laser beam (similar in spirit to a LIDAR), which
a thermal camera observes and tracks. Such thermal patterns enable tracking poorly-textured objects whose tracking is highly challenging with standard cameras while not
affecting the object’s appearance or physical properties. To
avail these thermal patterns in existing vision frameworks,
we train a network to reverse heat diffusion’s effects and remove inconsistent pattern points between different thermal
frames. We prototyped and tested this approach on dynamic
vision tasks like structure from motion, optical flow, and object tracking of everyday textureless objects.

Figure 1. Projecting trackable thermal patterns. Visual navigation is challenging in environments lacking distinct features, like
texture-less walls or highly repetitive tiling. (Top) A cameraprojector system can introduce distinct features, but these features
can not be used as a reference between frames because the projected pattern ‘moves’ along with the system. (Bottom) Our system comprises a thermal camera and a colocated laser projector.
The laser ‘paints’ a temporary heat pattern that ‘sticks’ to objects’
surfaces and can, therefore, be tracked in the thermal domain.

1. Introduction
Pattern matching is fundamental for navigating, understanding, and interacting with the world. In particular,
environment modeling and navigation require recognizing
the same patterns from different views and at different
times. But many parts of our environment, whether naturally formed or man-made, have an appearance that makes
these tasks challenging. For instance, as seen in Fig. 1(Top),
visual navigation in a long hallway using a textureless wall
or highly repetitive floor tiling will be difficult. This problem worsens at night when distant landscape features are
not visible. Similarly, creating a 3D model of a smooth,
textureless object is hard using its natural appearance.
In computer vision, the absence of a ‘good’ texture can
be mitigated by adding artificial patterns to the object. Such

patterns can be broadly classified into two categories: physical patterns directly imprinted on objects and projected patterns applied remotely. Physical patterns are helpful for dynamic tasks like object tracking because they can be designed with specific visual characteristics that make them
easy to detect and track (e.g., a QR code). However, applying such patterns requires direct contact with the object, and
they alter the object’s appearance. Conversely, projected
patterns can be applied remotely and changed at will, making them ideal for 3D reconstruction and material property
acquisition [23, 27]. However, projected patterns are ineffective for dynamic tasks because they do not ‘stick’ to the
object’s surface like physical patterns. This is illustrated by
the blue camera-projector system in Fig. 1(Top). The sys-

25223

