This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StraightPCF: Straight Point Cloud Filtering
Dasith de Silva Edirimuni1 , Xuequan Lu2 *, Gang Li1 , Lei Wei1 , Antonio Robles-Kelly1 , Hongdong Li3
1
Deakin University, 2 La Trobe University, 3 Australian National University
{dtdesilva, gang.li, lei.wei, antonio.robles-kelly}@deakin.edu.au,
b.lu@latrobe.edu.au, hongdong.li@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Point cloud filtering is a fundamental 3D vision task,
which aims to remove noise while recovering the underlying clean surfaces. State-of-the-art methods remove noise
by moving noisy points along stochastic trajectories to the
clean surfaces. These methods often require regularization
within the training objective and/or during post-processing,
to ensure fidelity. In this paper, we introduce StraightPCF,
a new deep learning based method for point cloud filtering.
It works by moving noisy points along straight paths, thus
reducing discretization errors while ensuring faster convergence to the clean surfaces. We model noisy patches as
intermediate states between high noise patch variants and
their clean counterparts, and design the VelocityModule to
infer a constant flow velocity from the former to the latter. This constant flow leads to straight filtering trajectories. In addition, we introduce a DistanceModule that
scales the straight trajectory using an estimated distance
scalar to attain convergence near the clean surface. Our
network is lightweight and only has ∼ 530K parameters,
being 17% of IterativePFN (a most recent point cloud filtering network). Extensive experiments on both synthetic
and real-world data show our method achieves state-ofthe-art results. Our method also demonstrates nice distributions of filtered points without the need for regularization. The implementation code can be found at: https:
//github.com/ddsediri/StraightPCF.

1. Introduction
In recent years, point clouds have become increasingly popular as the representation-of-choice for storing and manipulating 3D data, with numerous applications in both computer vision [12, 20, 25, 38] and geometry modelling [16,
25, 40]. Point clouds are unordered sets of 3D coordinates
which typically represent object surfaces and are captured
using 3D sensors such as depth and Lidar devices. However,
* Corresponding author: X. Lu, supported by fund 3.2501.11.47.

Figure 1. Filtered trajectories for the Isocahedron shape at 50K
resolution and noise scale σ = 3%. Our StraightPCF filters points
along much straighter paths, compared to ScoreDenoise [28].

noisy artifacts may appear in point clouds as a result of sensor limitations and environmental factors. Removing this
noise, known as filtering or denoising, is a fundamental 3D
vision task. Filtering methods are broadly categorized into
two groups: 1) conventional methods involving traditional
optimization and 2) deep learning based methods. Conventional methods can further be subdivided into normal based
methods which require surface normal information to reliably filter point clouds [2, 10, 13, 24, 30] and point based
methods which directly filter point clouds [15, 21, 32].
While normal based methods are limited by the accuracy
of normals, point based methods suffer from a loss of geometric details and still exhibit sensitivity to noise. Recently,
many deep learning approaches have been proposed to overcome these shortcomings.
Deep learning methods can be divided into 1) resampling, 2) displacement and 3) probability based methods. Resampling-based methods [26] show the least fidelity
when recovering the underlying noise-free surfaces as their
downsampling procedure results in the loss of crucial geometric information. By contrast, displacement and probability based methods show greater promise as they model
the filtering objective as a reverse Markov process, which
can be iteratively applied on the input to progressively remove noise. Early displacement based methods, such as

20721

