This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Robust Learning to Optimize with Theoretical Guarantees
Qingyu Song
CUHK

Wei Lin
CUHK

Abstract
Learning to optimize (L2O) is an emerging technique to
solve mathematical optimization problems with learningbased methods. Although with great success in many realworld scenarios such as wireless communications, computer networks, and electronic design, existing L2O works
lack theoretical demonstration of their performance and robustness in out-of-distribution (OOD) scenarios. We address this gap by providing comprehensive proofs. First, we
prove a sufficient condition for a robust L2O model with homogeneous convergence rates over all In-Distribution (InD)
instances. We assume an L2O model achieves robustness
for an InD scenario. Based on our proposed methodology of
aligning OOD problems to InD problems, we also demonstrate that the L2O model’s convergence rate in OOD scenarios will deteriorate by an equation of the L2O model’s
input features. Moreover, we propose an L2O model with
a concise gradient-only feature construction and a novel
gradient-based history modeling method. Numerical simulation demonstrates that our proposed model outperforms
the state-of-the-art baseline in both InD and OOD scenarios and achieves up to 10 × convergence speedup. The code
of our method can be found from https://github.
com/NetX-lab/GoMathL2O-Official.

1. Introduction
Learning to Optimize (L2O) is a promising new approach
in applying learning-based methods to tackle optimization
problems. In particular, L2O concentrates on problems with
well-defined objective functions and constraints [7]. Thus,
black-box optimization strategies, such as Bayesian Optimization [24], typically fall outside its scope. L2O has
shown benefits in problems from various domains, including LASSO regression in sparse coding using multilayer
perceptrons [8], and utility maximization in resource allocation wherein neural networks (NN) serve to approximate
the expensive matrix inversion [11].
L2O can be categorized into three main types: black-box
[6, 22, 26, 31], algorithm-unrolling [11, 21, 33], and mathinspired [9, 14]. Black-box L2O approaches the optimiza-

Juncheng Wang
HKBU

Hong Xu
CUHK

tion problem as a traditional pattern recognition task, approximating a mapping function from manually constructed
features to the solutions [26]. Algorithm-unrolling L2O
leverages well-defined algorithms, such as gradient descent
[19], to approximate the solutions of complex calculations.
Besides, much research has gone into explainable and trustworthy L2O. For example, Heaton et al. [9] employ an existing algorithm to prevent the L2O model from entering irrecoverable areas. Liu et al. [14] introduce a mathematicsdriven L2O (Math-L2O) framework for convex optimization, offering a general workflow for formulating an L2O
model. Despite empirical results, a theoretical analysis
on the robustness of L2O models under out-of-distribution
(OOD) conditions is still missing in [14].
OOD generalization for L2O has emerged as a vital issue, often considered more critical in L2O than in other
deep learning applications [23]. For L2O, OOD’s challenge involves resolving previously unseen problems, potentially involving novel optimization problems with unique
objectives [30]. Guaranteeing convergence in OOD scenarios remains elusive. For instance, a model’s output in an
OOD scenario could potentially veer into unpredictable areas when the domain changes significantly to an InD scenario.
Numerous efforts have been made to enhance the robustness of L2O models in training. Lv et al. [16] employ data
augmentation to prevent L2O models from overfitting to
specific tasks. Almeida et al. [2] transform the L2O model
into a hyperparameter tuner for existing optimization algorithms. Wichrowska et al. [29] focus on minimizing parameters in NNs and assembling heterogeneous optimization tasks. Liu et al. [14] try to regularize L2O models with
inspirations from existing algorithms. However, these studies predominantly aim to mitigate the limitations inherent
in existing L2O methods, with no comprehensive analysis
conducted on the impact of OOD on the deterioration of
convergence. This gap in the literature motivates us to quantify this deterioration with rigorous analysis.
The central thesis of this paper is to propose a general
and robust L2O model for both InD and OOD scenarios.
Chiefly, we first investigate L2O’s convergence behavior in
InD contexts and derive the criteria for a uniformly robust

27498

