This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CONFORM: Contrast is All You Need For High-Fidelity Text-to-Image
Diffusion Models
Tuna Han Salih Meral1
1

Enis Simsar2† Federico Tombari3,4

Virginia Tech

2

3

ETH Zürich

4

TUM

Pinar Yanardag1
Google

https://conform-diffusion.github.io
A bear and a horse

A lion and a frog on the street,
rainy driving scene

A green dog and a white clock
in the library

One cat and three dogs

SD

Ours (SD)

SD

Ours (SD)

SD

Ours (SD)

SD

Ours (SD)

Imagen

Ours (Imagen)

Imagen

Ours (Imagen)

Imagen

Ours (Imagen)

Imagen

Ours (Imagen)

Figure 1. Our training-free method combines a contrastive objective with test-time optimization, significantly improving how models such
as Imagen and Stable Diffusion generate images with text prompts consisting of multiple concepts or subjects such as ‘a bear and a horse’.

Abstract
Images produced by text-to-image diffusion models
might not always faithfully represent the semantic intent of
the provided text prompt, where the model might overlook
or entirely fail to produce certain objects. Existing solutions often require customly tailored functions for each of
these problems, leading to sub-optimal results, especially
for complex prompts. Our work introduces a novel perspective by tackling this challenge in a contrastive context. Our
approach intuitively promotes the segregation of objects in
attention maps while also maintaining that pairs of related
attributes are kept close to each other. We conduct extensive experiments across a wide variety of scenarios, each
involving unique combinations of objects, attributes, and
scenes. These experiments effectively showcase the versatility, efficiency, and flexibility of our method in working with
both latent and pixel-based diffusion models, including Stable Diffusion and Imagen. Moreover, we publicly share our
source code to facilitate further research.
† Enis Simsar is affiliated with DALAB at ETH Zürich.

1. Introduction
Diffusion text-to-image models [15] have showcased remarkable progress in generating images using textual cues
[33, 34, 37]. These models offer a wide set of capabilities,
ranging from image editing [2, 3, 9, 13, 29, 42], personalized content creation [36], and inpainting [25]. However,
images produced by these models might not always faithfully represent the semantic intent of the given text prompt
[6, 39]. Notable semantic discrepancies in models like Stable Diffusion [34] and Imagen [37] include a) missing objects where the model might overlook or entirely fail to produce certain objects; b) attribute binding where the model
might mistakenly link attributes to the wrong subjects [6];
and c) miscounting where the model fails to accurately produce the right quantity of objects [22, 48]. Figure 2 illustrates these shortcomings in popular diffusion models, Stable Diffusion [34] and Imagen [37]. For example, the output might neglect certain subjects, as in the ‘a bear and an
elephant’ prompt, where the bear is ignored as depicted in
Fig. 2(a). Additionally, the model might mix up attributes,
such as mixing the colors in the ‘a purple crown and a yellow suitcase’ prompt as seen in Fig. 2(b). Another behavior

9005

