This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SyncMask: Synchronized Attentional Masking for Fashion-centric
Vision-Language Pretraining
Chull Hwan Song1 * Taebaek Hwang1 * Jooyoung Yoon1
1

Dealicious Inc.

2

Shunghyun Choi1

Yeong Hyeon Gu2†

Sejong University

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs) have made signiﬁcant
strides in cross-modal understanding through large-scale
paired datasets. However, in fashion domain, datasets often exhibit a disparity between the information conveyed
in image and text. This issue stems from datasets containing multiple images of a single fashion item all paired with
one text, leading to cases where some textual details are
not visible in individual images. This mismatch, particularly
when non-co-occurring elements are masked, undermines
the training of conventional VLM objectives like Masked
Language Modeling and Masked Image Modeling, thereby
hindering the model’s ability to accurately align ﬁne-grained
visual and textual features. Addressing this problem, we propose Synchronized attentional Masking (SyncMask), which
generate masks that pinpoint the image patches and word
tokens where the information co-occur in both image and
text. This synchronization is accomplished by harnessing
cross-attentional features obtained from a momentum model,
ensuring a precise alignment between the two modalities.
Additionally, we enhance grouped batch sampling with semihard negatives, effectively mitigating false negative issues in
Image-Text Matching and Image-Text Contrastive learning
objectives within fashion datasets. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach, outperforming existing methods in three downstream tasks.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been rapid progress in developing
Vision-Language Pretraining (VLP) [32, 38, 6, 39, 19, 18,
42, 23, 36, 20, 27, 3], paving the way to bridge the gap
between visual and textual features. These VLP methods,
trained on extensive image-text datasets, have enabled a
deeper understanding of semantic alignment across different modalities. By ﬁne-tuning these pretrained models for
speciﬁc tasks, particularly in data-scarce areas like image* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Example of misaligned masks in the MLM task.

text retrieval, notable performance improvements have been
observed. In the pretraining phase, various factors such as
model architecture, training objectives, and batch sampling
techniques play a crucial role in effectively harnessing the
joint representation of multi-modal data.
However, there are some issues in applying conventional
generic VLP approaches to task-speciﬁc domains such as
fashion. Fashion VLP models [10, 45, 13, 14, 15] typically employ objectives such as Masked Language Modeling
(MLM) and Masked Image Modeling (MIM). These methods
mask elements like text words or image patches, leveraging
surrounding context for prediction or reconstruction. They
boost cross-modality by making models infer masked text
tokens or image patches from aligned features. However,
existing MLM and MIM often suffer from inherent misalignment limitations because the masks are generated randomly,
often leading to unmatched elements being masked.
To illustrate these limitations, consider Figure 1 (a) shows
a single description associated with four images from the
FashionGen [37] dataset. In Figure 1 (b), a random masking scenario is shown where the blue [MASK] might lead
the model to predict the masked word using only the text
context, thereby not incorporating the image information.
Similarly, the two red [MASK] tokens in (b) lack relevance
to the accompanying image, thus hindering the model’s ability to connecting between visual and textual features. Fur-

13948

