This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Flow-based Generative Super-Resolution Models via Learned Prior
Li-Yuan Tsao1 Yi-Chen Lo2 Chia-Che Chang2 Hao-Wei Chen1 Roy Tseng2 Chien Feng1 Chun-Yi Lee1
1
National Tsing Hua University 2 MediaTek Inc.
{lytsao, jaroslaw1007, kmes9961002}@gapp.nthu.edu.tw
{yichen.lo, chia-che.chang, roy.tseng}@mediatek.com

cylee@cs.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
Flow-based super-resolution (SR) models have demonstrated astonishing capabilities in generating high-quality
images. However, these methods encounter several challenges during image generation, such as grid artifacts, exploding inverses, and suboptimal results due to a fixed sampling temperature. To overcome these issues, this work introduces a conditional learned prior to the inference phase
of a flow-based SR model. This prior is a latent code
predicted by our proposed latent module conditioned on
the low-resolution image, which is then transformed by
the flow model into an SR image. Our framework is designed to seamlessly integrate with any contemporary flowbased SR model without modifying its architecture or pretrained weights. We evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed framework through extensive experiments and ablation analyses. The proposed framework successfully addresses all the inherent issues in flow-based SR models
and enhances their performance in various SR scenarios.
Our code is available at: https://github.com/
liyuantsao/FlowSR-LP

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) aims to reconstruct a highresolution (HR) image given its low-resolution (LR) counterpart. Typically, the effectiveness of SR methods is evaluated based on fidelity and perceptual quality of the generated SR images, with commonly used metrics such as
Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), Structural Similarity
(SSIM) for the former, and Learned Perceptual Image Patch
Similarity (LPIPS) [78] for the latter. However, optimizing
both metrics simultaneously is fundamentally challenging
due to the inherent perception-distortion trade-off [6] in SR
tasks. As a result, existing SR methods are broadly classified into two categories: fidelity-oriented SR, which prioritizes pixel-wise reconstruction accuracy, and generative SR,
which focuses on enhanced visual quality.
The recent emergence of Flow-based SR [34, 45, 50, 51,
67, 76] bridges this divide, as flow models possess the ca-

Figure 1. Our framework enhances the capability of contemporary
flow-based SR models by: (1) mitigating grid artifacts, (2) preventing exploding inverses, and (3) eliminating the use of a fixed
sampling temperature to unlock the full potential of flow models.

pability to control the diversity of image content during inference time by adjusting the sampling temperature (i.e., the
standard deviation of a Gaussian distribution). As a result, a
single flow-based SR model (or simply “flow model” hereafter) can produce images that either prioritize high fidelity
or exhibit improved perceptual quality. This unique feature provides flow-based models with the potential to excel
in each category of SR methods, making them a promising
framework for SR tasks.
Despite their flexibility, flow-based SR methods encounter several challenges in the image generation process.
These include (1) grid artifacts in the generated images, (2)
the exploding inverse issue, and (3) suboptimal results stemming from the use of a fixed sampling temperature. “Grid
artifacts” stands for the discontinuities in textures within an
image [47]. As depicted in the left image of Fig. 1 (a),
distinct borders between the generated image patches could
occasionally lead to a checkerboard pattern [53]. Another
critical aspect is the “exploding inverse” [4, 26] in invertible neural networks, which refers to the occurrence of infi-

26005

