This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Differentiable Neural Surface Refinement for Modeling Transparent Objects
Weijian Deng1
1

Dylan Campbell1 Chunyi Sun1 Shubham Kanitkar2
Matthew E. Shaffer2 Stephen Gould1
2

The Australian National University

RIOS Intelligent Machines

Abstract

𝒓𝒓
cam

cam

Neural implicit surface reconstruction leveraging volume rendering has led to significant advances in multi-view
reconstruction. However, results for transparent objects
can be very poor, primarily because the rendering function
fails to account for the intricate light transport induced by
refraction and reflection. In this study, we introduce transparent neural surface refinement (TNSR), a novel surface
reconstruction framework that explicitly incorporates physical refraction and reflection tracing. Beginning with an
initial, approximate surface, our method employs sphere
tracing combined with Snell’s law to cast both reflected and
refracted rays. Central to our proposal is an innovative differentiable technique devised to allow signals from the photometric evidence to propagate back to the surface model
by considering how the surface bends and reflects light
rays. This allows us to connect surface refinement with volume rendering, enabling end-to-end optimization solely on
multi-view RGB images. In our experiments, TNSR demonstrates significant improvements in novel view synthesis and
geometry estimation of transparent objects, without prior
knowledge of the refractive index.

1. Introduction
For the task of surface reconstruction from images, the advent of neural implicit representations has led to significant
advances in capturing complex surfaces with a precision
that extends beyond traditional methods [10, 23, 35, 39, 40].
Despite this progress, most reconstruction methods operate
under the assumption that light propagates in linear paths—
an assumption that holds for a variety of materials but falls
short when dealing with refractive elements such as glass.
In such contexts, light takes non-linear paths, its course altered by the phenomena of refraction and reflection, presenting unique challenges in accurately reconstructing surfaces and rendering the view-dependent phenomena intrinsic to refractive materials.
The pursuit of reconstructing the 3D geometry of refractive objects has spurred the development of a variety of

real surface

𝐩

estimated surface
real surface

𝐩 ∆
&

monitor

(a) ray-location correspondence

𝒓%

estimated surface

𝒓𝒓
𝒓𝒕

Volume
Rendering

𝐜̂

ℒ#
𝐂$%

(b) color consistency

Figure 1. Comparison of ray-location correspondence versus color
consistency for refining surfaces. Left: Previous methods use a
controlled camera setup [16, 17] to establish ray-location correspondence, refining surfaces when the refractive index is known
via the exact hitting point p of a light ray on a monitor. Right:
Our approach eliminates the need for a controlled camera setup or
a known refractive index. It employs ray tracing with an initial
surface estimate to compute paths of reflected and refracted rays
(rr and rt ). Color predictions from the opaque background are
obtained by querying a pre-learned radiance field along these rays.
Integrated with rendering and Fresnel equations, these predictions
yield the ĉ color prediction, compared to the actual color cgt using
a photometric loss. This loss improves ray accuracy and reduces
photometric loss, refining the surface estimate.

methods. To accurately model transparent objects, existing
methods consider the curved light paths caused by refraction and reflection [1, 15, 24]. For instance, to achieve better novel view synthesis, Pan et al. [24] employ the Eikonal
equation [13] to accurately compute these paths with known
refractive indices and object geometries. Li et al. [15] combine rendering with cost volume layers to refine surface
normals for detailed point cloud reconstruction. Furthermore, surface reconstruction of transparent objects benefits
from controlled setups that are adept at capturing complex
light interactions [6, 7, 16, 17, 20, 26, 32, 37]. These setups often employ custom-designed hardware, which are
critical for obtaining ray–location correspondence supervision [16, 17, 26, 37]. For instance, as illustrated in Fig. 1
(left), when an estimated surface is considered, the calculated ray hits the monitor at point p′ . This point typically

20268

