This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SHViT: Single-Head Vision Transformer with Memory Efficient Macro Design
Seokju Yun
Youngmin Ro*
Machine Intelligence Laboratory, University of Seoul, Korea
Code: https://github.com/ysj9909/SHViT

Abstract
Recently, efficient Vision Transformers have shown great
performance with low latency on resource-constrained devices. Conventionally, they use 4×4 patch embeddings and
a 4-stage structure at the macro level, while utilizing sophisticated attention with multi-head configuration at the
micro level. This paper aims to address computational redundancy at all design levels in a memory-efficient manner. We discover that using larger-stride patchify stem not
only reduces memory access costs but also achieves competitive performance by leveraging token representations
with reduced spatial redundancy from the early stages. Furthermore, our preliminary analyses suggest that attention
layers in the early stages can be substituted with convolutions, and several attention heads in the latter stages
are computationally redundant. To handle this, we introduce a single-head attention module that inherently prevents head redundancy and simultaneously boosts accuracy by parallelly combining global and local information.
Building upon our solutions, we introduce SHViT, a SingleHead Vision Transformer that obtains the state-of-the-art
speed-accuracy tradeoff. For example, on ImageNet-1k, our
SHViT-S4 is 3.3×, 8.1×, and 2.4× faster than MobileViTv2
×1.0 on GPU, CPU, and iPhone12 mobile device, respectively, while being 1.3% more accurate. For object detection and instance segmentation on MS COCO using MaskRCNN head, our model achieves performance comparable to FastViT-SA12 while exhibiting 3.8× and 2.0× lower
backbone latency on GPU and mobile device, respectively.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViT) have demonstrated impressive performance across various computer vision tasks due
to their high model capabilities [1–3]. Compared to Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) [4, 5], ViTs excel in modeling long-range dependencies and scale effectively with
large amounts of training data and model parameters [6].
Despite these advantages, the lack of inductive bias in
* Corresponding author (E-mail: youngmin.ro@uos.ac.kr)

Figure 1. Comparison of throughput and accuracy between our
SHViT and other recent methods.

vanilla ViTs necessitates more training data, and the global
attention module incurs quadratic computational complexity with respect to the image size. To address these challenges, previous research has either combined ViTs with
CNNs or introduced cost-efficient attention variants.
Recently, studies addressing problems with real-time
constraints have also proposed efficient models following
similar strategies. And their strategies can be categorized
into two groups: 1) efficient architecture - macro design;
and 2) efficient Multi-Head Self-Attention (MHSA) - micro
design. Studies exploring architectural design [7–12] utilize
convolution to handle high-resolution / low-level features
and employ attention for low-resolution / high-level features, demonstrating superior performance without complex
operations. However, most of these methods mainly focus
on which modules to use for aggregating tokens rather than
how to construct the tokens (about patchify stem and stage
design). On the other hand, efficient MHSA techniques reduce the cost of attention by implementing sparse attention [9, 13–18] or low-rank approximation [19–22]. These
modules are applied with the commonly adopted multi-head
mechanism. Despite all the great progress, redundancies in
macro/micro design are still not fully understood or addressed. In this paper, we explore the redundancy at all design levels, and propose memory-efficient solutions.
To identify computational redundancy in macro design,
we concentrate on patch embedding size, observing that

5756

