This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Toward Generalist Anomaly Detection via In-context Residual Learning with
Few-shot Sample Prompts

Jiawen Zhu and Guansong Pang *
School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University

Abstract

1. Introduction
Anomaly Detection (AD) is a crucial computer vision task
that aims to detect samples that substantially deviate from
the majority of samples in a dataset, due to its broad real-life
* Corresponding author: G. Pang (gspang@smu.edu.sg)

Few-shot
Query Image Image Prompts

Inference on Diverse Datasets
Industrial Defective Anomaly Detection

Label

(

0

)

(

1

)

(

1

)

?
Medical Image Anomaly Detection

?
Semantic Anomaly Detection

...

...

(
ELPV

0

?

)

BrainMRI

True positive rate

This paper explores the problem of Generalist Anomaly
Detection (GAD), aiming to train one single detection
model that can generalize to detect anomalies in diverse
datasets from different application domains without any
further training on the target data. Some recent studies
have showed that large pre-trained Visual-Language Models (VLMs) like CLIP have strong generalization capabilities on detecting industrial defects from various datasets,
but their methods rely heavily on handcrafted text prompts
about defects, making them difficult to generalize to anomalies in other applications, e.g., medical image anomalies or
semantic anomalies in natural images. In this work, we propose to train a GAD model with few-shot normal images as
sample prompts for AD on diverse datasets on the fly. To
this end, we introduce a novel approach that learns an incontext residual learning model for GAD, termed InCTRL.
It is trained on an auxiliary dataset to discriminate anomalies from normal samples based on a holistic evaluation
of the residuals between query images and few-shot normal sample prompts. Regardless of the datasets, per definition of anomaly, larger residuals are expected for anomalies
than normal samples, thereby enabling InCTRL to generalize across different domains without further training. Comprehensive experiments on nine AD datasets are performed
to establish a GAD benchmark that encapsulate the detection of industrial defect anomalies, medical anomalies,
and semantic anomalies in both one-vs-all and multi-class
setting, on which InCTRL is the best performer and significantly outperforms state-of-the-art competing methods.
Code is available at https:// github.com/ mala-lab/ InCTRL.

Training on Auxiliary Data
MVTec AD

MNIST

SPADE
Patchcore
RegAD
CoOp
WinCLIP
InCTRL (Ours)

False positive rate

False positive rate

False positive rate

Figure 1. Top: An illustration of InCTRL: a one-for-all model using few-shot normal images as sample prompts. Bottom: AUROC
curves of InCTRL and competing few-shot methods on three different application datasets without any training on the target data.

applications such as industrial inspection, medical imaging analysis, and scientific discovery, etc. [12, 36]. Current AD paradigms are focused on individually building
one model on the training data, e.g., a set of anomaly-free
samples, of each target dataset, such as data reconstruction
approach [2, 22, 31, 38, 43, 60, 63–65, 67–69], one-class
classification [6, 15, 41, 48, 66], and knowledge distillation approach [8, 11, 19, 42, 51, 52, 70]. Although these
approaches have shown remarkable detection performance
on various AD benchmarks, they require the availability of
large training data and the skilled detection model training per dataset. Thus, they become infeasible in application scenarios where training on the target dataset is not allowed due to either data privacy issues, e.g., arising from
using those data in training the models due to machine unlearning [62], or unavailability of large-scale training data
in the deployment of new applications. To tackle these challenges, this paper explores the problem of learning Generalist Anomaly Detection (GAD) models, aiming to train

17826

