This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MultiDiff: Consistent Novel View Synthesis from a Single Image
Norman Müller1

Katja Schwarz1 Barbara Rössle2 Lorenzo Porzi1
Matthias Nießner2 Peter Kontschieder1

Meta Reality Labs Zurich1

Reference Image

Samuel Rota Bulò1

Technical University of Munich2

+ Trajectory

Generated Views Along Trajectory

Figure 1. Given a single input image, MultiDiff synthesizes consistent novel views following a desired camera trajectory. These synthesized views harmonize well even in areas unseen from the reference view. Examples from RealEstate10K [81] (top two rows) and
ScanNet [9] (bottom row) test sets demonstrate that our model can handle large camera changes and challenging perspectives.

Abstract
We introduce MultiDiff, a novel approach for consistent
novel view synthesis of scenes from a single RGB image.
The task of synthesizing novel views from a single reference
image is highly ill-posed by nature, as there exist multiple,
plausible explanations for unobserved areas. To address
this issue, we incorporate strong priors in form of monocular depth predictors and video-diffusion models. Monocular depth enables us to condition our model on warped
reference images for the target views, increasing geometric stability. The video-diffusion prior provides a strong
proxy for 3D scenes, allowing the model to learn continuous and pixel-accurate correspondences across generated
images. In contrast to approaches relying on autoregressive image generation that are prone to drifts and error
accumulation, MultiDiff jointly synthesizes a sequence of
frames yielding high-quality and multi-view consistent re-

sults – even for long-term scene generation with large camera movements, while reducing inference time by an order
of magnitude. For additional consistency and image quality
improvements, we introduce a novel, structured noise distribution. Our experimental results demonstrate that MultiDiff outperforms state-of-the-art methods on the challenging,
real-world datasets RealEstate10K and ScanNet. Finally,
our model naturally supports multi-view consistent editing
without the need for further tuning.

1. Introduction
In this work, we address the challenging and highly illposed task of view extrapolation from a single image. The
goal is to synthesize a set of multiple novel views that are
diverse and in themselves consistent. As input, our method
only requires a single input image and a user-defined free10258

