This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

L4D-Track: Language-to-4D Modeling Towards
6-DoF Tracking and Shape Reconstruction in 3D Point Cloud Stream
Jingtao Sun1,2 Yaonan Wang1∗ Mingtao Feng3 Yulan Guo4 Ajmal Mian5 Mike Zheng Shou2∗
1
NERC-RVC, Hunan University 2 Show Lab, National University of Singapore
3
Xidian University 4 Sun Yat-Sen University 5 The University of Western Australia

(a) Unseen objects with known categories (e.g., laptop).

(b) Unseen objects with unknown categories (e.g., banana).

Figure 1. Given a 3D point cloud stream and the language-3D captions, our method achieves real-time, causal 6-DoF pose tracking while
reconstructing the 3D shape in the current observation. We demonstrate that: (a) our method not only enables zero-shot inference for
unseen objects with known categories, (b) but also perfectly showcases the zero-shot capabilities for unseen objects with unknown classes.

Abstract
3D visual language multi-modal modeling plays an
important role in actual human-computer interaction.
However, the inaccessibility of large-scale 3D-language
pairs restricts their applicability in real-world scenarios.
In this paper, we aim to handle a real-time multi-task for
6-DoF pose tracking of unknown objects, leveraging 3Dlanguage pre-training scheme from a series of 3D point
cloud video streams, while simultaneously performing 3D
shape reconstruction in current observation. To this end,
we present a generic Language-to-4D modeling paradigm
termed L4D-Track, that tackles zero-shot 6-DoF Tracking
and shape reconstruction by learning pairwise implicit 3D
representation and multi-level multi-modal alignment. Our
method constitutes two core parts. 1) Pairwise Implicit
3D Space Representation, that establishes spatial-temporal
to language coherence descriptions across continuous 3D
point cloud video. 2) Language-to-4D Association and
Contrastive Alignment, enables multi-modality semantic
connections between 3D point cloud video and language.
Our method trained exclusively on public NOCS-REAL275
dataset, achieves promising results on both two publicly
benchmarks. This not only shows powerful generalization
performance, but also proves its remarkable capability in
zero-shot inference. The project is released at L4D-Track.
*Corresponding Author

1. Introduction
The integration of the 3D physical world with coherent
natural language constitutes a pivotal advancement in field
of 3D computer vision and robotics, playing a crucial role in
the domains of embodied artificial intelligence [14]. Recent
research endeavors have increasingly focused on the task of
3D vision-language (3D-VL) learning. These tasks contain
a wide array of objectives, e.g., 3D visual grounding [30],
dense captioning [56] and question answering [1], often
employing task-specific model designs.
However, the absence of large-scale human-annotated
3D-text pairs has led to the prevalent adoption of an
alternative approach [53, 61], that involves pre-training
a generic 3D model leveraging large scale image-text
paired data, alongside 2D-3D back-projection. Despite the
existing approaches have made the promising progress in
terms of handling 3D visual understanding, this line of
methods suffers from several major challenges. Firstly, the
paradigm of mapping 3D data into 2D modalities utilizing
the vision-language (VL) foundation models, leads to lose
the vital information in 3D space and renders heavier
computational and memory costs. Secondly, given the
irregular and unstructured nature of 3D point cloud data,
a complete 3D-language foundation that learns a unified 3D
representation emerges as a more viable option compared
to the indirect VL-based approach. Futhermore, existing
methods are only capable of understanding concrete

21146

