This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Textual Constraints: Learning Novel Diffusion Conditions
with Fewer Examples
Yuyang Yu 1 * Bangzhen Liu 1 * Chenxi Zheng 1
Xuemiao Xu1,2,3,4† Huaidong Zhang 1† Shengfeng He 5
1

South China University of Technology 2 State Key Laboratory of Subtropical Building Science
3
Guangdong Provincial Key Lab of Computational Intelligence and Cyberspace Information
4
Ministry of Education Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot 5 Singapore Management University
Sketch

A living room with a couch and chair.

Pose

Garage kits, a figurine with purple hair and blue eyes.

Depth

Photograph sunrise at bow lake by Jag Canape on 500px.

Conditions

(a) ControlNet [44]

(b) ControlNet-100

(c) T2IAdapter [26]

(d) T2IAdapter-100

(e) Ours

Figure 1. We explore a novel aspect of learning diffusion conditions, requiring only a magnitude of a thousand times fewer examples (only
100 vs. 100k) compared to existing methods like ControlNet [44] and T2IAdapter [26]. The “-100” suffix in our model names indicates
training with just 100 text-image-condition pairs. Our method achieves both structural consistency and high-quality generation with these
limited samples, delivering performance comparable to the fully trained models of our competitors.

Abstract
In this paper, we delve into a novel aspect of learning
novel diffusion conditions with datasets an order of magnitude smaller. The rationale behind our approach is the elimination of textual constraints during the few-shot learning
process. To that end, we implement two optimization strategies. The first, prompt-free conditional learning, utilizes a
prompt-free encoder derived from a pre-trained Stable Diffusion model. This strategy is designed to adapt new conditions

to the diffusion process by minimizing the textual-visual correlation, thereby ensuring a more precise alignment between
the generated content and the specified conditions. The
second strategy entails condition-specific negative rectification, which addresses the inconsistencies typically brought
about by Classifier-free guidance in few-shot training contexts. Our extensive experiments across a variety of condition
modalities demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our
framework, yielding results comparable to those obtained
with datasets a thousand times larger. Our codes are available at https://github.com/Yuyan9Yu/BeyondTextConstraint.

* The first two authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding authors (xuemx@scut.edu.cn, huaidongz@scut.edu.cn).

7109

