This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Countering Personalized Text-to-Image Generation with Influence Watermarks
Hanwen Liu, Zhicheng Sun, Yadong Mu*
Peking University
hanwenliu@msn.com, sunzc@pku.edu.cn, myd@pku.edu.cn
Image w/ Watermark

Abstract
State-of-the-art personalized text-to-image generation
systems are usually trained on a few reference images to
learn novel visual representations. However, this is likely
to incur infringement of copyright for the reference image
owners, when these images are personal and publicly available. Recent progress has been made in protecting these images from unauthorized use by adding protective noises. Yet
current protection methods work under the assumption that
these protected images are not changed, which is in contradiction to the fact that most public platforms intend to modify user-uploaded content, e.g., image compression. This
paper introduces a robust watermarking method, namely
InMark, to protect images from unauthorized learning. Inspired by influence functions, the proposed method forges
protective watermarks on more important pixels for these
reference images from both heuristic and statistical perspectives. In this way, the personal semantics of these images are under protection even if these images are modified to some extent. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
the proposed InMark outperforms previous state-of-theart methods in both protective performance and robustness.

1. Introduction
As large-scale text-to-image models demonstrate incredible
capabilities in conditional image generation [15, 51, 53, 65],
their security and privacy issues become a serious topic for
consideration [19, 57, 58, 68, 71]. Recent studies [37, 39]
revealed that text-to-image models, e.g., diffusion models
[21, 25, 33, 34, 47], could be utilized for copyright violations or portrait misuses: Personalized text-to-image techniques based on diffusion models [17, 27], such as DreamBooth [50, 54], allow users to imitate the art style of paintings or produce vivid portraits at will, making artwork infringements [75] and deepfakes [14, 26, 28, 38] possible.
Since the solution of personal data protection [13, 24, 63]
* Corresponding author.

Personalized Generation

(a)
Protected
Real-world Modification (e.g., Compression)

(b)
Unprotected
Image w/ Degraded Watermark

Figure 1. The pipeline of unlearnable examples against diffusion models. By exploiting a denoising process, diffusion models
are capable of realistic image generation, which may be privacysensitive if personal images are involved. (a) To counteract this,
unlearnable examples use a protective watermark that counters
personalized image generation. (b) However, their effectiveness
could be degraded in the presence of real-world modifications
(e.g., image compression), due to the lack of robustness in their
approaches. We thus introduce a more robust method based on the
insight of focusing on more influential pixels within the image.

is still largely unexplored, it raises public concern about the
development of text-to-image model applications at scale.
Leveraging the adversarial noises related to the data has
been an essential design principle for a long in trustworthy
machine learning. Adversarial examples [4, 6, 44, 49, 66]
for images confuse a neural network by doing so, to
wrongly classify a given input. More recently, unlearnable
examples [55] consider scenarios where personal data is not
supposed to be learned by unauthorized neural networks.
By utilizing adversarial noises, training images become no
longer learnable for discriminatory machine learning tasks
[29]. Unlike machine unlearning [45, 61] which erases data
points from trained neural nets, unlearnable examples allow
users to take proactive action. These hard-to-learn examples may be a decent solution to protect reference images
from personalized text-to-image generation.
Towards countering personalized text-to-image generation, several recent studies present promising results in

12257

