This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GaussianEditor: Swift and Controllable 3D Editing with Gaussian Splatting
Yiwen Chen*1,2 Zilong Chen*3 Chi Zhang2 Feng Wang3 Xiaofeng Yang2
Yikai Wang3 Zhongang Cai4 Lei Yang4 Huaping Liu3 Guosheng Lin**1,2
1

2

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
4
SenseTime Research
https://buaacyw.github.io/gaussian-editor

Original view

³'HOHWHWKHELNH$GGDGRJRQWKHEHQFK´

Original view

³7XUQKLPinto Hulk´

³0DNHWKHJUDVVRQILUH´

³7XUQKLPLQWRDFORZQ´

³0DNHLWDXWXPQ´

Figure 1. Results of GaussianEditor. GaussianEditor offers swift, controllable, and versatile 3D editing. A single editing session only
takes 5-10 minutes. Please note our precise editing control, where only the desired parts are modiﬁed. Taking the “Make the grass on ﬁre”
example from the ﬁrst row of the ﬁgure, other objects in the scene such as the bench and tree remain unaffected.

Abstract
3D editing plays a crucial role in many areas such as
gaming and virtual reality. Traditional 3D editing methods,
which rely on representations like meshes and point clouds,
often fall short in realistically depicting complex scenes. On
the other hand, methods based on implicit 3D representations, like Neural Radiance Field (NeRF), render complex
scenes effectively but suffer from slow processing speeds and
limited control over speciﬁc scene areas. In response to these
challenges, our paper presents GaussianEditor, the ﬁrst 3D
editing algorithm based on Gaussian Splatting (GS), a novel

3D representation. GaussianEditor enhances precision and
control in editing through our proposed Gaussian semantic
tracing, which traces the editing target throughout the training process. Additionally, we propose Hierarchical Gaussian
splatting (HGS) to achieve stabilized and ﬁne results under
stochastic generative guidance from 2D diffusion models. We
also develop editing strategies for efﬁcient object removal
and integration, a challenging task for existing methods.
Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate GaussianEditor’s superior control, effective, and efﬁcient performance,
marking a signiﬁcant advancement in 3D editing.

** Corresponding author.
* The ﬁrst two authors contributed equally to this work.

21476

