This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ConvoFusion: Multi-Modal Conversational Diffusion
for Co-Speech Gesture Synthesis
Muhammad Hamza Mughal1,2
Rishabh Dabral1
Ikhsanul Habibie1
1
Marc Habermann
Christian Theobalt1,2
1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, SIC

2

Saarland University

Co-Speech Gesture Synthesis with Word-level Control

well-off in England

would eat

french food

3

Lucia Donatelli3

Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam

Dyadic Interaction Synthesis

and what we now think

Five-Person Interactive Dataset

Figure 1. Our C ONVO F USION approach generates body and hand gestures in monadic and dyadic settings, while also offering
advanced control over textual and auditory modalities in speech. Lastly, we introduce the D N D G ROUP G ESTURE dataset, showcasing rich interactions with co-speech gestures between five participants. Motions rendered using ASH [51].

Abstract
Gestures play a key role in human communication. Recent methods for co-speech gesture generation, while managing to generate beat-aligned motions, struggle generating gestures that are semantically aligned with the utterance. Compared to beat gestures that align naturally to
the audio signal, semantically coherent gestures require
modeling the complex interactions between the language
and human motion, and can be controlled by focusing on
certain words. Therefore, we present C ONVO F USION , a
diffusion-based approach for multi-modal gesture synthesis,
which can not only generate gestures based on multi-modal
speech inputs, but can also facilitate controllability in gesture synthesis. Our method proposes two guidance objectives that allow the users to modulate the impact of different
conditioning modalities (e.g. audio vs text) as well as to
choose certain words to be emphasized during gesturing.

Our method is versatile in that it can be trained either for
generating monologue gestures or even the conversational
gestures. To further advance the research on multi-party
interactive gestures, the D N D G ROUP G ESTURE dataset
is released, which contains 6 hours of gesture data showing 5 people interacting with one another. We compare our
method with several recent works and demonstrate effectiveness of our method on a variety of tasks. We urge the
reader to watch our supplementary video at our webpage.

1. Introduction
Gestures are one of the fundamental ways of expression and
can significantly enhance the interpretation of the verbally
communicated utterance [29]. As our society integrates
multi-billion parameter large-language-model (LLMs) [62,
74] into our workflows and daily lives, it is only natural to
consider ways to augment the LLM based on spoken language alone with non-verbal information essential to in-

1388

