This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AETTA: Label-Free Accuracy Estimation for Test-Time Adaptation
Taeckyung Lee†

Sorn Chottananurak†
†

KAIST

‡

Taesik Gong‡

Sung-Ju Lee†

Nokia Bell Labs

{taeckyung,sorn111930,profsj}@kaist.ac.kr, taesik.gong@nokia-bell-labs.com

Abstract
Test-time adaptation (TTA) has emerged as a viable solution to adapt pre-trained models to domain shifts using unlabeled test data. However, TTA faces challenges of adaptation
failures due to its reliance on blind adaptation to unknown
test samples in dynamic scenarios. Traditional methods for
out-of-distribution performance estimation are limited by
unrealistic assumptions in the TTA context, such as requiring labeled data or re-training models. To address this issue,
we propose AETTA, a label-free accuracy estimation algorithm for TTA. We propose the prediction disagreement as
the accuracy estimate, calculated by comparing the target
model prediction with dropout inferences. We then improve
the prediction disagreement to extend the applicability of
AETTA under adaptation failures. Our extensive evaluation
with four baselines and six TTA methods demonstrates that
AETTA shows an average of 19.8%p more accurate estimation compared with the baselines. We further demonstrate the
effectiveness of accuracy estimation with a model recovery
case study, showcasing the practicality of our model recovery
based on accuracy estimation. The source code is available
at https://github.com/taeckyung/AETTA.

1. Introduction
The rise of deep learning has impacted various fields with
remarkable achievements [4, 13, 17, 32, 33]. In real-world
deep learning applications, the divergence between training
and test data, known as domain shifts, often leads to poor
accuracy. For instance, object detection models encountering
previously unseen data (e.g., variations of objects) or distributional shifts (e.g., weather changes) might suffer from
performance degradation. To overcome this challenge, TestTime Adaptation (TTA) [2, 11, 12, 28, 29, 34–36] has been
regarded as a promising solution recently and actively studied. TTA aims to adapt pre-trained models to domain shifts
on the fly with only unlabeled test data.
Despite recent advances in TTA, significant challenges
hinder its practical applications. The core issue is that TTA’s

Online Test Streams
Model A

Model B
Proposed Method
Adapted
Model
Dropout
Inferences

Prediction
Disagreement

Accuracy
Estimation

A

B

True acc.
Estimated acc.

Figure 1. AETTA estimates the model’s accuracy after adaptation
using unlabeled test data without needing source data or groundtruth labels. AETTA can be integrated into existing TTA methods
to estimate their accuracy under various scenarios.

reliance on unlabeled test-domain samples makes TTA susceptible to adaptation failures, especially in dynamic environments where the domain continuously changes [29, 30].
Although recent TTA studies deal with dynamic test streams
in TTA [11, 12, 29, 35, 36], the inherent risk of TTA–
blind adaptation to unseen test samples without groundtruth labels–remains a critical vulnerability. Notably, the
absence of ground-truth labels makes it difficult to monitor the correctness of the adaptation. While various out-ofdistribution performance estimation approaches have been
proposed [1, 5, 15, 27], such methods necessitate labeled
train data for accuracy estimation, which is impractical for
TTA scenarios.
In light of these challenges, we propose AETTA (Accuracy Estimation for Test-Time Adaptation), a novel accuracy
estimation method designed for TTA without reliance on
labeled data or source data access (Figure 1). AETTA leverages prediction disagreement with dropout inferences, where
the prediction disagreement between the adapted model and
dropout inferences serves as a basis for performance estimation. To enhance AETTA’s robustness to adaptation failure
scenarios, we propose robust disagreement equality that dynamically adjust the accuracy estimates based on model

28643

