This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PIN: Positional Insert Unlocks Object Localisation Abilities in VLMs
Michael Dorkenwald

Nimrod Barazani Cees G. M. Snoek* Yuki M. Asano*
University of Amsterdam
https://quva-lab.github.io/PIN/

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs), such as Flamingo and
GPT-4V, have shown immense potential by integrating large
language models with vision systems. Nevertheless, these
models face challenges in the fundamental computer vision
task of object localisation, due to their training on multimodal data containing mostly captions without explicit spatial grounding. While it is possible to construct custom,
supervised training pipelines with bounding box annotations that integrate with VLMs, these result in specialized
and hard-to-scale models. In this paper, we aim to explore
the limits of caption-based VLMs and instead propose to
tackle the challenge in a simpler manner by i) keeping the
weights of a caption-based VLM frozen and ii) not using
any supervised detection data. To this end, we introduce
an input-agnostic Positional Insert (PIN), a learnable spatial prompt, containing a minimal set of parameters that
are slid inside the frozen VLM, unlocking object localisation capabilities. Our PIN module is trained with a simple
next-token prediction task on synthetic data without requiring the introduction of new output heads. Our experiments
demonstrate strong zero-shot localisation performances on
a variety of images, including Pascal VOC, COCO, LVIS,
and diverse images like paintings or cartoons.

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have shown remarkable results across diverse tasks, propelled by the advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) [12, 15, 50].
Early works [21, 32, 42, 49, 63] used extensive imagecaption data for end-to-end training, a trend later evolved
by works like [4, 11, 26, 30, 31, 65], which efficiently integrated pretrained vision and language models through fusion networks to further enhance cross-modal understanding. Flamingo [4] demonstrates impressive multimodal incontext learning abilities. However, like many captionbased VLMs, it faces challenges in object localisation, a
consequence of its training on web data.
* Equal last author.

Figure 1. We learn a single Positional Insert (PIN) for unlocking
zero-shot object localisation abilities in a frozen Vision Language
Model (VLM) without adding any additional heads or requiring
supervised datasets. Further output examples shown in Fig. 5 & 6.

Equipping VLMs with precise object localisation abilities is important for tasks like autonomous driving [1, 58,
59], assistive technology [61], and robotics [8, 14, 16]. Despite their proficiency in integrating visual-textual data, current image-caption training hinders accurate spatial understanding. Therefore, enhancing spatial comprehension in
VLMs is key to enabling more nuanced and context-aware
interactions.
One recent stream of research [9,38,53–55,60,62,66] focuses on developing unified expert Vision Language Models (VLMs) capable of performing a variety of tasks, including localisation, with a universal architecture. Although
these models show impressive results across different tasks,
their success largely depends on the availability of extensive task-specific, supervised data [9, 34, 54, 55]. Furthermore, [9, 38, 41, 53–55] require a large amount of compute
for training. The setting we tackle in this paper is different. Our goal is to efficiently enable the localisation capabilities of VLMs while keeping their parameters untouched
and without the need for localisation supervised datasets.
Our work aims to unlock the localisation abilities of
caption-based VLMs by integrating spatial understanding
into their existing zero-shot capabilities. We introduce a
Positional Insert (PIN), a learnable spatial prompt designed

13548

