This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Accelerating Neural Field Training via Soft Mining
Shakiba Kheradmand1 Daniel Rebain1 Gopal Sharma1 Hossam Isack2
Abhishek Kar2 Andrea Tagliasacchi3, 4, 5 Kwang Moo Yi1
1
University of British Columbia, 2 Google Research,
3
Google DeepMind, 4 Simon Fraser University, 5 University of Toronto
https://ubc-vision.github.io/nf-soft-mining/

Figure 1. Teaser: we introduce “soft mining” to accelerate neural field training. When applied to Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) training,
our method significantly improves convergence. We visualize the error maps (blue denotes low error and red denotes high error) and the
rendered novel views for uniform sampling and our method. We plot the convergence showing the Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR)
for the corresponding scene. We render both images at 1k iterations of training, specified by the red dashed line in the (right) graph. Our
method achieves the same PSNR significantly faster than the baselines.

Abstract
We present an approach to accelerate Neural Field training by efficiently selecting sampling locations. While Neural Fields have recently become popular, it is often trained
by uniformly sampling the training domain, or through
handcrafted heuristics. We show that improved convergence
and final training quality can be achieved by a soft mining
technique based on importance sampling: rather than either considering or ignoring a pixel completely, we weigh
the corresponding loss by a scalar. To implement our idea
we use Langevin Monte-Carlo sampling. We show that by
doing so, regions with higher error are being selected more
frequently, leading to more than 2x improvement in convergence speed. The code and related resources for this study
are publicly available at project page.

1. Introduction
Neural fields [46] have recently become popular due to
their versatile nature, and their ease of integration with

popular workloads like novel view synthesis [23]. Neural fields map input coordinates to output values and are
typically implemented as variants of multi-layer perceptrons (MLP) [20, 36, 40]. They have demonstrated impressive capabilities in representing signals for 1D audio [36],
2D images [24, 40], 3D shapes [23, 27], and 4D light fields
[38, 49]. Beyond modeling and compressing signals, they
have also been utilized to simulate physics [6, 28].
While neural fields provide impressive results, training
them can be lengthy, e.g. on modern GPUs training the
original Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [23] for a single
scene can take hours. Researchers have since improved
the training process through alterations to network architectures [9, 24], and through better loss functions [2].
An angle that none of the papers above consider is how
training batches are formed. That is, which pixels in the 2D
image, or which rays in the radiance field are used for each
optimization step. These methods typically rely on simple
uniform sampling, which may lead to sub-optimal training

20071

