This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Neglected Tails in Vision-Language Models
Shubham Parashar*1 Zhiqiu Lin∗2 Tian Liu∗1 Xiangjue Dong1
Yanan Li3 Deva Ramanan2 James Caverlee1 Shu Kong14†
1

Texas A&M University

2

Carnegie Mellon University

1. Introduction
Vision-language models (VLMs) such as CLIP [35]
play a pivotal role in mainstream multimodal systems, including visual chatbots [23, 31] and text-to-image generation [3, 36]. Their efficacy largely stems from their webscale image-text pretraining datasets like LAION [37, 38]
that cover a wide range of visual concepts.
Imbalanced performance of VLMs. Despite their
strong capabilities in visual understanding, VLMs often ex* Co-first authors; † corresponding author. Project page at link.

Zhejiang Lab

4

University of Macau

(a) freq. of ImageNet concepts

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs) excel in zero-shot
recognition but their performance varies greatly across
different visual concepts. For example, although CLIP
achieves impressive accuracy on ImageNet (60-80%), its
performance drops below 10% for more than ten concepts
like night snake, presumably due to their limited presence in the pretraining data. However, measuring the frequency of concepts in VLMs’ large-scale datasets is challenging. We address this by using large language models
(LLMs) to count the number of pretraining texts that contain synonyms of these concepts. Our analysis confirms
that popular datasets, such as LAION, exhibit a long-tailed
concept distribution, yielding biased performance in VLMs.
We also find that downstream applications of VLMs, including visual chatbots (e.g., GPT-4V) and text-to-image models
(e.g., Stable Diffusion), often fail to recognize or generate
images of rare concepts identified by our method. To mitigate the imbalanced performance of zero-shot VLMs, we
propose REtrieval-Augmented Learning (REAL). First, instead of prompting VLMs using the original class names,
REAL uses their most frequent synonyms found in pretraining texts. This simple change already outperforms costly
human-engineered and LLM-enriched prompts over nine
benchmark datasets. Second, REAL trains a linear classifier on a small yet balanced set of pretraining data retrieved using concept synonyms. REAL surpasses the previous zero-shot SOTA, using 400× less storage and 10,000×
less training time!

3

(b) freq. vs. zero-shot accuracy

(c) Popular multimodal systems like visual chatbots and generative models struggle with tailed concepts. An example is the night snake,
a rare class found by our method on ImageNet.

Figure 1. Vision-language models (VLMs) inherit long tails
from their pretraining data. (a) VLMs’ pretraining datasets,
such as LAION-400M [37] and LAION-2B [38], exhibit longtailed distributions for visual concepts defined in downstream
tasks like ImageNet [10]. We sort the 1K ImageNet classes according to their frequency in LAION-400M calculated with our concept frequency estimation method (cf. Fig. 2). (b) For zero-shot
recognition, OpenCLIP models [16] trained on LAION-400M and
LAION-2B respectively yield per-class accuracies that strongly
correlate with the long-tailed concept frequencies (binned on a
log-scale). Interestingly, other VLMs such as CLIP [35] and
MetaCLIP [49] (trained on private data) also show similar imbalanced performances, likely because their web-scraped pretraining datasets follow similar long-tailed distributions of the real
world. (c) Our method helps identify rare concepts, such as the
night snake, which is one of the most tailed ImageNet concepts.
We show that state-of-the-art multimodal systems, including GPT4V [50], LLaVA [23], DALL-E 3 [41], and SD-XL [2], all fail to
recognize or generate it. The supplement shows more examples.

hibit biased performance in downstream tasks. For instance,
in zero-shot visual recognition tasks (which do not use training samples), CLIP [35] achieves up to 80% mean accuracy
across 1K semantic classes on ImageNet [10] but less than

12988

