This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HHMR: Holistic Hand Mesh Recovery by
Enhancing the Multimodal Controllability of Graph Diffusion Models
Mengcheng Li1 , Hongwen Zhang2 , Yuxiang Zhang1 , Ruizhi Shao1 , Tao Yu3 , Yebin Liu1 *.
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University.
3
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University

Figure 1. We introduce HHMR, a graph diffusion-based generation framework that are compatible with various human hand mesh recovery
tasks.

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed a trend of the deep integration of the generation and reconstruction paradigms. In this
paper, we extend the ability of controllable generative models for a more comprehensive hand mesh recovery task: direct hand mesh generation, inpainting, reconstruction, and
fitting in a single framework, which we name as Holistic
Hand Mesh Recovery (HHMR). Our key observation is that
different kinds of hand mesh recovery tasks can be achieved
by a single generative model with strong multimodal controllability, and in such a framework, realizing different
tasks only requires giving different signals as conditions. To
achieve this goal, we propose an all-in-one diffusion framework based on graph convolution and attention mechanisms
for holistic hand mesh recovery. In order to achieve strong
control generation capability while ensuring the decoupling
of multimodal control signals, we map different modalities
to a shared feature space and apply cross-scale random
* Corresponding Author.

masking in both modality and feature levels. In this way,
the correlation between different modalities can be fully exploited during the learning of hand priors. Furthermore, we
propose Condition-aligned Gradient Guidance to enhance
the alignment of the generated model with the control signals, which significantly improves the accuracy of the hand
mesh reconstruction and fitting. Experiments show that our
novel framework can realize multiple hand mesh recovery
tasks simultaneously and outperform the existing methods
in different tasks, which provides more possibilities for subsequent downstream applications including gesture recognition, pose generation, mesh editing, and so on.

1. Introduction
Hand mesh recovery aims to recover hand pose and mesh
from images, which has achieved a wide range of applications in ARVR, human-computer interaction, robotics, and
etc,. In the past decades, with the development of deep
learning techniques, the paradigm of hand mesh recovery

645

