This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOIAnimator: Generating Text-prompt Human-object Animations using Novel
Perceptive Diffusion Models
Wenfeng Song1 , Xinyu Zhang1 , Shuai Li2,3 *, Yang Gao3 , Aimin Hao3,5 ,
Xia Hou1 , Chenglizhao Chen4 , Ning Li1 , Hong Qin6†
1

Beijing Information Science and Technology University 2 Zhongguancun Laboratory, China
3

4
5
6

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University

College of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum (East China)

Research Unit of Virtual Human and Virtual Surgery (2019RU004), Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences

Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University (SUNY at Stony Brook), Stony Brook, New York 11794-2424, USA
https://zxylinkstart.github.io/HOIAnimator-Web/

A person bends over, lifts
a large box with both
hands and walks around
casually.

Zoom out

180°
A person approaches the
small table and shifts
position with their hips
resting against it.

180°

A person picks up a
backpack and carries
it on his back.
Temporal changing

180°

Figure 1. Our HOIAnimator excels in turning text descriptions into realistic animations of human-object interactions. It’s adept at depicting
a variety of actions, such as bending, lifting boxes, and picking up bags, with believable contact between the human and the objects.

Abstract
To date, the quest to rapidly and effectively produce
human-object interaction (HOI) animations directly from
textual descriptions stands at the forefront of computer vision research. The underlying challenge demands both a
discriminating interpretation of language and a comprehensive physics-centric model supporting real-world dynamics.
To ameliorate, this paper advocates HOIAnimator, a novel
and interactive diffusion model with perception ability and
also ingeniously crafted to revolutionize the animation of
complex interactions from linguistic narratives. The effectiveness of our model is anchored in two ground-breaking
innovations: (1) Our Perceptive Diffusion Models (PDM)
brings together two types of models: one focused on human movements and the other on objects. This combination
allows for animations where humans and objects move in
concert with each other, making the overall motion more
*,† Corresponding authors

realistic. Additionally, we propose a Perceptive Message
Passing (PMP) mechanism to enhance the communication
bridging the two models, ensuring that the animations are
smooth and unified; (2) We devise an Interaction Contact
Field (ICF), a sophisticated model that implicitly captures
the essence of HOIs. Beyond mere predictive contact points,
the ICF assesses the proximity of human and object to their
respective environment, informed by a probabilistic distribution of interactions learned throughout the denoising
phase. Our comprehensive evaluation showcases HOIanimator’s superior ability to produce dynamic, context-aware
animations that surpass existing benchmarks in text-driven
animation synthesis.

1. Introduction and Motivation
In the dynamic landscape of AI-guided creation (AIGC), 3D
animation has emerged as a crucial and challenging domain.
This challenge is epitomized in human-object interactions

811

