This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Making Visual Sense of Oracle Bones for You and Me
Runqi Qiao1 Lan Yang1 * Kaiyue Pang2 Honggang Zhang1
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey
{qrq, ylan, zhhg}@bupt.edu.cn
k.pang@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Visual perception evolves over time. This is particularly
the case of oracle bone scripts, where visual glyphs seem
intuitive to people from distant past prove difficult to be understood in contemporary eyes. While semantic correspondence of an oracle can be found via a dictionary lookup,
this proves to be not enough for public viewers to connect
the dots, i.e., why does this oracle mean that? Common
solution relies on a laborious curation process to collect
visual guide for each oracle (Fig. 1), which hinges on the
case-by-case effort and taste of curators. This paper delves
into one natural follow-up question: can AI take over?
Begin with a comprehensive human study, we show participants could indeed make better sense of an oracle glyph
subjected to a proper visual guide and its efficacy can be
approximated via a novel metric termed TransOV (Transferable Oracle Visuals). We then define a new conditional
visual generation task based on an oracle glyph and its semantic meaning and importantly approach it by circumventing any form of model training in the presence of fatal lack
of oracle data. At its heart is to leverage foundation model
like GPT-4V to reason about the visual cues hidden inside
an oracle and take advantage of an existing text-to-image
model for final visual guide generation. Extensive empirical
evidence shows our AI-enabled visual guides achieve significantly comparable TransOV performance compared with
those collected under manual efforts. Finally, we demonstrate the versatility of our system under a more complex
setting, where it is required to work alongside with an AI
image denoiser to cope with raw oracle scan image inputs
(cf. processed clean oracle glyphs). Code is available at
https://github.com/RQ-Lab/OBS-Visual.

1. Introduction
Not everyone can read art, but with proper guide, they might
have a better chance. It is an experience that you and me,
*

Corresponding author.

Oracle Bone Script of “Rest”

b

a

a – scan

b – crop

c

c - denoise

Visual Guide of “Rest”

is a person

+

is a tree

a person leaning against a tree, resting.
So, conveys the idea of taking a break.

Figure 1. A well visual guide can effectively bridge the gap between modern viewers and the visual glyphs from 3,000 years ago.

as museum and exhibition visitors, are so used to that generally takes place without notice - - to first form an initial
impression of an art piece or installment, then habitually
look for the information label nearby to seek for interpretation and finally with those information bearing in mind,
to reappreciate the art with a deeper or different perspective. Lighthearted as this process might sound, these information labels, often varying across art forms and key to
enabling public understanding and immersion of art, require
joint hard efforts from both the curators and the artists themselves. As an AI practitioner, the immediate question becomes: can I program this? Not to completely drive humans
of course, but to use AI to ease manual labour by generating
guides from minimum cues provided by humans.

12656

