This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Groupwise Query Specialization and Quality-Aware Multi-Assignment
for Transformer-based Visual Relationship Detection
Jongha Kim* Jihwan Park* Jinyoung Park*
Jinyoung Kim Sehyung Kim Hyunwoo J. Kim†
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
{jonghakim, jseven7071, lpmn678, k012100, shkim129, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Visual Relationship Detection (VRD) has seen significant advancements with Transformer-based architectures
recently. However, we identify two key limitations in a conventional label assignment for training Transformer-based
VRD models, which is a process of mapping a ground-truth
(GT) to a prediction. Under the conventional assignment,
an ‘unspecialized’ query is trained since a query is expected to detect every relation, which makes it difficult for
a query to specialize in specific relations. Furthermore, a
query is also insufficiently trained since a GT is assigned
only to a single prediction, therefore near-correct or even
correct predictions are suppressed by being assigned ‘no
relation (?)’ as a GT. To address these issues, we propose Groupwise Query Specialization and Quality-Aware
Multi-Assignment (SpeaQ). Groupwise Query Specialization trains a ‘specialized’ query by dividing queries and
relations into disjoint groups and directing a query in a
specific query group solely toward relations in the corresponding relation group. Quality-Aware Multi-Assignment
further facilitates the training by assigning a GT to multiple predictions that are significantly close to a GT in terms
of a subject, an object, and the relation in between. Experimental results and analyses show that SpeaQ effectively trains ‘specialized’ queries, which better utilize the
capacity of a model, resulting in consistent performance
gains with ‘zero’ additional inference cost across multiple VRD models and benchmarks. Code is available at
https://github.com/mlvlab/SpeaQ.

1. Introduction
Visual Relationship Detection (VRD) is the task of detecting instances (i.e., subject, object) and their relation
(i.e., predicate) given an image, including Scene Graph
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Generation (SGG) and Human-Object Interaction (HOI)
Detection tasks. The task has a wide range of applications, including image retrieval [13], visual question answering [10, 29, 34] and image captioning [39]. Recently, Transformer-based architectures have been increasingly adopted for VRD tasks [3, 14, 16, 22], demonstrating
remarkable performances.
To train Transformer-based VRD models, a label assignment is required, which is a process of mapping a groundtruth (GT) to a prediction. Following DETR [1], the Hungarian matching algorithm [19] has been a standard of label assignment for Transformer-based VRD models. However, we observe that queries trained under a standard label
assignment are largely ‘unspecialized’, therefore leaving a
large portion of a model’s capacity underutilized. To this
end, we first identify two major limitations of a standard label assignment that ends up training unspecialized queries.
Firstly, under a standard assignment, a query is trained
to detect every relation rather than focusing on a specific
relation. Such multiple roles imposed on a query make it
difficult for a query to specialize in a specific role since
it provides ambiguous training signals overall. The longtailed property of relation distributions of VRD benchmarks
even aggravates the problem since unbalanced training signals make it harder for a query to successfully balance between multiple relations. Secondly, due to a constraint in
a standard assignment that a GT can only be assigned to
a single prediction, near-correct or even correct predictions
are assigned ‘no relation (?)’ as a GT, which provides negative signals that suppress the predictions. For instance,
about 45% of high-quality predictions1 are assigned ‘no relation (?)’ as a GT in the case of a model trained on the
Visual Genome benchmark. In sum, an unspecialized query
is trained due to multiple roles that defer the specialization
of a query, and the deficiency in positive training signals
under the standard assignment.
1 A high-quality prediction is defined as a prediction that is correctly
classified and overlaps with the GT on subject and object with IoU over
0.6.

28160

