This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GenesisTex: Adapting Image Denoising Diffusion to Texture Space
Chenjian Gao1,2†#

Boyan Jiang2
Xinghui Li2 Yingpeng Zhang2#
Qian Yu1*
1
School of Software, Beihang University
2
R&D Efficiency and Capability Department, Tencent IEG
https://cjeen.github.io/GenesisTexPaper/

Abstract
We present GenesisTex, a novel method for synthesizing
textures for 3D geometries from text descriptions. GenesisTex adapts the pretrained image diffusion model to
texture space by texture space sampling. Specifically, we
maintain a latent texture map for each viewpoint, which
is updated with predicted noise on the rendering of the
corresponding viewpoint. The sampled latent texture
maps are then decoded into a final texture map. During
the sampling process, we focus on both global and local
consistency across multiple viewpoints: global consistency
is achieved through the integration of style consistency
mechanisms within the noise prediction network, and
low-level consistency is achieved by dynamically aligning
latent textures. Finally, we apply reference-based inpainting and img2img on denser views for texture refinement.
Our approach overcomes the limitations of slow optimization in distillation-based methods and instability in
inpainting-based methods. Experiments on meshes from
various sources demonstrate that our method surpasses the
baseline methods quantitatively and qualitatively.

Latent-Paint (SDS-based)

TEXTure (inpainting-based)

Ours (texture space sampling)

red volkswagon beetle, cartoon style

Figure 1. Texturing results of different methods. Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) based method produces blurred and oversaturated textures. Inpainting-based approach results in artifacts at
the boundaries of inpainting masks. Texture space sampling concurrently generating content from multiple viewpoints, produces
clean, clear and natural colored textures.

1. Introduction
In recent years, with the development of deep learning,
3D content generation technology has made significant
progress. The applications of 3D content generation are
diverse, ranging from AR/VR to gaming and filmmaking. While there has been considerable research on deep
learning-based geometric asset generation[40], there has
been a notable industry demand for generating realistic textures for given geometries.
Recently, text-conditioned image diffusion models [34]
have achieved impressive results in image generation. Some
works [7, 19, 29] have leveraged text-conditioned image
diffusion models to generate textured 3D assets by gener† Work was done during an internship at Tencent IEG.
# Equal contribution.
* Corresponding author.

ating content from multiple viewpoints, achieving notable
performance. In this work, our focus is on generating highquality textures for a given geometry, leveraging the priors provided by pre-trained text-to-image diffusion models.
This task poses several challenges, including: 1) View consistency: ensuring cross-view constraints for maintaining
low-level consistency; 2) High efficiency: generating textures for a model within a few minutes, enabling practical
applications; 3) Zero-shot learning: achieving texture generation without requiring additional training or finetuning.
Addressing these challenges is crucial for successful application of image diffusion models to the texture domain.
Currently, the most prominent method for text-to-3D
generation is Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [7, 19, 29].
SDS utilizes the prior knowledge from image diffusion

4620

