This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly-Supervised Emotion Transition Learning for
Diverse 3D Co-speech Gesture Generation
Xingqun Qi1 , Jiahao Pan1 , Peng Li1 , Ruibin Yuan1 , Xiaowei Chi1 , Mengfei Li1
Wenhan Luo1 , Wei Xue1 , Shanghang Zhang2 , Qifeng Liu1, , Yike Guo1,
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Peking University
xingqun.qi@connect.ust.hk, {liuqifeng, yikeguo}@ust.hk
Neutral Emotion

Transition

Happiness Emotion

context filled by

Speech Audio

Transcripts: I remember that night when I arrived in my hotel, I check my phone to discover popular and vibrant places in their own beloved country. Students hang out at different eating…

Sampling1:

Sampling2:

Figure 1. Diverse exemplary clips sampled by our method from our newly collected BEAT Emotion Transition Dataset. The vital
frames are visualized to demonstrate that the upper body gestures change with the emotion transition of human speech, synchronously.
From top to bottom: the input speech audio, the corresponding transcript, and two sampled clips. Best view on screen.

Abstract
Generating vivid and emotional 3D co-speech gestures
is crucial for virtual avatar animation in human-machine
interaction applications. While the existing methods enable generating the gestures to follow a single emotion label, they overlook that long gesture sequence modeling with
emotion transition is more practical in real scenes. In addition, the lack of large-scale available datasets with emotional transition speech and corresponding 3D human gestures also limits the addressing of this task. To fulfill this
goal, we first incorporate the ChatGPT-4 and an audio
inpainting approach to construct the high-fidelity emotion
transition human speeches. Considering obtaining the realistic 3D pose annotations corresponding to the dynamically inpainted emotion transition audio is extremely difficult, we propose a novel weakly supervised training strategy to encourage authority gesture transitions. Specifically,
to enhance the coordination of transition gestures w.r.t. difCorresponding authors.

ferent emotional ones, we model the temporal association
representation between two different emotional gesture sequences as style guidance and infuse it into the transition
generation. We further devise an emotion mixture mechanism that provides weak supervision based on a learnable mixed emotion label for transition gestures. Last, we
present a keyframe sampler to supply effective initial posture cues in long sequences, enabling us to generate diverse gestures. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art models constructed
by adapting single emotion-conditioned counterparts on
our newly defined emotion transition task and datasets.
Our code and dataset will be released on the project page:
https://xingqunqi-lab.github.io/Emo-Transition-Gesture/.

1. Introduction
Co-speech gesture generation aims to synthesize vivid and
emotional human postures coordinated with the audio input. These non-verbal behaviors serve as a key factor dur-

10424

