This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Defense without Forgetting: Continual Adversarial Defense with
Anisotropic & Isotropic Pseudo Replay
Yuhang Zhou1 , Zhongyun Hua1,2 *
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen,
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Novel Security Intelligence Technologies
1

{23B95105@stu, huazhongyun@}.hit.edu.cn

Adversarial Robustness

Abstract
Deep neural networks have demonstrated susceptibility
to adversarial attacks. Adversarial defense techniques often focus on one-shot setting to maintain robustness against
attack. However, new attacks can emerge in sequences in
real-world deployment scenarios. As a result, it is crucial
for a defense model to constantly adapt to new attacks, but
the adaptation process can lead to catastrophic forgetting
of previously defended against attacks. In this paper, we
discuss for the first time the concept of continual adversarial defense under a sequence of attacks, and propose a lifelong defense baseline called Anisotropic & Isotropic Replay
(AIR), which offers three advantages: (1) Isotropic replay
ensures model consistency in the neighborhood distribution
of new data, indirectly aligning the output preference between old and new tasks. (2) Anisotropic replay enables
the model to learn a compromise data manifold with fresh
mixed semantics for further replay constraints and potential
future attacks. (3) A straightforward regularizer mitigates
the ’plasticity-stability’ trade-off by aligning model output
between new and old tasks. Experiment results demonstrate
that AIR can approximate or even exceed the empirical performance upper bounds achieved by Joint Training.

1. Introduction
Plenty of studies have demonstrated that high-performance
deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to adversarial
attacks [27, 31, 44], indicating that the addition of carefully
designed but human-imperceptible perturbations to the inputs of a DNN can easily deceive the network and lead to
incorrect predictions, a phenomenon known as adversarial
attack. The existence of such attacks presents a significant
threat to the deployment of the DNN-based systems. For instance, the elaborate physical adversarial attacks [3, 6, 23]
* Zhongyun Hua is the corresponding author.

...
Distill.

Init
Data Aug.

Traditional
One-shot Defense

Attack
T+3

Attack
T+2

Continual Adversarial Denfese

Attack
T+1

Attack
T

Coming Attack

robustness for
previous attack

robustness for
future attack

catastrophic
forgetting

Attack
T-1

Attack
T-2

...

Previous Attack
previous
model (fixed)

current
model

Figure 1. The difference between one-shot defense and continual
defense. The model diagram on the left presents the one-shot defense studies an isolated Min-Max process and implicitly assumes
the potential attack is static. For a continual attack sequence, the
indispensable adaptation process introduces additional challenge
of catastrophic forgetting of previous attacks. Therefore, a deployable adversarial defense should be a life-one learning task rather
than a one-shot task. We propose a self-distillation pseudo-replay
baseline to alleviate the catastrophic forgetting against attack sequence, indicated by the model diagram on the right.

may cause the DNNs-based auto-drive systems to make incorrect judgments, potentially resulting in traffic accidents.
To ensure the reliability of DNNs in various scenarios,
many defense methods have been proposed to maintain the
robustness of DNN against adversarial attacks [16, 25, 34,
48, 54]. Existing defenses are always limited to the oneshot assumption, which indicates that the model enters a
static process after a single defense training stage. However,
in real deployment scenarios, new attacks occurs continuously [11, 13, 16, 22, 27] and even become a task sequence.
As a result, defense model needs to constantly adapt to new
attacks for adaptive robustness and turns into a life-long

24263

