This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

See, Say, and Segment: Teaching LMMs to Overcome False Premises
Tsung-Han Wu* Giscard Biamby* David Chan Lisa Dunlap
Ritwik Gupta Xudong Wang Joseph E. Gonzalez Trevor Darrell
University of California, Berkeley

Abstract
False-premise Query

Current open-source Large Multimodal Models (LMMs)
excel at tasks such as open-vocabulary language grounding
and segmentation but can suffer under false premises when
queries imply the existence of something that is not actually
present in the image. We observe that existing methods that
fine-tune an LMM to segment images significantly degrade
their ability to reliably determine (“see”) if an object is
present and to interact naturally with humans (“say”), a
form of catastrophic forgetting. In this work, we propose a
cascading and joint training approach for LMMs to solve this
task, avoiding catastrophic forgetting of previous skills. Our
resulting model can “see” by detecting whether objects are
present in an image, “say” by telling the user if they are not,
proposing alternative queries or correcting semantic errors
in the query, and finally “segment” by outputting the mask
of the desired objects if they exist. Additionally, we introduce
a novel False Premise Correction benchmark dataset, an
extension of existing RefCOCO(+/g) referring segmentation
datasets (which we call FP-RefCOCO(+/g)). The results
show that our method not only detects false premises up to
55% better than existing approaches, but under false premise
conditions produces relative cIOU improvements of more
than 31% over baselines, and produces natural language
feedback judged helpful up to 67% of the time.

1. Introduction
Perception systems engaging with real-world environments
often need to understand and respond to complex queries
such as “find the keys with the purple heart on them” or
“bring me the remote for the television.” Solving such complex visual tasks can require active reasoning, world knowledge, and an implicit understanding of the scene which are
often unavailable to simple visual perception systems [33].
An extension of referring segmentation [22], “reasoning segmentation,” requires that models are capable not only of
understanding the query but reasoning on the query as well.
However, what if the “keys with the purple heart” do not
1 *Equal contribution.

SESAME (Ours)

Prior Work

Veg

Mushroom
Please segment a bowl of
pineapple in this image.

Sure, it is [SEG].

❌

✓

There are no pineapples, but
there is a bowl of mushrooms.

Figure 1. False premise failures with LMMs: contemporary opensource LMMs combined with segmentation decoders are able to
generate referring segments effectively but have difficulty on segmentation questions which ask the model to refer to something that
is not present in the image. SESAME, our See-Say-Segment LMM,
uses model chaining and joint training to overcome this problem.

exist in the scene? While recent methods for reasoning segmentation have shown remarkable performance on “positive”
queries where the query object exists in the scene, most existing approaches for reasoning segmentation fail to account
for this “false premise” scenario [33], and happily produce a
hallucinated segmentation even when the objects associated
with the query do not exist in the image [37, 66] (see Fig. 1).
It is desirable for robust reasoning segmentation systems to
not only respond in the negative but to also propose corrected
expressions when appropriate. Such robust systems should
first be able to “see”, by detecting if an object from the
query is present in an image, then “say” something about
the object itself if it’s not there, suggesting alternatives to
the user’s query and optionally providing additional helpful
information in the scene, before finally being able to “segment” by showing where in an image an object is grounded,
if the user has not withdrawn their request.
Until now, “false premise”-aware approaches have focused on the “see” and “segment” components, often using
two-stage cascaded approaches, where an auxiliary classifier
is used to “see” and a segmentation backbone is used to “segment” [37, 63, 66]. These pipeline-based approaches do not
demonstrate reasoning ability when interpreting a reference
and can not engage with users in task-directed dialogue; they
cannot “say” anything about the query if it is incorrect, unfor-

13459

