This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Convolutional Prompting meets Language Models for Continual Learning
Anurag Roy1

Riddhiman Moulick1 Vinay K. Verma2 * Saptarshi Ghosh1
1
IIT Kharagpur, 2 IML Amazon India

Abir Das1

{anurag_roy@,riddhimanmoulick@kgpian.,saptarshi@cse.,abir@cse.}iitkgp.ac.in, vinayugc@gmail.com

Abstract
Continual Learning (CL) enables machine learning models to learn from continuously shifting new training data
in absence of data from old tasks. Recently, pretrained vision transformers combined with prompt tuning have shown
promise for overcoming catastrophic forgetting in CL. These
approaches rely on a pool of learnable prompts which can be
inefficient in sharing knowledge across tasks leading to inferior performance. In addition, the lack of fine-grained layer
specific prompts does not allow these to fully express the
strength of the prompts for CL. We address these limitations
by proposing ConvPrompt, a novel convolutional prompt
creation mechanism that maintains layer-wise shared embeddings, enabling both layer-specific learning and better
concept transfer across tasks. The intelligent use of convolution enables us to maintain a low parameter overhead
without compromising performance. We further leverage
Large Language Models to generate fine-grained text descriptions of each category which are used to get task similarity and dynamically decide the number of prompts to be
learned. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority
of ConvPrompt and improves SOTA by ∼ 3% with significantly less parameter overhead. We also perform strong
ablation over various modules to disentangle the importance
of different components. 1

1. Introduction
In this constantly changing world, computer vision models
must adapt to the new and emerging concepts. However,
such models often suffer from catastrophic forgetting [15,
31, 40], a phenomenon where previously learned concepts
are forgotten when adapting to novel concepts. A trivial
solution to this problem is to have separate models for each
new task. However, this would require task identities to be
available during inference which may not be very practical.
Another way to tackle this will be to keep all the data that
the model was trained on, add the new data to it, and then
* Work started before joining Amazon
1 Project page:
https : / / cvir . github . io / projects /

convprompt

train the model again from the beginning. Naturally, this
will incur increased storage and computation as well. A
line of work attempting to maintain a balance, keeps a few
samples from previous tasks and uses them for rehearsing
the previous concepts while learning a new task [4, 6, 8, 16,
19, 29, 36, 38, 42, 56]. However, storing samples from older
tasks may not always be feasible, especially where longterm storage of data is not permitted possibly due to privacy,
security or legislative concerns [17]. Therefore, developing
rehearsal-free CL approaches requiring no storage of old
data has come up to be desirable.
Recently, there has been a surge of prompt tuning based
approaches [9, 10, 20, 23, 34, 46, 47, 53, 54] that leverage on
pre-trained transformers and show promising performance
without using any rehearsal data. Prompt tuning, originally
introduced in NLP [28] attaches small learnable vectors to
a pre-trained frozen model to properly reuse the already
learned representations. Although promising for continual
learning, these approaches, however, suffer from the following drawbacks – (1) Learning task-specific and task-shared
information in separate layers ignores possible interaction
between task-specific and task-shared components [43, 49]
and (2) Always learning a fixed number of prompts per task
irrespective of the tasks’ similarity with the previous ones.
The redundant prompts can lead to overfitting specifically
in cases where the tasks are highly similar usually seen in
fine-grained datasets.
In this work, we propose ConvPrompt, which leverages
task-specific prompts that is generated by convolution over
task-shared parameters. We also exploit similarity between
tasks to control the generation of prompts. Specifically, task
shared knowledge is modeled by a learnable embedding
matrix at each layer. Prompts, on the other hand, are task
specific and are generated by convoluting on the task shared
embeddings with learnable kernels. The shared embeddings
are free to adapt with the different tasks. The prompt generating convolution kernels, on the other hand, are set aside
once learned for a task and new set of kernels are employed
for the next task. Such a design enables the shared embeddings to capture common concepts while allowing the
convolution operations to capture the task-specific concepts
from the common concepts. Moreover, we employ language

23616

