This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LiDAR4D: Dynamic Neural Fields for Novel Space-time View LiDAR Synthesis
Zehan Zheng, Fan Lu, Weiyi Xue, Guang Chen† , Changjun Jiang
Tongji University
{zhengzehan, lufan, xwy, guangchen, cjjiang}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract
Although neural radiance fields (NeRFs) have achieved
triumphs in image novel view synthesis (NVS), LiDAR NVS
remains largely unexplored. Previous LiDAR NVS methods
employ a simple shift from image NVS methods while ignoring the dynamic nature and the large-scale reconstruction
problem of LiDAR point clouds. In light of this, we propose LiDAR4D, a differentiable LiDAR-only framework for
novel space-time LiDAR view synthesis. In consideration
of the sparsity and large-scale characteristics, we design a
4D hybrid representation combined with multi-planar and
grid features to achieve effective reconstruction in a coarseto-fine manner. Furthermore, we introduce geometric constraints derived from point clouds to improve temporal consistency. For the realistic synthesis of LiDAR point clouds,
we incorporate the global optimization of ray-drop probability to preserve cross-region patterns. Extensive experiments on KITTI-360 and NuScenes datasets demonstrate
the superiority of our method in accomplishing geometryaware and time-consistent dynamic reconstruction. Codes
are available at https:// github.com/ ispc-lab/ LiDAR4D.

1. Introduction
Dynamic scene reconstruction is of crucial importance
across various fields such as AR/VR, robotics and autonomous driving. Existing advanced methods in computer vision enable high-fidelity 3D scene reconstruction
and novel view synthesis (NVS), which can further serve
a wide range of downstream tasks and applications. For instance, we could reconstruct driving scenarios directly from
collected sensor logs, allowing for scene replay and novel
data generation [43]. It shows great potential for boosting
data diversity, forming data closed-loop, and improving the
generalizability of the autonomous driving system.
However, the majority of current research focuses on
novel view synthesis for cameras, while other sensors such
as LiDAR remain largely unexplored. Similar to camera
images, LiDAR point clouds are also partial observations
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Dynamic scenes of LiDAR point clouds in autonomous driving. Large-scale vehicle motion poses a significant
challenge for dynamic reconstruction and novel space-time view
synthesis. White dots indicate the ego-car trajectory.

of the scene that vary across different locations and views.
The reconstruction faces considerable challenges due to
the sparsity, discontinuity and occlusion of LiDAR point
clouds. Furthermore, as illustrated in Figure 1, dynamic
scenarios combine novel spatial view and temporal view
synthesis simultaneously. Meanwhile, the large motion of
dynamic objects makes it difficult to align and reconstruct.
Traditional LiDAR-based 3D scene reconstruction techniques aggregate multiple sparse point cloud frames directly
in the world coordinate system [19] and further convert
them into explicit surface representations such as triangular
meshes [25]. Subsequently, the intersection of the LiDAR
beams with the mesh surface can be calculated by performing ray-casting to render novel-view LiDAR point clouds.
Nevertheless, high-quality surface reconstruction of
complex large-scale scenes is challenging to accomplish,
which may lead to significant geometric errors. Furthermore, the aforementioned explicit reconstruction method is
limited to static scenes and struggles to accurately model the
intensity or ray-drop characteristics of actual LiDAR points.
Neural radiance fields [26] implicitly reconstruct the

5145

