This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MANUS: Markerless Grasp Capture using Articulated 3D Gaussians
Chandradeep Pokhariya1 *

Ishaan Nikhil Shah1 **

Angela Xing2 **

Kefan Chen2

Avinash Sharma1

Srinath Sridhar2

1

Zekun Li2

IIIT Hyderabad 2 Brown University
ivl.cs.brown.edu/research/manus

Figure 1. We introduce MANUS, a novel markerless approach for capturing grasps by employing an articulated 3D Gaussian representation
to accurately model hand shapes. This approach improves contact estimation accuracy in comparison to other template-based approaches
when evaluated against ground truth contacts.

Abstract
Understanding how we grasp objects with our hands has
important applications in areas like robotics and mixed reality. However, this challenging problem requires accurate
modeling of the contact between hands and objects. To
capture grasps, existing methods use skeletons, meshes, or
parametric models that does not represent hand shape accurately resulting in inaccurate contacts. We present MANUS,
a method for Markerless Hand-Object Grasp Capture using
Articulated 3D Gaussians. We build a novel articulated
3D Gaussians representation that extends 3D Gaussian
splatting [29] for high-fidelity representation of articulating hands. Since our representation uses Gaussian primitives optimized from the multi-view pixel-aligned losses, it
enables us to efficiently and accurately estimate contacts
between the hand and the object. For the most accurate
results, our method requires tens of camera views that cur** Equal Contribution
* Work was done while at Brown University

rent datasets do not provide. We therefore build MANUSGrasps, a new dataset that contains hand-object grasps
viewed from 50+ cameras across 30+ scenes, 3 subjects,
and comprising over 7M frames. In addition to extensive
qualitative results, we also show that our method outperforms others on a quantitative contact evaluation method
that uses paint transfer from the object to the hand.

1. Introduction
Every day, the average person effortlessly grasps more than
a hundred different objects [74, 76]. This seemingly routine
act of grasping poses a significant challenge for machines,
as is evident from the extensive research on this topic in
computer vision [16] and robotics [3, 4]. High-fidelity capture of natural human grasps could unlock new applications
in areas like robotics and mixed reality, but this challenging
problem first requires us to accurately estimate the contact
between the hand and the object [5].
Previous work has addressed this problem by using
gloves or special sensors [20, 49], but these devices are

2197

