This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoML: Online Meta Adaptation for 3D Human Motion Prediction
Xiaoning Sun1 , Huaijiang Sun1 , Bin Li2 , Dong Wei1 , Weiqing Li1 , Jianfeng Lu1
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
Tianjin AiForward Science and Technology Co., Ltd., China
{sunxiaoning,sunhuaijiang,csdwei}@njust.edu.cn, libin@aiforward.com

(a) Existing methods

Abstract
In the academic field, the research on human motion prediction tasks mainly focuses on exploiting the observed information to forecast human movements accurately in the
near future horizon. However, a significant gap appears
when it comes to the application field, as current models
are all trained offline, with fixed parameters that are inherently suboptimal to handle the complex yet ever-changing
nature of human behaviors. To bridge this gap, in this paper, we introduce the task of online meta adaptation for human motion prediction, based on the insight that finding
“smart weights” capable of swift adjustments to suit different motion contexts along the time is a key to improving
predictive accuracy. We propose MoML, which ingeniously
borrows the bilevel optimization spirit of model-agnostic
meta-learning, to transform previous predictive mistakes
into strong inductive biases to guide online adaptation. This
is achieved by our MoAdapter blocks that can learn error information by facilitating efficient adaptation via a few
gradient steps, which fine-tunes our meta-learned “smart”
initialization produced by the generic predictor. Considering real-time requirements in practice, we further propose
Fast-MoML, a more efficient variant of MoML that features
a closed-form solution instead of conventional gradient update. Experimental results show that our approach can effectively bring many existing offline motion prediction models online, and improves their predictive accuracy.

1. Introduction
3D human motion prediction is aimed at forecasting a future
motion sequence accurately based on the historical observation. As a core technology in computer vision and robotics,
it has been widely used in applications such as human-robot
collaboration [27, 40] and autonomous driving [6, 34].
Academically, current mainstream works on this task are
formulated as an offline problem. They are dedicated to exploiting spatial correlations of body-joints [9, 26, 30] and
temporal information of sequences [32, 38, 54], with the

observation

(b) Ours: Online adaptive setting

frozen

Predictor

prediction

streaming data

observation
adaptive

Params
shared

adaptive

Errors

Params

prediction

Params
shared

Params

?

∙∙∙

adaptive

?
Params
shared

Params

keep predicting
& adapting

Figure 1. Existing methods predicts a short future given the observation, with frozen parameters handling all scenarios. We present
a new paradigm for this task, in which: (1) motions are dynamically arriving as streaming data, instead of previous static setting;
(2) we propose online meta adaptation approach, with adaptive parameters fitting the ever-changing nature of human motions; (3) as
new data appears, we exploit the information in previous predictive mistakes as the driving force for online adaptation.

goal of learning a generic predictor that can handle various
motions over the entire data distribution. Meanwhile, they
only model the prescribed observation-target window with
static data, with samples less than one second. However,
real motions are streaming data that dynamically arrive,
with diverse movements and may keep changing continuously over time, e.g., leading to concept drift [41]. Existing
offline-trained predictors use frozen parameters to tackle the
complexity and variability of human motions, which is inherently suboptimal for real-world applications.
To bridge this gap, we draw inspiration from the human mindsets. Humans have derived basic predictive ability
through their growth and learning, while making mistakes
is still inevitable. A remarkable attribute of human intelligence is the ability to quickly adjust his/her thinking to suit
the new situation and avoid making further mistakes during prediction. In contrast, for existing deep learning-based
motion predictors, the dynamic relations between model parameters and testing errors are never discussed.
In this paper, we introduce the task of online meta adaptation for human motion prediction, based on the insight
that finding “smart” weights capable of swift parameter ad-

1042

