This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaskPLAN: Masked Generative Layout Planning from Partial Input
Hang Zhang, Anton Savov, Benjamin Dillenburger
Digital Building Technologies, ETH Zurich
{hangzhang, asavov, dillenbb}@ethz.ch

Abstract
Layout planning, spanning from architecture to interior design, is a slow, iterative exploration of ill-defined
problems, adopting a ”I’ll know it when I see it” approach to potential solutions. Recent advances in generative models promise automating layout generation, yet often overlook the crucial role of user-guided iteration, cannot generate full solutions from incomplete design ideas,
and do not learn for the inter-dependency of layout attributes. To address these limitations, we propose MaskPLAN, a novel generative model based on Graph-structured
Dynamic Masked Autoencoders (GDMAE) featuring five
transformers generating a blend of graph-based and imagebased layout attributes. MaskPLAN lets users generate and
adjust layouts with partial attribute definitions, create alternatives for preferences, and practice new compositiondriven or functionality-driven workflows. Through crossattribute learning and the user input as a global conditional
prior we ensure that design synthesis is calibrated at every
intermediate stage, maintaining its feasibility and practicality. Extensive evaluations show MaskPLAN’s superior
performance over existing methods across multiple metrics.

1. Introduction
Layout planning is a ubiquitous task across various domains, including architecture, urban, landscape, and interior design. It involves balancing functional needs, often
depicted as a bubble diagram, with their compositional arrangement into a cohesive layout [26, 38]. The design of
floor plan layouts is a slow, iterative process exploration of
ill-defined problems, which under the motto ”I’ll know it
when I see it” focuses on embracing possible solutions instead of solving for predefined criteria.
Recent achievements in generative models have shown
significant potential for automating the process of layout
generation [15, 23, 27, 35], specifically in the context of autonomously generating floor plans based on high level functional requirements [2, 7, 29, 31–33, 36, 40, 41, 53].
However, existing approaches predominantly employ

Figure 1. MaskPLAN allows users to influence layout generation with just the features they prioritize, using partial inputs
in a Graph-structured Dynamic Masked Autoencoder (GDMAE)
equipped with five attribute-specific generative transformers for
predicting layouts from incomplete design ideas.

holistic end-to-end architectures, while overlooking the critical role of user-guided iteration for the evolving understanding of design challenges. Furthermore, previous studies on user-guided layout generation [16, 21, 34, 40, 44, 50]
exhibit three key shortcomings: (1) inability to accept partial inputs, (2) unsupported relevant attributes for user input,
and (3) failure to combine functional and compositional attributes due to unlearned interdependencies.
Recently, masked autoencoders (MAE) [11, 17] enable
autoregressive image synthesis based on partial information with high-fidelity results [5, 6, 17]. In this paper,
we propose MaskPLAN (Fig. 1), a novel, MAE-based userguided generative model for layout planning. MaskPLAN
addresses the three shortcomings in the state of the art with:
• Partial Input - we introduce a dynamic masking mechanism in a generative layout planning workflow that takes
partial user input and autocompletes the remaining properties of the layout (Sec. 3.1). To date, MaskPLAN stands
as the first model to accept such a free range of input.
• Full set of learnable attributes - we demonstrate exhaustive user-AI interactions by enabling users to define functional and compositional attributes in layout design cus-

8964

