This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Perceptual Assessment and Optimization of HDR Image Rendering
Peibei Cao1 , Rafał K. Mantiuk2 , and Kede Ma1,3 *
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge
3
Shenzhen Research Institute, City University of Hong Kong
peibeicao2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, kede.ma@cityu.edu.hk, rkm38@cam.ac.uk
https://github.com/cpb68/HDRQA/

Abstract
High dynamic range (HDR) rendering has the ability to
faithfully reproduce the wide luminance ranges in natural
scenes, but how to accurately assess the rendering quality is relatively underexplored. Existing quality models are
mostly designed for low dynamic range (LDR) images, and
do not align well with human perception of HDR image
quality. To fill this gap, we propose a family of HDR quality
metrics, in which the key step is employing a simple inverse
display model to decompose an HDR image into a stack of
LDR images with varying exposures. Subsequently, these
decomposed images are assessed through well-established
LDR quality metrics. Our HDR quality models present three
distinct benefits. First, they directly inherit the recent advancements of LDR quality metrics. Second, they do not
rely on human perceptual data of HDR image quality for
re-calibration. Third, they facilitate the alignment and prioritization of specific luminance ranges for more accurate
and detailed quality assessment. Experimental results show
that our HDR quality metrics consistently outperform existing models in terms of quality assessment on four HDR
image quality datasets and perceptual optimization of HDR
novel view synthesis.

1. Introduction
High dynamic range (HDR) images aim to faithfully capture the large luminance variations of natural scenes that
low dynamic range (LDR) images are not capable of [16].
In the past few years, numerous HDR imaging and display devices have been developed and commercialized in
response to the escalating demand for HDR images in various fields, including photography, gaming, film, and virtual reality. Consequently, HDR image quality assessment
(IQA) has become a practically demanding technique for
* Corresponding author.

monitoring, ensuring, and optimizing the perceptual quality
of HDR images during imaging, compression, communication, and rendering.
At present, HDR quality metrics are largely lacking,
which is likely due to the prevailing assumption that most
LDR quality models, such as the peak signal-to-noise ratio
(PSNR) and the structural similarity (SSIM) index [59], are
readily applicable to HDR images. It was not until recently
that researchers realized their poor account for human perception of HDR image quality [12, 14]. Mantiuk et al. [28]
made initial attempts by extending the classic visual difference predictor (VDP) [10] to HDR-VDP, which was subsequently improved from various psychophysical and physiological perspectives [29, 31, 41]. Although the HDRVDP family embodies many aspects of the early visual system, they contain complex and non-differentiable modules,
which may hinder their application scope, especially when
adopted as loss functions in perceptual optimization.
Other initiatives have focused on transforming linear luminances into a perceptually more uniform space as a way
of improving the applicability of LDR quality metrics. Representative transformations include the logarithmic function [60], the perceptually uniform (PU) encoding curve [1]
and its derivative, the PU21 encoding [25], and the perceptual quantizer [37]. The issue with perceptually uniform
transformations lies in their tendency to either map luminance values that surpass the LDR image range (e.g., PU21
assigns high luminances to values above 255), or to compress the values to a range of [0, 1] (e.g., the perceptual
quantizer), which alters the image contrast. In the former
case, image quality models incapable of handling values
beyond the maximum pixel value (255 or 1) will fail to
capture distortions in bright regions. In the latter case, the
compressed contrast will cause unanticipated changes in the
metric predictions.
Inspired by [38], we propose a family of full-reference
HDR quality metrics, which rely on a simple inverse display
model [26] to transform an (uncalibrated) HDR image to a

22433

