This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DS-NeRV: Implicit Neural Video Representation with Decomposed Static and
Dynamic Codes
Hao Yan

Zhihui Ke
Xiaobo Zhou†
Tie Qiu
Xidong Shi
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University

Dadong Jiang

{yan hao, kezhihui, xiaobo.zhou, qiutie, suif, patrickdd}@tju.edu.cn

Figure 1. (Left) Our proposed DS-NeRV decomposes the video into learnable static and dynamic codes, which represent static elements
and dynamic elements in the video. (Right) Video reconstruction results for various implicit neural representations with 0.35M.

Abstract
Implicit neural representations for video (NeRV) have
recently become a novel way for high-quality video representation. However, existing works employ a single network to represent the entire video, which implicitly confuse static and dynamic information. This leads to an inability to effectively compress the redundant static information and lack the explicitly modeling of global temporalcoherent dynamic details. To solve above problems, we propose DS-NeRV, which decomposes videos into sparse learnable static codes and dynamic codes without the need for
explicit optical flow or residual supervision. By setting different sampling rates for two codes and applying weighted
sum and interpolation sampling methods, DS-NeRV efficiently utilizes redundant static information while maintaining high-frequency details. Additionally, we design a crosschannel attention-based (CCA) fusion module to efficiently
fuse these two codes for frame decoding. Our approach
achieves a high quality reconstruction of 31.2 PSNR with
only 0.35M parameters thanks to separate static and dynamic codes representation and outperforms existing NeRV
methods in many downstream tasks. Our project website is
at https://haoyan14.github.io/DS-NeRV/.

† Corresponding Author

1. Introduction
In the first half of 2022, video traffic accounted for a substantial 65.93% share of the overall network traffic and constituted as much as 80% of the total downstream traffic during the evening peak hours [1, 2]. This causes tremendous
pressure on network communication and storage. Thus, it
is crucial to explore more efficient video representations for
compression.
In recent years, implicit neural representations (INR)
have emerged as a promising solution due to their remarkable capacity to represent diverse forms of signals [9, 34,
38, 41]. With the development of INR, it has been applied
to video representation tasks, such as NeRV [9], which has
transformed the challenge of video compression into a problem of model compression. Additionally, INR-based video
representations often exhibit a simpler training process and
a higher decoding speed [11] compared to traditional video
compression methods [13, 22, 43, 47] and learning-based
video compression methods [3, 14, 26, 28, 52].
Typically, INR-based video representations can be categorized into two types: (1) index-based [4, 9, 25] methods that model the video as a neural network, where the
positional encoding of the frame index is taken as input
to reconstruct the corresponding frame. (2) hybrid-based
methods [11, 54] that employ an encoder-decoder archi-

23019

