This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generating Enhanced Negatives for Training Language-Based Object Detectors
Shiyu Zhao1,∗
Long Zhao3
Vijay Kumar B G2
Yumin Suh2
Dimitris N. Metaxas1
Manmohan Chandraker2,4
Samuel Schulter2
NEC Laboratories America

3

Google Research

1. Introduction
Using natural language in object detection to describe semantics bears the potential to significantly increase the size
of the detector’s label space and enable novel applications.
While standard detectors operate on a fixed label space [23,
38, 42], natural language allows for a broad spectrum of object descriptions, ranging from generic terms like ”vehicle”
to specific expressions like ”the red sports car parked on the
left side” [12, 17, 25, 30, 41, 53, 54]. Several works advanced language-based object detection over the past few
years with novel training strategies [3, 5, 19, 22, 32, 34, 57]
and model architectures [11, 15, 33, 45].
Referring expression or visual grounding datasets [14,
30, 36, 50, 54] provide the natural language object descrip∗ Part of this work was done during an internship at NEC Laboratories
America. Correspondence to: Shiyu Zhao sz553@rutgers.edu

UC San Diego

Woman in a dress walking across a bridge

Abstract

Positive

Existing work
Woman in a
dress walking
across a bridge

Our work

Car parked on the
street

Woman in a dress
walking across a bridge
LLM

(random sample)
Negative

The recent progress in language-based open-vocabulary
object detection can be largely attributed to finding better
ways of leveraging large-scale data with free-form text annotations. Training such models with a discriminative objective function has proven successful, but requires good
positive and negative samples. However, the free-form nature and the open vocabulary of object descriptions make
the space of negatives extremely large. Prior works randomly sample negatives or use rule-based techniques to
build them. In contrast, we propose to leverage the vast
knowledge built into modern generative models to automatically build negatives that are more relevant to the original data. Specifically, we use large-language-models to
generate negative text descriptions, and text-to-image diffusion models to also generate corresponding negative images. Our experimental analysis confirms the relevance of
the generated negative data, and its use in language-based
detectors improves performance on two complex benchmarks. Code is available at https://github.com/
xiaofeng94/Gen-Enhanced-Negs.

4

Woman in a dress
walking across a beach

Text2Img
Negative image

2

Positive

Rutgers University

Negative

1

Figure 1. The key contribution of our work is to leverage largelanguage-models and text-to-image diffusion models to automatically generate negative object descriptions and images for training
language-based object detectors. In contrast to prior work, our
generated negatives are more relevant to the original data and provide a better training signal for detectors.

tions along with bounding box annotations needed for training. However, this data only describes what is present in the
images, but misses to describe what is not. Yet, the notion of
negatives is crucial for training discriminative models like
language-based detectors [7, 24, 39].
Detection datasets with a fixed label space provide negative classes implicitly or explicitly, with exhaustive [23, 42]
or federated [6, 16] annotations, respectively. Any part of
an image that does not overlap significantly with a bounding box of category c is verified to not be of that category
(for exhaustive annotation). On the other hand, the space
of negatives for a free-form text description of an object is
extremely large. While some existing datasets provide negative samples in free-form text [43, 46], they were not annotated with bounding boxes. Hence, existing language-based
detectors often define the negatives for one object as the descriptions of all other objects in the same image or descriptions of other random samples [3, 11, 19]. However, such
negatives may not be directly related to the original positive
description and define a weaker training signal (see Fig. 1).
By explicitly evaluating on human-curated negatives, a re-

13592

