This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ShapeWalk: Compositional Shape Editing through Language-Guided Chains
Habib Slim
KAUST

Mohamed Elhoseiny
KAUST

habib.slim@kaust.edu.sa

mohamed.elhoseiny@kaust.edu.sa

Figure 1. Visualizing shape chains from ShapeWalk. Our dataset consists of 158K unique shapes connected through 26K
edit chains, with an average length of 14 chained shapes. We illustrate the interpolation process by coloring shapes based on
their proximity to the starting shape (blue), and the ending shape (orange). Each consecutive pair of shapes is associated with
precise language instructions describing the applied edits. For each shape transition, we also provide a precise edit vector θij
describing the parameter changes necessary to transition from one shape to the next.

Abstract
Editing 3D shapes through natural language instructions
is a challenging task that requires the comprehension of
both language semantics and fine-grained geometric details. To bridge this gap, we introduce ShapeWalk, a carefully designed synthetic dataset designed to advance the
field of language-guided shape editing. The dataset consists
of 158K unique shapes connected through 26K edit chains,
with an average length of 14 chained shapes. Each consecutive pair of shapes is associated with precise language
instructions describing the applied edits. We synthesize edit
chains by reconstructing and interpolating shapes sampled
from a realistic CAD-designed 3D dataset in the parameter

space of the GeoCode shape program. We leverage rulebased methods and language models to generate accurate
and realistic natural language prompts corresponding to
each edit. To illustrate the practicality of our contribution,
we train neural editor modules in the latent space of shape
autoencoders, and demonstrate the ability of our dataset to
enable a variety of language-guided shape edits. Finally,
we introduce multi-step editing metrics to benchmark the
capacity of our models to perform recursive shape edits.
We hope that our work will enable further study of compositional language-guided shape editing, and finds application
in 3D CAD design and interactive modeling.

22574

