This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards the Uncharted: Density-Descending Feature Perturbation
for Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation

1

Xiaoyang Wang1,2,3
Huihui Bai4
2
XJTLU
University of Liverpool

3

Limin Yu1
Metavisioncn

Yao Zhao4
Jimin Xiao1 *
4
Beijing Jiaotong University

Abstract
Semi-supervised semantic segmentation allows model to
mine effective supervision from unlabeled data to complement label-guided training. Recent research has primarily focused on consistency regularization techniques,
exploring perturbation-invariant training at both the image and feature levels. In this work, we proposed a
novel feature-level consistency learning framework named
Density-Descending Feature Perturbation (DDFP). Inspired by the low-density separation assumption in semisupervised learning, our key insight is that feature density can shed a light on the most promising direction for
the segmentation classifier to explore, which is the regions
with lower density. We propose to shift features with confident predictions towards lower-density regions by perturbation injection. The perturbed features are then supervised by the predictions on the original features, thereby
compelling the classifier to explore less dense regions to
effectively regularize the decision boundary. Central to
our method is the estimation of feature density. To this
end, we introduce a lightweight density estimator based
on normalizing flow, allowing for efficient capture of the
feature density distribution in an online manner. By extracting gradients from the density estimator, we can determine the direction towards less dense regions for each
feature. The proposed DDFP outperforms other designs on
feature-level perturbations and shows state of the art performances on both Pascal VOC and Cityscapes dataset under various partition protocols. The project is available at
https://github.com/Gavinwxy/DDFP.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental task in visual understanding, involving pixel-level classification on input
images [7, 24, 34, 55]. However, segmentation models often exhibit a strong dependence on large amounts of annotated data. Unfortunately, collecting such training data
* Corresponding author.

(a) Original features

(b) Perturbed features

Figure 1. t-SNE visualization of per-pixel features from Pascal
VOC 2012 dataset [13]. (a) Features extracted from encoder. (b)
Features after the proposed DDFP strategy (shown in red). The
perturbed features significantly deviate from high density centers
and move towards low density regions within and out of clusters.

can be both time-consuming and laborious, thereby impeding the practical application of segmentation models. To
address the challenge, semi-supervised semantic segmentation is drawing growing attention recently [42]. Such learning paradigm aims to enhance label-efficiency by utilizing
a limit amount of labeled data alongside massive unlabeled
data. The key lies in mining effective training signal from
unlabeled data to allow better model generalization.
Recent research in semi-supervised semantic segmentation has witnessed a transition from primal adversarial learning approaches [21, 35, 42] to self-training methods [16, 19, 50, 52]. Recent studies focus on consistency
regularization frameworks, which aim to enforce prediction
agreement across diverse views of unlabelled images [15].
Notably, alternative data views can also be created at feature level, which is explored by a line of works [33, 37, 51].
Among these methods, uniformly sampled noise, random
channel dropout, and perturbations adversarial to predictions are applied to image features. Subsequently, predictions on perturbed features are supervised by those derived
from the original ones, enabling feature-level consistency
learning. These methods have demonstrated their efficacy.
Nonetheless, previous design of feature-level perturbations

3303

