This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AIDE: An Automatic Data Engine for Object Detection in Autonomous Driving
Mingfu Liang1

Jong-Chyi Su2 Samuel Schulter2 Sparsh Garg2 Shiyu Zhao3
Ying Wu1 Manmohan Chandraker2,4
1
2
Northwestern University
NEC Laboratories America 3 Rutgers University 4 UC San Diego

Abstract
Autonomous vehicle (AV) systems rely on robust perception models as a cornerstone of safety assurance. However,
objects encountered on the road exhibit a long-tailed distribution, with rare or unseen categories posing challenges to
a deployed perception model. This necessitates an expensive process of continuously curating and annotating data
with significant human effort. We propose to leverage recent
advances in vision-language and large language models to
design an Automatic Data Engine (AIDE) that automatically identifies issues, efficiently curates data, improves the
model through auto-labeling, and verifies the model through
generation of diverse scenarios. This process operates iteratively, allowing for continuous self-improvement of the
model. We further establish a benchmark for open-world
detection on AV datasets to comprehensively evaluate various learning paradigms, demonstrating our method’s superior performance at a reduced cost.

1. Introduction
Autonomous vehicles (AVs) operate in an ever-changing
world, encountering diverse objects and scenarios in a longtailed distribution. This open-world nature poses a significant challenge for AV systems since it is a safety-critical
application where reliable and well-trained models must be
deployed. The need for continuous model improvement
becomes apparent as the environment evolves, demanding adaptability to handle unexpected events. Despite the
wealth of data collected on the road every minute, its effective utilization remains low due to challenges in discerning
which data to leverage. While solutions exist for this in industry [1, 2], they are often trade secrets and presumably
require significant human effort. Hence, developing a comprehensive automated data engine can lower entry barriers
for the AV industry.
Designing automated data engines can be challenging,
but the existence of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) and
This work was part of Mingfu’s internship at NEC Labs America.
Email: mingfuliang2020@u.northwestern.edu

Figure 1. Top: Components for DevOp systems for autonomous
driving. Bottom: With our automatic data system, we can achieve
similar performance with less labeling and training costs.

Large Language Models (LLMs) allows new avenues to
these hard problems. A traditional data engine can be broken down into finding issues, curating and labeling data,
model training, and evaluation, all of which can benefit
from automation. In this paper, we propose an Automatically Improving Data Engine (called AIDE) that leverages
VLMs and LLMs to automate the data engine. Specifically, we use VLMs to identify the issue, query relevant
data, auto-label data, and verify together with LLMs. The
high-level steps are shown in Fig. 1 top.
In contrast to traditional data engines that rely heavily
on extensive human labeling and intervention, AIDE automated the process by utilizing pre-trained VLMs and LLMs.
Different from other confidential solutions in industry [1,
2], we provide our efficient solutions to lower the entry
barrier. While open-vocabulary object detection (OVOD)
methods [3, 4] do not require any human annotations, they
are a good starting point for detecting novel objects but their

14695

