This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gaussian Head Avatar: Ultra High-fidelity Head Avatar via Dynamic Gaussians
Yuelang Xu1 , Bengwang Chen1 , Zhe Li1 , Hongwen Zhang2 , Lizhen Wang1 , Zerong Zheng3 , Yebin Liu1†
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 2 Beijing Normal University 3 NNKosmos Technology

Figure 1. Gaussian head avatar achieves ultra high-fidelity image synthesis with controllable expressions at 2K resolution. The above
shows different views of the synthesized avatar, and the bottom shows different identities animated by the same expression. 16 views are
used during the training.

Abstract
Creating high-fidelity 3D head avatars has always been
a research hotspot, but there remains a great challenge under lightweight sparse view setups. In this paper, we propose Gaussian Head Avatar represented by controllable 3D
Gaussians for high-fidelity head avatar modeling. We optimize the neutral 3D Gaussians and a fully learned MLPbased deformation field to capture complex expressions.
The two parts benefit each other, thereby our method can
model fine-grained dynamic details while ensuring expression accuracy. Furthermore, we devise a well-designed
geometry-guided initialization strategy based on implicit
SDF and Deep Marching Tetrahedra for the stability and
convergence of the training procedure. Experiments show
our approach outperforms other state-of-the-art sparseview methods, achieving ultra high-fidelity rendering quality at 2K resolution even under exaggerated expressions.
Project page: https : / / yuelangx . github . io /
gaussianheadavatar.
†Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
High-fidelity 3D human head avatar modeling is of great
significance in many fields, such as VR/AR, telepresence,
digital human and film production. Automatically creating high-fidelity avatars has been a research hotspot in
computer vision for decades. Although some traditional
head avatars [37, 39, 41, 54] can realize high-fidelity animation, they typically require accurate geometries reconstructed and tracked from dense multi-view videos, thus
limiting their applications in lightweight settings.
Thanks to the Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [43]
which show great capability of novel view synthesis in
the absence of accurate geometry, recent methods [38, 57]
skip the geometry reconstruction and tracking steps but directly learn high-quality NeRF-based head avatars. Other
works [42, 48, 71] have verified that NeRF can be applied
to either dense or sparse views, which greatly lowers the
threshold for head avatar reconstruction. However, it still
remains challenging for these NeRF-based approaches to
synthesize high-fidelity images at 2K resolutions with pixel-

1931

