This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ID-Blau: Image Deblurring by Implicit Diffusion-based reBLurring
AUgmentation
Jia-Hao Wu∗,1 Fu-Jen Tsai∗,2 Yan-Tsung Peng3 Chung-Chi Tsai4 Chia-Wen Lin2 Yen-Yu Lin1
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University1 National Tsing Hua University2
National Chengchi University3 Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.4
jiahao.11@nycu.edu.tw
charles0184@gmail.com

fjtsi@gapp.nthu.edu.tw
cwlin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

Abstract
Image deblurring aims to remove undesired blurs from
an image captured in a dynamic scene. Much research
has been dedicated to improving deblurring performance
through model architectural designs. However, there is
little work on data augmentation for image deblurring.
Since continuous motion causes blurred artifacts during image exposure, we aspire to develop a groundbreaking blur
augmentation method to generate diverse blurred images
by simulating motion trajectories in a continuous space.
This paper proposes Implicit Diffusion-based reBLurring
AUgmentation (ID-Blau), utilizing a sharp image paired
with a controllable blur condition map to produce a corresponding blurred image. We parameterize the blur patterns of a blurred image with their orientations and magnitudes as a pixel-wise blur condition map to simulate motion trajectories and implicitly represent them in a continuous space. By sampling diverse blur conditions, IDBlau can generate various blurred images unseen in the
training set. Experimental results demonstrate that IDBlau can produce realistic blurred images for training
and thus significantly improve performance for state-of-theart deblurring models. The source code is available at
https://github.com/plusgood-steven/ID-Blau.

1. Introduction
Camera shake or object movements cause unpleasant motion blurs when we capture images. Such blurs are usually
non-uniform, leading to locally and globally undesirable artifacts. Image deblurring aims to restore the sharpness of a
blurred image, a highly ill-posed problem that has remained
challenging over the past decades.
Image deblurring has reached remarkable progress with
the rise of deep learning. Numerous methods based on con∗ equal contribution

ytpeng@cs.nccu.edu.tw
lin@cs.nycu.edu.tw

Blur Condition Field

Condition A

Condition B

Condition C

𝟗𝟗𝟗𝟗𝟗
𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏

𝟎𝟎𝟎
𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐𝟐

Sharp

ID-Blau

Reblurred A

Reblurred B

Reblurred C

Figure 1. Examples of continuous reblurring by ID-Blau, where
blur condition maps represent pixel-wise blur information, consisting of blur orientations and magnitudes, in a continuous space.
ID-Blau can take a sharp image and a blur condition map to synthesize a blurred image, even unseen in the training set. Condition
A is a blur condition map computed from the GoPro training set,
which can be used to reblur a sharp image to generate a blurred
image as provided in the training set. We can create Condition B
and C based on A to synthesize new reblurred images, where Condition B is Condition A with rotated orientations, and Condition C
is Condition A added with a camera motion blur.

volutional neural networks (CNNs) have rendered success
in deblurring. These methods mostly adopted recurrentbased architectures, such as multi-scales [8, 18, 28], multipatches [39, 41], and multi-temporal [20]. In addition to
CNN-based methods, several studies have shown significant
improvement using Transformers [3, 13, 31, 33, 40]. Transformers [32] utilize self-attention mechanisms to extract
longer-range features than CNNs but require more memory. To overcome the high memory usage in the vanilla
self-attention mechanism, some efficient attention mechanisms have been proposed, such as the channel-wise [40]
and strip-wise attention [31] mechanisms.

25847

