This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ManiFPT: Defining and Analyzing Fingerprints of Generative Models
Hae Jin Song1,2 * Mahyar Khayatkhoei1,2 Wael AbdAlmageed3
1
University of Southern California 2 USC Information Sciences Institute 3 Clemson University

Abstract
Recent works have shown that generative models leave
traces of their underlying generative process on the generated samples, broadly referred to as fingerprints of a generative model, and have studied their utility in detecting
synthetic images from real ones. However, the extend to
which these fingerprints can distinguish between various
types of synthetic image and help identify the underlying
generative process remain under-explored. In particular,
the very definition of a fingerprint remains unclear, to our
knowledge. To that end, in this work, we formalize the definition of artifact and fingerprint in generative models, propose
an algorithm for computing them in practice, and finally
study its effectiveness in distinguishing a large array of different generative models. We find that using our proposed
definition can significantly improve the performance on the
task of identifying the underlying generative process from
samples (model attribution) compared to existing methods.
Additionally, we study the structure of the fingerprints, and
observe that it is very predictive of the effect of different
design choices on the generative process.

1. Introduction
While distinguishing synthetic images from real ones has received a lot of attention in recent years [5, 13, 27, 52, 65, 66],
distinguishing between different methods of image synthesis
remains mostly under-studied [59, 62]. The latter, denoted
model attribution, is an interesting problem in two respects:
first, in practice it is often valuable to identify the source of
synthetic data – not just that it is synthetic – to differentiate
between authorized vs. malicious personification [14] and
digital copyright infringement [11]; second, model attribution provides a systematic way of studying the similarities
and differences between various families of generative models and revealing the unique limitations of each family in
learning the true distribution, thereby accelerating developments of new generative models that improve upon such
limitations [3, 7, 16, 46, 59].
* Corresponding author: Hae Jin Song <haejinso@usc.edu>

Figure 1. Our definition of artifacts and fingerprints of a generative model. We estimate the true data manifold M using real
samples and compute an artifact a as the difference between a generated sample and its closest point in the real dataset. We define
the fingerprint F of a generative model as the set of all its artifacts.

We study the problem of fingerprinting generative models
(GMs) based on their samples with an aim to provide a
formal, analytical framework to study and compare their
characteristics. Recent works on GAN-generated images and
DeepFake detection have observed that generative models
leave unique traces of computations on their samples that are
distinguishable from natural image generation process (i.e.
image capturing and processing steps of digital cameras).
Such observations include checkerboard patterns introduced
by deconvolution layers in generator networks [44], spectral
discrepancies due to the frequency bias of generative models
[7, 37, 51, 59] and semantic inconsistencies like mismatched
eye colors and asymmetric facial features [39].
The existence of such fingerprints have been supported
by two streams of approaches: one by showing that a classifier can effectively distinguish samples generated by a
model from real samples [59, 62], and another by directly
visualizing the differences between generated and true samples [7, 8, 62]. While such works provide evidence for the
existence of some fingerprints, the fingerprint itself still remains without an explicit definition. In other words, existing
works define the measures of fingerprints [7, 8, 12, 39, 41],
rather than fingerprints themselves. This brings about two
major drawbacks in developing methods for fingerprinting

10791

