This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRF Analogies: Example-Based Visual Attribute Transfer for NeRFs
Michael Fischer1 * Zhengqin Li2

Thu Nguyen-Phuoc2

Carl Marshall2
1

Geometry

University College London

Given

Appearance

A

Given

Aljaž Božič2

Zhao Dong2

Tobias Ritschel1
2

Meta Reality Labs Research
Geometry

A’

Given

B

Inferred

Appearance

B’

Figure 1. Given a source NeRF that encodes 3D geometry (A) and appearance (A’), as well as a target NeRF that encodes 3D geometry
without appearance (B), our method infers a NeRF analogy (B’) that combines the target geometry with the source appearance.

Abstract
A Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) encodes the specific relation of 3D geometry and appearance of a scene. We here
ask the question whether we can transfer the appearance
from a source NeRF onto a target 3D geometry in a semantically meaningful way, such that the resulting new NeRF
retains the target geometry but has an appearance that is
an analogy to the source NeRF. To this end, we generalize classic image analogies from 2D images to NeRFs. We
leverage correspondence transfer along semantic affinity
that is driven by semantic features from large, pre-trained
2D image models to achieve multi-view consistent appearance transfer. Our method allows exploring the mix-andmatch product space of 3D geometry and appearance. We
show that our method outperforms traditional stylizationbased methods and that a large majority of users prefer
our method over several typical baselines. Project page:
mfischer-ucl.github.io/nerf_analogies.

1. Introduction
Understanding and representing the three-dimensional
world, a fundamental challenge in computer vision, requires
accurate modeling of the interplay between geometry and
appearance. NeRFs [42] have emerged as a pivotal tool
in this space, uniquely encoding this relationship via op* Corresponding author. Work done during an internship at Meta Reality Labs Research. Contact: m.fischer@cs.ucl.ac.uk.

timized color- and density-mappings. However, in spite of
their success for high-quality novel view synthesis (NVS),
most NeRF representations remain notoriously hard to edit,
which led to the research field of NeRF editing.
In this work, we contribute to this evolving landscape
by exploring NeRF Analogies, a novel aspect of NeRF manipulation between semantically related objects. Fig. 1 illustrates this concept: We begin with an existing NeRF,
designated A′ , which is derived from the geometric structure of a boot (A) and its appearance. This NeRF, which
we henceforth will call our source NeRF, encodes the relation of geometry and appearance. In a NeRF analogy,
we now seek to infer a new NeRF, B ′ , which, given a target geometric shape (the sneaker, B), satisfies the analogy
A : A′ :: B : B ′ , i.e., combines the visual appearance of
A′ with the new geometry B. NeRF analogies hence are a
way of changing a NeRF’s geometry while maintaining its
visual appearance - a counterpoint to recent research, which
often aims to update the encoded appearance based on (potentially non-intuitive) text-embeddings, while keeping the
geometry (largely) unchanged.
Creating a NeRF analogy essentially requires solving the
problem of finding semantically related regions between
the target geometry B and the existing source NeRF A′ ,
which will then serve as guides for the subsequent appearance transfer. While image-based correspondence has been
thoroughly researched in the past [7, 14, 15, 39, 45, 49, 51],
recent work has shown the (un)reasonable success of the
activations of large, pre-trained networks for the task of
(dense) semantic image correspondence [1, 8, 50, 63]. More

4640

