This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniPT: Universal Parallel Tuning for Transfer Learning with
Efficient Parameter and Memory

1

Haiwen Diao1 , Bo Wan2 , Ying Zhang3 , Xu Jia1 , Huchuan Lu* 1 , Long Chen4
Dalian University of Technology 2 KU Leuven 3 Tencent WeChat 4 HKUST

diaohw@mail.dlut.edu.cn; bwan@esat.kuleuven.be; yinggzhang@tencent.com;
xjia@dlut.edu.cn;

lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn;

Abstract
Parameter-efficient transfer learning (PETL), i.e., finetuning a small portion of parameters, is an effective strategy
for adapting pre-trained models to downstream domains.
To further reduce the memory demand, recent PETL works
focus on the more valuable memory-efficient characteristic. In this paper, we argue that the scalability, adaptability,
and generalizability of state-of-the-art methods are hindered
by structural dependency and pertinency on specific pretrained backbones. To this end, we propose a new memoryefficient PETL strategy, Universal Parallel Tuning (UniPT),
to mitigate these weaknesses. Specifically, we facilitate the
transfer process via a lightweight and learnable parallel
network, which consists of: 1) A parallel interaction module that decouples the sequential connections and processes
the intermediate activations detachedly from the pre-trained
network. 2) A confidence aggregation module that learns
optimal strategies adaptively for integrating cross-layer features. We evaluate UniPT with different backbones (e.g.,
T5 [69], VSE∞ [12], CLIP4Clip [58], Clip-ViL [73], and
MDETR [42]) on various vision-and-language and pure NLP
tasks. Extensive ablations on 18 datasets have validated that
UniPT can not only dramatically reduce memory consumption and outperform the best competitor, but also achieve
competitive performance over other plain PETL methods
with lower training memory overhead. Our code is publicly
available at: https://github.com/Paranioar/UniPT.

1. Introduction
Large-scale deep neural networks [5, 17, 21, 68] trained on
massive data have been successfully investigated in various
vision and multimodal learning tasks [2, 18, 19, 26, 75, 87].
The most prevalent and straightforward strategy for transferring the knowledge from pre-trained models to downstream tasks is fully fine-tuning [12, 42, 58, 73]. However,
* Corresponding author. Work was done when Haiwen visited HKUST.

longchen@ust.hk

fine-tuning the entire network is prohibitively expensive, especially given a large model with millions of parameters.
Meanwhile, it easily suffers from the over-fitting problem
with a relatively “small” downstream dataset. To address it,
there is an increasing interest in parameter-efficient transfer
learning (PETL) [3, 34, 49, 65], which facilitates domain
adaptation by adjusting or inserting a few modules.
Currently, mainstream state-of-the-art PETL approaches
can be coarsely grouped into three categories: (a) Partially
Tuning [44, 90]: It only updates a few task-specific parameters and freezes most original parameters, such as modifies
the bias items [6, 90] or the normalization layers [44]. (b)
Adapter Tuning [24, 32, 34, 59]: It usually inserts a new
bottleneck-shaped module after each backbone layer, which
is the only part that needs to be updated. Typically, the
new module consists of a linear down-projection, a nonlinearity activation, and a linear up-projection. (c) Prompt
Tuning [27, 39, 49, 95]: It first integrates a fixed number of
learnable vectors as additional input tokens (i.e., prompts).
Then, it only learns the prompts and freezes all the raw parameters of the pre-trained network during the fine-tuning
stage. Although all the above PETL methods can dramatically reduce the trainable parameters and storage constraints,
their memory consumption remains costly during the training stage. As shown in Figure 1(a-c), the backward gradients
still need to go through (nearly the entire) foundation models.
This memory-extensive characteristic severely limits their
applications in resource-constrained scenarios.
Consequently, a few recent works [6, 22, 54, 77, 80, 91]
emphasize the requirements of both parameter and memory
efficiency during the training process. In particular, the most
successful method that achieves a good balance between performance and efficiency is Ladder Side Tuning (LST) [77].
As shown in Figure 1(d), it first constructs a lightweight side
network by keeping the same structure as the pre-trained
network but reducing the dimension of each original layer by
a predefined reduction factor. Then, it learns a static gated
ladder connection to combine the pair-wise features at each
layer between the side and pre-trained network.

28729

