This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TULIP: Transformer for Upsampling of LiDAR Point Clouds
Bin Yang1 , Patrick Pfreundschuh1 , Roland Siegwart1 , Marco Hutter2 , Peyman Moghadam3,4† , Vaishakh Patil2†
1
Autonomous Systems Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, 2 Robotic Systems Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
3
School of EER, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Australia, 4 Data61, CSIRO, Brisbane, Australia
{biyang, patripfr, rolandsi, mahutter, patilv}@ethz.ch, peyman.moghadam@csiro.au

Abstract
LiDAR Upsampling is a challenging task for the perception systems of robots and autonomous vehicles, due to
the sparse and irregular structure of large-scale scene contexts. Recent works propose to solve this problem by converting LiDAR data from 3D Euclidean space into an image super-resolution problem in 2D image space. Although
their methods can generate high-resolution range images
with fine-grained details, the resulting 3D point clouds often blur out details and predict invalid points. In this paper, we propose TULIP, a new method to reconstruct highresolution LiDAR point clouds from low-resolution LiDAR
input. We also follow a range image-based approach but
specifically modify the patch and window geometries of a
Swin-Transformer-based network to better fit the characteristics of range images. We conducted several experiments on three public real-world and simulated datasets.
TULIP outperforms state-of-the-art methods in all relevant metrics and generates robust and more realistic point
clouds than prior works. The code is available at https:
//github.com/ethz-asl/TULIP.git.

1. Introduction
Light Detection And Ranging (LiDAR) is one of the most
common sensors for perception in various fields of autonomy, such as autonomous driving, and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV). LiDARs are used to generate 3D point clouds
of the scene. These point clouds are essential for mapping,
localization, and object detection tasks. However, the accuracy of these tasks often depends on the resolution of
the point cloud [53]. Furthermore, the resolution of a LiDAR is inherently associated with increased energy consumption and cost, making its use impractical for various
applications. LiDARs also have different vertical and horizontal resolutions. The vertical resolution of rotating 3D
LiDARs is typically much lower than the horizontal res† Authors share last authorship.

(a) Input

(b) Ground Truth

(c) SwinIR [29]

(d) TULIP (Ours)

Figure 1. TULIP generates more realistic LiDAR point clouds
from low-resolution LiDAR input (a) and outperforms the state-ofthe-art image super-resolution approach [29] in upsampling with
fine-grained details of different objects in the scene.

olution. These limitations make an upsampling technique
necessary to increase the resolution of the LiDAR data, especially in the vertical direction. Moreover, upsampling LiDAR data has the potential to counter domain shift problems in LiDAR-based learning methods. Notably, the use
of lower resolution LiDAR data in a system that has been
trained on higher resolution data leads to a significant drop
in performance [3]. Therefore, such upsampling techniques
can not only help to mitigate the domain gap by creating
a virtual high-resolution sensor that matches the target domain [42, 61] but also reduce the high cost of collecting new
LiDAR data, annotating and retraining the methods.
Deep learning has led to remarkable advancements in LiDAR upsampling techniques in recent years. Several recent methods [42, 56, 58] have focused on learning the upsampling process within the 3D Euclidean space. However, the processing of 3D data in deep learning can be
quite resource-intensive. One way to address this challenge is the representation of the point cloud as a range image [18, 26, 43, 49]. This approach facilitates the adoption
of well-established image-based super-resolution methods.

15354

