This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Random Feature Regularization on Fine-tuning Deep Neural Networks
Shin’ya Yamaguchi*
NTT, Kyoto University

Sekitoshi Kanai
NTT

Abstract
While fine-tuning is a de facto standard method for training deep neural networks, it still suffers from overfitting
when using small target datasets. Previous methods improve
fine-tuning performance by maintaining knowledge of the
source datasets or introducing regularization terms such as
contrastive loss. However, these methods require auxiliary
source information (e.g., source labels or datasets) or heavy
additional computations. In this paper, we propose a simple method called adaptive random feature regularization
(AdaRand). AdaRand helps the feature extractors of training models to adaptively change the distribution of feature
vectors for downstream classification tasks without auxiliary source information and with reasonable computation
costs. To this end, AdaRand minimizes the gap between feature vectors and random reference vectors that are sampled
from class conditional Gaussian distributions. Furthermore,
AdaRand dynamically updates the conditional distribution to
follow the currently updated feature extractors and balance
the distance between classes in feature spaces. Our experiments show that AdaRand outperforms the other fine-tuning
regularization requiring auxiliary source information and
heavy computation costs.

1. Introduction
Fine-tuning is a standard technique for training deep neural
network models. In fine-tuning, we pre-train a model on
large-scale source tasks (e.g., ImageNet [28] and WebImageText for CLIP [27]) before training it on target tasks.
Fine-tuning can improve the performance and efficiency of
training on the target task [12]. However, fine-tuning deep
neural networks still suffers from overfitting when small
target datasets are used [18].
To alleviate the overfitting, previous studies have proposed regularization terms so that models maintain source
knowledge [18–20, 33]. The early methods simply minimize the gap between source and target models on the
* Corresponding author. shinya.yamaguchi@ntt.com

Kazuki Adachi
NTT

Daiki Chijiwa
NTT

model parameters [18] or the intermediate outputs [19].
The recent methods have evolved to utilize auxiliary source
information such as source classification labels [33] and
source datasets [20] to improve the performance. However,
the source information is not always available because pretraining methods are not limited to supervised classification
and source datasets are often private. For instance, multimodal pre-training by CLIP [27] provides only pre-trained
parameters but not the source dataset (WebImageText). Thus,
we cannot directly apply the regularization methods using
the auxiliary source information to CLIP pre-trained models.
An alternative regularization strategy that does not require source information is to modify feature vectors or task
heads to be desirable for solving downstream classification
tasks [10, 36–38]. These methods penalize the feature extractors of fine-tuning models by \ell _1/\ell _2 loss for selecting
features to train effectively [10, 37] or contrastive loss for
obtaining instance discriminative features [36]. More recently, Zhou et al. [38] have shown a regularization method
that enforces linear classification head parameters to classify
the features extracted from fixed source models. However,
this method requires additional memory to store pre-trained
features and compute their penalty term. This increases
the memory and computation costs of fine-tuning and the
complexity of implementation.
To achieve high performance without auxiliary source
information and non-negligible computation costs, we spotlight the method proposed by Zhong and Maki [37], which
we call random feature regularization (RandReg). RandReg
penalizes the feature extractor by the \ell _2 distance between
feature vectors and random reference vectors. The reference
vectors are drawn from a class-agnostic prior distribution
that is independent of the target task, e.g., uniform distribution. By perturbing features with randomness in addition to
penalizing the feature norms, RandReg boosts fine-tuning
performance without auxiliary source information and heavy
additional computation costs.
Although RandReg boosts the performance, we empirically found that (a) the performance gain of RandReg depends on the choice of the prior distribution because the
feature norms and scales of pre-trained models vary widely

23481

