This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-supervised debiasing using low rank regularization
Geon Yeong Park1 , Chanyong Jung1 , Sangmin Lee2 , Jong Chul Ye1,2,3∗ Sang Wan Lee1,4∗
1
Bio and Brain Engineering, 2 Mathematical Sciences,
3
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, 4 Brain and Cognitive Sciences
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Korea
{pky3436, jcy132, leeleesang, jong.ye, sangwan}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Spurious correlations can cause strong biases in deep
neural networks, impairing generalization ability. While
most existing debiasing methods require full supervision
on either spurious attributes or target labels, training a
debiased model from a limited amount of both annotations is
still an open question. To address this issue, we investigate
an interesting phenomenon using the spectral analysis of
latent representations: spuriously correlated attributes make
neural networks inductively biased towards encoding lower
effective rank representations. We also show that a rank
regularization can amplify this bias in a way that encourages
highly correlated features. Leveraging these findings, we
propose a self-supervised debiasing framework potentially
compatible with unlabeled samples. Specifically, we first
pretrain a biased encoder in a self-supervised manner with
the rank regularization, serving as a semantic bottleneck
to enforce the encoder to learn the spuriously correlated
attributes. This biased encoder is then used to discover
and upweight bias-conflicting samples in a downstream task,
serving as a boosting to effectively debias the main model.
Remarkably, the proposed debiasing framework significantly
improves the generalization performance of self-supervised
learning baselines and, in some cases, even outperforms
state-of-the-art supervised debiasing approaches.

1. Introduction
While modern deep learning solves several challenging tasks
successfully, a series of recent works [16, 18, 20] have
reported that the high accuracy of deep networks on indistribution samples does not always guarantee low test error
on out-of-distribution (OOD) samples, especially in the context of spurious correlations. Existing studies [3, 38, 50]
suggest that the deep networks can be potentially biased to
the spuriously correlated attributes, or dataset bias, which are
misleading statistical heuristics that are closely correlated
but not causally related to the target label.

These catastrophic pitfalls of dataset bias have facilitated the development of debiasing methods, which can be
roughly categorized into approaches: (1) leveraging annotations of spurious attributes, i.e., bias label [27, 46, 49, 56];
(2) presuming specific type of bias, e.g., color and texture
[5, 17, 53]; or (3) without using explicit kinds of supervisions on dataset bias [30, 31, 35, 39, 60].
While substantial advances have been made in this regard,
these approaches still fail to address the problem: how to
train a debiased classifier by fully exploiting unlabeled samples lacking both bias and target label. More specifically,
while the large-scale unlabeled dataset can be potentially
biased towards spuriously correlated sensitive attributes, e.g.,
ethnicity, gender, or age [1, 2], current existing debiasing
frameworks are not designed to deal with this real-world
unsupervised settings. Here we also confirm that most supervised debiasing frameworks suffer from performance degradation in the low-labeled data setting. Moreover, recent
works have suggested that self-supervised learning might
not be sufficient to deal with OOD generalization [10, 19, 44]
when dataset bias remains after data augmentation.
To tackle this issue, we first make a series of empirical observations that allow us to examine the fundamental
difference between biased and unbiased representations. Interestingly, we found that spurious correlations suppress the
effective rank [45] of latent representations, which severely
deteriorates the semantic diversity of representations and
leads to the degradation of feature discriminability. Another notable aspect of our findings is that the intentional
increase of feature redundancy amplifies “prejudice” in neural networks. To be specific, as we enforce the correlation
among latent features to regularize the effective rank of
representations (i.e., rank regularization), the accuracy on
bias-conflicting samples quickly declines while the model
still performs reasonably well on the bias-aligned 1 samples.
1 The bias-aligned samples refer to data with a strong correlation be-

tween (potentially latent) spurious features and target labels. The biasconflicting samples refer to the opposite cases where spurious correlations
do not exist.

12395

