This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

L2B: Learning to Bootstrap Robust Models for Combating Label Noise
Yuyin Zhou1* Xianhang Li1* Fengze Liu2 Qingyue Wei5
Xuxi Chen3 Lequan Yu4 Cihang Xie1 Matthew P. Lungren5 Lei Xing5
∗

1

equal contribution

University of California, Santa Cruz 2 Johns Hopkins University
4
The University of Hong Kong 5 Stanford University

Abstract
Deep neural networks have shown great success in representation learning. However, when learning with noisy
labels (LNL), they can easily overfit and fail to generalize to new data. This paper introduces a simple and effective method, named Learning to Bootstrap (L2B), which
enables models to bootstrap themselves using their own
predictions without being adversely affected by erroneous
pseudo-labels. It achieves this by dynamically adjusting the
importance weight between real observed and generated labels, as well as between different samples through metalearning. Unlike existing instance reweighting methods, the
key to our method lies in a new, versatile objective that enables implicit relabeling concurrently, leading to significant
improvements without incurring additional costs.
L2B offers several benefits over the baseline methods. It
yields more robust models that are less susceptible to the
impact of noisy labels by guiding the bootstrapping procedure more effectively. It better exploits the valuable information contained in corrupted instances by adapting the
weights of both instances and labels. Furthermore, L2B is
compatible with existing LNL methods and delivers competitive results spanning natural and medical imaging tasks
including classification and segmentation under both synthetic and real-world noise. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method effectively mitigates the challenges of
noisy labels, often necessitating few to no validation samples, and is well generalized to other tasks such as image
segmentation. This not only positions it as a robust complement to existing LNL techniques but also underscores its
practical applicability. The code and models are available
at https://github.com/yuyinzhou/l2b.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, deep learning has made significant
strides, especially when provided with extensive, high-

3

UT Austin

quality datasets. However, the persistent issue of label
noise in real-world datasets, which stems from factors
such as inter-observer variability, human annotation errors,
and adversarial rival, can significantly undermine performance [31]. As the size of datasets for deep learning continues to grow, the impact of label noise may become more
significant. Understanding and addressing label noise is
crucial for improving the accuracy and reliability of deep
learning models [28, 49, 53, 60, 70, 71, 73].
Existing learning with noisy labels (LNL) methods, such
as [9, 35], focus on loss correction by estimating a noise
corruption matrix, which is often challenging and involves
assumptions [13, 29, 54]. Recent research like [10, 15, 62]
primarily targets identifying and utilizing clean samples
within noisy datasets, frequently treating low-loss samples as clean [3]. Unlike approaches that discard noisy
examples, meta-learning methods [38, 40] assign adaptive weights to each sample, with noisier ones receiving lower weights. However, this may compromise performance in high-noise scenarios by neglecting or underweighting portions of the training data. To better utilize
corrupted samples, several studies have focused on using
network predictions, or pseudo-labels [19], to recalibrate labels [2, 37, 43, 44, 61]. The bootstrapping loss method [37]
is notable for using pseudo-labels in training targets, countering noisy sample effects. However, the static weight of
pseudo-labels can lead to overfitting and inadequate label
correction [2]. Addressing this, Arazo et al. [2] developed a
dynamic bootstrapping method that adjusts the balance between actual and pseudo-labels using a mixture model.
In contrast to prior works that individually reweight labels or instances, our paper introduces a simple and effective approach to concurrently adjust both, elegantly unified
under a meta-learning framework. We term our method as
Learning to Bootstrap (L2B), as our goal is to enable the
network to self-boost its capabilities by harnessing its own
predictions in combating label noise. Specifically, L2B introduces a new, versatile loss that allows dynamically ad-

23523

