This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Garment Recovery with Shape and Deformation Priors
Ren Li

Corentin Dumery Benoît Guillard
CVLab, EPFL

Pascal Fua

{name.surname}@epfl.ch

Shape Prior
(ISP)

Deformation
Model (Prior)

Fitting

Trained on Synthetic Data

Garment Recovery

Simulation

Figure 1. We propose a ﬁtting method that leverages shape and deformation priors trained on synthetic data to recover realistic 3D garment
mesh from in-the-wild images. We produce triangulated meshes that are directly usable for animation and simulation.

Abstract
While modeling people wearing tight-ﬁtting clothing has
made great strides in recent years, loose-ﬁtting clothing remains a challenge. We propose a method that delivers realistic garment models from real-world images, regardless
of garment shape or deformation. To this end, we introduce
a ﬁtting approach that utilizes shape and deformation priors learned from synthetic data to accurately capture garment shapes and deformations, including large ones. Not
only does our approach recover the garment geometry accurately, it also yields models that can be directly used by
downstream applications such as animation and simulation.

1. Introduction
3D clothed human recovery aims to reconstruct the body
shape, pose, and clothing of many different people from images. It is key to applications such as fashion design, virtual
try-on, 3D avatars, along with virtual and augmented reality.
Recent years have seen tremendous progress in modeling
people wearing tight-ﬁtting clothing both in terms of body
poses [6, 14, 21, 22, 25, 26, 28, 30, 38, 41, 54] and 3D shape
of the clothes [5, 9–11, 20, 31, 32, 39]. However, looseﬁtting clothing remains a challenge. Existing approaches
either rely on mesh templates with limited generality, or
produce models expressed in terms of 3D point clouds [37]
or as a single watertight mesh that tightly binds the body

and garment together [53], neither of which is straightforward to integrate into downstream applications.
In this paper, we propose a method that overcomes these
limitations and can effectively recover the shape of loose ﬁtting garments from single images. The recovered garments
can then be animated without any additional processing, as
shown in Fig. 1. Starting from the Implicit Sewing Patterns
(ISP) model [32] that represents garments in terms of a set
of individual 2D panels and 3D surfaces associated to these
panels, we introduce a deformation model that we apply to
the 3D surfaces so that they can deviate substantially from
the body shape. These deformations are conditioned on normals estimated from an input image of the target garment.
They are learned from synthetic mesh data featuring loose
clothing, where the deformations are taken to be those required to ﬁt individual ISP 3D surfaces to the ground-truth
3D meshes.
Given the trained deformation model, we designed a
two-stage ﬁtting process to recover the 3D garment from
in-the-wild images. First, the parameters of the pre-trained
deformation model are optimized to produce a shape that
minimizes the distance between garment outlines and segmented garment regions, the differences between garment
normals and the normals estimated in the images by offthe-shelf-algorithms [46, 53], and a physics-based loss to
promote physical plausibility of the results. Then, ﬁne local
details are recovered by directly optimizing the vertex positions of the reconstructed mesh with the same loss. Our ﬁtting process does not require external 3D annotations, other

1586

