This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Smooth Diffusion: Crafting Smooth Latent Spaces in Diffusion Models
Jiayi Guo1,2 ,* Xingqian Xu1,3 ,* Yifan Pu2 , Zanlin Ni2 , Chaofei Wang2 , Manushree Vasu1 ,
Shiji Song2 , Gao Huang2† , Humphrey Shi1,3†
1

SHI Labs @ Georgia Tech & UIUC

2

Tsinghua University

3

Picsart AI Research (PAIR)

https://github.com/SHI-Labs/Smooth-Diffusion
Task 1: Image Interpolation

“A realistic dog”

Smooth
Diffusion
(Ours)

Stable
Diffusion
Image A

Interpolation

Task 2: Image Inversion and Reconstruction
Task 3: Image Editing
“A train going back to its course filled with people”
Replace Item: “rabbit”→ “cat”

“A mouse is next to a keyboard on a desk”

Source

Smooth Diff. Stable Diff.

Image B
Add Item: +“bacon”

Transfer Style: “watercolor style”

Source

Smooth Diff. Stable Diff.

Drag Point

Source

Smooth Diff. Stable Diff.

Figure 1. Smooth Diffusion for downstream image synthesis tasks. Our method formally introduces latent space smoothness to
diffusion models like Stable Diffusion [62]. This smoothness dramatically aids various tasks in: 1) improving continuity of transitions in
image interpolation, 2) reducing approximation errors in image inversion, & 3) better preserving unedited contents in image editing.

Abstract
Recently, diffusion models have made remarkable
progress in text-to-image (T2I) generation, synthesizing images with high fidelity and diverse contents. Despite this advancement, latent space smoothness within diffusion models remains largely unexplored. Smooth latent spaces ensure that a perturbation on an input latent corresponds to
a steady change in the output image. This property proves
beneficial in downstream tasks, including image interpolation, inversion, and editing. In this work, we expose the
non-smoothness of diffusion latent spaces by observing noticeable visual fluctuations resulting from minor latent variations. To tackle this issue, we propose Smooth Diffusion, a

new category of diffusion models that can be simultaneously
high-performing and smooth. Specifically, we introduce
Step-wise Variation Regularization to enforce the proportion between the variations of an arbitrary input latent and
that of the output image is a constant at any diffusion training step. In addition, we devise an interpolation standard
deviation (ISTD) metric to effectively assess the latent space
smoothness of a diffusion model. Extensive quantitative and
qualitative experiments demonstrate that Smooth Diffusion
stands out as a more desirable solution not only in T2I generation but also across various downstream tasks. Smooth
Diffusion is implemented as a plug-and-play Smooth-LoRA
to work with various community models. Code is available
at https://github.com/SHI-Labs/Smooth-Diffusion.

* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

7548

