This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spectrum AUC Difference (SAUCD): Human-aligned 3D Shape Evaluation
Zhong Li2
Lele Chen2
Xuan Gong3,2,1
Tianyu Luan1,2 *
Lichang Chen2,4
Yi Xu2
Junsong Yuan1
1

State University of New York at Buffalo
3

Harvard Medical School

4

OPPO US Research Center

University of Maryland, College Park

Ground truth mesh

Abstract
Existing 3D mesh shape evaluation metrics mainly focus
on the overall shape but are usually less sensitive to local
details. This makes them inconsistent with human evaluation, as human perception cares about both overall and
detailed shape. In this paper, we propose an analytic metric
named Spectrum Area Under the Curve Difference (SAUCD)
that demonstrates better consistency with human evaluation. To compare the difference between two shapes, we first
transform the 3D mesh to the spectrum domain using the
discrete Laplace-Beltrami operator and Fourier transform.
Then, we calculate the Area Under the Curve (AUC) difference between the two spectrums, so that each frequency
band that captures either the overall or detailed shape is
equitably considered. Taking human sensitivity across frequency bands into account, we further extend our metric
by learning suitable weights for each frequency band which
better aligns with human perception. To measure the performance of SAUCD, we build a 3D mesh evaluation dataset
called Shape Grading, along with manual annotations from
more than 800 subjects. By measuring the correlation between our metric and human evaluation, we demonstrate
that SAUCD is well aligned with human evaluation, and
outperforms previous 3D mesh metrics. Our project page:
https://bit.ly/saucd.

1. Introduction
With the recent progress of 3D reconstruction and processing
techniques, 3D mesh shapes have increasing applications in
fields such as video games, industrial design, 3D printing,
etc. In these applications, assessing the visual quality of
the 3D mesh shape is a crucial task. To meet the requirements of various applications, a promising evaluation metric
should not only reflect the geometry measurement but also
align with human visual perception. Considering that human
beings perceive 3D meshes in both overall shape and local
* Work done while Tianyu was an intern at OPPO US Research Center.

2

A. Mesh w/ pose error

B. Mesh w/ smoothing error

SAUCD (Ours):
UHD:
Chamfer Distance:
Mesh B has smaller error Mesh B has smaller error Mesh A has smaller error
4.96
Error
2.65
1.71

1.35
0.75

0.40
Mesh A Mesh B

Mesh A Mesh B

Mesh A Mesh B

Figure 1. An example of how previous spatial domain 3D shape
metrics (Chamfer Distance [6] and UHD [47]) deviate from human
evaluation. we create Mesh A by adding a small pose error to the
ground truth mesh, and by applying a large smoothing kernel to
ground truth, we create Mesh B. Contrary to human perception,
previous spatial domain metrics evaluate Mesh B better than Mesh
A. This indicates that while they are sensitive to general shape
differences, they tend to overlook high-frequency details. Note that
different metrics use different units of measurement.

details, it is a challenging task to find an evaluation metric
that can align well with humans.
Previous metrics have the following disadvantages in this
scenario. Traditional spatial domain measurements such as
Chamfer Distance [6] which calculates the mean distance
between a vertex on one mesh and its nearest vertex on
the other mesh, can accurately measure the spatial distance.
However, it does not guarantee capturing all shape details. In
fact, such measurements in the spatial domain often overlook
finer shape details, as the details tend to get overwhelmed by
the overall shape. Fig. 1 illustrates the discrepancy between
spatial measurements and human evaluation as mesh details
change. Specifically, When we remove the wrinkles from the
ground truth mesh (resulting in Mesh B), the errors detected
by previous metrics are not as significant as when we slightly

20155

