This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PREGO: online mistake detection in PRocedural EGOcentric videos
Alessandro Flaborea*q♣ Guido Maria D’Amely di Melendugno*q Leonardo Pliniq Luca Scofanoq
Edoardo De Matteisq Antonino Furnari♠ Giovanni Maria Farinella‡♠ Fabio Galasso‡q
{flaborea,damely,dematteis,galasso}@di.uniroma1.it

{plini,scofano}@diag.uniroma1.it

{antonino.furnari,giovanni.farinella}@unict.it
q Sapienza University of Rome, Italy

♣ ItalAI (italailabs.com)

♠ University of Catania, Italy

Abstract
Promptly identifying procedural errors from egocentric
videos in an online setting is highly challenging and valuable for detecting mistakes as soon as they happen. This
capability has a wide range of applications across various fields, such as manufacturing and healthcare. The nature of procedural mistakes is open-set since novel types
of failures might occur, which calls for one-class classifiers trained on correctly executed procedures. However,
no technique can currently detect open-set procedural mistakes online. We propose PREGO, the first online one-class
classification model for mistake detection in PRocedural
EGOcentric videos. PREGO is based on an online action
recognition component to model the current action, and a
symbolic reasoning module to predict the next actions. Mistake detection is performed by comparing the recognized
current action with the expected future one. We evaluate
PREGO on two procedural egocentric video datasets, Assembly101 and Epic-tent, which we adapt for online benchmarking of procedural mistake detection to establish suitable benchmarks, thus defining the Assembly101-O and
Epic-tent-O datasets, respectively. The code is available
at https://github.com/aleflabo/PREGO.

1. Introduction
Egocentric procedure learning is gaining attention due to
advancements in Robotics and Augmented Reality (AR)
technologies. These technologies are pivotal to enhancing online1 monitoring systems, offering real-time feedback,
and improving operator efficiency in various fields. Recent
* Authors contributed equally.
‡ Co-senior role.

1 Most workflows can be aided by online monitoring algorithms, which

provide feedback to the operator in due course. However, they may lag due
to processing or connectivity delays. We distinguish online from real-time,
whereby the second has strict requirements of instantaneous response.

Recognition
Module

Detected

MISTAKE
Current Sequence:
?

Anticipation
Module

Input Context:

Next Action

Figure 1. PREGO is based on two main components: The recognition module (top) processes the input video in an online fashion and
predicts actions observed at each timestep; the anticipation module (bottom) reasons symbolically via a Large Language Model to
predict the future action based on past action history and a brief
context, such as instances of other action sequences. Mistakes are
identified when the current action detected by the step recognition
method differs from the one forecasted by the step anticipation
module (right).

works have produced numerous datasets [4, 8, 9, 12, 14, 18,
26, 27, 27, 28, 32, 35, 40], methodologies aimed at advancing procedure learning [12, 14, 17, 32, 34, 39] and error detection models [8, 27, 35]. Despite these advancements, as
outlined in Table 1, state-of-the-art methods typically focus
on supervised and offline mistake detection. They are unsuitable for situations requiring dynamic decision-making,
specifically within an online setting, or when errors occur
unpredictably, thus defining these instances as open-set conditions.
In this work, we propose the first model to detect PRocedural errors in EGOcentric videos (PREGO), which operates online, thus causal, and can recognize unseen procedural mistakes, fitting for open-set scenarios. We prioritize
egocentric videos due to their highly detailed perspective,
essential for accurately identifying steps within procedures.

18483

