This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Reference Low-Light Enhancement via Physical Quadruple Priors
Wenjing Wang
Peking University

Huan Yang
01.AI

Jianlong Fu
Microsoft Research Asia

Jiaying Liu *
Peking University

Abstract
Understanding illumination and reducing the need for
supervision pose a significant challenge in low-light enhancement. Current approaches are highly sensitive to
data usage during training and illumination-specific hyperparameters, limiting their ability to handle unseen scenarios. In this paper, we propose a new zero-reference lowlight enhancement framework trainable solely with normal
light images. To accomplish this, we devise an illuminationinvariant prior inspired by the theory of physical light transfer. This prior serves as the bridge between normal and lowlight images. Then, we develop a prior-to-image framework
trained without low-light data. During testing, this framework is able to restore our illumination-invariant prior
back to images, automatically achieving low-light enhancement. Within this framework, we leverage a pretrained generative diffusion model for model ability, introduce a bypass decoder to handle detail distortion, as well as offer a
lightweight version for practicality. Extensive experiments
demonstrate our framework’s superiority in various scenarios as well as good interpretability, robustness, and efficiency. Code is available on our project homepage.

1. Introduction
Restoring images in low-light conditions is an important
and challenging task in computer vision. The goal is to unveil concealed details in poorly lit areas, ultimately elevating the overall image quality. Over time, a large number of
algorithms have been developed to address this challenge.
However, current methods exhibit limitations due to their
dependence on supervisory information and their adaptability to unseen domains. In the following, we review recent
advancements and then present our primary contributions.
Supervised Methods. Deep learning has significantly influenced the advancement of low-light enhancement. In
2017, Li et al. [31] introduced the initial deep-based low* Corresponding author. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62332010, and in
part by the Key Laboratory of Science, Technology and Standard in Press
Industry (Key Laboratory of Intelligent Press Media Technology).

(a) Input

(b) SCI-MIT

(c) SCI-LOL

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Comparison with a SOTA zero-reference method:
SCI [34]. The SCI model, trained on varied datasets like LOL [48]
and MIT [2], yields diverse enhancement results. Nevertheless,
none effectively maintains a consistent lighting effect across both
dark and moderately dark images. In contrast, our model demonstrates greater robustness across various scenarios.

light enhancement model using a straightforward autoencoder. Subsequently, a series of studies improved the
network design by incorporating concepts from the Retinex
theory [48, 49, 63], Fourier transform [16], image processing systems [15], semantics [50], and adopting innovative
architectures like Flow-based generative models [47], vision transformers [3] and diffusion models [57, 65]. In addition to RGB images, a body of research is dedicated to RAW
data [4, 5, 17], videos [59], and multi-modalities [51, 52].
While these models have achieved notable success, they
rely on paired data for training, which can be inflexible and
less robust in unforeseen scenarios. Recent studies explore
how to reduce this dependency on supervision.
Unsupervised Methods. Some work transitions from the
strict requirement of pairwise pairings to only necessitating unpaired normal-low light data for training. EnlightenGAN [19], FlexiCurve [25], and NeRCo [54] employ adversarial learning, where discriminators are constructed to
guide low-light enhancement models, i.e., the generators.
CLIP-LIT [27] learns prompts from images under varied illuminations. PairLIE [7] instead learns adaptive priors from
paired low-light instances of the same scene. However,

26057

