This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TransNeXt: Robust Foveal Visual Perception for Vision Transformers
Dai Shi
daishiresearch@gmail.com
Code:

https://github.com/DaiShiResearch/TransNeXt

ImageNet-1K pre-trained model evaluation

Mask R-CNN with 1x schedule

UperNet with 160k iterations

Figure 1. A comprehensive comparison of performance on ImageNet-1K, robustness on ImageNet-A, COCO detection and instance
segmentation performance based on Mask R-CNN 1×, ADE20K semantic segmentation performance based on UperNet.

Abstract
Due to the depth degradation effect in residual connections, many efficient Vision Transformers models that rely
on stacking layers for information exchange often fail to
form sufficient information mixing, leading to unnatural visual perception. To address this issue, in this paper, we
propose Aggregated Attention, a biomimetic design-based
token mixer that simulates biological foveal vision and continuous eye movement while enabling each token on the
feature map to have a global perception. Furthermore, we
incorporate learnable tokens that interact with conventional
queries and keys, which further diversifies the generation
of affinity matrices beyond merely relying on the similarity
between queries and keys. Our approach does not rely on
stacking for information exchange, thus effectively avoiding
depth degradation and achieving natural visual perception.
Additionally, we propose Convolutional GLU, a channel
mixer that bridges the gap between GLU and SE mechanism, which empowers each token to have channel attention
based on its nearest neighbor image features, enhancing local modeling capability and model robustness. We combine
aggregated attention and convolutional GLU to create a new
visual backbone called TransNeXt. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our TransNeXt achieves state-of-the-art
performance across multiple model sizes. At a resolution
of 2242 , TransNeXt-Tiny attains an ImageNet accuracy of
84.0%, surpassing ConvNeXt-B with 69% fewer parameters. Our TransNeXt-Base achieves an ImageNet accuracy
of 86.2% and an ImageNet-A accuracy of 61.6% at a resolution of 3842 , a COCO object detection mAP of 57.1, and an
ADE20K semantic segmentation mIoU of 54.7.

1. Introduction
The Vision Transformer (ViT) [12] has emerged as a popular
backbone architecture for various computer vision tasks in
recent years. The ViT model comprises two key components: the self-attention layer (token mixer) and the MLP
layer (channel mixer). The self-attention mechanism plays
a crucial role in feature extraction by dynamically generating an affinity matrix through similarity computations between queries and keys. This global information aggregation
method has demonstrated remarkable feature extraction potential, with no inductive bias like convolution [25], and
can build powerful data-driven models. However, the transformer encoder design of vision transformers, originally
developed for language modeling [44], exhibits inherent limitations in downstream computer vision tasks. Specifically,
the computation of the global affinity matrix in self-attention
poses a challenge due to its quadratic complexity and high
memory consumption, which restricts its application on highresolution image features.
In order to mitigate the computational and memory burdens imposed by the quadratic complexity inherent in the
self-attention mechanism, a plethora of sparse attention
mechanisms have been proposed in previous studies. One
such representative method is local attention [33], which
restricts attention within a window on the feature map. However, due to the limited receptive field, this method often
requires alternating stacking with different types of token
mixers to achieve cross-window information exchange. Another representative method spatially downsamples the keys
and values of attention (such as pooling [47–49], grid sampling [43]). This method, due to its sacrifice of the query’s
fine-grained perception of the feature map, also has certain

17773

