This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RMem: Restricted Memory Banks Improve Video Object Segmentation
Junbao Zhou∗ Ziqi Pang∗ Yu-Xiong Wang
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
{junbaoz,ziqip2,yxw}@illinois.edu

Input Videos

Abstract
With recent video object segmentation (VOS) benchmarks evolving to challenging scenarios, we revisit a simple but overlooked strategy: restricting the size of memory banks. This diverges from the prevalent practice of expanding memory banks to accommodate extensive historical information. Our specially designed “memory deciphering” study offers a pivotal insight underpinning such a
strategy: expanding memory banks, while seemingly beneficial, actually increases the difficulty for VOS modules to
decode relevant features due to the confusion from redundant information. By restricting memory banks to a limited number of essential frames, we achieve a notable improvement in VOS accuracy. This process balances the importance and freshness of frames to maintain an informative memory bank within a bounded capacity. Additionally,
restricted memory banks reduce the training-inference discrepancy in memory lengths compared with continuous expansion. This fosters new opportunities in temporal reasoning and enables us to introduce the previously overlooked
“temporal positional embedding.” Finally, our insights are
embodied in “RMem” (“R” for restricted), a simple yet
effective VOS modification that excels at challenging VOS
scenarios and establishes new state of the art for object
state changes (on the VOST dataset) and long videos (on
the Long Videos dataset). Our code and demos are available at https://restricted-memory.github.io/.

1. Introduction
The rapid progress of video object segmentation (VOS) algorithms has motivated the creation of more challenging
benchmarks, as exemplified by VOST [34] on more complicated videos with significant object state changes and
the Long Videos dataset [25] featuring extremely long duration. These benchmarks elevate the spatio-temporal modeling and prompt us to reassess conventional VOS designs:
can learning-based VOS modules effectively decipher historical information in such challenging scenarios?
To delve into this issue, it is essential to focus on memory
banks, which are central to storing past features and feed* Equal contribution.

Video
Frames
GT
Masks

Long-term
Memory

Conventional Unrestricted Memory
∅

Append

Append

Predicted
Masks

Long-term
Memory

Our Restricted Memory
∅

Append

Select
Update

Predicted
Masks

Figure 1. In light of challenging object state changes [34, 41, 47],
we rethink the conventional approach of continuously accumulating the features into memory banks: despite capturing all the information, it complicates the deciphering of relevant features. Conversely, restricting the memory significantly enhances VOS.

ing input to VOS modules, and are fundamental in memorybased VOS framework [9, 11, 45]. Typically, the memory
banks are managed via the simple intuition of expansion,
continuously appending newly sampled frames as the video
progresses. While this approach is intended to encompass
all historical information, thereby enhancing VOS, we realize its potential limitation: as videos become longer or more
complex, these expanding memory banks may overwhelm
the capability of VOS modules to discern reliable features.
We investigate this hypothesis by conducting a pilot
study, named “memory deciphering,” to quantify the decoding capability of VOS modules. In our analysis, we continue to use object segmentation as the proxy to VOS, but
shift the prediction target to decoding the object mask at
the initial frame (frame 0) from the memory bank. This
choice is deliberate based on the principle of controlling
variables: (1) In the VOS framework, the information of
frame 0 is implicitly propagated to subsequent frames, ensuring the presence of relevant information for decoding;
(2) This prediction target is consistent across frames and allows for a fair comparison of decoding efficacy under varying memory sizes. Intuitively, the later frames have rigor-

18602

