This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MRFP: Learning Generalizable Semantic Segmentation from Sim-2-Real with
Multi-Resolution Feature Perturbation
Sumanth Udupa† 1 , Prajwal Gurunath† 1 , Aniruddh Sikdar† 2 , Suresh Sundaram1
Department of Aerospace Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India
2
Robert Bosch Centre for Cyber-Physical Systems, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India
1

{sumanthudupa, prajwalg, aniruddhss, vssuresh} @iisc.ac.in

Abstract
Deep neural networks have shown exemplary performance on semantic scene understanding tasks on source
domains, but due to the absence of style diversity during training, enhancing performance on unseen target domains using only single source domain data remains a
challenging task. Generation of simulated data is a feasible alternative to retrieving large style-diverse real-world
datasets as it is a cumbersome and budget-intensive process. However, the large domain-specific inconsistencies
between simulated and real-world data pose a significant
generalization challenge in semantic segmentation. In this
work, to alleviate this problem, we propose a novel MultiResolution Feature Perturbation (MRFP) technique to randomize domain-specific fine-grained features and perturb
style of coarse features. Our experimental results on various urban-scene segmentation datasets clearly indicate
that, along with the perturbation of style-information, perturbation of fine-feature components is paramount to learn
domain invariant robust feature maps for semantic segmentation models. MRFP is a simple and computationally efficient, transferable module with no additional learnable parameters or objective functions, that helps state-of-the-art
deep neural networks to learn robust domain invariant features for simulation-to-real semantic segmentation. Code is
available at https://github.com/airl-iisc/MRFP.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vision
task, with diverse downstream applications, such as autonomous driving [52], robot navigation [30, 38], medical
image analysis [1], land cover classification [49], and building detection [4, 37]. Producing synthetic data for training deep neural networks (DNNs) is a cost-effective and

straightforward alternative compared to the myriad of challenges associated with collecting real-world data. However, models trained on synthetic data leads to the domain
shift problem [2, 6, 27, 34, 42], resulting in a drastic drop
in performance. In safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving, different illuminations, adverse weather
conditions and the domain shift from synthetic data [32, 33]
cause a significant drop in the performance of DNNs when
tested on real-world datasets. There are two primary challenges with training models on synthetic datasets: 1) It is
not feasible to synthetically generate all potential unseen
domains. 2) Models trained on synthetic data do not generalize to real-world scenarios due to the domain gap that
persists when deployed in real-world situations.
In this paper, we propose a novel feature perturbation
technique referred to as Multi-Resolution Feature Perturbation (MRFP) to address the domain gap between the
source and target domains, especially in a Sim-2-Real Single Domain Generalization (SDG) setting. We hypothesise that there exists a latent space consisting of domainagnostic features that are: 1) independent of style information such as illumination and color characterized as low
frequency (LF) components; and 2) fine-grained local texture information characterized as high-frequency (HF) components. The objective of MRFP is to selectively perturb
domain-variant LF and HF encoder features, aiming to improve the generalizability of DNNs. MRFP achieves this
through two divergent receptive field branches tasked to focus on HF fine-grained features and LF semantic information. While previous works have focused their efforts on
SDG [12, 18, 44, 46, 47, 56] and some have tackled the Sim2-Real [7, 8, 45] setting, there is a dearth of literature on the
Sim-2-Real problem with an image frequency perspective.
To address the domain gap, existing approaches involve enhancing the domain variance of the available source domain data and enriching its representation. This is achieved
through methods such as introducing adversarial perturba-

† Equal contribution of authors.

5904

