This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

COLMAP-Free 3D Gaussian Splatting
Sifei Liu2
Amey Kulkarni2
Jan Kautz2
Alexei A. Efros3
Xiaolong Wang1
1
2
3
UC San Deigo
NVIDIA
UC Berkeley

Yang Fu1 *

Nope-NeRF

Ours

Nope-NeRF

Ours

Nope-NeRF

Ours

Nope-NeRF

Ours

Figure 1. Novel View Synthesis and Camera Pose Estimation Comparison. We propose COLMAP-Free 3D Gaussian Splatting (CF3DGS) for novel view synthesis without known camera parameters. Our method achieves more robustness in pose estimation and better
quality in novel view synthesis than previous state-of-the-art methods.

Abstract
While neural rendering has led to impressive advances
in scene reconstruction and novel view synthesis, it relies
heavily on accurately pre-computed camera poses. To relax this constraint, multiple efforts have been made to train
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) without pre-processed camera poses. However, the implicit representations of NeRFs
provide extra challenges to optimize the 3D structure and
camera poses at the same time. On the other hand, the recently proposed 3D Gaussian Splatting provides new opportunities given its explicit point cloud representations. This
paper leverages both the explicit geometric representation
and the continuity of the input video stream to perform
novel view synthesis without any SfM preprocessing. We
process the input frames in a sequential manner and progressively grow the 3D Gaussians set by taking one input
frame at a time, without the need to pre-compute the camera poses. Our method significantly improves over previous
* This work was done while Yang Fu was a part-time intern at NVIDIA.

approaches in view synthesis and camera pose estimation
under large motion changes. Our project page is https:
//oasisyang.github.io/colmap-free-3dgs.

1. Introduction
The field of photo-realistic scene reconstruction and view
synthesis has been largely advanced with the rise of Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRFs [26]). An important initialization
step for training NeRF is to first prepare the camera poses
for each input image. This is usually achieved by running
the Structure-from-Motion (SfM) library COLMAP [38].
However, this pre-processing is not only time-consuming but
also can fail due to its sensitivity to feature extraction errors
and difficulties in handling textureless or repetitive regions.
Recent studies [5, 22, 47] have focused on reducing the
reliance on SfM by integrating pose estimation directly
within the NeRF framework. Simultaneously solving 3D
scene reconstruction and camera registration has been a
chicken-and-egg problem for a long time in computer vi-

20796

