This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CausalPC: Improving the Robustness of Point Cloud Classification by
Causal Effect Identification
Yuanmin Huang, Mi Zhang*, Daizong Ding, Erling Jiang, Zhaoxiang Wang, Min Yang
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
{yuanminhuang23@m.,mi zhang@,17110240010@,eljiang21@m.,wangzx23@m.,m yang@}fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks have demonstrated remarkable
performance in point cloud classification. However, previous works show they are vulnerable to adversarial perturbations that can manipulate their predictions. Given the
distinctive modality of point clouds, various attack strategies have emerged, posing challenges for existing defenses
to achieve effective generalization. In this study, we for the
first time introduce causal modeling to enhance the robustness of point cloud classification models. Our insight is
from the observation that adversarial examples closely resemble benign point clouds from the human perspective. In
our causal modeling, we incorporate two critical variables,
the structural information, (standing for the key feature
leading to the classification) and the hidden confounders,
(standing for the noise interfering with the classification).
The resulting overall framework CausalPC consists of three
sub-modules to identify the causal effect for robust classification. The framework is model-agnostic and adaptable
for integration with various point cloud classifiers. Our approach significantly improves the adversarial robustness of
three mainstream point cloud classification models on two
benchmark datasets. For instance, the classification accuracy for DGCNN on ModelNet40 increases from 29.2% to
72.0% with CausalPC, whereas the best-performing baseline achieves only 42.4%.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed tremendous development in
autonomous driving, where understanding 3D point clouds
plays an indispensable role. Although deep neural networks
(DNN) have achieved extraordinary performance in point
cloud classification [32, 33, 45], the deep and non-linear
structure also raises the concern of adversarial attacks. For
instance, an attacker can slightly modify a point cloud by
human-unnoticeable perturbations to mislead the prediction
* Corresponding author: Mi Zhang

Add

Shift

Delete

Shape-invariant

Original

Figure 1. The demonstration of adversarial point clouds generated
by various adversarial attacks.

of a DNN. Since such misprediction can lead to severe consequences in real-world scenarios, the study of adversarial
examples in point cloud classification has become an intense topic in 3D vision.
Existing adversarial attacks for point cloud data are summarized in Fig.1. Each attack holds a distinct geometric pattern. For instance, beyond the conventional shifting points
attacks [15, 51] (i.e., slight perturbation on the position of
existing points), previous works also propose adding [51] or
deleting [62] points as their attack strategies. Recent variants of shifting points attacks use generative models like
GANs and AutoEncoders to yield perturbed point clouds
[11, 64]. Following the definition of adversarial examples,
these attacks produce such slight perturbations to a point
cloud that are imperceptible to human eyes, which however
become the key for us to design an effective defense.
Existing defenses against adversarial examples in point
cloud data are roughly categorized into adversarial training and input-oriented defense. The former incorporates the
generated adversarial examples into the training set, aiding
classifiers in correctly identifying perturbed point clouds
[20, 21]. In contrast, the latter explicitly recognize specific
patterns, such as outliers within adversarial point clouds,
and mitigate these identified patterns [7, 63]. However,
both the above approaches share the common limitation:
they fail to generalize in defending against more sophisti-

19779

