This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling Laws of Synthetic Images for Model Training ... for Now
Lijie Fan1,†, * Kaifeng Chen2 Dilip Krishnan2 Dina Katabi1 Phillip Isola1 Yonglong Tian2,†
1

MIT CSAIL,

2

Google Research,

†

equal contribution

Github Repo: https://github.com/google-research/syn-rep-learn

Supervised

Abstract

CLIP

1. Introduction
The quality and quantity of data play a crucial role in training vision models. Historically, the emphasis has been on
creating large, meticulously curated image datasets with
categorical labels at the image level for training supervised
models [14, 34, 50, 62]. Prominent examples include CI* Work done while at Google.

0.4

Out-of-Distribution

Better

Recent significant advances in text-to-image models unlock the possibility of training vision systems using synthetic
images, potentially overcoming the difficulty of collecting
curated data at scale. It is unclear, however, how these
models behave at scale, as more synthetic data is added to
the training set. In this paper we study the scaling laws of
synthetic images generated by state of the art text-to-image
models, for the training of supervised models: image classifiers with label supervision, and CLIP with language supervision. We identify several factors, including text prompts,
classifier-free guidance scale, and types of text-to-image
models, that significantly affect scaling behavior. After tuning these factors, we observe that synthetic images demonstrate a scaling trend similar to, but slightly less effective
than, real images in CLIP training, while they significantly
underperform in scaling when training supervised image
classifiers. Our analysis indicates that the main reason for
this underperformance is the inability of off-the-shelf textto-image models to generate certain concepts, a limitation
that significantly impairs the training of image classifiers.
Our findings also suggest that scaling synthetic data can be
particularly effective in scenarios such as: (1) when there
is a limited supply of real images for a supervised problem
(e.g., fewer than 0.5 million images in ImageNet), (2) when
the evaluation dataset diverges significantly from the training data, indicating the out-of-distribution scenario, or (3)
when synthetic data is used in conjunction with real images,
as demonstrated in the training of CLIP models.

Scaling Ability

0.5

0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

ImageNet ImageNet-Sk ImageNet-R ImageNet Downstream
Real
SD (CLIP Template)
SD (Caption)
MUSE (Caption)
Imagen (Caption)

Figure 1. Scaling ability (i.e., the slope of the power law curve
between loss and dataset size fitted in the log space, see Eq. 2)
comparison between real and synthetic images on supervised classifier and CLIP training. Red bars represent real images and blue
bars represent synthetic images generated with different text-toimage models. Supervised models are trained on real or synthetic
ImageNet, and text in parentheses is the text prompt used to generate the images (details in Section 3.1). ImageNet-Sketch and
ImageNet-R are out-of-distribution tests. CLIP models are trained
on LAION-400M with real or synthetic images. We see that: (1)
scaling ability of synthetic data is slightly worse than that of real
data for CLIP training; (2) robustness on ImageNet-Sketch and
ImageNet-R datasets can be better when training on synthetic data.

FAR [34] and ImageNet [14]. While creating these datasets
is effective on a smaller scale, their expansion to hundreds of millions of samples presents significant challenges.
These challenges include the intensive labor required for curation at scale, as well as the increasing potential for noise
and quality issues as the datasets scale up.
Recently, there has been an increasing interest in training vision models using language supervision [30, 45].
This shift is exemplified by models like CLIP [45], which
move beyond the fixed, predefined categories typical of
datasets like ImageNet. Training these models requires
extensive image-text pair datasets. Developments ranging
from the creation of the Conceptual Captions dataset [59],
which comprises millions of image-text pairs, to the LAION

7382

