This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ZeroNVS: Zero-Shot 360-Degree View Synthesis from a Single Image
Kyle Sargent1 , Zizhang Li1 , Tanmay Shah2 , Charles Herrmann2 , Hong-Xing Yu1 ,
Yunzhi Zhang1 , Eric Ryan Chan1 , Dmitry Lagun2 , Li Fei-Fei1 , Deqing Sun2 , Jiajun Wu1
1

Stanford University, 2 Google Research

Abstract
We introduce a 3D-aware diffusion model, ZeroNVS, for
single-image novel view synthesis for in-the-wild scenes.
While existing methods are designed for single objects with
masked backgrounds, we propose new techniques to address
challenges introduced by in-the-wild multi-object scenes
with complex backgrounds. Specifically, we train a generative prior on a mixture of data sources that capture
object-centric, indoor, and outdoor scenes. To address issues from data mixture such as depth-scale ambiguity, we
propose a novel camera conditioning parameterization and
normalization scheme. Further, we observe that Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) tends to truncate the distribution
of complex backgrounds during distillation of 360-degree
scenes, and propose “SDS anchoring” to improve the diversity of synthesized novel views. Our model sets a new
state-of-the-art result in LPIPS on the DTU dataset in the
zero-shot setting, even outperforming methods specifically
trained on DTU. We further adapt the challenging MipNeRF 360 dataset as a new benchmark for single-image
novel view synthesis, and demonstrate strong performance
in this setting. Code and models are available at this url.

1. Introduction
Models for single-image, 360-degree novel view synthesis
(NVS) should produce realistic and diverse results: the synthesized images should look natural and 3D-consistent to
humans, and they should also capture the many possible explanations of unobservable regions. This challenging problem has typically been studied in the context of single objects without backgrounds, where the requirements on both
realism and diversity are simplified. Recent progress relies on large 3D datasets like Objaverse-XL [8] which have
enabled training conditional diffusion [18] models to perform photorealistic and 3D-consistent NVS via Score Distillation Sampling [SDS; 26]. Meanwhile, since image diversity mostly lies in the background, not the object, the ignorance of background significantly lowers the expectation
of synthesizing diverse images–in fact, most object-centric
methods do not consider diversity metrics [18, 21, 27].

Neither assumption holds for the more challenging problem of zero-shot, 360-degree novel view synthesis on realworld scenes. There is no single, large-scale dataset of
scenes with ground-truth geometry, texture, and camera parameters, analogous to Objaverse-XL for objects. The background, which cannot be ignored anymore, also needs to be
well modeled for synthesizing diverse results.
We address both issues with our new model, ZeroNVS.
Inspired by previous object-centric methods [18, 21, 27],
ZeroNVS also trains a 2D conditional diffusion model followed by 3D distillation. But unlike them, ZeroNVS works
well on scenes due to two technical innovations: a new
camera parametrization and normalization scheme for conditioning, which allows training the diffusion model on diverse scene datasets, and an “SDS anchoring” mechanism,
improving the background diversity over standard SDS.
To overcome the key challenge of limited training data,
we propose training the diffusion model on a massive
mixed dataset comprised of all scenes from CO3D [30],
RealEstate10K [44], and ACID [16], so that the model may
potentially handle complex in-the-wild scenes. The mixed
data of such scale and diversity are captured with a variety
of camera settings and have several different types of 3D
ground truth, e.g., computed with COLMAP [32] or ORBSLAM [23]. We show that while the camera conditioning
representations from prior methods [18] are too ambiguous or inexpressive to model in-the-wild scenes, our new
camera parametrization and normalization scheme allows
exploiting such diverse data sources and leads to superior
NVS on real-world scenes.
Building a 2D conditional diffusion model that works
effectively for in-the-wild scenes enables us to then study
the limitations of SDS in the scene setting. In particular, we observe limited diversity from SDS in the generated scene backgrounds when synthesizing long-range (e.g.,
180-degree) novel views. We therefore propose “SDS anchoring” to ameliorate the issue. In SDS anchoring, we propose to first sample several “anchor” novel views using the
standard Denoising Diffusion Implicit Model (DDIM) sampling [36]. This yields a collection of pseudo-ground-truth
novel views with diverse contents, since DDIM is not prone

9420

