This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LTM: Lightweight Textured Mesh Extraction and Refinement of Large
Unbounded Scenes for Efficient Storage and Real-time Rendering
Jaehoon Choi 1 Rajvi Shah 2 Qinbo Li 2 Yipeng Wang 2 Ayush Saraf 2 Changil Kim 2
Jia-Bin Huang 1,2 Dinesh Manocha 1 Suhib Alsisan 2 Johannes Kopf 2
1
University of Maryland 2 Meta

Abstract
Advancements in neural signed distance fields (SDFs)
have enabled modeling 3D surface geometry from a set of
2D images of real-world scenes. Baking neural SDFs can
extract explicit mesh with appearance baked into texture
maps as neural features. The baked meshes still have a
large memory footprint and require a powerful GPU for
real-time rendering. Neural optimization of such large
meshes with differentiable rendering pose significant challenges. We propose a method to produce optimized meshes
for large unbounded scenes with low triangle budget and
high fidelity of geometry and appearance. We achieve
this by combining advancements in baking neural SDFs
with classical mesh simplification techniques and proposing
a joint appearance-geometry refinement step. The visual
quality is comparable to or better than state-of-the-art neural meshing and baking methods with high geometric accuracy despite significant reduction in triangle count, making the produced meshes efficient for storage, transmission,
and rendering on mobile hardware. We validate the effectiveness of the proposed method on large unbounded scenes
from mip-NeRF 360, Tanks & Temples, and Deep Blending datasets, achieving at-par rendering quality with 73×
reduced triangles and 11× reduction in memory footprint.

1. Introduction
Photorealistic reconstruction and rendering of real-world
objects and scenes is a longstanding problem of importance
with several applications in computer vision, robotics and
AR/VR. In recent years, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs)
[1, 2, 38, 39] have been quite successful at novel view synthesis. However, the scene representation is learned as an
implicit volumetric representation that is expensive to evaluate. This is a crucial limitation for many applications, such
as Augmented and Virtual Reality (AR/VR), often requiring
real-time rendering with low memory and compute power.

Figure 1. Example results using LTM showing mesh geometry
(top-left) and novel-view synthesis (right). Bottom right plot compares performance of different methods on mip-NeRF360 outdoor
dataset. Our method achieves comparable rendering quality to
BakedSDF while reducing the mesh size considerably.

Since modern graphics engines are highly optimized to rasterize triangle meshes, researchers have started exploring
ways to extract explicit mesh representations from volumetric functions.
MobileNeRF [5] uses a polygon mesh with texture maps
storing feature vectors and opacity. Although their rendering quality is good, the mesh quality is far from an
ideal surface. While NeRF2Mesh [50] and NeRFMeshing [44], based on volumetric density fields, excel at generating highly detailed geometry, they often result in noisy
and bumpy surfaces and numerous floaters, especially in
planar regions, which are common in large-scale scenes.
In contrast, neural Signed Distance Function (SDF) methods [42, 52, 54] typically excel in reconstructing accurate
surface geometry. However, they may not be able to capture
small or detailed geometry, and their rendering quality is inferior to volumetric density-field methods. BakedSDF [55]
overcomes these limitations by applying mip-NeRF 360
techniques to train SDF representation, though the resulting mesh representation has a high memory overhead.
Previous neural SDF methods that rely on the Marching Cube algorithm [34] result in meshes with high storage
overhead. This results in a significant challenge for practi-

5053

