This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Simple Recipe for Language-guided Domain Generalized Segmentation
Mohammad Fahes1

Tuan-Hung Vu1,2
1
Inria

Andrei Bursuc1,2
2
Valeo.ai

Patrick Pérez3
3
Kyutai

Raoul de Charette1

https://astra-vision.github.io/FAMix
Abstract
Generalization to new domains not seen during training
is one of the long-standing challenges in deploying neural networks in real-world applications. Existing generalization techniques either necessitate external images for
augmentation, and/or aim at learning invariant representations by imposing various alignment constraints. Largescale pretraining has recently shown promising generalization capabilities, along with the potential of binding different modalities. For instance, the advent of vision-language
models like CLIP has opened the doorway for vision models
to exploit the textual modality. In this paper, we introduce
a simple framework for generalizing semantic segmentation
networks by employing language as the source of randomization. Our recipe comprises three key ingredients: (i) the
preservation of the intrinsic CLIP robustness through minimal fine-tuning, (ii) language-driven local style augmentation, and (iii) randomization by locally mixing the source
and augmented styles during training. Extensive experiments report state-of-the-art results on various generalization benchmarks. Code is accessible on the project page1 .

1. Introduction
A prominent challenge associated with deep neural networks is their constrained capacity to generalize when confronted with shifts in data distribution. This limitation is
rooted in the assumption of data being independent and
identically distributed, a presumption that frequently proves
unrealistic in real-world scenarios. For instance, in safetycritical applications like autonomous driving, it is imperative for a segmentation model to exhibit resilient generalization capabilities when dealing with alterations in lighting,
variations in weather conditions, and shifts in geographic
location, among other considerations.
To address this challenge, domain adaptation [13, 18, 33,
34, 47, 48] has emerged; its core principle revolves around
1 https://astra-vision.github.io/FAMix

aligning the distributions of both the source and target domains. However, DA hinges on having access to target data,
which may not always be available. Even when accessible,
this data might not encompass the full spectrum of distributions encountered in diverse real-world scenarios. Domain
generalization [31, 32, 49, 52, 62, 63] overcomes this limitation by enhancing the robustness of models to arbitrary
and previously unseen domains.
The training of segmentation networks is often backed
by large-scale pretraining as initialization for the feature
representation. Until now, to the best of our knowledge, domain generalization for semantic segmentation (DGSS) networks [7, 19, 23, 24, 29, 36, 37, 51, 53, 58] are pretrained
with ImageNet [9]. The underlying concept is to transfer
the representations from the upstream task of classification
to the downstream task of segmentation.
Lately, contrastive language image pretraining (CLIP)
[22, 39, 55, 56] has demonstrated that transferable visual
representations could be learned from the sole supervision of loose natural language descriptions at very large
scale. Subsequently, a plethora of applications have been
proposed using CLIP [39], including zero-shot semantic
segmentation [30, 59], image editing [27], transfer learning [10, 40], open-vocabulary object detection [16], fewshot learning [64, 65] etc. A recent line of research proposes fine-tuning techniques to preserve the robustness of
CLIP under distribution shift [15, 26, 45, 50], but they are
limited to classification.
In this paper, we aim at answering the following question: How to leverage CLIP pretraining for enhanced domain generalization for semantic segmentation? The motivation for rethinking DGSS with CLIP is twofold. On one
hand, distribution robustness is a notable characteristic of
CLIP [12]. On the other hand, the language modality offers an extra source of information compared to unimodal
pretrained models.
A direct comparison of training two segmentation models under identical conditions but with different pretraining, i.e. ImageNet vs. CLIP, shows that CLIP pretraining
does not yield promising results. Indeed, Tab. 1 shows that
fine-tuning CLIP-initialized network performs worse than

23428

