This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ZERO-IG: Zero-Shot Illumination-Guided Joint Denoising and Adaptive
Enhancement for Low-Light Images
Yiqi Shi 1 *, Duo Liu 1 *, Liguo Zhang 1†, Ye Tian 2 , Xuezhi Xia 1,3 , Xiaojing Fu 1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Engineering University
2
Hangzhou Institute of Technology, Xidian University
3
Wuhan Digital Engineering Research Institute

1

{shiyiqi, liu duo, zhangliguo, fuxiaojing }@hrbeu.edu.cn,
tianye@xidian.edu.cn, xiaxuezhi709@gmail.com

Abstract
This paper presents a novel zero-shot method for jointly
denoising and enhancing real-word low-light images. The
proposed method is independent of training data and noise
distribution. Guided by illumination, we integrate denoising and enhancing processes seamlessly, enabling end-toend training. Pairs of downsampled images are extracted
from a single original low-light image and processed to
preliminarily reduce noise. Based on the smoothness of
illumination, near-authentic illumination can be estimated
from the denoised low-light image. Specifically, the illumination is constrained by the denoised image’s brightness,
uniformly amplifying pixels to raise overall brightness to
normal-light level. We simultaneously restrict the illumination by scaling each pixel of the denoised image based
on its intensity, controlling the enhancement amplitude for
different pixels. Applying the illumination to the original
low-light image yields an adaptively enhanced reflection.
This prevents under-enhancement and localized overexposure. Notably, we concatenate the reflection with the illumination, preserving their computational relationship, to ultimately remove noise from the original low-light image in
the form of reflection. This provides sufficient image information for the denoising procedure without changing the
noise characteristics. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our method outperforms other state-of-the-art methods. The source code is available at https://github.
com/Doyle59217/ZeroIG.

1. Introduction
Images taken in real low-light conditions typically exhibit
a low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and contain underex* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

(a) Input

(b) SNR-aware [33]

(c) PairLIE [6]

(d) ZERO-IG

Figure 1. Visual comparison on a real night-time low-light image.

posed regions. These images provide inadequate information and can impair computer vision tasks. Achieving highquality low-light image enhancement (LLIE) requires improving brightness and contrast as well as effectively reducing noise. In the past decades, traditional methods like histogram equalization [14, 19] and gamma correction [9, 25]
have been used to enhance low-light images. Additionally,
various traditional methods [5, 17] are based on Retinex theory [12]. Retinex theory suggests that low-light observation can be decomposed into illuminated and reflected components. Illumination, influenced by ambient light, leads
to low-light images formation. Reflection represents the
image’s intrinsic properties and is typically viewed as the
target for enhancement. However, these hand-crafted constraints/priors are not adaptive enough and their results may
suffer from under- and over- enhancement, in addition, they
may present intensive noises.
Recently, deep learning methods have known significant
advancements [4, 18, 26, 30, 33, 38]. However, the effectiveness of these LLIE methods [21, 24, 27, 29, 31, 34,
36, 37] heavily rely on carefully selected paired/unpaired
training data. Still, the low-light environments are highly

3015

