This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gaussian Splatting SLAM
Hidenobu Matsuki1∗

Riku Murai2∗

Paul H. J. Kelly2

Andrew J. Davison1

1

2

Dyson Robotics Laboratory, Imperial College London
Software Performance Optimisation Group, Imperial College London

{h.matsuki20, riku.murai15, p.kelly, a.davison}@imperial.ac.uk

Figure 1. From a single monocular camera, we reconstruct a high fidelity 3D scene live at 3fps. For every incoming RGB frame, 3D
Gaussians are incrementally formed and optimised together with the camera poses. We show both the rasterised Gaussians (left) and
Gaussians shaded to highlight the geometry (right). Notice the details and the complex material properties (e.g. transparency) captured.
Thin structures such as wires are accurately represented by numerous small, elongated Gaussians, and transparent objects are effectively
represented by placing the Gaussians along the rim. Our system significantly advances the fidelity a live monocular SLAM system can
capture.

Abstract
We present the first application of 3D Gaussian Splatting
in monocular SLAM, the most fundamental but the hardest
setup for Visual SLAM. Our method, which runs live at 3fps,
utilises Gaussians as the only 3D representation, unifying
the required representation for accurate, efficient tracking,
mapping, and high-quality rendering. Designed for challenging monocular settings, our approach is seamlessly extendable to RGB-D SLAM when an external depth sensor is
available. Several innovations are required to continuously
reconstruct 3D scenes with high fidelity from a live camera.
First, to move beyond the original 3DGS algorithm, which
requires accurate poses from an offline Structure from Motion (SfM) system, we formulate camera tracking for 3DGS
using direct optimisation against the 3D Gaussians, and
show that this enables fast and robust tracking with a wide
basin of convergence. Second, by utilising the explicit nature of the Gaussians, we introduce geometric verification
*Authors contributed equally to this work.

and regularisation to handle the ambiguities occurring in
incremental 3D dense reconstruction. Finally, we introduce
a full SLAM system which not only achieves state-of-the-art
results in novel view synthesis and trajectory estimation but
also reconstruction of tiny and even transparent objects.

1. Introduction
A long-term goal of online reconstruction with a single
moving camera is near-photorealistic fidelity, which will
surely allow new levels of performance in many areas of
Spatial AI and robotics as well as opening up a whole range
of new applications. While we increasingly see the benefit of applying powerful pre-trained priors to 3D reconstruction, a key avenue for progress is still the invention
and development of core 3D representations with advantageous properties. Many “layered” SLAM methods exist which tackle the SLAM problem by integrating multiple different 3D representations or existing SLAM components; however, the most interesting advances are when a
new unified dense representation can be used for all aspects

18039

