This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Insights from the Use of Previously Unseen Neural Architecture Search Datasets
Rob Geada* David Towers*, 1 Matthew Forshaw1,3 Amir Atapour-Abarghouei2 A. Stephen McGough1
1

Newcastle University, UK — 2 Durham University, UK — 3 The Alan Turing Institute, UK
rob@geada.net, amir.atapour-abarghouei@durham.ac.uk
{d.towers2, matthew.forshaw, stephen.mcgough}@ncl.ac.uk

Abstract
The boundless possibility of neural networks which can
be used to solve a problem – each with different performance – leads to a situation where a Deep Learning expert
is required to identify the best neural network. This goes
against the hope of removing the need for experts. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) offers a solution to this by
automatically identifying the best architecture. However,
to date, NAS work has focused on a small set of datasets
which we argue are not representative of real-world problems. We introduce eight new datasets created for a series of
NAS Challenges: AddNIST, Language, MultNIST, CIFARTile, Gutenberg, Isabella, GeoClassing, and Chesseract.
These datasets and challenges are developed to direct attention to issues in NAS development and to encourage authors to consider how their models will perform on datasets
unknown to them at development time. We present experimentation using standard Deep Learning methods as well
as the best results from challenge participants.

1. Introduction
One of the main appeals of Deep Learning (DL) was its
ability to democratise Machine Learning. No longer would
you require a domain expert to develop an optimal solution to a given problem since DL models are capable of
learning the required patterns and features from the data
themselves and would not need the domain expert to identify and extract the required features. Unfortunately, rather
than removing the need for an expert, the new paradigm
has just shifted where the expert is required. These experts
now spend their time identifying the most optimal neural
network architecture for a given problem. Those who are
not that proficient would select between pre-existing offthe-shelf networks such as ResNet [10], VGG [23] or Inception [25]. However, to get the best results for a particular problem, one should search across all possible solutions,
* These authors performed equal contribution.

not just those which may have shown good results in other
problem domains, as no network is optimal for all problems. This idea of the ‘no free lunch’ [34] is backed up
by our findings here, with some networks giving far poorer
performance than what would be expected.
A DL problem can be seen as the combination of a particular task – such as classification – one wishes to apply
in a particular data domain. The data domain is normally
realised as a dataset for training the DL network.
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) is a fast-developing
field of DL – which can be seen from the increase of published papers in the domain over the last few years [3]. The
aim of NAS is to remove the need for an expert’s time and
knowledge to generate state-of-the-art competitive Neural
Networks from a particular dataset [40]. NAS methods
search through millions (if not billions) of candidate architectures from a pre-defined search space to find optimum
networks. These search spaces comprise not only different
network topologies but also the types of nodes which make
up these networks – such as fully connected layers, convolutions and pooling. Although NAS can be applied to any
data modality, the majority of work to date has focused on
image-based datasets, with modern NAS methods achieving
this feat in a few GPU hours [19, 37]. In addition to a predefined search space, a NAS approach will have a search
strategy. In terms of the task, the majority of work in NAS
has focused on classification problems.
NAS techniques are often evaluated by their ability to
find networks that perform well on benchmark datasets,
such as CIFAR-10 [12] and ImageNet [5]. These datasets,
combined with standard search spaces such as NAS-Bench
[6], fill an important role, allowing a direct comparison between NAS methods. While there is a clear benefit in using
common benchmark datasets, we argue this is against the
ethos of NAS – removing the need for domain experts, required to develop optimal architectures for a given problem.
Developing against common datasets can be seen as
over-engineering a process to reach a solution we already

22541

