This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OneFormer3D: One Transformer for Unified Point Cloud Segmentation
Maxim Kolodiazhnyi, Anna Vorontsova, Anton Konushin, Danila Rukhovich
Samsung Research
{m.kolodiazhn, a.vorontsova, a.konushin, d.rukhovich}@samsung.com

Abstract
Semantic, instance, and panoptic segmentation of 3D
point clouds have been addressed using task-specific models of distinct design. Thereby, the similarity of all segmentation tasks and the implicit relationship between them
have not been utilized effectively. This paper presents a
unified, simple, and effective model addressing all these
tasks jointly. The model, named OneFormer3D, performs
instance and semantic segmentation consistently, using a
group of learnable kernels, where each kernel is responsible for generating a mask for either an instance or a semantic category. These kernels are trained with a transformerbased decoder with unified instance and semantic queries
passed as an input. Such a design enables training a model
end-to-end in a single run, so that it achieves top performance on all three segmentation tasks simultaneously.
Specifically, our OneFormer3D ranks 1st and sets a new
state-of-the-art (+2.1 mAP50 ) in the ScanNet test leaderboard. We also demonstrate the state-of-the-art results in
semantic, instance, and panoptic segmentation of ScanNet
(+21 PQ), ScanNet200 (+3.8 mAP50 ), and S3DIS (+0.8
mIoU) datasets.

1. Introduction
3D point cloud segmentation is the task of grouping points
into meaningful segments. Such a segment may comprise
points of the same semantic category or belonging to the
same single object (an instance). Semantic- and instancebased grouping give rise to three formulations of the segmentation task: semantic, instance, and panoptic. Semantic
segmentation outputs a mask for each semantic category, so
that each point in a point cloud gets assigned with a semantic label. Instance segmentation returns a set of masks of individual objects; since some regions cannot be treated as an
distinguishable object but rather serve as a background (like
a floor or a ceiling), only a part of points in a point cloud
is being labeled. Panoptic segmentation is the most general formulation: it implies predicting a mask for each foreground object (thing), and a semantic label for each back-

Existing approaches

Point
Cloud

Semantic
Model

Semantic
SOTA

Instance
Model

Instance
SOTA

Panoptic
Model

Panoptic
SOTA

OneFormer3D, ours

Point
Cloud

Semantic
SOTA
Unified
Model

Instance
SOTA
Panoptic
SOTA

Figure 1. Traditional 3D point cloud segmentation methods address different tasks with task-specific models to achieve the best
performance. We propose OneFormer3D, a 3D segmentation
framework that tackles semantic, instance, and panoptic segmentation tasks with a multi-task train-once design.

ground point (stuff ).
Despite all three 3D segmentation tasks actually imply
predicting a set of masks, they are typically solved with
models of completely different architectures. 3D semantic segmentation methods rely on U-Net-like networks [6,
22, 25, 27, 34, 40, 48]. 3D instance segmentation methods
combine semantic segmentation models with aggregation
schemes based either on clustering [3, 10, 13, 21, 35, 49],
object detection [11, 15], or transformer decoders [31, 32].
3D panoptic segmentation methods [23, 38, 44] perform
panoptic segmentation in 2D images, than lift the predicted
masks into 3D space and aggregate them point-wise. The
question naturally arises: is it possible to tackle all three 3D
segmentation tasks jointly with a single unified approach?
Recenty, various ways of unifying 2D segmentation
methods have been proposed [4, 5, 41]. All these methods train a single panoptic model on all three tasks, so that
high performance is obtained without changing the network
architecture. Still, the best results are achieved when the
model is trained for each task separately. As can be expected, such a training policy results in three times larger

20943

