This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BiTT: Bi-directional Texture Reconstruction of Interacting Two Hands from a
Single Image
Minje Kim1
1
KAIST

2

Tae-Kyun Kim1,2
Imperial College London

Two hands reconstruction via
① Symmetric information of
left and right hand,
② Hand texture parametric model

Input: Single Image of
Interacting Two Hands

Free View, Free Pose, Relightable Two Hand Reconstruction

Figure 1. Taking a single image input, our method renders the personalized texture of two hands at novel views, poses, and light conditions.

Abstract
Creating personalized hand avatars is important to offer a realistic experience to users on AR / VR platforms.
While most prior studies focused on reconstructing 3D hand
shapes, some recent work has tackled the reconstruction
of hand textures on top of shapes. However, these methods are often limited to capturing pixels on the visible
side of a hand, requiring diverse views of the hand in a
video or multiple images as input. In this paper, we propose a novel method, BiTT(Bi-directional Texture reconstruction of Two hands), which is the first end-to-end trainable method for relightable, pose-free texture reconstruction of two interacting hands taking only a single RGB image, by three novel components: 1) bi-directional (left $
right) texture reconstruction using the texture symmetry of
left / right hands, 2) utilizing a texture parametric model
for hand texture recovery, and 3) the overall coarse-to-fine
stage pipeline for reconstructing personalized texture of two
interacting hands. BiTT first estimates the scene light condition and albedo image from an input image, then reconstructs the texture of both hands through the texture parametric model and bi-directional texture reconstructor. In experiments using InterHand2.6M and RGB2Hands datasets,
our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art hand
texture reconstruction methods quantitatively and qualita-

tively. The code is available at https://github.com/
yunminjin2/BiTT.

1. Introduction
3D human reconstruction has been studied in various areas.
With the increasing usage of human-computer interaction,
virtual reality (VR), and augmented reality (AR), reconstruction of human parts, including the full body, face, and
hand, has been intensively studied for years. In particular,
hand pose estimation, shape, and texture reconstruction are
essential tasks for AR/VR interfaces. 3D hand reconstruction is still a challenging task due to the highly varied poses
and shapes of hands. Previous works [3, 4, 9, 14, 23, 45] focused on estimating the 3D pose and shape of a single hand.
A single hand reconstruction has been recently extended to
two interacting hands [18, 19, 21, 49] and hand-object interaction [2, 8, 15, 16, 46] scenarios.
Learning the appearance of objects and humans is currently in active research for realistic reconstruction. NeRF
[27] represents objects/scenes by a neural radiance field
based on volume rendering. Appearance reconstruction
of clothed human bodies [1, 12, 22, 30, 44] and faces
[20, 25, 32, 38, 48] has been intensively studied compared
to hands. For learning hand appearance, LISA [7] used a
radiance field to learn the shape and color appearance from

10726

