This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic Human Mesh Reconstruction with Textures
Xiaoyu Zhan1 , Jianxin Yang1 , Yuanqi Li1 , Jie Guo1 , Yanwen Guo1∗ , and Wenping Wang2
1
Nanjing University 2 Texas A&M University
{zhanxy,jianxin-yang,yuanqili}@smail.nju.edu.cn, {guojie,ywguo}@nju.edu.cn, wenping@tamu.edu

https://zhanxy.xyz/projects/shert

Face
estimation

Mesh-sampled
texture

Input image

Face substitution
Text-driven
generated texture
Inpainted texture

light blue, long-sleeved shirt,
intricate floral embroidery
(a) SMPL-X model
& Target surface

(b) Reconstructed
semantic mesh

(c) Sampled &
Generated textures

Facial expression
(d) Face substitution
& Animation

(e) Monocular image
reconstruction

Figure 1. Semantic Human mEsh Reconstruction with Textures (SHERT): (a) Given a target surface and the corresponding semantic
guider, (b) SHERT reconstructs a detailed semantic model, which has stable UV unwrapping and skinning weights with high-quality
triangle meshes. (c) It can either sample a texture map from the target surface or generate from the text prompts. (d) Based on our semantic
representation, SHERT allows for high-precision facial reconstruction and animation of the body, face, and hands. (e) Moreover, SHERT
is capable of inferring a fully textured avatar from a monocular image.

Abstract
The field of 3D detailed human mesh reconstruction has
made significant progress in recent years. However, current
methods still face challenges when used in industrial applications due to unstable results, low-quality meshes, and a
lack of UV unwrapping and skinning weights. In this paper,
we present SHERT, a novel pipeline that can reconstruct semantic human meshes with textures and high-precision details. SHERT applies semantic- and normal-based sampling
between the detailed surface (e.g. mesh and SDF) and the
corresponding SMPL-X model to obtain a partially sampled
semantic mesh and then generates the complete semantic
mesh by our specifically designed self-supervised completion and refinement networks. Using the complete semantic mesh as a basis, we employ a texture diffusion model to
create human textures that are driven by both images and
texts. Our reconstructed meshes have stable UV unwrapping, high-quality triangle meshes, and consistent semantic

information. The given SMPL-X model provides semantic
information and shape priors, allowing SHERT to perform
well even with incorrect and incomplete inputs. The semantic information also makes it easy to substitute and animate different body parts such as the face, body, and hands.
Quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate that
SHERT is capable of producing high-fidelity and robust semantic meshes that outperform state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Recovering highly realistic details and textures of a human
mesh from monocular images is crucial for various applications such as gaming, movies, cartoons, VR, virtual try-on,
and digital avatars. Current approaches [1, 2, 4, 23, 24, 26,
39, 54, 55, 57, 61, 63, 64, 67, 70] primarily focus on the recovery of the geometric details that are associated with images, but their results are not yet practical for real-world ap-

142

