This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Abductive Ego-View Accident Video Understanding for Safe Driving Perception
Jianwu Fang1†⇤ , Lei-lei Li2⇤ , Junfei Zhou2⇤ , Junbin Xiao3 , Hongkai Yu4 , Chen Lv5 ,
Jianru Xue1 , and Tat-Seng Chua3
1

Xi’an Jiaotong University
4

2

Chang’an University

Cleveland State University

5

3

National University of Singapore

Nanyang Technological University

www.lotvsmmau.net *

Abstract
We present MM-AU, a novel dataset for Multi-Modal
Accident video Understanding. MM-AU contains 11,727
in-the-wild ego-view accident videos, each with temporally aligned text descriptions. We annotate over 2.23 million object boxes and 58,650 pairs of video-based accident
reasons, covering 58 accident categories. MM-AU supports various accident understanding tasks, particularly
multimodal video diffusion to understand accident causeeffect chains for safe driving. With MM-AU, we present
an Abductive accident Video understanding framework for
Safe Driving perception (AdVersa-SD). AdVersa-SD performs video diffusion via an Object-Centric Video Diffusion (OAVD) method which is driven by an abductive CLIP
model. This model involves a contrastive interaction loss
to learn the pair co-occurrence of normal, near-accident,
accident frames with the corresponding text descriptions,
such as accident reasons, prevention advice, and accident
categories. OAVD enforces the object region learning while
fixing the content of the original frame background in video
generation, to find the dominant objects for certain accidents. Extensive experiments verify the abductive ability of
AdVersa-SD and the superiority of OAVD against the stateof-the-art diffusion models. Additionally, we provide careful benchmark evaluations for object detection and accident
reason answering since AdVersa-SD relies on precise object
and accident reason information.

1. Introduction
Autonomous Vehicles (AV) are around the corner for
practical use [11]. Yet, occasionally emerging traffic accidents are among the biggest obstacles to be crossed. To
make a step further, it is urgent to comprehensively understand the traffic accidents, such as telling what objects are
involved, why an accident occurs and how to prevent it.
* Equal contribution. †Corresponding author.

Techniques that can answer these questions are of crucial
importance for safe AV systems. So far, there is a lack of a
large-scale dataset to develop such techniques.
Therefore, this paper constructs MM-AU, a multi-modal
dataset for ego-view accident video understanding. MMAU contains 11,727 in-the-wild ego-view accident videos.
The videos are temporally aligned with the text descriptions
of accident reasons, prevention solutions, and accident categories. In total, 58.6K pairs of video-based Accident reason
Answers (ArA) are annotated for 58 accident categories.
Moreover, to enable object-centric accident video understanding, we annotate over 2.23M object boxes for about
463K video frames. As shown in Fig. 1, MM-AU can facilitate 8 tasks of traffic accident video understanding, and the
models are required to infer ¨ what objects are involved, ≠
what kinds of accidents, Æ where and Ø when the accident
will occur, ∞ why the accident occurs, ± what are the keys
to accident reasons, ≤ how to prevent it, and ≥ multimodal
accident video diffusion.
Different from previous works that concentrate on the
former 4 basic tasks [3, 15, 24, 59], we advocate an
Abductive Accident Video Understanding for Safe Driving
(AdVersa-SD) perception by considering the accident reasons into the accident video understanding. For the ∞-≤
tasks, few works [37, 65] formulate Video Question Answering (VQA) problem to discern the accident reasons for
given videos. However, abductive understanding of accident is more crucial to prevent collision. Hence, we present
AdVersa-SD, which underscores a diffusion technique to
bridge the visual content with specific accident reason texts.
Leveraging the text-vision CLIP model [44] and the
video diffusion techniques [12, 57], we propose an abductive CLIP in AdVersa-SD with a constrastive interaction loss for the accident reason involved semantic cooccurrence learning within the text and video clips, such
as the pairs of ( ,tr ) and ( , ta ). To verify the abductive
ability of abductive CLIP, we treat it as an engine to drive an
Object-centric Accident Video Diffusion (OAVD) model by
enforcing the learning of object locations and restricting the

22030

