This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PointBeV: A Sparse Approach to BeV Predictions
Loick Chambon1,2 , Éloi Zablocki1 , Mickaël Chen1 , Florent Bartoccioni1 , Patrick Pérez*3 , Matthieu Cord1,2
1

Valeo.ai, Paris, France

2

Sorbonne Université, Paris, France

Bird’s-eye View (BeV) representations have emerged as
the de-facto shared space in driving applications, offering a unified space for sensor data fusion and supporting
various downstream tasks. However, conventional models
use grids with fixed resolution and range and face computational inefficiencies due to the uniform allocation of resources across all cells. To address this, we propose PointBeV, a novel sparse BeV segmentation model operating on
sparse BeV cells instead of dense grids. This approach offers precise control over memory usage, enabling the use
of long temporal contexts and accommodating memoryconstrained platforms. PointBeV employs an efficient twopass strategy for training, enabling focused computation
on regions of interest. At inference time, it can be used
with various memory/performance trade-offs and flexibly
adjusts to new specific use cases. PointBeV achieves stateof-the-art results on the nuScenes dataset for vehicle, pedestrian, and lane segmentation, showcasing superior performance in static and temporal settings despite being trained
solely with sparse signals. We release our code with two
new efficient modules used in the architecture: Sparse Feature Pulling, designed for the effective extraction of features
from images to BeV, and Submanifold Attention, which enables efficient temporal modeling. The code is available at
https://github.com/valeoai/PointBeV .

1. Introduction
Bird’s-eye View (BeV) representations are now ubiquitously in driving applications. Indeed, a top-view egocentric grid is not only a convenient shared space for fusing inputs from multiple sensors [28, 39, 42, 49], but also
a space-aware representation relevant for many downstream
tasks such as detection [31, 34], segmentation [15, 39], forecasting [11], tracking [48], or planning [8, 18, 40]. BeV
segmentation encompasses a broad family of tasks such
as 2D instance segmentation [15], 3D instance segmentation [20, 21, 54], occupancy forecasting [22, 35] and online
* Work done at Valeo.ai.

IoU (→)

Abstract
38

5.5k

8k 13k

3

Kyutai, Paris, France

23k 40k
PointBeV

4.1k

37
Simple-BEV

36

BEVFormer
3.6k

LaRa

35
32
31

CVT

0.5
1
2
Memory Usage (GiB) (←)

4

Figure 1. BeV vehicle IoU vs. memory footprint on nuScenes
[3] validation set. Models are evaluated without visibility filtering
(i.e all annotated vehicles are considered) at resolution 224 × 480.
The memory consumption is calculated using a 40GB A100 GPU.
The size of a dot represents the number of BeV points being evaluated, the smaller the better. PointBeV has the capacity to explore
various trade-offs between efficiency and performance by varying
the number of points being considered. The remaining points are
considered as zeros in the final prediction. Using PointBeV we
can achieve state-of-the-art performance with only a small portion
of the points and without losing performance.

mapping [27]. In this paper, we focus on BeV segmentation
from multiple cameras, in scenarios with or without past
frames, respectively referred to as temporal and static.
BeV representations are usually implemented using
grids of fixed resolution and range [9, 13, 15, 26, 31].
This limits their efficiency in terms of compute, even more
clearly when considering temporal tasks, where aggregating past frames for long horizons can be a very costly endeavor. Departing from these dense BeV grid approaches,
we present in this paper PointBeV, a camera-based BeV
segmentation model that operates on sparse BeV features.
Our approach offers control over the model’s memory usage by restricting the number of points considered, and enables adaptive focus on specific regions of interest. Notably, we develop two modules for efficient sparse operations: the Sparse Feature Pulling module, which retrieves
features from multiple cameras using sparse coordinates,
and the Submanifold Attention module, adapted from sub-

15195

