This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

“Previously on ...” From Recaps to Story Summarization
Aditya Kumar Singh

Dhruv Srivastava
Makarand Tapaswi
CVIT, IIIT Hyderabad, India

Story Summary

Recap

https://katha-ai.github.io/projects/recap-story-summ/

- Who is it you're looking for?
- I need you to break the story...

- Bauer contacted Meredith Reed.
- You're suggesting muzzling the
press?

- That's Jack Bauer!
- [Jack] Get up or I will kill you right here.

- ... Meredith Reed. Call her publisher and demand not to run the story.
- ... muzzling press. The freedom of press is constitutionally protected?
- You are the President. Tell them this story will create a war.
- ... I don't need to tell what damage your criminal prosecution will do.
- You're poison. ... never should have let you do this.

- It's about the people...murdered
your father.
- ... working under Russian agents.

- Novakovich was just murdered.
- ... Bauer has no idea...Novakovich
was operating under my orders?

- Where's Novakovich? What did he say to Bauer?
- Nothing ... was bleeding ... wounded by one of the guards.
- ... murdered. Bauer learned that Novakovich killed Omar and Renee.
- Lunatic was gonna kill me, Yuri. Think of it as sacrificing a rook for a king.
- ... orders? There's nothing more dangerous than a wounded animal.

Figure 1. We illustrate how TV show recaps can be used to generate labels for multimodal story summarization. The top half features
the recap shown at the beginning of the episode S08E23 based on key moments (shots and dialogs) from S08E22 of the TV series 24. As
recaps help viewers recall essential story events, we extend these aligned segments to create summarization labels (visualized in the bottom
half where the actual shots and dialogs inherited from recap are marked in deep red). For example, in the sub-story (left), the recap hints
at Jack Bauer relaying classified information to the press, while the summary presents the complete sub-story, including Logan informing
President Taylor about their failure to catch Jack and their disagreement over muzzling the press.

Abstract
We introduce multimodal story summarization by leveraging TV episode recaps – short video sequences interweaving key story moments from previous episodes to bring viewers up to speed. We propose PlotSnap, a dataset featuring two crime thriller TV shows with rich recaps and long
episodes of 40 minutes. Story summarization labels are
unlocked by matching recap shots to corresponding substories in the episode. We propose a hierarchical model
TaleSumm that processes entire episodes by creating compact shot and dialog representations, and predicts importance scores for each video shot and dialog utterance by enabling interactions between local story groups. Unlike traditional summarization, our method extracts multiple plot
points from long videos. We present a thorough evaluation
on story summarization, including promising cross-series
generalization. TaleSumm also shows good results on classic video summarization benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Imagine settling in to catch the latest episode of our favorite
TV series. We hit play and the familiar “Previously on ...”,

the recap, a smartly edited segment swiftly brings us up to
speed, reminding us of key moments from past episodes.
A TV show recap is a concise, under-two-minute sequence of crucial plot points from previous episodes. To
satisfy the time constraint, the recap is constructed by editing shots from previous episode with sharp and rapid cuts
and selecting/modifying dialog utterances to ensure relevance to the sub-story. A good recap sets the stage for the
main part of the episode by weaving visual and dialog cues
to spark the viewers’ memory. Thus, a recap is a great way
to identify sub-stories important to the overall story arc.
We use recaps to create story summaries by identifying
and expanding the sub-stories from the episode (Fig. 1). We
introduce an innovative shot-matching algorithm (Sec. 3)
that associates shots from the recap to their corresponding
shots in the episode. Different from a recap, a story summary consists of entire scenes or sub-stories that are essential to the narrative. Thus, a first-time viewer may watch
story summaries of each episode serially and understand the
main narrative, while watching recaps serially does not help
as they are only meant as memory triggers and assume that
the viewer has seen the episode before.
We propose a novel task of creating multimodal story

13635

