This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Structure-Guided Adversarial Training of Diffusion Models
Ling Yang∗†

Haotian Qian* Zhilong Zhang
Peking University

Jingwei Liu

Bin Cui†

yangling0818@163.com, zzdmqht@gmail.com, {zzl2018math, bin.cui}@pku.edu

Previous Instance-Level Training

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated exceptional efficacy
in various generative applications. While existing models
focus on minimizing a weighted sum of denoising score
matching losses for data distribution modeling, their training primarily emphasizes instance-level optimization, overlooking valuable structural information within each minibatch, indicative of pair-wise relationships among samples.
To address this limitation, we introduce Structure-guided
Adversarial training of Diffusion Models (SADM). In this
pioneering approach, we compel the model to learn manifold structures between samples in each training batch. To
ensure the model captures authentic manifold structures in
the data distribution, we advocate adversarial training of the
diffusion generator against a novel structure discriminator
in a minimax game, distinguishing real manifold structures
from the generated ones. SADM substantially outperforms
existing methods in image generation and cross-domain
fine-tuning tasks across 12 datasets, establishing a new
state-of-the-art FID of 1.58 and 2.11 on ImageNet for classconditional image generation at resolutions of 256×256 and
512×512, respectively.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [20, 56–59, 73] have achieved remarkable
generation quality in various tasks, including image generation [12, 50–52, 67, 74, 75, 79], audio synthesis [4, 33, 49],
and interdisciplinary applications [21, 24, 71]. Starting from
tractable noise distribution, diffusion models generate data
by progressively removing noise. This involves the model
learning to reverse a pre-defined diffusion process that sequentially introduces varying levels of noise to the data. The
model is parameterized and undergoes training by optimizing
the weighted sum of denoising score matching losses [20]
for various noise levels [57], aiming to learn the recovery of
clean images from corrupted images.
* Contributed equally.
† Corresponding authors.

Our Structure-Guided Training

Noise Distribution

Training data Distribution

Figure 1. Comparison between previous instance-level training and
our structure-guided training for diffusion models.

Aiming to maximally model the data distribution, recent
works [28, 42, 60, 63, 72, 76] attempt to improve the precision of training diffusion models. For instance, many
approaches design effective weighting schemes [8, 17, 30,
42, 60, 76] for maximum likelihood training or add an extra
regularization term [10, 37, 46] to the denoising score loss.
There are also some works to enhance the model expressiveness by incorporating other generative models, such as VAE
[31, 51, 63], GAN [69], and Normalizing Flows [29, 43, 78].
However, their improved training of diffusion models primarily concentrates on instance-level optimization, overlooking
the valuable structural information among batch samples.
This oversight is significant, as the incorporation of structural details is crucial for aligning the learned distribution
with the underlying data distribution.
To mitigate the challenges posed by existing instancelevel training methods, we propose Structure-guided
Adversarial training of Diffusion Models (SADM). In contrast to conventional instance-level training illustrated in
Fig. 1, our approach guides diffusion training at a structural
level. During batch training, the model is facilitated to learn
manifold structures within batch samples, represented by
pair-wise relationships in a low-dimensional feature space.
To accurately learn real manifold structures in the data distribution, we introduce a novel structure discriminator that
distinguishes genuine manifold structures from generated

7256

