This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SurMo: Surface-based 4D Motion Modeling for Dynamic Human Rendering
Tao Hu, Fangzhou Hong, Ziwei Liu
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Abstract
Dynamic human rendering from video sequences has
achieved remarkable progress by formulating the rendering
as a mapping from static poses to human images. However,
existing methods focus on the human appearance reconstruction of every single frame while the temporal motion
relations are not fully explored. In this paper, we propose
a new 4D motion modeling paradigm, SurMo, that jointly
models the temporal dynamics and human appearances in a
unified framework with three key designs: 1) Surface-based
motion encoding that models 4D human motions with an
efficient compact surface-based triplane. It encodes both
spatial and temporal motion relations on the dense surface
manifold of a statistical body template, which inherits body
topology priors for generalizable novel view synthesis with
sparse training observations. 2) Physical motion decoding
that is designed to encourage physical motion learning by
decoding the motion triplane features at timestep t to predict both spatial derivatives and temporal derivatives at the
next timestep t + 1 in the training stage. 3) 4D appearance
decoding that renders the motion triplanes into images by
an efficient volumetric surface-conditioned renderer that focuses on the rendering of body surfaces with motion learning conditioning. Extensive experiments validate the stateof-the-art performance of our new paradigm and illustrate the expressiveness of surface-based motion triplanes
for rendering high-fidelity view-consistent humans with fast
motions and even motion-dependent shadows. Our project
page is at: https://taohuumd.github.io/projects/SurMo.

1. Introduction
Creating volumetric videos of human actors is required
in many applications such as AR/VR, telepresence, video
game and film character creation. Recent neural rendering
methods [25, 43, 54, 61] have made great progress in generating free-viewpoint videos of humans from several sparse
multi-view videos, which are simple yet effective compared
with traditional graphics approaches [2, 3, 62]. At the core
of the technique is to model pose- and time-varying appearances of dynamic humans. The motions of dressed humans are often expressed as the movement of body and a
sequence of natural secondary motion of clothes, e.g., dy-

Figure 1. Given several sparse multi-view video sequences with
estimated 3D body meshes, SurMo synthesizes subject-specific
appearance. We specifically focus on the synthesis of plausible
time-varying appearances by learning an effective 4D motion representation.

namic movements of the T-shirt induced by dancing in Fig.
1. The secondary motion of clothes arises from intricate
physical interactions with the body, typically changing over
time, which leads to challenges for plausible rendering of
dynamic humans.
Most existing methods [25, 43, 61] are conditioned on
static poses and use a pose-guided generator to synthesize time-varying appearances. However, the appearance of
clothed humans undergoes complex geometric transformations induced not only by the static pose but also its dynamics, whereas the modeling of dynamics is often ignored. In
addition, these methods are often focused on the 2D appearance reconstruction of every single frame while the temporal motion relations are not fully explored. Due to these
issues, they fail to render plausible secondary motions of
clothes, i.e., generating the same appearances for fast and
slow motions. A key challenge of learning temporal dynamics lies in the requirement of a tremendous amount of
training observations to construct a 4D motion volume.
To solve these issues, we propose a new paradigm
to learn time-varying appearances of the secondary motion from just several sparse viewpoint video sequences,
which is achieved by jointly modeling the temporal motion dynamics and human appearances in a unified rendering framework based on an efficient surface-based motion

6550

