This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Equi-angular Representations for Online Continual Learning
Minhyuk Seo1,† Hyunseo Koh1 Wonje Jeung1 Minjae Lee1 San Kim1 Hankook Lee2,3
Sungjun Cho2 Sungik Choi2 Hyunwoo Kim4,∗ Jonghyun Choi5,∗
1

Yonsei Univ. 2 LG AI Research 3 Sungkyunkwan Univ. 4 Zhejiang Lab 5 Seoul National Univ.
{dbd0508, specific0924, reccos1020, nasmik419}@yonsei.ac.kr
khs8157@gmail.com, {sungik.choi,sungjun.cho}@lgresearch.ai
hankook.lee@skku.edu, hwkim@zhejianglab.com, jonghyunchoi@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Online continual learning suffers from an underfitted solution due to insufficient training for prompt model update
(e.g., single-epoch training). To address the challenge, we
propose an efficient online continual learning method using the neural collapse phenomenon. In particular, we induce neural collapse to form a simplex equiangular tight
frame (ETF) structure in the representation space so that
the continuously learned model with a single epoch can better fit to the streamed data by proposing preparatory data
training and residual correction in the representation space.
With an extensive set of empirical validations using CIFAR10/100, TinyImageNet, ImageNet-200, and ImageNet-1K,
we show that our proposed method outperforms state-ofthe-art methods by a noticeable margin in various online
continual learning scenarios such as disjoint and Gaussian scheduled continuous (i.e., boundary-free) data setups. Code is available at https://github.com/
yonseivnl/earl.

1. Introduction
A growing interest in continuous learning (CL) involves
training the model using continuous data streams. Mostly,
CL research has focused on the offline scenario that assumes
the model can be trained in multiple epochs for the current
task [8, 42, 54]. However, substantial storage and computational complexity are required to store all data to train a
model for multiple epochs. Recently, there has been significant interest in online CL as a more realistic set-up with a
lower computational overhead of allowing a single training pass through the data stream [1, 7, 27]. Learning a
model in streamed data by a single training pass is challenging, since the temporal distribution at each intermediate
† : Work done while interning at LG AI Research.
∗ : Indicates corresponding authors.

time point is likely imbalanced, even if the overall distribution of a dataset is balanced. Imbalanced data distributions
would cause several problems, such as bias towards the major classes [24, 61] and the hindrance to generalization [53].
Recently, minority collapse [14], the phenomenon in
which the angles between classifier vectors for minor
classes (i.e., the classes that have a relatively small number
of samples) become narrow, has been proposed as a fundamental issue in training with imbalanced data, making the
classification of minor classes considerably more challenging. In contrast, for balanced data sets, it was proven that
classifier vectors and the last layer activations for all classes
converge into an optimal geometric structure, named the
simplex equiangular tight frame (ETF) structure, where all
pairwise angles between classes are equal and maximally
widened when using cross entropy (CE) [23, 30, 52, 65] or
mean squared error (MSE) [32, 41, 48, 64] loss. This phenomenon is called neural collapse [34].
Although neural collapse naturally occurs only in balanced training, several recent studies attempted to induce
neural collapse in imbalanced training to address the minority collapse problem using a fixed ETF classifier [55, 62].
When employing a fixed ETF classifier, the output features
are pulled toward the corresponding classifier vector during
training, since the classifier is fixed. More recently, research
has also been extended to induce neural collapse in offline
CL using a fixed ETF classifier [56].
However, unlike offline CL, there are a number of challenges in inducing neural collapse in online CL, even with a
fixed ETF classifier. The prerequisite for neural collapse is
reaching the terminal phase of training (TPT) by sufficient
training [34]. In offline CL, the model can reach the TPT
phase for each task by multi-epoch training. In contrast,
a single-pass training constraint often prevents the online
CL from reaching TPT. As shown in Fig. 1, the offline CL
quickly reaches TPT shortly after the arrival of novel task
data, while online CL (vanilla ETF) does not.

23933

