This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SparseOcc: Rethinking Sparse Latent Representation for
Vision-Based Semantic Occupancy Prediction
Pin Tang1

Zhongdao Wang2 Guoqing Wang1 Jilai Zheng1
Xiangxuan Ren1 Bailan Feng2 Chao Ma1 *
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
{pin.tang,guoqing.wang,zhengjilai,bunny renxiangxuan,chaoma}@sjtu.edu.cn
{wangzhongdao,fengbailan}@huawei.com
Project page: https://pintang1999.github.io/sparseocc.html

Abstract
Vision-based perception for autonomous driving requires an explicit modeling of a 3D space, where 2D latent
representations are mapped and subsequent 3D operators
are applied. However, operating on dense latent spaces
introduces a cubic time and space complexity, which limits scalability in terms of perception range or spatial resolution. Existing approaches compress the dense representation using projections like Bird’s Eye View (BEV) or
Tri-Perspective View (TPV). Although efficient, these projections result in information loss, especially for tasks like
semantic occupancy prediction. To address this, we propose SparseOcc, an efficient occupancy network inspired by
sparse point cloud processing. It utilizes a lossless sparse
latent representation with three key innovations. Firstly, a
3D sparse diffuser performs latent completion using spatially decomposed 3D sparse convolutional kernels. Secondly, a feature pyramid and sparse interpolation enhance
scales with information from others. Finally, the transformer head is redesigned as a sparse variant. SparseOcc
achieves a remarkable 74.9% reduction on FLOPs over the
dense baseline. Interestingly, it also improves accuracy,
from 12.8% to 14.1% mIOU, which in part can be attributed
to the sparse representation’s ability to avoid hallucinations
on empty voxels.

1. Introduction
Accurate perception of the surrounding environment is crucial for autonomous driving systems [11, 14]. In recent
years, vision-based 3D perception algorithms have gained
significant attention and advancement due to their cost* Corresponding author.

(a) View Transformation

3D Dense Representation

BEV Representation

TPV Representation

3D Sparse Representation

(b) Representation for 3D Space

Figure 1. (a) Vision-based perception methods for autonomous
driving typically first extract image features by a 2D latent encoder
and then map them to 3D using view transformation. (b) For the
3D latent space, existing methods mostly employ the dense, BEV,
or TPV representation, while we rethink the possibility of using
sparse representation to achieve superior efficiency and accuracy.

effectiveness. The typical workflow involves employing
a 2D encoder to extract latent representations from images. A view transformation method, such as lift-splatshoot (LSS) [25], is then applied to lift the perspective 2D
latent features to a 3D voxel space, utilizing predicted depth
information. This 3D scene representation serves as the
foundation for deriving geometry and semantic information
to describe the driving environment, supporting various 3D
perception tasks including object detection [15, 17, 40, 43],
semantic segmentation [11, 30, 36], and semantic occupancy prediction [13, 33, 34]. In this study, we specifically focus on the challenging task of semantic occupancy
prediction [31–34], which entails predicting both static and
dynamic elements within the scene.
Several alternatives are available for representing 3D

15035

