This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReCoRe: Regularized Contrastive Representation Learning of World Model
Rudra P.K. Poudel1
Harit Pandya1
Stephan Liwicki1
1
Cambridge Research Laboratory
Toshiba Europe Ltd, UK

Roberto Cipolla1,2
2
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge, UK

first-name.last-name@toshiba.eu

rc10001@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
While recent model-free Reinforcement Learning (RL)
methods have demonstrated human-level effectiveness in
gaming environments, their success in everyday tasks like
visual navigation has been limited, particularly under significant appearance variations. This limitation arises from
(i) poor sample efficiency and (ii) over-fitting to training
scenarios. To address these challenges, we present a world
model that learns invariant features using (i) contrastive unsupervised learning and (ii) an intervention-invariant regularizer. Learning an explicit representation of the world
dynamics i.e. a world model, improves sample efficiency
while contrastive learning implicitly enforces learning of
invariant features, which improves generalization. However, the naı̈ve integration of contrastive loss to world models is not good enough, as world-model-based RL methods
independently optimize representation learning and agent
policy. To overcome this issue, we propose an interventioninvariant regularizer in the form of an auxiliary task such
as depth prediction, image denoising, image segmentation,
etc., that explicitly enforces invariance to style interventions. Our method outperforms current state-of-the-art
model-based and model-free RL methods and significantly
improves on out-of-distribution point navigation tasks evaluated on the iGibson benchmark. With only visual observations, we further demonstrate that our approach outperforms recent language-guided foundation models for point
navigation, which is essential for deployment on robots with
limited computation capabilities. Finally, we demonstrate
that our proposed model excels at the sim-to-real transfer
of its perception module on the Gibson benchmark.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep RL algorithms have been successfully employed for designing optimal strategies for games
[25, 31] and shown a promise for controlling robots [21,
35]. Model-free RL approaches learn the policy along with
the visual encoder in an end-to-end fashion from raw ob-

Contrastive Loss
World
Model
Intervention Invariant Regularizer (e.g. depth)
GT Depth

World-Model Depth Prediction

Consistent perception of open spaces as appearance changes

Figure 1. Intervention invariant regularizer is applied in addition
to the contrastive loss in world-model-based RL. ReCoRe learns
robust representations that are invariant to out-of-distribution appearance variations which help in the generalization of downstream tasks (such as navigation). Notice the consistent depth predictions despite texture variations of an iGibson evaluation scene.

servations. As a result, they require a large number of
training samples, which makes it difficult to deploy them
on real robots where obtaining a large amount of training
data is resource intensive, especially for safety-critical tasks
such as autonomous navigation [9]. On the contrary, in
model-based RL, an explicit predictive model of the world
is learned called world model, enabling the agent to plan by
thinking ahead [6, 10, 13, 31]. The world model is learned
separately from the policy, therefore, the policy can use
the world model as a surrogate for the real world. Consequently, model-based methods have higher sample efficiency [10, 13] making them more suitable in real environments since they can be trained with a small amount of data.
Nevertheless, even current model-based RL struggles
with generalization, as model-based approaches have to
learn the world model purely from experience, which poses
several challenges: The central issue is the training bias,
which can be exploited by an agent, and leads to poor performance when deployed [10]. Another issue is that the
latent representation is learned from a reconstruction loss,

22904

