This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inversion-Free Image Editing with Language-Guided Diffusion Models
Sihan Xu1 * Yidong Huang1 * Jiayi Pan2† Ziqiao Ma1 Joyce Chai1
1
University of Michigan 2 University of California, Berkeley
https://sled-group.github.io/InfEdit/
Input

Photo of a corgi

A german shepherd
dog standing

A sitting anime girl
with long red hair

A man playing
basketball

InfEdit (with <3s)

corgi → cat

corgi → fox

...a corgi
ㅅ
red

...a corgi
ㅅ
blue

...a corgi
ㅅ
standing

...a corgi
ㅅ
running

… in the forest

… with rainbow

… with a cute cat

… with a corgi

...with her eyes closed ... in the classroom

… in Ghibli style

… in Junji Ito style

basketball → guitar

… in lakers jersey

… in a court

… with mouth open … in front of a house

long → short

red → green

basketball → soccer basketball → tennis

man → spiderman

Figure 1. Our inversion-free editing (InfEdit) method demonstrates strong performance in various complex image editing tasks.

Abstract
Despite recent advances in inversion-based editing, textguided image manipulation remains challenging for diffusion models. The primary bottlenecks include 1) the timeconsuming nature of the inversion process; 2) the struggle
to balance consistency with accuracy; 3) the lack of compatibility with efficient consistency sampling methods used
in consistency models. To address the above issues, we start
by asking ourselves if the inversion process can be eliminated for editing. We show that when the initial sample is
known, a special variance schedule reduces the denoising
step to the same form as the multi-step consistency sam-

pling. We name this Denoising Diffusion Consistent Model
(DDCM), and note that it implies a virtual inversion strategy without explicit inversion in sampling. We further unify
the attention control mechanisms in a tuning-free framework for text-guided editing. Combining them, we present
inversion-free editing (InfEdit), which allows for consistent and faithful editing for both rigid and non-rigid semantic changes, catering to intricate modifications without
compromising on the image’s integrity and explicit inversion. Through extensive experiments, InfEdit shows strong
performance in various editing tasks and also maintains a
seamless workflow (less than 3 seconds on one single A40),
demonstrating the potential for real-time applications.

* Authors contributed equally to this work.
† Work done while the author was at the University of Michigan.

9452

