This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FineSports: A Multi-person Hierarchical Sports Video Dataset for
Fine-grained Action Understanding

1

Jinglin Xu1 Guohao Zhao2 Sibo Yin2 Wenhao Zhou1 Yuxin Peng2 *
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology Beijing
2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
xujinglinlove@gmail.com; ssee7235@gmail.com; 2000012982@stu.pku.edu.cn;
m202320876@xs.ustb.edu.cn; pengyuxin@pku.edu.cn

A Multi-person Hierarchical Sports Video Dataset (FineSports)

Fine-grained spatial-temporal annotations

Interaction

#30 |Guard |Stephen Curry

Dribble Move

a player
wearing a
[white] jersey
number [35]

Right P&R

Dribble Move

Ball Delivered

Prompt-driven Target Action Encoder (PTA)

Ball handler

#3 |Guard |Chris Paul

Defense Commits

Interaction
Ball Delivered

#34 | Guard | Shaun Livingston

Drives Straight

Dribble Jumper

Make 2 Pts

Action Tube-specific Detector (ATD)

Prompt-driven Spatial-Temporal Action Localization (PoSTAL)

Post-UP Right Shoulder

Figure 1. An overview of the FineSports dataset and new prompt-driven spatial-temporal action location approach, PoSTAL. FineSports
is a multi-person basketball sports video dataset with high-quality fine-grained annotations on action procedures covering target players’
movements and multiple players’ interactions. It provides the potential for capturing target player movement in 2D and proposing PoSTAL
with better sports analysis ability via constructing a prompt-driven target action encoder and an action tube-specific detector.

Abstract
Fine-grained action analysis in multi-person sports is
complex due to athletes’ quick movements and intense physical confrontations, which result in severe visual obstructions in most scenes. In addition, accessible multi-person
sports video datasets lack fine-grained action annotations in
both space and time, adding to the difficulty in fine-grained
action analysis. To this end, we construct a new multiperson basketball sports video dataset named FineSports,
which contains fine-grained semantic and spatial-temporal
* Corresponding author.

annotations on 10,000 NBA game videos, covering 52 finegrained action types, 16,000 action instances, and 123,000
spatial-temporal bounding boxes. We also propose a new
prompt-driven spatial-temporal action location approach
called PoSTAL, composed of a prompt-driven target action
encoder (PTA) and an action tube-specific detector (ATD)
to directly generate target action tubes with fine-grained
action types without any off-line proposal generation. Extensive experiments on the FineSports dataset demonstrate
that PoSTAL outperforms state-of-the-art methods. Data
and code are available at https://github.com/PKUICST-MIPL/FineSports_CVPR2024.

21773

