This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HIVE: Harnessing Human Feedback for Instructional Visual Editing
Shu Zhang*1 , Xinyi Yang*1 , Yihao Feng*1 , Can Qin1 , Chia-Chih Chen1 , Ning Yu1 , Zeyuan Chen1 ,
Huan Wang1 , Silvio Savarese1,2 , Stefano Ermon2 , Caiming Xiong1 , Ran Xu1
1
Salesforce AI Research, 2 Stanford University

Remove the red arch

Add a moon in the background

Change the plant color to blue

Add a sweater for the duck

Figure 1. We show four groups of representative results. In each triplet, from left to right are: the original image, InstructPix2Pix [7]
using our data (IP2P-Ours), and HIVE. We observe that HIVE leads to more acceptable results than the model without human feedback.
For instance, in the left two examples, IP2P-Ours understands the editing instruction “remove” and “change to blue” individually, but fails
to understand the corresponding objects. Human feedback resolves this ambiguity, as shown in other examples as well.

Abstract
Incorporating human feedback has been shown to be
crucial to align text generated by large language models
to human preferences. We hypothesize that state-of-the-art
instructional image editing models, where outputs are generated based on an input image and an editing instruction,
could similarly benefit from human feedback, as their outputs may not adhere to the correct instructions and preferences of users. In this paper, we present a novel framework to harness human feedback for instructional visual
editing (HIVE). Specifically, we collect human feedback on
the edited images and learn a reward function to capture
the underlying user preferences. We then introduce scalable diffusion model fine-tuning methods that can incorporate human preferences based on the estimated reward.
Besides, to mitigate the bias brought by the limitation of
data, we contribute a new 1.1M training dataset, a 3.6K
reward dataset for rewards learning, and a 1K evaluation dataset to boost the performance of instructional image
editing. We conduct extensive empirical experiments quantitatively and qualitatively, showing that HIVE is favored

over previous state-of-the-art instructional image editing
approaches by a large margin.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art (SOTA) text-to-image generative models
have shown impressive performance in terms of both image
quality and alignment between output images and captions
[1, 44, 46]. Thanks to the impressive generation abilities
of these models, instructional image editing has emerged
as one of the most promising application scenarios for content generation [7]. Different from traditional image editing [3, 16, 16, 30, 55, 55], where both the input and the
edited caption are needed, instructional image editing only
requires human-readable instructions. For instance, classic
image editing approaches require an input caption “a dog
is playing a ball”, and an edited caption “a cat is playing
a ball”. In contrast, instructional image editing only needs
editing instruction such as “change the dog to a cat”. This
*Denotes equal contribution. Primary contact: shu.zhang@salesforce.com.
Our project page: https://shugerdou.github.io/hive/.

9026

