This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-agent Long-term 3D Human Pose Forecasting via Interaction-aware
Trajectory Conditioning
Jaewoo Jeong∗ , Daehee Park∗ , and Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST
{jeong207,bag2824,kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Human pose forecasting garners attention for its diverse applications. However, challenges in modeling the
multi-modal nature of human motion and intricate interactions among agents persist, particularly with longer
timescales and more agents. In this paper, we propose an
interaction-aware trajectory-conditioned long-term multiagent human pose forecasting model, utilizing a coarseto-fine prediction approach: multi-modal global trajectories are initially forecasted, followed by respective local pose forecasts conditioned on each mode. In doing
so, our Trajectory2Pose model introduces a graph-based
agent-wise interaction module for a reciprocal forecast of
local motion-conditioned global trajectory and trajectoryconditioned local pose. Our model effectively handles the
multi-modality of human motion and the complexity of longterm multi-agent interactions, improving performance in
complex environments. Furthermore, we address the lack
of long-term (6s+) multi-agent (5+) datasets by constructing a new dataset from real-world images and 2D annotations, enabling a comprehensive evaluation of our proposed model. State-of-the-art prediction performance on
both complex and simpler datasets confirms the generalized effectiveness of our method. The code is available at
https://github.com/Jaewoo97/T2P.

1. Introduction
Human pose forecasting aims to predict future human motion based on observed past motion [20, 31, 32, 35, 37,
53, 86]. Humans instinctively perform such tasks, allowing
them to naturally navigate in crowded areas or identify and
circumvent potential dangers. For this reason, human pose
forecasting plays an important role in various computer vision tasks [21, 23, 27, 54, 85, 91]. Indeed, recent years have
seen a proliferation of work on multi-agent motion forecasting which aim towards modeling complex multi-agent inter* Denotes equal contribution.

Figure 1. Human motion is goal-directed and influenced by other
entities. Therefore, global intention contains hints for local intention, allowing us to infer local pose from global trajectories. Our
method first forecasts global trajectories, upon which local poses
are conditioned for subsequent forecasts. Pose and trajectory-wise
inter-agent interactions are considered for both predictions.

action [20, 47, 53, 71, 74].
Although various methods have been proposed, they
share two major limitations. The first is a limitation on
long-term predictions, as previous studies predicted up to
3 seconds at most [4, 47, 74, 75]. However, a sufficiently
long forecast horizon is essential to fully leverage human
pose forecasting for diverse downstream tasks in the scope
of identifying potential danger or understanding human behavior. The second is that multi-person interactions are
not proficiently learned. Existing methods consider the
joints of multiple people all at once as objects of interaction [47, 65, 74], resulting in an excessive complexity with
respect to the number of joints. Due to such inefficient modeling, these approaches are found to be incompetent in longterm (3s+) multi-agent (6+) settings, limiting their practicality on complex real-world environments.
Moreover, these challenges are also due to the limitations
of datasets. Existing pose forecasting datasets have limited
sequence length (∼3s) and number of agents (∼2). Therefore, previous works [47, 69, 75] have randomly blended
disparate datasets to model multi-agent interaction with up
to 10 agents. Yet, such naively merged data lacks authentic
interaction as agents from different scenes remain uninfluenced. As such, there was no opportunity to develop and

1617

