This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Distillation via Untargeted and Targeted Intermediate Adversarial Samples
1

Junhao Dong1,2 , Piotr Koniusz4,3*, Junxi Chen5 , Z. Jane Wang6 , and Yew-Soon Ong1,2*
Nanyang Technological University, 2 CFAR, IHPC, A*STAR, 3 Australian National University,
4
Data61 CSIRO, 5 Sun Yat-sen University, 6 University of British Columbia
{junhao003, asysong}@ntu.edu.sg, piotr.koniusz@data61.csiro.au,
chenjx353@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, zjanew@ece.ubc.ca

Abstract
Adversarially robust knowledge distillation aims to compress large-scale models into lightweight models while preserving adversarial robustness and natural performance on
a given dataset. Existing methods typically align probability distributions of natural and adversarial samples between
teacher and student models, but they overlook intermediate
adversarial samples along the “adversarial path” formed
by the multi-step gradient ascent of a sample towards the
decision boundary. Such paths capture rich information
about the decision boundary. In this paper, we propose a
novel adversarially robust knowledge distillation approach
by incorporating such adversarial paths into the alignment
process. Recognizing the diverse impacts of intermediate
adversarial samples (ranging from benign to noisy), we
propose an adaptive weighting strategy to selectively emphasize informative adversarial samples, thus ensuring efficient utilization of lightweight model capacity. Moreover,
we propose a dual-branch mechanism exploiting two following insights: (i) complementary dynamics of adversarial paths obtained by targeted and untargeted adversarial
learning, and (ii) inherent differences between the gradient
ascent path from class ci towards the nearest class boundary and the gradient descent path from a specific class cj
towards the decision region of ci (i ̸= j). Comprehensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on
lightweight models under various settings.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have advanced image classification [17, 18, 24, 27, 39, 41] and retrieval [61], generative models [35, 36, 45], deblurring [59], few-shot learning [23, 29, 51, 52], medical diagnosis [9], and biometrics
[32]. However, DNNs are vulnerable to adversarial examples: images with imperceptible perturbations [48]. Despite
their visual similarity to the natural images, adversarial examples can fool DNNs, leading to incorrect or harmful pre* Corresponding author.

robust
teacher

student

student

alignment
or

n-1

n-2 ...

2

intermediate
adversarial
samples

1

1 step

adversarial
sample

decision
boundary

natural
sample

distillation types:
student

or

student

vanilla

or

adv.
robust

4

3

2

1

student

or

ours

Figure 1. Comparison of distillation methods. (i) Vanilla distillation employs a naturally trained teacher model without adversarial samples, resulting in susceptibility to adversarial attacks. (ii)
Standard adversarially robust distillation incorporates adversary generation from each natural sample x (black frame) to its adversarial counterpart x̂ (red frame). The robust teacher is adversarially pre-trained, and thus the student can distill its responses for
natural and adversarial samples. (iii) Our adversarially robust
knowledge distillation with intermediate adversarial samples
extends upon this by introducing intermediate adversarial samples x̂(1) , · · · , x̂(n−1) collected from intermediate steps along the
“adversarial path”, thereby enabling a more nuanced transfer of
robust knowledge based on the comprehensive adversarial landscape. Distillation types are further illustrated in Appendix A.

dictions with high confidence. Thus, the adversarial vulnerabilities undermine public confidence in the reliability of
DNNs and raise trustworthiness concerns [22].
Adversarial training [16] helps models become adversarially robust by augmenting the training set with adversarial
samples. However, adversarial training is computationally
costly, with limited usage in resource-constrained scenarios. Moreover, the robustness achieved by adversarial training is mainly observed in large models, leaving lightweight
models vulnerable to adversarial attacks [3]. Unlike vanilla
knowledge distillation [19], “adversarially robust knowl-

28432

