This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-IAD: A Real-World Multi-View Dataset for Benchmarking Versatile
Industrial Anomaly Detection
Chengjie Wang1,2 Wenbing Zhu3,4 Bin-Bin Gao2 Zhenye Gan2
Jiangning Zhang2 Zhihao Gu1 Shuguang Qian4 Mingang Chen5 Lizhuang Ma1 *
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent 3 Fudan University 4 Rongcheer Co., Ltd
5
Shanghai Development Center of Computer Software Technology

{jasoncjwang, danylgao, wingzygan, vtzhang}@tencent.com, ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn
{Louis.zhu, Bruce.qian}@rongcheer.com, cmg@sscenter.sh.cn, ellery-holmes@sjtu.edu.cn
Website:

https://realiad4ad.github.io/Real-IAD

Abstract
Industrial anomaly detection (IAD) has garnered significant attention and experienced rapid development. However, the recent development of IAD approach has encountered certain difficulties due to dataset limitations. On
the one hand, most of the state-of-the-art methods have
achieved saturation (over 99% in AUROC) on mainstream
datasets such as MVTec, and the differences of methods
cannot be well distinguished, leading to a significant gap
between public datasets and actual application scenarios.
On the other hand, the research on various new practical anomaly detection settings is limited by the scale of
the dataset, posing a risk of overfitting in evaluation results. Therefore, we propose a large-scale, Real-world, and
multi-view Industrial Anomaly Detection dataset, named
Real-IAD, which contains 150K high-resolution images of
30 different objects, an order of magnitude larger than existing datasets. It has a larger range of defect area and
ratio proportions, making it more challenging than previous datasets. To make the dataset closer to real application
scenarios, we adopted a multi-view shooting method and
proposed sample-level evaluation metrics. In addition, beyond the general unsupervised anomaly detection setting,
we propose a new setting for Fully Unsupervised Industrial Anomaly Detection (FUIAD) based on the observation
that the yield rate in industrial production is usually greater
than 60%, which has more practical application value. Finally, we report the results of popular IAD methods on the
Real-IAD dataset, providing a highly challenging benchmark to promote the development of the IAD field.

* Corresponding authors.

1. Introduction
High-quality datasets play a pivotal role in the development of computer vision technology, guiding the direction
of technological advancement and bridging the gap between
technical research and practical application. For instance,
ImageNet [13] has made an indelible contribution to the development of deep learning model structures and learning
methodologies. MVTec AD [2] abstracts defect detection in
manufacturing into a research topic, thereby bringing visual
learning algorithms closer to industrial production application scenarios. Nevertheless, the data volume of current AD
datasets is still small and needs further development.
Industrial production is the cornerstone of human societal development, with product quality inspection playing a key role [7]. Defects in the production process of
parts can affect product quality and subsequently reduce
product lifespan. In the production of pharmaceuticals,
food, batteries, and other products, product defects can
pose a threat to human safety. Given the importance of
defect detection, manufacturing companies have invested
substantial resources in this area [2–4], and academia has
also gradually turned its attention to this issue in recent
years [1, 12, 15, 25, 26, 34]. Some automation technologies
have begun to play a role in practical applications. Early applications of visual learning technology in industrial defect
detection mainly involved supervised learning for detection [6, 14, 28] and segmentation [8, 16, 32] tasks. Although
these methods have practical value, they still face technical
challenges such as the need for precise defect location annotation. Moreover, the detection performance significantly
decreases for defects that are scarce or not included in the
training set. With the advent of datasets like MVTec AD [2]
and VisA [40], a large number of unsupervised anomaly
detection methods have emerged [12, 23, 26, 29, 34, 38].
These techniques only need to ensure that the images in the

22883

