This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Physics-guided Shape-from-Template:
Monocular Video Perception through Neural Surrogate Models
David Stotko

Nils Wandel

Reinhard Klein

University of Bonn
90°

Abstract
3D reconstruction of dynamic scenes is a long-standing
problem in computer graphics and increasingly difficult the
less information is available. Shape-from-Template (SfT)
methods aim to reconstruct a template-based geometry from
RGB images or video sequences, often leveraging just a
single monocular camera without depth information, such
as regular smartphone recordings. Unfortunately, existing reconstruction methods are either unphysical and noisy
or slow in optimization. To solve this problem, we propose a novel SfT reconstruction algorithm for cloth using
a pre-trained neural surrogate model that is fast to evaluate, stable, and produces smooth reconstructions due to
a regularizing physics simulation. Differentiable rendering
of the simulated mesh enables pixel-wise comparisons between the reconstruction and a target video sequence that
can be used for a gradient-based optimization procedure
to extract not only shape information but also physical parameters such as stretching, shearing, or bending stiffness
of the cloth. This allows to retain a precise, stable, and
smooth reconstructed geometry while reducing the runtime
by a factor of 400–500 compared to ϕ-SfT, a state-of-the-art
physics-based SfT approach.

1. Introduction
Shape-from-template (SfT) methods are a practical solution
to many reconstruction tasks without the need for expensive
hardware setups for capturing scenes. It is possible to reconstruct dynamic geometry from image-based sources like
RGB video sequences where neither depth information nor
multiple perspectives are given. Nonetheless, some kind of
template is provided that represents the object’s state at the
beginning of the optimization. This strongly constrains the
object’s size and hence its distance to the camera. However, as each point of the underlying mesh is able to move,
there are several hundred or thousand degrees of freedom in
moving the object and changing its appearance.

<90°

Figure 1. Behavior of stretchable objects like cloth when two anchor points are pulled apart from each other. Neither distances nor
angles must remain constant under these deformations.

Most current techniques rely on deformation models to
limit the degrees of freedom to e.g. isometric or conformal
deformations [2]. In reality, this behavior is only partially
fulfilled, as stretchable objects like cloth do not conserve
distances or angles. This is easy to see when we look at the
sketch in Figure 1 where two points are pulled away from
each other, causing a piece of cloth to stretch and shear over
the affected area. Such effects are always happening due to
anchor points that control the overall acceleration caused by
gravity, wind, or other forces. Therefore, it is more realistic
to model deformations by performing a physical simulation
of the dynamics [20]. Moreover, a stable simulation guarantees a smooth and high-quality reconstruction.
Our approach adopts the general scheme of using a differentiable physics simulation to restrict the object’s movement and a differentiable renderer which together allow for
a pixel-wise comparison to the target and corresponding
gradient-based optimization of input parameters [20]. In
contrast to previous methods, we replace the classical cloth
simulation [26, 29] with a physics-based neural network.
Furthermore, we use nvdiffrast [23] as a fast and differentiable rasterizer together with optimizable uv-coordinates
for texture mapping. Our goal with these modifications is
to reduce the computation time of the optimization process
drastically from many hours to only a few minutes per scene
while retaining comparable accuracy for the reconstructed
mesh. The source code will be published upon acceptance.

11895

