This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CCEdit: Creative and Controllable Video Editing via Diffusion Models
Ruoyu Feng1,2 * , Wenming Weng1,2 , Yanhui Wang1,2 ,
Yuhui Yuan2 , Jianmin Bao2 , Chong Luo2 † , Zhibo Chen1 † , Baining Guo2
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia
https://ruoyufeng.github.io/CCEdit.github.io/

Intention: Transform this video into the Van Gogh Starry Night style.

Intention: Transform this video into the mechanical style.

Intention: Transform this video into the cyberpunk style.

Intention: Make the foreground puppy chubby and adorable.

Intention: Replace the background with snowy winter scene.

Input Video

Edited Video

Figure 1. Built upon diffusion models, CCEdit provides users with a powerful and flexible set of video editing capabilities, including style
transfer (row 1-3), foreground modifications (row 4), and background replacement (row 5).

Abstract
In this paper, we present CCEdit, a versatile generative
video editing framework based on diffusion models. Our
approach employs a novel trident network structure that
separates structure and appearance control, ensuring precise and creative editing capabilities. Utilizing the foundational ControlNet architecture, we maintain the structural
integrity of the video during editing. The incorporation
of an additional appearance branch enables users to exert
fine-grained control over the edited key frame. These two
∗ This work is done when Ruoyu Feng is an intern with MSRA.

side branches seamlessly integrate into the main branch,
which is constructed upon existing text-to-image (T2I) generation models, through learnable temporal layers. The
versatility of our framework is demonstrated through a diverse range of choices in both structure representations and
personalized T2I models, as well as the option to provide
the edited key frame. To facilitate comprehensive evaluation, we introduce the BalanceCC benchmark dataset, comprising 100 videos and 4 target prompts for each video. Our
extensive user studies compare CCEdit with eight state-ofthe-art video editing methods. The outcomes demonstrate
CCEdit’s substantial superiority over all other methods.

† Corresponding author.

6712

