This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continual Self-supervised Learning: Towards Universal Multi-modal Medical
Data Representation Learning
Yiwen Ye1 Yutong Xie2† Jianpeng Zhang3 Ziyang Chen1 Qi Wu2 Yong Xia1,4,5†
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
Australian Institute for Machine Learning (AIML), The University of Adelaide, Australia
3
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
4
Research & Development Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University in Shenzhen, China
5
Ningbo Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
ywye@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, yutong.xie678@gmail.com, jianpeng.zhang0@gmail.com
zychen@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au, yxia@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
1i

2i

3i

…

Joint SSL

ni
iteration

1s 2s 3s 4s 5s … ns

Our Sequential SSL stage

(a) Multi-modal SSL Paradigms
D
OR

2D_Xray_
QaTa

C
y_
ra
_X
2D

RIC
T_
_C
D
3

3D_
C

1D_Report_PudMe
d20k

T_L
iver

R
stX
he

Single-Modal SSL
Report 2
D_
X-ray
MR
I_L
CT
A
MR
Path.

2D
_P
at
h.
_N
C

H

S
I_V
MR
2D_

Self-supervised learning (SSL) is an efficient pre-training
method for medical image analysis. However, current research is mostly confined to certain modalities, consuming
considerable time and resources without achieving universality across different modalities. A straightforward solution is combining all modality data for joint SSL, which
poses practical challenges. Firstly, our experiments reveal conflicts in representation learning as the number of
modalities increases. Secondly, multi-modal data collected
in advance cannot cover all real-world scenarios. In this
paper, we reconsider versatile SSL from the perspective
of continual learning and propose MedCoSS, a continuous SSL approach for multi-modal medical data. Different
from joint representation learning, MedCoSS assigns varying data modalities to separate training stages, creating a
multi-stage pre-training process. We propose a rehearsalbased continual learning approach to manage modal conflicts and prevent catastrophic forgetting. Specifically, we
use the k-means sampling to retain and rehearse previous
modality data during new modality learning. Moreover, we
apply feature distillation and intra-modal mixup on buffer
data for knowledge retention, bypassing pretext tasks. We
conduct experiments on a large-scale multi-modal unlabeled dataset, including clinical reports, X-rays, CT, MRI,
and pathological images. Experimental results demonstrate MedCoSS’s exceptional generalization ability across
9 downstream datasets and its significant scalability in integrating new modality data. The code and pre-trained model
are available at https://github.com/yeerwen/MedCoSS.

…

._GlaS
2D_Path

Multi-Modal SSL
Joint SSL
Ours

(b) Generalization Results

Figure 1. (a) Comparison between joint SSL and our sequential
SSL. Different colored balls represent different modalities. The
joint SSL suffers from the high costs to integrate knowledge from
new data while our sequential SSL shows a distinct advantage in
this aspect. (b) Generalization performance of five single-modal
pre-trained models (dashed lines) and two multi-modal pre-trained
models (solid lines). The label shows the data dimension, modality, and dataset name.

† Yutong Xie and Yong Xia are the corresponding authors.

11114

