This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeconfuseTrack: Dealing with Confusion for Multi-Object Tracking
Cheng Huang*, Shoudong Han* †, Mengyu He, Wenbo Zheng, Yuhao Wei
National Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{chenghuang7, shoudonghan}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Accurate data association is crucial in reducing confusion, such as ID switches and assignment errors, in multiobject tracking (MOT). However, existing advanced methods
often overlook the diversity among trajectories and the ambiguity and conflicts present in motion and appearance cues,
leading to confusion among detections, trajectories, and associations when performing simple global data association.
To address this issue, we propose a simple, versatile, and
highly interpretable data association approach called Decomposed Data Association (DDA). DDA decomposes the
traditional association problem into multiple sub-problems
using a series of non-learning-based modules and selectively
addresses the confusion in each sub-problem by incorporating targeted exploitation of new cues. Additionally, we introduce Occlusion-aware Non-Maximum Suppression (ONMS)
to retain more occluded detections, thereby increasing opportunities for association with trajectories and indirectly
reducing the confusion caused by missed detections. Finally,
based on DDA and ONMS, we design a powerful multiobject tracker named DeconfuseTrack, specifically focused
on resolving confusion in MOT. Extensive experiments conducted on the MOT17 and MOT20 datasets demonstrate
that our proposed DDA and ONMS significantly enhance
the performance of several popular trackers. Moreover, DeconfuseTrack achieves state-of-the-art performance on the
MOT17 and MOT20 test sets, significantly outperforms the
baseline tracker ByteTrack in metrics such as HOTA, IDF1,
AssA. This validates that our tracking design effectively reduces confusion caused by simple global association.

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) is a crucial task in the
field of computer vision with extensive applications, including video surveillance [42], autonomous driving [33], and
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparing different data association methods. (a) Global
Association. (b) Decomposed Data Association (Ours)

human-computer interaction [13]. The goal of MOT is to
track multiple objects of interest simultaneously in a video sequence. Despite significant advancements in this field, MOT
still faces several challenges, such as occlusion, appearance
variations, and complex interactions between objects.
In recent years, most MOT methods [5, 7, 12, 50, 58]
adopt the tracking-by-detection paradigm. In this paradigm,
data association plays a crucial role in MOT by establishing
correspondences between tracking trajectories and detection
results. To improve the accuracy of data association, many
methods introduce additional cues to complement motion
cues, including appearance features [50, 57], motion direction [7, 28], confidence scores [23, 58], depth information
[11, 29], and natural language cues [55]. These additional
cues are shown to alleviate issues caused by the ambiguity
of motion cues or motion estimation errors to some extent.
Furthermore, some methods [26, 31, 58] divide the data association process into multiple stages, assigning priorities to
trajectories and detection results through incremental matching, thereby reducing confusion during association.

19290

