This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SceneTex: High-Quality Texture Synthesis for Indoor Scenes via Diffusion Priors
Dave Zhenyu Chen1

Haoxuan Li1 Hsin-Ying Lee2 Sergey Tulyakov2 Matthias Nießner1
1
2
Technical University of Munich
Snap Research
https://daveredrum.github.io/SceneTex/

Figure 1. We introduce SceneTex, a text-driven texture synthesis architecture for 3D indoor scenes. Given scene geometries and text
prompts as input, SceneTex generates high-quality and style-consistent textures via depth-to-image diffusion priors.

Abstract

We propose SceneTex, a novel method for effectively generating high-quality and style-consistent textures for indoor
scenes using depth-to-image diffusion priors. Unlike previous methods that either iteratively warp 2D views onto
a mesh surface or distillate diffusion latent features without accurate geometric and style cues, SceneTex formulates
the texture synthesis task as an optimization problem in the
RGB space where style and geometry consistency are properly reflected. At its core, SceneTex proposes a multiresolution texture field to implicitly encode the mesh appearance. We optimize the target texture via a score-distillationbased objective function in respective RGB renderings. To
further secure the style consistency across views, we introduce a cross-attention decoder to predict the RGB values
by cross-attending to the pre-sampled reference locations
in each instance. SceneTex enables various and accurate
texture synthesis for 3D-FRONT scenes, demonstrating significant improvements in visual quality and prompt fidelity
over the prior texture generation methods.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing high-quality 3D contents is an essential yet
highly demanding task for numerous applications, including gaming, film making, robotic simulation, autonomous
driving, and upcoming VR/AR scenarios. With an increasing number of 3D content datasets, the computer vision and
graphics community has witnessed a soaring research interest in the field of 3D geometry generation [2, 12, 36, 38, 40,
60, 68, 73]. Despite achieving a remarkable success in 3D
geometry modeling, generating the object appearance, i.e.
textures, is still bottlenecked by laborious human efforts.
It typically requires a substantially long time for designing
and adjustment, and immense 3D modelling expertise with
tools such as Blender. As such, automatic designing and
augmenting the textures has not yet been fully industrialized due to a huge demand for human expertise and financial expenses.
Leveraging the recent advances of 2D diffusion models, tremendous progress has been made for text-to-3D
generation, especially for synthesizing textures of given
shapes [8, 39, 50]. Seminal work such as Text2Tex [8] and
Latent-Paint [39] have achieved great success in generating high-quality appearances for objects, facilitating highfidelity texture synthesis from input prompts. Despite the

21081

