This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ZeroShape: Regression-based Zero-shot Shape Reconstruction
Zixuan Huang1∗

Stefan Stojanov2∗ Anh Thai2 Varun Jampani3
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign,
2
Georgia Institute of Technology, 3 Stability AI

Abstract

1. Introduction
Inferring the properties of individual objects such as their
category or 3D shape is a fundamental task in computer vision. The ultimate goal is to do this accurately for any object, generally referred to as zero-shot generalization. For
machine learning methods, this means high accuracy on
data distributions that may be significantly different from
the training set, such as images of novel types of objects
like machine parts or images from uncommon visual contexts like underwater imagery. An object representation capable of zero-shot generalization, therefore, needs to accurately capture the visual properties that are shared across all

Quantitative Comparison with SOTA
on Zero-Shot 3D Shape Reconstruction
0.80

F-Score (↑)

We study the problem of single-image zero-shot 3D shape
reconstruction. Recent works learn zero-shot shape reconstruction through generative modeling of 3D assets, but
these models are computationally expensive at train and inference time. In contrast, the traditional approach to this
problem is regression-based, where deterministic models
are trained to directly regress the object shape. Such regression methods possess much higher computational efficiency
than generative methods. This raises a natural question:
is generative modeling necessary for high performance, or
conversely, are regression-based approaches still competitive? To answer this, we design a strong regression-based
model, called ZeroShape, based on the converging findings
in this field and a novel insight. We also curate a large
real-world evaluation benchmark, with objects from three
different real-world 3D datasets. This evaluation benchmark is more diverse and an order of magnitude larger than
what prior works use to quantitatively evaluate their models, aiming at reducing the evaluation variance in our field.
We show that ZeroShape not only achieves superior performance over state-of-the-art methods, but also demonstrates
significantly higher computational and data efficiency.1

James M. Rehg1

0.75

0.70

0.65

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

Inference time in seconds/image (↓)
SS3D

MCC

One-2-3-45

OpenLRM

Point-E

Shap-E

Ours

Figure 1. We outperform SOTA methods for zero-shot 3D shape
reconstruction, while having faster inference time and less training
data. Circle size indicates the number of 3D assets used for training, with biggest being 3M2 . F-Score with threshold 0.05 is averaged over Octroc3D [47], Pix3D [48] and OmniObject3D [60].

objects in the world—an extremely ambitious goal.
Recent work in computer vision has taken the broader
challenge of zero-shot generalization head-on, with impressive developments for 2D vision tasks like segmentation [23, 38], visual question answering [3, 24], image generation [1, 44, 45], and in training general vision representations that can be easily adapted for any vision task [34, 39].
This progress has largely been enabled by increasing model
size and scaling training dataset size to the order of tens to
hundreds of millions of images.
These developments have inspired efforts which aim at
zero-shot generalization for single image 3D object shape
reconstruction [20, 26, 27, 33]. This is a classical and famously ill-posed problem, with important applications like
virtual object placement in scenes in AR and object manipulation in robotics. These works aim to learn a “zero-shot
3D shape prior” by relying on generative diffusion models for 3D point clouds [33], NeRFs [20], or for 2D im-

* Both authors contributed equally to this work.
1 Project website at:
zeroshape.html

https : / / zixuanh . com / projects /

2 We use 3M as a reference value. Point-E [33] and Shape-E [20] state
a dataset size of “several million”.

10061

