This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Optimizing Diffusion Noise Can Serve As Universal Motion Priors
Korrawe Karunratanakul1 Konpat Preechakul2 Emre Aksan4
Thabo Beeler4 Supasorn Suwajanakorn3 Siyu Tang1
1

ETH Zürich, Switzerland
3
VISTEC, Thailand

2
4

UC Berkeley
Google

https://korrawe.github.io/dno-project/

Figure 1. Our proposed Diffusion Noise Optimization (DNO) can leverage the existing human motion diffusion models as universal
motion priors. We demonstrate its capability in the motion editing tasks where DNO can preserve the content of the original model and
accommodates a diverse range of editing modes, including changing trajectory, pose, joint location, and avoiding newly added obstacles.

Abstract
We propose Diffusion Noise Optimization (DNO), a new
method that effectively leverages existing motion diffusion
models as motion priors for a wide range of motion-related
tasks. Instead of training a task-specific diffusion model
for each new task, DNO operates by optimizing the diffusion latent noise of an existing pre-trained text-to-motion
model. Given the corresponding latent noise of a human
motion, it propagates the gradient from the target criteria
defined on the motion space through the whole denoising
process to update the diffusion latent noise. As a result,
DNO supports any use cases where criteria can be defined
as a function of motion. In particular, we show that, for mo-

tion editing and control, DNO outperforms existing methods in both achieving the objective and preserving the motion content. DNO accommodates a diverse range of editing modes, including changing trajectory, pose, joint locations, or avoiding newly added obstacles. In addition,
DNO is effective in motion denoising and completion, producing smooth and realistic motion from noisy and partial
inputs. DNO achieves these results at inference time without the need for model retraining, offering great versatility
for any defined reward or loss function on the motion representation.

1334

