This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LTA-PCS: Learnable Task-Agnostic Point Cloud Sampling

* First two authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

Classification
Completion

…

Training

Classification

Completion

…

Forward Backward

Inference

Classification

Completion

…

(b) Learnable Task-specific methods

1. Introduction
3D point cloud has been widely used in many areas like autonomous driving and robotics. However, the point clouds
collected by LiDAR or other sensors contain millions or
even billions of points, making it challenging to process,
store, and transmit them efficiently. Therefore, to improve
computational efficiency and reduce memory costs, it is
critical to develop point cloud sampling methods to reduce
the number of points while preserving the essential features
of the original point clouds.
Among point cloud sampling methods, the most widely
used one is the farthest point sampling (FPS) strategy in
Fig. 1(a). It samples the critical points based on their 3D
coordinates iteratively and selects a group of points that

3D coordinates

(a) FPS

Training

Recently, many approaches directly operate on point
clouds for different tasks. These approaches become more
computation and storage demanding when point cloud size
is large. To reduce the required computation and storage,
one possible solution is to sample the point cloud. In this
paper, we propose the first Learnable Task-Agnostic Point
Cloud Sampling (LTA-PCS) framework. Existing taskagnostic point cloud sampling strategy (e.g., FPS) does not
consider semantic information of point clouds, causing degraded performance on downstream tasks. While learningbased point cloud sampling methods consider semantic information, they are task-specific and require task-oriented
ground-truth annotations. So they cannot generalize well
on different downstream tasks. Our LTA-PCS achieves
task-agnostic point cloud sampling without requiring taskoriented labels, in which both the geometric and semantic
information of points is considered in sampling. Extensive
experiments on multiple downstream tasks demonstrate the
effectiveness of our LTA-PCS.

Inference

Abstract

Inference

Jiaheng Liu1∗ , Jianhao Li1∗ , Kaisiyuan Wang3 , Hongcheng Guo1 , Jian Yang1 ,
Junran Peng2 , Ke Xu1 , Xianglong Liu1 , Jinyang Guo1†
1
Beihang University 2 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
The University of Sydney

Pretrained 2D
feature extractor

Classification
Completion
…

(c) Learnable Task-agnostic method (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of FPS, learnable task-specific methods,
and our LTA-PCS. FPS samples points using 3D coordinates,
which ignores semantic meaning. Learnable Task-specific methods need different sampling networks for different tasks. Our LTAPCS is task-agnostic, where one trained sampling network can be
used for different tasks. Note that the pretrained 2D feature extractor is frozen in training, and not used at inference.

are farthest apart from each other. Although FPS is taskagnostic, it does not utilize the semantic information of
point clouds as the sampling process is solely based on the
point coordinates, causing degraded performance on downstream tasks. Recently, in Fig. 1 (b), learning-based point
cloud sampling methods [7, 15] are proposed to sample the

28035

