This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dynamic Prompt Optimizing for Text-to-Image Generation
†

Wenyi Mo1,2 , Tianyu Zhang3 , Yalong Bai3 , Bing Su1,2 , Ji-Rong Wen1,2 and Qing Yang3
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
Du Xiaoman Technology
{mowenyi, jrwen}@ruc.edu.cn, subingats@gmail.com
{zhangtianyu, libai, yangqing}@duxiaoman.com

Abstract
Text-to-image generative models, specifically those
based on diffusion models like Imagen and Stable Diffusion, have made substantial advancements. Recently, there
has been a surge of interest in the delicate refinement of
text prompts. Users assign weights or alter the injection
time steps of certain words in the text prompts to improve
the quality of generated images. However, the success of
fine-control prompts depends on the accuracy of the text
prompts and the careful selection of weights and time steps,
which requires significant manual intervention. To address
this, we introduce the Prompt Auto-Editing (PAE) method.
Besides refining the original prompts for image generation,
we further employ an online reinforcement learning strategy to explore the weights and injection time steps of each
word, leading to the dynamic fine-control prompts. The reward function during training encourages the model to consider aesthetic score, semantic consistency, and user preferences. Experimental results demonstrate that our proposed
method effectively improves the original prompts, generating visually more appealing images while maintaining semantic alignment. Code is available at this https URL.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image generative models take a user-provided text
to generate images matching the description [1, 16, 29, 30].
The input text is called a prompt since it prompts the generative models to follow the user’s instructions. However,
it has been reported that recent text-to-image models are
sensitive to prompts [5, 15, 19]. The organization of the input prompts plays a crucial role in determining the quality
and relevance of the generated images. Interestingly, even
when two prompts convey identical meanings, different ex† Corresponding authors.

pressions of these prompts may yield vastly different image
interpretations. Therefore, it is crucial to craft appropriate
prompts that convey the user’s intended ideas and establish
clear communication with the generative model.
For a given pre-trained text-to-image generative model,
it is unclear which type of prompt is the most suitable. Consequently, users heavily rely on heuristic engineering methods [21] by repeatedly running the generative model with
modified prompt candidates in search of an optimal one.
They append modifier words to enhance the art style or
emphasize the image quality. These hand-crafted heuristics need to be implemented separately for each design intention and generative model, resulting in a costly, timeconsuming, and labor-intensive trial-and-error process. Although there are learning-based methods [9, 44] that aim to
enhance the quality of image generation results by rephasing or appending modifiers to user-input prompts, these
methods lack control over the extent to which the added
modifier words influence the image generation process.
It is a common practice to assign varying levels of importance to specific words in the design of text prompt* . This
technique allows for more precise control over the generation process, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). Another notable
characteristic of the diffusion model is the multi-step denoising process. This multi-step design allows us to use
different prompts at different time steps, thus achieving better results. By precisely adjusting the effect time range of
modifier words during this process, a significant enhancement of the visual aesthetics of the generated image can be
achieved, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). Therefore, to achieve more
precise and detailed control over various aspects of the generated image, we propose a novel prompt format called the
Dynamic Fine-control Prompt (DF-Prompt). It consists of
several triples of tokens, effect ranges, and importance levels. Traditional hand-crafted heuristic prompt engineering
* https://github.com/AUTOMATIC1111/stable-diffus
ion-webui/wiki/Features#attentionemphasis

26627

