This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HUGS: Human Gaussian Splats
Muhammed KocabasNRB
N

Apple

Jen-Hao Rick ChangN
R

James GabrielN Oncel TuzelN

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

B

Anurag RanjanN

ETH Zurich

60 FPS

…

30 min.

Animatable human avatar & disentangled scene representation
60 FPS rendering time

Short (80 frames), in-the-wild
monocular video

Novel poses & scenes

Figure 1. Human Gaussian Splats (HUGS) is a neural rendering framework that trains on 50-100 frames of a monocular video containing
a human in a scene. HUGS enables novel view rendering with novel human poses at 60 FPS by learning a disentangled representation that
can also render the human in other scenes.

Abstract
Recent advances in neural rendering have improved
both training and rendering times by orders of magnitude.
While these methods demonstrate state-of-the-art quality
and speed, they are designed for photogrammetry of static
scenes and do not generalize well to freely moving humans
in the environment. In this work, we introduce Human
Gaussian Splats (HUGS) that represents an animatable human together with the scene using 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS). Our method takes only a monocular video with
a small number of (50-100) frames, and it automatically
learns to disentangle the static scene and a fully animatable human avatar within 30 minutes. We utilize the SMPL
body model to initialize the human Gaussians. To capture
details that are not modeled by SMPL (e.g., cloth, hairs),
we allow the 3D Gaussians to deviate from the human body
model. Utilizing 3D Gaussians for animated humans brings
new challenges, including the artifacts created when arWork done while MK was an intern at Apple.

ticulating the Gaussians. We propose to jointly optimize
the linear blend skinning weights to coordinate the movements of individual Gaussians during animation. Our approach enables novel-pose synthesis of human and novel
view synthesis of both the human and the scene. We achieve
state-of-the-art rendering quality with a rendering speed
of 60 FPS while being ∼100× faster to train over previous work. Our code will be announced here: https:
//github.com/apple/ml-hugs

1. Introduction
Photorealistic rendering and animation of human bodies is an important area of research with many applications
in AR/VR, visual effects, visual try-on, movie production,
etc. Early works [1–3] for creating human avatars relied
on capturing high-quality data in a multi-camera capture
setup, extensive compute, and lots of manual effort. Recent work addresses these problem by directly generating
3D avatars from videos using 3D parametric body mod-

505

