This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InteractDiffusion: Interaction Control in Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
Jiun Tian Hoe1
1

Xudong Jiang1

Chee Seng Chan2

School of EEE, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

jiuntian001@e.ntu.edu.sg

2

Generated Image

cell phone

Interaction Input
holding

Generated Image

cell phone
talking

bag

bag

another
person

person

cs.chan@um.edu.my

InteractDiffusion

GLIGEN
Layout Input

Weipeng Hu1

CISiP, Universiti Malaya, Malaysia

{exdjiang,eyptan,weipeng.hu}@ntu.edu.sg

Stable Diffusion
Generated Image

Yap-Peng Tan1

another
person

person

Caption: a person is holding a bag, another person is talking on a cell phone

feeding
person

person

cat

cat

Caption: a person is feeding a cat
Figure 1. Generated samples of size 512x512. Stable Diffusion conditions on text caption only, while GLIGEN conditions on extra layout
input. Our proposed InteractDiffusion conditions on extra interaction label and its location shown by the shaded area.

Abstract
Large-scale text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models have
showcased incredible capabilities in generating coherent
images based on textual descriptions, enabling vast applications in content generation. While recent advancements
have introduced control over factors such as object localization, posture, and image contours, a crucial gap remains
in our ability to control the interactions between objects
in the generated content. Well-controlling interactions in
generated images could yield meaningful applications,
such as creating realistic scenes with interacting characters. In this work, we study the problems of conditioning
T2I diffusion models with Human-Object Interaction
(HOI) information, consisting of a triplet label (person,
action, object) and corresponding bounding boxes. We
propose a pluggable interaction control model, called
InteractDiffusion that extends existing pre-trained T2I difcorresponding authors

fusion models to enable them being better conditioned on
interactions. Specifically, we tokenize the HOI information
and learn their relationships via interaction embeddings.
A conditioning self-attention layer is trained to map HOI
tokens to visual tokens, thereby conditioning the visual
tokens better in existing T2I diffusion models. Our model
attains the ability to control the interaction and location on
existing T2I diffusion models, which outperforms existing
baselines by a large margin in HOI detection score, as
well as fidelity in FID and KID. Project page: https:
//jiuntian.github.io/interactdiffusion.

1. Introduction
The advent of diffusion generative models recently opens
up new creative task opportunities. While diffusion models could generate diverse high quality images that reconstruct the original data distributions, it is important to
control the content generated. Numerous literatures have

6180

