This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Noisy Correspondence Learning with Equivariant Similarity Consistency
Yuchen Yang, Likai Wang, Erkun Yang∗ , Cheng Deng*
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
yuchenyanggm@gmail.com, lkwang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, erkunyang@gmail.com, chdeng.xd@gmail.com

Abstract
The surge in multi-modal data has propelled crossmodal matching to the forefront of research interest. However, the challenge lies in the laborious and expensive process of curating a large and accurately matched multimodal dataset. Commonly sourced from the Internet, these
datasets often suffer from a significant presence of mismatched data, impairing the performance of matching models. To address this problem, we introduce a novel regularization approach named Equivariant Similarity Consistency (ESC), which can facilitate robust clean and noisy
data separation and improve the training for cross-modal
matching. Intuitively, our method posits that the semantic
variations caused by image changes should be proportional
to those caused by text changes for any two matched samples. Accordingly, we first calculate the ESC by comparing
image and text semantic variations between a set of elaborated anchor points and other undivided training data.
Then, pairs with high ESC are filtered out as noisy correspondence pairs. We implement our method by combining
the ESC with a traditional hinge-based triplet loss. Extensive experiments on three widely used datasets, including
Flickr30K, MS-COCO, and Conceptual Captions, verify the
effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Cross-modal learning aims to extract and understand
meaningful correspondences between data from different
modalities, which contains various downstream tasks, such
as audio-visual recognition [1, 2], multi-modal fusion [23,
27], and cross-modal generation [31, 32, 34, 52]. One of the
most essential tasks in cross-modal learning is cross-modal
matching, which aims to capture the semantic similarities
between instances from multiple modalities and retrieve relevant instances correctly. With the rapid development of
computility, cross-modal matching methods [25, 44, 45, 53]
have achieved remarkable progress with massive and cor* Corresponding authors.

Semantic Variation by Image Change

𝑰𝟏

𝑰𝟑

𝑰𝟐

𝒔𝟏𝟏
𝑻𝟏 A little black

dog is lying on
the grass.

𝒔𝟏𝐍
𝑻𝟐 A little white
dog is lying on
the grass.

𝑰𝑵

…

𝒔𝐍𝟏
𝑻𝟑 A little white
cat is lying on
the grass.

𝒔𝐍𝐍
man in blue is
… Aplaying
football

𝑻𝑵

Semantic Variation by Text Change

Figure 1. Illustration of the key idea in ESC. We intentionally
create image and text spaces with different lengths to emphasize
that semantic changes in two spaces are not necessarily equal.

rect correspondence data. However, collecting such highquality labeled training data is significantly hard due to its
economic cost. Current multi-modal datasets unavoidably
contain noisy correspondence so that the performance of
cross-modal tasks almost reaches a bottleneck. Therefore,
learning with noisy correspondence has become an essential
and indispensable research field.
Similar to noisy label problems [3, 16–18, 42, 43, 47],
noisy correspondence learning focuses on dividing training
data into clean set and noisy set, and then training different sets with different strategies. Relevant methods like
[15, 29, 49] are almost based on the memorization effect
of DNNs [51] observed in [13], which means that DNNs
often prioritize learning simple patterns over fitting noisy
samples. Inspired by this empirical observation, training
data can be separated into two partitions (clean and noisy
sets) based on their loss difference, i.e., small-loss samples
are more likely to be clean data. Most existing methods for
addressing noisy correspondence utilize triplet loss to filter
out noisy samples and train matching models. Nevertheless,
the sensitivity of margin α in triplet loss to different pairs
of noisy correspondence data varies, causing triplet loss to
easily fail in noisy datasets and lower the robustness in division and training. Therefore, how to improve the robustness
remains an urgent problem to be addressed in noisy correspondence.

17700

