This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Data Valuation and Detections in Federated Learning
Wenqian Li
National University of Singapore
wenqian@u.nus.edu
Fengrui, Zhang
Georgetown University
fz128@georgetown.edu

Abstract
Federated Learning (FL) enables collaborative model
training while preserving the privacy of raw data. A challenge in this framework is the fair and efficient valuation
of data, which is crucial for incentivizing clients to contribute high-quality data in the FL task. In scenarios involving numerous data clients within FL, it is often the
case that only a subset of clients and datasets are pertinent to a specific learning task, while others might have either a negative or negligible impact on the model training
process. This paper introduces a novel privacy-preserving
method for evaluating client contributions and selecting relevant datasets without a pre-specified training algorithm
in an FL task. Our proposed approach, FedBary, utilizes Wasserstein distance within the federated context, offering a new solution for data valuation in the FL framework. This method ensures transparent data valuation and
efficient computation of the Wasserstein barycenter and reduces the dependence on validation datasets. Through extensive empirical experiments and theoretical analyses, we
demonstrate the advantages of this data valuation method
as a promising avenue for FL research. Codes are available at https://github.com/muz1lee/MOTdata.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) has emerged as a privacypreserving approach for collaboratively training models
without sharingw data [21], in which the learning proceeds by iteratively exchanging model parameters between
the server and clients. The success of the trained model
hinges on the availability of large, high-quality, and rele* Corresponding Author

Shuran Fu
NUS (Chongqing) Research Institution
shuran.fu@nusricq.cn
Yan Pang*
National University of Singapore
jamespang@nus.edu.sg

vant data [13]. Thus, it is crucial for the server to select
valuable clients in the FL training process to ensure better
model performance and explainability [33]. In the context
of cross-silo FL, there is a mutual interest among clients in
understanding the value of their own data as well as that
of others. If there are free riders or malicious actors in FL,
clients are unwilling to provide high-quality data to train the
local model. Thus, fair valuation of data quality and accurate detection of noisy data become indispensable components of federated training [20].
In the context of a data marketplace with numerous potential clients, each possessing unique datasets, a central
server issuing a learning task must discern and select the
most valuable data clients for participation. This necessitates a fair and accurate assessment of each client’s contribution. Commonly, existing methods evaluate contributions
based on validation performance of the trained model, utilizing the concept of Shapley value (SV) to measure each
client’s marginal contribution to an FL model. This method,
however, involves evaluating all possible subset combinations, leading to a computational complexity of O(2N ) for
N clients. Although efforts have been made to reduce the
complexity through approximations [8, 11, 20, 34], these
approaches may introduce biased evaluations and remain
impractical for large-scale settings. Moreover, approaches
based on validation performance are post-hoc, which assess
client contributions after model training. This approach is
problematic because some clients might be irrelevant to the
FL task, and subsets of noisy data might also be involved in
training without detection, leading to the waste of computational resources and poor model performance. Additionally, this evaluation method is typically client-level, based
on model gradients, and does not delve into the granularity
of individual data points, leading to a lack of transparency
in the evaluation process.

12027

