This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Test-Time Adaptation for Depth Completion
Hyoungseob Park
Yale Vision Lab

Anjali Gupta
Yale Vision Lab

Alex Wong
Yale Vision Lab

hyoungseob.park@yale.edu

anjali.gupta@yale.edu

alex.wong@yale.edu

Abstract
It is common to observe performance degradation when
transferring models trained on some (source) datasets to target testing data due to a domain gap between them. Existing
methods for bridging this gap, such as domain adaptation
(DA), may require the source data on which the model was
trained (often not available), while others, i.e., source-free
DA, require many passes through the testing data. We propose an online test-time adaptation method for depth completion, the task of inferring a dense depth map from a single
image and associated sparse depth map, that closes the performance gap in a single pass. We first present a study on
how the domain shift in each data modality affects model performance. Based on our observations that the sparse depth
modality exhibits a much smaller covariate shift than the
image, we design an embedding module trained in the source
domain that preserves a mapping from features encoding
only sparse depth to those encoding image and sparse depth.
During test time, sparse depth features are projected using
this map as a proxy for source domain features and are used
as guidance to train a set of auxiliary parameters (i.e., adaptation layer) to align image and sparse depth features from
the target test domain to that of the source domain. We evaluate our method on indoor and outdoor scenarios and show
that it improves over baselines by an average of 21.1%. Code
available at github.com/seobbro/TTA-depth-completion.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the 3-dimensional (3D) structure of an environment can support a number of spatial tasks, from robotic
navigation and manipulation to augmented and virtual reality.
Most systems addressing these tasks are built for sensor platforms equipped with range (i.e., lidar or radar) or optics (i.e.,
camera or sensors). While range sensors can measure the
3D coordinates of the surrounding space, they often yield
point clouds that are sparse. Likewise, these coordinates
can also be estimated from images by means of Structurefrom-Motion (SfM) or Visual Inertial Odometry (VIO). For
the goal of dense mapping, depth completion is the task of

recovering the dense depth of a 3D scene as observed from
a sparse point cloud, which is often post-processed into a
sparse depth map by projecting the points onto the image
plane, and guided by a synchronized calibrated image.
Training a depth completion model can be done in a supervised (using ground truth) or unsupervised (using SfM)
manner. The former dominates in performance, but requires
expensive annotations that are often unavailable; the latter
uses unannotated images, but they must satisfy SfM assumptions between frames, i.e., motion, covisibility, etc. Like
most learning-based methods, models trained under both
paradigms typically experience a performance drop when
tested on a new dataset due to a covariate shift, i.e., domain
gap. As we can only assume that a single pair of image
and sparse depth map is available in the target domain for
the depth completion, models belonging to either learning
paradigms cannot easily be trained or adapted to the new
domain even when given the testing data. We focus on testtime adaptation (TTA) for depth completion, where one is
given access to the test data in a stream, i.e., one batch at a
time, without being able to revisit previously-seen examples.
The goal is to learn causally and to quickly adapt a set of
pre-existing weights trained on a source domain to a target
test domain, so one can reduce the performance gap.
We begin with some motivating observations on the effects of the domain gap: (i) Errors in target domain tend
to be higher when feed both the image and sparse depth as
input rather than sparse depth only, as shown in Fig. 1. This
implies that the depth modality exhibits a smaller covariate
shift between the source and target domains than the image
modality, to the extent that forgoing the image altogether
often yields superior results than using either both sparse
depth and image or the image alone. (ii) Yet, when operating
in the source domain, we observe the opposite effect – forgoing the image is detrimental to performance. Naturally, this
begs the question: How should one leverage data modalities
that are less sensitive to the domain shift (e.g., sparse depth)
to support alignment between source and target domains for
modalities that are more sensitive (e.g., RGB image)?
To answer this question, we investigate a test-time adaptation approach that learns an embedding for guiding the

20519

