This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-scale Dynamic and Hierarchical Relationship Modeling for Facial Action
Units Recognition
Zihan Wang1,2,3 , Siyang Song4∗ , Cheng Luo5 , Songhe Deng1,2,3 , Weicheng Xie1,2,3 and Linlin Shen1,2,3∗
Computer Vision Institute, School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University,
2
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society,
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University,
4
University of Leicester, 5 Monash University

1

Upper face

Abstract

AU2

Human facial action units (AUs) are mutually related
in a hierarchical manner, as not only they are associated
with each other in both spatial and temporal domains but
also AUs located in the same/close facial regions show
stronger relationships than those of different facial regions.
While none of existing approach thoroughly model such hierarchical inter-dependencies among AUs, this paper proposes to comprehensively model multi-scale AU-related dynamic and hierarchical spatio-temporal relationship among
AUs for their occurrences recognition. Specifically, we first
propose a novel multi-scale temporal differencing network
with an adaptive weighting block to explicitly capture facial
dynamics across frames at different spatial scales, which
specifically considers the heterogeneity of range and magnitude in different AUs’ activation. Then, a two-stage strategy is introduced to hierarchically model the relationship
among AUs based on their spatial distribution (i.e., local
and cross-region AU relationship modelling). Experimental results achieved on BP4D and DISFA show that our
approach is the new state-of-the-art in the field of AU occurrence recognition. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/CVI-SZU/MDHR.

1. Introduction
Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [11] specifies a set
of Facial Action Units (AUs) to describe multiple atomic
human facial muscle movements, which can comprehensively and objectively describe various human facial expressions in an anonymous and concise manner [30]. Recent studies frequently show that AUs are robust and effective low-dimensional facial descriptors for various human
behaviours understanding tasks, such as emotion [33, 51],
mental health [34, 44] and pain level [10] analysis. As a
∗

Corresponding author

AU1

Middle face

(a)

Upper

AU4

AU6

Middle
AU9

Lower face

AU12
AU26
AU25

Local relationship

Lower

Cross-region relationship

Subtle motion

(b)
t

Large motion

t+T
t+1

Figure 1. (a) hierarchical AU relationship; and (b) heterogeneous
range and magnitude of different AUs’ activation.

result, a large number of studies attempt to automatically
recognize AU occurrences from facial images or videos
[7, 8, 16, 41, 45, 46, 55].
Most of these approaches conduct AU recognition on
still face images. Since each AU usually occur in a specific
facial region, some recognize each AU based on a small
facial patch defined by automatically detected facial landmarks [14, 18, 38]. However, they not only ignore contextual cues (i.e., AUs are mutually dependent [48]) obtainable from other facial regions for each AU’s recognition, but
also suffer from errors caused by facial landmark detection.
Consequently, other approaches jointly recognize multiple
AUs from the entire face, allowing informative contextual
cues [32, 36] to be utilized at the cost of including noises
introduced by irrelevant facial regions when recognizing a
particular AU. Specifically, transformer [13, 57] and graphbased [29, 46] approaches have been widely extended to
model the relationship among AUs. However, most of these
employ the same strategy to model the relationship between

1270

