This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Background Prompts to Discover Implicit Knowledge for Open
Vocabulary Object Detection
Jiaming Li1

Jiacheng Zhang1 Jichang Li1,2 Ge Li3 Si Liu4
Liang Lin1 Guanbin Li 1,5,6 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
3
SECE, Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
4
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Beihang University, China
5
GuangDong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
6
Research Institute, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
{lijm48,zhangjch58}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {liguanbin,linlng}@mail.sysu.edu.cn
csjcli@connect.hku.hk, lige@pku.edu.cn, liusi@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract

Conventional designs

Open vocabulary object detection (OVD) aims at seeking an optimal object detector capable of recognizing objects from both base and novel categories. Recent advances
leverage knowledge distillation to transfer insightful knowledge from pre-trained large-scale vision-language models
to the task of object detection, signiﬁcantly generalizing the
powerful capabilities of the detector to identify more unknown object categories. However, these methods face signiﬁcant challenges in background interpretation and model
overﬁtting and thus often result in the loss of crucial background knowledge, giving rise to sub-optimal inference performance of the detector. To mitigate these issues, we
present a novel OVD framework termed LBP to propose
learning background prompts to harness explored implicit
background knowledge, thus enhancing the detection performance w.r.t. base and novel categories. Speciﬁcally,
we devise three modules: Background Category-speciﬁc
Prompt, Background Object Discovery, and Inference Probability Rectiﬁcation, to empower the detector to discover,
represent, and leverage implicit object knowledge explored
from background proposals. Evaluation on two benchmark
datasets, OV-COCO and OV-LVIS, demonstrates the superiority of our proposed method over existing state-of-the-art
approaches in handling the OVD tasks.

DetPro

Visual embedding encoded by CLIP
Base class contextual embedding
Distillation loss
Uniform distribution boundary

LBP(ours)

Background class embedding
RoI embeddings encoded by detector
Background classification loss
Background underlying class embedding

Figure 1. An example to illustrate previous and our designs
in background interpretation. Conventional designs use a single
background embedding to push the RoI embedding away from the
CLIP embedding. DetPro [4] proposes to uniformly push the RoI
embedding away when the CLIP embedding nears a base class
embedding, leading to a loss of class relation. Our LBP, on the
other hand, learns multiple background underlying class embeddings, effectively preserving class relations and alleviating loss
conﬂict. “Distillation loss” uses knowledge distillation to align
visual features encoded by the decoder with CLIP embeddings,
while “Background classiﬁcation loss” refers to the classiﬁcation
loss for background proposals.

1. Introduction
Compared to conventional vision tasks [11, 12, 18–22, 39],
object detection has witnessed signiﬁcant success in research, such as [26, 30, 32, 41], however, solely detecting and classifying objects within known categories (base
classes) during inference signiﬁcantly diminishes its generalization capacity in real-world applications. Open Vo* Corresponding author.

16678

