This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

iKUN: Speak to Trackers without Retraining
Yunhao Du1 , Cheng Lei1 , Zhicheng Zhao1,2,3 *, Fei Su1,2,3
1
The school of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Network System and Network Culture, China
3
Key Laboratory of Interactive Technology and Experience System Ministry
of Culture and Tourism, Beijing, China
{dyh bupt,mr.leicheng,zhaozc,sufei}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Referring multi-object tracking (RMOT) aims to track
multiple objects based on input textual descriptions. Previous works realize it by simply integrating an extra textual
module into the multi-object tracker. However, they typically need to retrain the entire framework and have difficulties in optimization. In this work, we propose an insertable
Knowledge Unification Network, termed iKUN, to enable
communication with off-the-shelf trackers in a plug-andplay manner. Concretely, a knowledge unification module (KUM) is designed to adaptively extract visual features
based on textual guidance. Meanwhile, to improve the localization accuracy, we present a neural version of Kalman
filter (NKF) to dynamically adjust process noise and observation noise based on the current motion status. Moreover, to address the problem of open-set long-tail distribution of textual descriptions, a test-time similarity calibration method is proposed to refine the confidence score
with pseudo frequency. Extensive experiments on ReferKITTI dataset verify the effectiveness of our framework.
Finally, to speed up the development of RMOT, we also
contribute a more challenging dataset, Refer-Dance, by extending public DanceTrack dataset with motion and dressing descriptions. The codes and dataset are available at
https://github.com/dyhBUPT/iKUN .

1. Introduction
Traditional multi-object tracking (MOT) task aims to track
all specific classes of objects frame-by-frame, which plays
an essential role in video understanding. Although significant developments have been achieved, it suffers from poor
flexibility and generalization. To address this problem, referring multi-object tracking (RMOT) task is recently proposed [37], whose core idea is to guide the multi-object
* Corresponding author

(a) previous framework

(b) our framework

Figure 1. Comparison among previous RMOT frameworks
and ours. (a) Previous methods incorporate the referring module into the multi-object tracker, which need to retrain the overall
framework. (b) Instead, our designed model iKUN can be directly
plugged after an off-the-shelf tracker, in which the tracker is frozen
while training.

tracking with a language description. For example, if we
input “moving car in the left” as the query, the tracker
will predict all trajectories corresponding to the description. However, as the cost of high flexibility, the model
is required to perform detection, association and referring
simultaneously. Therefore, balancing the optimization between subtasks becomes a critical issue.
To accomplish this task, existing methods, e.g., TransRMOT [37], simply integrate a textual module into existing
trackers, as shown in Fig.1(a). However, this framework
has several intrinsic drawbacks: i) Task competition. The
optimization competition between detection and association has been revealed by some MOT methods [24, 48]. In
RMOT, the added referring subtask will further exacerbate
this problem. ii) Engineering cost. Whenever we want to replace the baseline tracker, we need to rewrite the codes and

19135

