This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WALT3D: Generating Realistic Training Data from Time-Lapse Imagery
for Reconstructing Dynamic Objects under Occlusion
Khiem Vuong1,∗

N Dinesh Reddy2,∗

Robert Tamburo1

Srinivasa G. Narasimhan1

1

2
Carnegie Mellon University
Amazon
https://www.cs.cmu.edu/˜walt3d

Input Image
Predicted Segmentation
3D View
Predicted Shape
Figure 1. Models trained on our automatically generated data from time-lapse imagery can reliably estimate amodal 2D bounding box,
segmentation as well as 3D shape and pose despite the complex occlusions presented in the input image.

Abstract
Current methods for 2D and 3D object understanding
struggle with severe occlusions in busy urban environments,
partly due to the lack of large-scale labeled ground-truth
annotations for learning occlusion. In this work, we introduce a novel framework for automatically generating
a large, realistic dataset of dynamic objects under occlusions using freely available time-lapse imagery. By leveraging off-the-shelf 2D (bounding box, segmentation, keypoint)
and 3D (pose, shape) predictions as pseudo-groundtruth,
unoccluded 3D objects are identified automatically and
composited into the background in a clip-art style, ensuring realistic appearances and physically accurate occlusion
configurations. The resulting clip-art image with pseudogroundtruth enables efficient training of object reconstruction methods that are robust to occlusions. Our method
demonstrates significant improvements in both 2D and 3D
reconstruction, particularly in scenarios with heavily occluded objects like vehicles and people in urban scenes.

1. Introduction
In recent years, remarkable progress has been made in advancing scene understanding tasks such as object detection [49, 51, 63], tracking [14, 78, 81], segmentation [10,
31], and 3D reconstruction [35, 44, 70]. These achievements are mainly attributed to the availability of largescale datasets [13, 15, 23, 50, 77] and architectural innova∗ denotes equal contribution and joint first author

tions [17, 30, 42]. Despite this progress, a notable challenge
persists in scenarios with severe occlusion, where only a
portion of the object is visible: an object may be partially
occluded by other objects or truncated by the camera’s fieldof-view. This phenomenon is referred to as amodal perception [36], and it is hard to intuitively infer their complete
shapes. Overcoming these challenges is important to advance many smart cities applications as well as robotics applications, where the number of cameras on vehicles and
city infrastructure is rapidly increasing [3, 25, 55].
Efforts to learn holistic representations necessitate a
substantially annotated and realistic dataset. While recent works such as KINS [58], COCO-Amodal [84], and
Ithaca365 [16] have contributed by annotating some amodal
ground-truth data, the available annotations remain limited. This scarcity is primarily due to the inherent difficulty in obtaining supervision for amodal representations,
as labeling hidden parts of objects is a difficult task for people to accomplish consistently [58, 60, 84]. Moreover, 3D
annotations under occlusions, including object shape and
pose [7, 43, 74], are even meager due to the difficulty of annotating 3D data, posing challenges for 3D prediction tasks.
Expanding on WALT [62], we utilize time-lapse videos
from stationary cameras to synthesize realistic occlusion
scenarios by extracting unoccluded objects and composite
them back into the background image at their original positions. Unlike WALT which focuses solely on compositing and learning 2D tasks, our approach extends to generating high-quality 3D pseudo-groundtruth data for robust
3D object reconstruction under occlusion. Additionally,
our 3D-based compositing method, named WALT3D, in

9514

