This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffusionMTL: Learning Multi-Task Denoising Diffusion Model
from Partially Annotated Data
Hanrong Ye and Dan Xu
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST
Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong
{hyeae, danxu}@cse.ust.hk

Abstract
Recently, there has been an increased interest in the
practical problem of learning multiple dense scene understanding tasks from partially annotated data, where each
training sample is only labeled for a subset of the tasks.
The missing of task labels in training leads to low-quality
and noisy predictions, as can be observed from state-ofthe-art methods. To tackle this issue, we reformulate the
partially-labeled multi-task dense prediction as a pixellevel denoising problem, and propose a novel multi-task
denoising diffusion framework coined as DiffusionMTL. It
designs a joint diffusion and denoising paradigm to model
a potential noisy distribution in the task prediction or feature maps and generate rectified outputs for different tasks.
To exploit multi-task consistency in denoising, we further
introduce a Multi-Task Conditioning strategy, which can
implicitly utilize the complementary nature of the tasks to
help learn the unlabeled tasks, leading to an improvement
in the denoising performance of the different tasks. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments demonstrate
that the proposed multi-task denoising diffusion model can
significantly improve multi-task prediction maps, and outperform the state-of-the-art methods on three challenging
multi-task benchmarks, under two different partial-labeling
evaluation settings. The code is available at https:
//prismformore.github.io/diffusionmtl/.

1. Introduction
Multi-task learning for dense scene understanding [1–4]
is an important research topic that has recently gained a
lot of attention from computer vision researchers. It aims
at jointly learning multiple scene-related dense prediction
tasks, including semantic segmentation, surface normal estimation, depth estimation, etc. This multi-task learning
problem has dual superiority over traditional single-task
learning. On the one hand, multi-task models are naturally

Task 0
Noisy Prediction or
Noisy Feature

Multi-Task
Conditioning

Denoised
Output

Task T

Diffusion Process
Initial

Decayed

Denoising Process
Denoising Step 1

Denoising Step 2

Figure 1. Motivative illustration of the proposed DiffusionMTL
for multi-task partially supervised dense prediction. The model
denoise the manually decayed multi-task prediction or feature
maps (denoted as {X0S , ..., XTS }, T, S are the numbers of tasks
and steps separately) in a step by step manner, and obtain the denoised outputs {X00 , ..., XT0 }. The denoising process is guided by
the designed multi-task condition feature Fcond .

more efficient than single-task models with similar structures because different tasks can share some network modules. On the other hand, different tasks are able to help each
other and improve overall performance by sharing information through cross-task consistency [5]. However, annotating a real-world multi-task learning dataset at the pixel level
is a daunting task. As an alternative, collecting data annotated for different tasks and using them to train a multi-task
model is a much more feasible approach. This motivates recent work [6] that defines an important new problem known
as “Multi-Task Partially Supervised Learning (MTPSL)”,
where each training sample contains labels for a subset of
the tasks, rather than all tasks. As there is a lack of multitask labels for each training sample, the partially supervised
multi-task learning problem is more challenging compared
to the fully supervised multi-task learning problem. To handle this problem, previous state-of-the-art models [6] fo-

27960

