This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tuning Stable Rank Shrinkage: Aiming at the Overlooked Structural Risk in
Fine-tuning
Sicong Shen1 * Yang Zhou1 * Bingzheng Wei2 Eric I-Chao Chang3 Yan Xu1†
1
School of Biological Science and Medical Engineering, Beihang University
2
Xiaomi Corporation 3 Taiwan Artificial Intelligence Foundation
{sicongshen3,xuyan04}@gmail.com

Abstract
Existing fine-tuning methods for computer vision tasks
primarily focus on re-weighting the knowledge learned from
the source domain during pre-training. They aim to retain
beneficial knowledge for the target domain while suppressing unfavorable knowledge. During the pre-training and
fine-tuning stages, there is a notable disparity in the data
scale. Consequently, it is theoretically necessary to employ
a model with reduced complexity to mitigate the potential
structural risk. However, our empirical investigation in this
paper reveals that models fine-tuned using existing methods still manifest a high level of model complexity inherited
from the pre-training stage, leading to a suboptimal stability
and generalization ability. This phenomenon indicates an
issue that has been overlooked in fine-tuning: Structural
Risk Minimization. To address this issue caused by data
scale disparity during the fine-tuning stage, we propose a
simple yet effective approach called Tuning Stable Rank
Shrinkage (TSRS). TSRS mitigates the structural risk during
the fine-tuning stage by constraining the noise sensitivity
of the target model based on stable rank theories. Through
extensive experiments, we demonstrate that incorporating
TSRS into fine-tuning methods leads to improved generalization ability on various tasks, regardless of whether the
neural networks are based on convolution or transformer
architectures. Additionally, empirical analysis reveals that
TSRS enhances the robustness, convexity, and smoothness of
the loss landscapes in fine-tuned models. Code is available
at https://github.com/WitGotFlg/TSRS.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep learning has garnered remarkable performance in numerous computer vision tasks but its efficacy
heavily hinges on the availability of substantial training data,
* Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

zhouyangbme@buaa.edu.cn

a challenge that arises in various scenarios due to the exorbitant costs associated with annotation and privacy concerns [63]. Consequently, transfer learning has emerged as
a proposed solution to tackle this challenge [64]. Among
transfer learning methods, fine-tuning stands out as a popular approach that allows for the direct utilization of learned
feature representations from a large-scale source data corpus
[18, 19]. By leveraging pre-trained neural networks (NNs),
fine-tuning enables satisfactory performance on target tasks,
even when confronted with limited amounts of training data.
Hitherto, many methods have been proposed to improve
vanilla fine-tuning by either retaining the valuable knowledge or suppressing the unfavorable one to the target task
[8, 27, 33, 37, 50, 57, 60]. These methods mainly focus on
re-weighting the prior knowledge of the source domain to
reduce the empirical risk of the target model. However, according to the theory of structural risk minimization (SRM),
a model with good generalization ability needs to exhibit
both low empirical risk and low model complexity [51]. In
the pre-training stage, a NN needs to have a large complexity
to fit a large amount of source data, whereas in the finetuning stage, it necessitates a lower complexity congruous
with the small amount of the target data to minimize the
structural risk [4, 21, 32]. Hence, directly inheriting the pretrained model from the source domain inevitably introduces
redundant model complexity, which subsequently increases
the structural risk of the model in the target domain and
diminishes its generalization ability. Mainstream fine-tuning
methods primarily concentrate on knowledge re-weighting
and do not effectively address the issue of model complexity
(see Fig. 1a). Our empirical investigations show that even if
the fine-tuned model fits plausibly well in the target domain,
its model complexity remains largely unchanged. Therefore, in addition to knowledge re-weighting, considering the
model complexity is crucial for mitigating the structural risk
of the target model during the fine-tuning process.
An intuitive approach to reducing the complexity of the
fine-tuned model is to adjust its weights. However, this
approach may not provide an optimal solution for transfer

28474

