This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StegoGAN: Leveraging Steganography
for Non-Bijective Image-to-Image Translation
Samuel Mermet 2
Lorenz Hurni 1
Yizi Chen 1 *
Sidi Wu 1 *
1
3,2
Konrad Schindler
Nicolas Gonthier
Loic Landrieu 4,2
1

ETH Zurich

2

Univ Gustave Eiffel, IGN, ENSG, LASTIG

3

IGN

4

Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Ecole des Ponts, LIGM

Abstract
Most image-to-image translation models postulate that a
unique correspondence exists between the semantic classes
of the source and target domains. However, this assumption does not always hold in real-world scenarios due to
divergent distributions, different class sets, and asymmetrical information representation. As conventional GANs
attempt to generate images that match the distribution of
the target domain, they may hallucinate spurious instances
of classes absent from the source domain, thereby diminishing the usefulness and reliability of translated images.
CycleGAN-based methods are also known to hide the mismatched information in the generated images to bypass cycle consistency objectives, a process known as steganography. In response to the challenge of non-bijective image
translation, we introduce StegoGAN, a novel model that
leverages steganography to prevent spurious features in
generated images. Our approach enhances the semantic
consistency of the translated images without requiring additional postprocessing or supervision. Our experimental
evaluations demonstrate that StegoGAN outperforms existing GAN-based models across various non-bijective imageto-image translation tasks, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Our code and pretrained models are accessible at
https://github.com/sian-wusidi/StegoGAN .

1. Introduction
Image-to-image translation is an active research subject with
impactful applications ranging from changing the style of
images [12, 36] to automatically creating maps from satellite
images [36] or changing the modality of medical images [9].
When the source and target domains exhibit substantial differences, ensuring the semantic consistency between input
images and their translation becomes particularly challeng* Equal contribution.

matchable
features

Image from X

Image from Y

(a) Semantically misaligned domains.

unmatchable
feature

hallucination

Image from X ...

translated to Y

(b) GAN models hallucinate spurious features.

Image from Y...

translated to X ...

and back to Y

(c) CycleGAN models hide unmatchable features by steganography.

Figure 1. Non-Bijective Translation. When image domains
present classes without equivalence (a), GAN models tend to hallucinate spurious features when translating images (b). A related
phenomenon is steganography, where CycleGAN-based models
covertly encode features in low-amplitude patterns to bypass cycle
consistency (c). Instead of disabling this phenomenon, we harness
steganography to prevent the hallucination of spurious features.

ing [8]. Our work explores the surprisingly uncharted field
of adversarial, non-bijective image-to-image translation.
Non-Bijective Image Translation. Existing translation
methods assume a one-to-one correspondence between
classes of the source and target domains: horses to zebras [36], satellite image features to their cartographic repre-

7922

