This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FaceCom: Towards High-fidelity 3D Facial Shape Completion
via Optimization and Inpainting Guidance
Yinglong Li1 , Hongyu Wu1 *, Xiaogang Wang3 , Qingzhao Qin2 ,
Yijiao Zhao2 , Yong Wang2 , Aimin Hao1
1

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
2
Peking University School and Hospital of Stomatology
3
College of Computer and Information Science, Southwest University
{dragonylee, whyvrlab, ham}@buaa.edu.cn, wangxiaogang@swu.edu.cn,
2211210502@pku.edu.cn, {kqcadcs, kqcadc}@bjmu.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose FaceCom, a method for 3D facial shape
completion, which delivers high-fidelity results for incomplete facial inputs of arbitrary forms. Unlike end-to-end
shape completion methods based on point clouds or voxels, our approach relies on a mesh-based generative network that is easy to optimize, enabling it to handle shape
completion for irregular facial scans. We first train a
shape generator on a mixed 3D facial dataset containing 2405 identities. Based on the incomplete facial input, we fit complete faces using an optimization approach
under image inpainting guidance. The completion results are refined through a post-processing step. FaceCom
demonstrates the ability to effectively and naturally complete facial scan data with varying missing regions and
degrees of missing areas. Our method can be used in
medical prosthetic fabrication and the registration of deficient scanning data. Our experimental results demonstrate that FaceCom achieves exceptional performance in
fitting and shape completion tasks. The code is available at
https://github.com/dragonylee/FaceCom.git.

1. Introduction
The shape completion of incomplete facial scans
presents a significant challenge in the fields of computer vision, graphics, and medicine. On one hand, limitations in
scanning devices and occlusions during the capture process
often result in incomplete scans. On the other hand, clinical scenarios often involve patients with facial defects, for
whom conventional maxillofacial repair methods such as
mirrored reconstruction [2] or the selection of pre-designed
* Corresponding author.

prosthetics from a database [31] may lack personalized
shapes and require manual adjustments to fit the patient’s
facial contours. With the rapid development of deep learning and the increasing availability of three-dimensional facial datasets, there is a growing interest in leveraging diverse individual samples and deep learning techniques for
personalized and precise facial shape completion.
While recent years have seen numerous works on image inpainting for faces [22, 27, 30, 46], there have been
relatively few studies directly addressing shape completion
for three-dimensional facial data. Most voxel-based shape
completion approaches [12,35] and point cloud based methods [41,42] have demonstrated promising results on various
3D datasets, such as ShapeNet [8]. However, when applied
to 3D facial datasets, their completion results for incomplete data are often rough and inaccurate. These results
may be attributed to the high similarity between 3D facial
shapes, which requires networks to learn subtle shape variations. While point cloud-based methods can learn different
shapes, they are insensitive to small-scale deformations and
struggle to generate smooth results due to the lack of explicit surface adjacency. Similarly, voxel based methods,
although offering regular results and ease of construction
and training, face challenges in generating high-precision
results due to memory and resolution limitations. Therefore, we propose a novel approach that operates directly on
facial mesh data for generation purposes.
Our proposed method involves a graph convolutional
neural network structure, specifically an autoencoder, that
operates directly on explicit meshes to learn various facial
shape features and perform parameterized generation tasks.
Our approach aims to learn the facial shapes of as many
identities as possible, focusing on neutral faces without considering variations of expressions. To address the limited
number of identities in existing 3D facial datasets, we mix

2177

