This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text2Loc: 3D Point Cloud Localization from Natural Language
†

Hi, I am standing on the
west of a green building,
east of a green road,
west of a black garage...

Got it!
Coming soon!

Localization Recall (%)

Yan Xia∗1,2 Letian Shi∗1 Zifeng Ding3 João F. Henriques4
Daniel Cremers1,2
1
2
Technical University of Munich Munich Center for Machine Learning (MCML)
3
LMU Munich 4 Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
{yan.xia, letian.shi, cremers}@tum.de, zifeng.ding@campus.lmu.de, joao@robots.ox.ac.uk

Number of top retrievals

Figure 1. (Left) We introduce Text2Loc, a solution designed for city-scale position localization using textual descriptions. When provided
with a point cloud representing the surroundings and a textual query describing a position, Text2Loc determines the most probable location
of that described position within the map. (Right) Localization performance on the KITTI360Pose test set. The proposed Text2Loc achieves
consistently better performance across all top retrieval numbers. Notably, it outperforms the best baseline by up to 2 times, localizing text
queries below 5 m.

Abstract
We tackle the problem of 3D point cloud localization
based on a few natural linguistic descriptions and introduce a novel neural network, Text2Loc, that fully interprets
the semantic relationship between points and text. Text2Loc
follows a coarse-to-fine localization pipeline: text-submap
global place recognition, followed by fine localization. In
global place recognition, relational dynamics among each
textual hint are captured in a hierarchical transformer with
max-pooling (HTM), whereas a balance between positive
and negative pairs is maintained using text-submap contrastive learning. Moreover, we propose a novel matchingfree fine localization method to further refine the location
predictions, which completely removes the need for complicated text-instance matching and is lighter, faster, and more
accurate than previous methods. Extensive experiments
show that Text2Loc improves the localization accuracy by
up to 2× over the state-of-the-art on the KITTI360Pose
dataset. Our project page is publicly available at https:
//yan-xia.github.io/projects/text2loc/.

† Corresponding author. * Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
3D localization [18, 28] using natural language descriptions in a city-scale map is crucial for enabling autonomous
agents to cooperate with humans to plan their trajectories [11] in applications such as goods delivery or vehicle
pickup [36, 38]. When delivering a takeaway, couriers often encounter the “last mile problem”. Pinpointing the exact delivery spot in residential neighborhoods or large office
buildings is challenging since GPS signals are bound to fail
among tall buildings and vegetation [34, 37]. Couriers often rely on voice instructions over the phone from the recipient to determine this spot. More generally, the “last mile
problem” occurs whenever a user attempts to navigate to an
unfamiliar place. It is therefore essential to develop the capability to perform localization from the natural language,
as shown in Fig. 1.
As a possible remedy, we can match linguistic descriptions to a pre-built point cloud map using calibrated depth
sensors like LiDAR. Point cloud localization, which focuses
on the scene’s geometry, offers several advantages over images. It remains consistent despite lighting, weather, and
season changes, whereas the same geometric structure in
images might appear vastly different.
The main challenge of 3D localization from natural
language descriptions lies in accurately interpreting the

14958

