This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mitigating Object Hallucinations in Large Vision-Language Models through
Visual Contrastive Decoding
Guanzheng Chen1,3
Xin Li1,3,†
Hang Zhang1,3, *
Sicong Leng1,2, *
2
2
1,3
Shijian Lu
Chunyan Miao
Lidong Bing
1
2
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Nanyang Technological University
3
Hupan Lab, 310023, Hangzhou, China
https://github.com/DAMO-NLP-SG/VCD

Abstract
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have advanced
considerably, intertwining visual recognition and language
understanding to generate content that is not only coherent
but also contextually attuned. Despite their success, LVLMs
still suffer from the issue of object hallucinations, where
models generate plausible yet incorrect outputs that include
objects that do not exist in the images. To mitigate this issue, we introduce Visual Contrastive Decoding (VCD), a
simple and training-free method that contrasts output distributions derived from original and distorted visual inputs.
The proposed VCD effectively reduces the over-reliance on
statistical bias and unimodal priors, two essential causes of
object hallucinations. This adjustment ensures the generated
content is closely grounded to visual inputs, resulting in contextually accurate outputs. Our experiments show that VCD,
without either additional training or the usage of external
tools, significantly mitigates the object hallucination issue
across different LVLM families. Beyond mitigating object hallucinations, VCD also excels in general LVLM benchmarks,
highlighting its wide-ranging applicability.

1. Introduction
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have become integral in the intersection of computer vision and natural
language processing, enabling a range of applications due
to their ability to generate contextually relevant textual descriptions from visual inputs. These models are characterized by their effectiveness in capturing and translating
complex visual patterns into coherent linguistic representations [5, 12, 18, 33, 45, 49, 71, 73, 78]. The evolution of
* Equal contribution. Sicong Leng is under the Joint PhD Program between DAMO Academy and Nanyang Technological University.
† Correspondence: xinting.lx@alibaba-inc.com.

Original Visual Inputs V

Textual Input X
On the beach, there
are ...

𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒈𝒈𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊 𝒚𝒚 𝒙𝒙, 𝒗𝒗

People
Umbrellas
Loungers
Surfboard

Distorted Visual Inputs V ‘

𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒈𝒈𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊𝒊 𝒚𝒚 𝒙𝒙, 𝒗𝒗𝒗

People
Umbrellas
Loungers
Surfboards

Visual Contrastive
Decoding
𝟏𝟏 + 𝜶𝜶 𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒈𝒈𝒈𝒈𝒈𝒈𝒈𝒈 𝒚𝒚 𝒙𝒙, 𝒗𝒗
−𝜶𝜶 𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍𝒍(𝒚𝒚|𝒙𝒙, 𝒗𝒗′ )
People
Umbrellas
Loungers
Surfboards

hallucinated object
“Surfboards” eliminated

Figure 1. An illustration of Visual Contrastive Decoding. The hallucinated object “Surfboards” is highlighted in red, and it is eliminated during the generative process by contrasting with the output
distribution that favors hallucinations.

LVLMs is marked by ongoing improvements in model architecture, training methodologies, and data diversity, leading
to enhanced performance and application versatility. Despite
these advancements, specific challenges persist, with the
issue of object hallucination [20, 38, 43, 48] being a prominent concern that impacts the reliability and applicability of
LVLMs across domains.
Object Hallucination in this context refers to the phenomenon where LVLMs generate textual content that is
semantically coherent but inconsistent with ground-truth
objects in the given image. This challenge not only reveals
fundamental issues of LVLMs, such as over-reliance on statistical bias [1, 2, 19, 38] and unimodal priors [21, 22, 51,
68, 70, 75], but also has direct implications for the practical deployment of LVLMs. In applications where precision
and reliability of generated content are paramount, object
hallucinations can lead to misinformation, misinterpretation, and subsequent erroneous decision-making. In domains
like healthcare [26, 66], autonomous systems [8, 69], and
robotics [46, 50], such inaccuracies are not just undesirable
but could have significant consequences. Addressing the hallucination issue is therefore essential to enhance the integrity,

13872

