This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Local-consistent Transformation Learning for Rotation-invariant
Point Cloud Analysis
Yiyang Chen1 Lunhao Duan2 Shanshan Zhao3† Changxing Ding1,4† Dacheng Tao5
1
South China University of Technology 2 Wuhan University 3 The University of Sydney
4
Pazhou Lab 5 Nanyang Technological University
eeyychen@mail.scut.edu.cn, lhduan@whu.edu.cn
{sshan.zhao00, dacheng.tao}@gmail.com, chxding@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Rotation invariance is an important requirement for
point shape analysis. To achieve this, current state-of-theart methods attempt to construct the local rotation-invariant
representation through learning or defining the local reference frame (LRF). Although efficient, these LRF-based
methods suffer from perturbation of local geometric relations, resulting in suboptimal local rotation invariance. To
alleviate this issue, we propose a Local-consistent Transformation (LocoTrans) learning strategy. Specifically, we
first construct the local-consistent reference frame (LCRF)
by considering the symmetry of the two axes in LRF. In
comparison with previous LRFs, our LCRF is able to preserve local geometric relationships better through performing local-consistent transformation. However, as the consistency only exists in local regions, the relative pose information is still lost in the intermediate layers of the network. We mitigate such a relative pose issue by developing a relative pose recovery (RPR) module. RPR aims
to restore the relative pose between adjacent transformed
patches. Equipped with LCRF and RPR, our LocoTrans
is capable of learning local-consistent transformation and
preserving local geometry, which benefits rotation invariance learning. Competitive performance under arbitrary
rotations on both shape classification and part segmentation tasks and ablations can demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Code will be available publicly at
https://github.com/wdttt/LocoTrans.

1. Introduction
Point cloud analysis [1, 6, 10, 20, 37, 42, 45] is a fundamental task in 3D vision. Existing works [21, 29] have achieved
excellent performance in classification and part segmentation for pre-aligned point cloud data. However, these works
†Corresponding authors

Figure 1. Illustration of LRFs and the points transformation. For
two reference points marked by Blue and Cyan, we use the LRF
in OrientedMP [16] and our proposed LCRF to transform the local patches centered in them, respectively. By observing (a) and
(b), we can find that our LCRF is able to yield local-consistent
transformation and thus preserve the local shapes better. In comparison, OrientedMP only generates consistent orientation in one
axis (marked by Red) but fails in the other (marked by Green).

tend to suffer severe performance drops when processing
3D objects with arbitrary rotations, as they do not learn the
rotation-invariant feature representations. The lack of the
capability for rotation invariance limits the application of
the point cloud analysis model in practical situations. Currently, many attempts [2, 12, 16, 34, 41] have been made to
improve the performance under arbitrary rotations.
To achieve rotation invariance, previous works [2, 34,
43] propose to exploit local relative geometric relationships
that remain unchanged under rotations, such as distance and
angle, for feature learning, instead of the 3D coordinates.
However, such a strategy does not fully use 3D geometric information. Recently, some methods [4, 16, 41] aim
to learn rotation-invariant representations by building local
reference frames (LRFs). These LRF-based methods con-

5418

