This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Align before Adapt: Leveraging Entity-to-Region Alignments for Generalizable
Video Action Recognition
Yifei Chen

Dapeng Chen Ruijin Liu Sai Zhou Wenyuan Xue
IT Innovation and Research Center, Huawei Technologies
{chenyifei14, chendapeng8, liuruijin1}@huawei.com

Abstract
Large-scale visual-language pre-trained models have
achieved significant success in various video tasks. However, most existing methods follow an “adapt then align”
paradigm, which adapts pre-trained image encoders to
model video-level representations and utilizes one-hot or
text embedding of the action labels for supervision. This
paradigm overlooks the challenge of mapping from static images to complicated activity concepts. In this paper, we propose a novel “Align before Adapt” (ALT) paradigm. Prior
to adapting to video representation learning, we exploit the
entity-to-region alignments for each frame. The alignments
are fulfilled by matching the region-aware image embeddings
to an offline-constructed text corpus. With the aligned entities, we feed their text embeddings to a transformer-based
video adapter as the queries, which can help extract the
semantics of the most important entities from a video to a
vector. This paradigm reuses the visual-language alignment
of VLP during adaptation and tries to explain an action by
the underlying entities. This helps understand actions by
bridging the gap with complex activity semantics, particularly when facing unfamiliar or unseen categories. ALT
demonstrates competitive performance while maintaining
remarkably low computational costs. In fully supervised experiments, it achieves 88.1% top-1 accuracy on Kinetics-400
with only 4947 GFLOPs. Moreover, ALT outperforms the
previous state-of-the-art methods in both zero-shot and fewshot experiments, emphasizing its superior generalizability
across various learning scenarios.

1. Introduction
Video action recognition is a fundamental task in the pursuit of intelligent video understanding. The recent trend
of utilizing the visual-language pre-trained (VLP) models [26, 31, 49, 73] have significantly advanced the research
of action recognition [27, 37, 43, 45, 64, 71]. By lightly
fine-tuning the model, VLP-based methods outperform the

Wei Peng

previous end-to-end network architectures, including twostream networks [54, 63, 78], 3D convolutional neural networks [6, 14, 15, 22, 48, 58, 59, 67], and vision-transformerbased (ViT) networks [3, 12, 38, 46, 70]. Employing a pretrained VLP model for action recognition can better encode
the semantic meaning of items in images, even if they have
very different visual appearances. This is very helpful in
understanding human action and also explains why VLP
models have achieved superior performance. As shown in
Fig. 1, the current VLP-based action recognition methods
follow an “adapt then align” paradigm. They either introduce
temporal interaction upon image representations or insert
temporal modules into pre-trained image encoders. However,
the “adapt then align” paradigm will merely fit the video
representation to the action name, which potentially destroys
the other visual-semantic correspondences provided by VLP
models. As far as we are concerned, actions are complex
concepts that involve multiple fine-grained entities, such as
body parts, scenes, and objects. With VLP model, the text
embedding of the relevant entities should also be grounded
in some image region. “adapt then align” paradigm does not
emphasize the underlying entities-to-regions correspondence
behind the action concept. Furthermore, human-centric activities often share common entities, implying that visuallanguage correspondences can be reused across different
actions, even for those that were not included in the training
set. The re-usability of entities-to-regions correspondences
allow the model to quickly recognize new action categories.
In this paper, we propose the “ALign before adapt” (ALT)
paradigm. Unlike the “adapt then align” approaches that
align the image-level visual embedding with the text embedding of the action name, ALT aims to establish an entity-level
correspondence to support action recognition. The relevant
entities should have evidence in specific regions of the image.
To achieve entities-to-regions alignment, the VLP model is
leveraged in two aspects: (1) Aggregating adjacent and similar image token embeddings from the VLP model. The
resulting embedding typically represents a region containing
the same entity. (2) Selecting the most relevant entities for
each region by matching their image embeddings to the text

18688

