This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TexOct: Generating Textures of 3D Models with Octree-based Diffusion
Jialun Liu, Chenming Wu1 ,* Xinqi Liu, Xing Liu, Jinbo Wu, Haotian Peng,
Chen Zhao, Haocheng Feng, Jingtuo Liu, Errui Ding
Department of Computer Vision Technology(VIS), Baidu Inc.
liujialun@baidu.com

Abstract
This paper focuses on synthesizing high-quality and
complete textures directly on the surface of 3D models
within 3D space. 2D diffusion-based methods face challenges in generating 2D texture maps due to the infinite
possibilities of UV mapping for a given 3D mesh. Utilizing point clouds helps circumvent variations arising from
diverse mesh topologies and UV mappings. Nevertheless,
achieving dense point clouds to accurately represent texture details poses a challenge due to limited computational
resources. To address these challenges, we propose an efficient octree-based diffusion pipeline called TexOct. Our
method starts by sampling a point cloud from the surface of
a given 3D model, with each point containing texture noise
values. We utilize an octree structure to efficiently represent
this point cloud. Additionally, we introduce an innovative
octree-based diffusion model that leverages the denoising
capabilities of the Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model
(DDPM). This model gradually reduces the texture noise on
the octree nodes, resulting in the restoration of fine texture.
Experimental results on ShapeNet demonstrate that TexOct
effectively generates high-quality 3D textures in both unconditional and text / image-conditional scenarios.

1. Introduction
3D models, represented by polygon meshes, are widely
used in visual applications like videos, games, and VR /
AR scenarios. The quality of texture maps is vital for the
appearance of 3D models across various applications. In
previous decades, creating high-quality textures typically
required experienced designers to invest substantial effort,
resulting in considerable consumption of both time and
cost. However, recent advancements in creating content
with neural networks have brought new energy and perspective to this area of computer vision and graphics.
A common method for handling texture maps is UV representation, which converts 3D textures to a set of 2D im* Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

VS

VS

Occlusion

Text2Tex

Ours

Point-UV (Stage-1)

Figure 1.
Comparisons with different methods: (a) In
Text2Tex [8], self-occlusion (the blue box) results in texture errors (the red box). In contrast, our method of directly generating textures in 3D space avoids issues caused by self-occlusion.
(the green box). (b) Point-UV [43] (Stage-1) utilizes limited point
cloud data to capture 3D information, resulting in rough textures
(the purple box). In comparison, our method generates highquality details (the orange box) with denser point cloud.

ages using UV coordinate transformation. This method effectively links 3D texture generation with 2D image generation techniques, such as GAN [13, 18, 31, 35, 46] and Diffusion models [10, 27, 29, 30]. However, constructing a unified UV mapping for all shapes of 3D objects presents challenges, making it difficult to generate 3D textures from 2D
UV space directly. To bypass the challenges, recent studies [4, 5, 8, 32] investigated the application of 2D generation
techniques for producing multi-view textures for 3D objects. These methods focus on ensuring consistency across
different views, which is crucial for realistic and coherent
texturing. However, due to self-occlusion, these methods
face limitations in finding an optimal set of views that can
adequately cover the entire surface of a 3D object. This becomes an instance of the notorious NP-hard set cover problem [11], and maintaining pixel-perfect multi-view consis-

4284

