This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Synthesize Step-by-Step: Tools, Templates and
LLMs as Data Generators for Reasoning-Based Chart VQA
Zhuowan Li1 * Bhavan Jasani2 * Peng Tang2 Shabnam Ghadar2
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 AWS AI Labs
zli110@jhu.edu {bjasani, tangpen, shabnam}@amazon.com

Abstract
Understanding data visualizations like charts and plots
requires reasoning about both visual elements and numerics. Although strong in extractive questions, current chart
visual question answering (chart VQA) models suffer on
complex reasoning questions. In this work, we address the
lack of reasoning ability by data augmentation. We leverage Large Language Models (LLMs), which have shown to
have strong reasoning ability, as an automatic data annotator that generates question-answer annotations for chart
images. The key innovation in our method lies in the Synthesize Step-by-Step strategy: our LLM-based data generator learns to decompose the complex question into step-bystep sub-questions (rationales), which are then used to derive the final answer using external tools, i.e. Python. This
step-wise generation procedure is trained on synthetic data
generated using a template-based QA generation pipeline.
Experimental results highlight the significance of the proposed step-by-step generation. By training with the LLMaugmented data (L A M EN DA), we significantly enhance the
chart VQA models, achieving the state-of-the-art accuracy
on the ChartQA and PlotQA datasets. In particular, our
approach improves the accuracy of the previous state-ofthe-art approach from 38% to 54% on the human-written
questions in the ChartQA dataset, which needs strong reasoning. We hope our work underscores the potential of synthetic data and encourages further exploration of data augmentation using LLMs for reasoning-heavy tasks.

1. Introduction
Data visualizations like charts and plots play an important
role in real-world data analysis applications. Unlike natural
images, chart are text-heavy and data-driven, thus requiring
better visual perception (e.g. OCR) and cognitive reasoning
(e.g. math calculation, matching the legends with bars). For
* indicates equal contributions. The work was done when Zhuowan Li
was an intern at Amazon.

What is the total of Democrats and
Republicans in 2010?

LLM
templates

Synthesize
Step-by-Step

Chart VQA model
A: 113

38%

LaMenDa

54%
Chart VQA model ++
A: 87

Figure 1. Existing chart VQA models struggle with complex reasoning questions. We attribute this to limited reasoning questions
in existing datasets and address it by data augmentation. We finetune an LLM-based data generator that automatically generates
question-answer annotations given a chart image. Our key innovation is Synthesize Step-by-Step, which breaks complex questions
down into easy steps that could be solved using external tools. We
use templates to train the LLM. Training with LLM-augmented
data, L A M EN DA, greatly enhances the chart VQA models.

example, to answer “what is the total of Democrats and Republicans in 2010” in Fig. 1, the model needs to recognize
the texts, match the legends of “democrats” and “republicans” to the bars, then calculate the sum. This is a challenging task requiring multimodal perception and reasoning.
Compounding the complexity, the inherent difficulty of
chart reasoning also amplifies the cost of collecting human
annotations. Most existing datasets are synthetically generated using simple rules and heuristics, posing a risk of
model overfitting. Among the datasets, only ChartQA [40]
contains complex human-annotated question-answer pairs,
although there are very few of those per image. For example, for the image in Fig. 1, while a lot more questions can
be asked, only two questions are annotated (What is the total of Republicans and Democrats in 2010? Which color
represents Republican?). Importantly, these human-written
questions pose great challenges for contemporary models.
For example, the state-of-the-art model [35] achieves only
38% accuracy when confronted with human-written ques-

13613

