This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Counterfactual Problems in Referring Expression Comprehension
Zhihan Yu and Ruifan Li*
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
{yzh0, rfli}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Traditional referring expression comprehension (REC)
aims to locate the target referent in an image guided by a
text query. Several previous methods have studied on the
Counterfactual problem in REC (C-REC) where the objects
for a given query cannot be found in the image. However,
these methods focus on the overall image-text or specific attribute mismatch only. In this paper, we address the C-REC
problem from a deep perspective of fine-grained attributes.
To this aim, we first propose a fine-grained counterfactual
sample generation method to construct C-REC datasets.
Specifically, we leverage pre-trained language model such
as BERT to modify the attribute words in the queries, obtaining the corresponding counterfactual samples. Furthermore, we propose a C-REC framework. We first adopt three
encoders to extract image, text and attribute features. Then,
our dual-branch attentive fusion module fuses these crossmodal features with two branches by an attention mechanism. At last, two prediction heads generate a bounding box and a counterfactual label, respectively. In addition, we incorporate contrastive learning with the generated
counterfactual samples as negatives to enhance the counterfactual perception. Extensive experiments show that our
framework achieves promising performance on both public
REC datasets RefCOCO/+/g and our constructed C-REC
datasets C-RefCOCO/+/g. The code and data are available
at https://github.com/Glacier0012/CREC.

1. Introduction
Given an image and a text query, referring expression comprehension (REC) [37, 42] aims to locate the visual target
referent guided by the query. An example is shown in Figure 1 a). REC connects image regions with natural language, which contributes to downstream vision-language
tasks such as image captioning [3, 16, 49] and visual question answering [11, 41, 45]. In addition, REC task has various practical applications, including interactive photo edit* Corresponding author.

Query: little black cat
Output: bounding box

a) Traditional REC

Query: little black cat on the left
Output: none

b) Counterfactual REC

Figure 1. Comparison of traditional REC and counterfactual REC.
a) In traditional REC, the target referent guided by text query always exists in the given image, which is marked by a bounding
box. b) In counterfactual REC, the target referent cannot be found.

ing [44] and robot navigation [1, 36].
Generally, REC models can be grouped into two categories, two-stage models [5, 25, 26, 50] and one-stage models [7, 27, 46, 48, 51]. The former group extracts region proposals from off-the-shelf object detectors [12, 35] and ranks
them by semantic similarity to output the top-score region.
In contrast, the latter group has an end-to-end structure with
faster inference speed and competitive performance. However, most of these two groups of methods suppose that the
target referent can always be found in the given image. They
overlook the counterfactual text queries that could appear
in real-world scenarios. For example, when a home service
robot is asked to grasp “a fork” but there is only “a knife”
in its sight, the bounding box output by most REC models
will cause wrong movements. In fact, a more reasonable
reaction of the robot is to provide a “no target” feedback.
We refer to this counterfactual problem as Counterfactual
Referring Expression Comprehension (C-REC).
Several methods have recently studied on C-REC. One
group considers C-REC as a matching task based on extracted entity and specific attribute [6, 10]. The other adopts
classification frameworks that detect the overall counterfac-

13438

