This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Universal Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation
by Mitigating Common-Class Bias
Wenyu Zhang1 , Qingmu Liu2 *, Felix Ong Wei Cong2∗ , Mohamed Ragab1,3 , Chuan-Sheng Foo1,3
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
2
National University of Singapore (NUS)
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR)
1

Abstract
Domain adaptation is a critical task in machine learning
that aims to improve model performance on a target domain
by leveraging knowledge from a related source domain.
In this work, we introduce Universal Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation (UniSSDA), a practical yet challenging
setting where the target domain is partially labeled, and
the source and target label space may not strictly match.
UniSSDA is at the intersection of Universal Domain Adaptation (UniDA) and Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation
(SSDA): the UniDA setting does not allow for fine-grained
categorization of target private classes not represented in
the source domain, while SSDA focuses on the restricted
closed-set setting where source and target label spaces
match exactly. Existing UniDA and SSDA methods are susceptible to common-class bias in UniSSDA settings, where
models overfit to data distributions of classes common to
both domains at the expense of private classes. We propose a new prior-guided pseudo-label refinement strategy
to reduce the reinforcement of common-class bias due to
pseudo-labeling, a common label propagation strategy in
domain adaptation. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed strategy on benchmark datasets Office-Home, DomainNet, and VisDA. The proposed strategy attains the best
performance across UniSSDA adaptation settings and establishes a new baseline for UniSSDA.

1. Introduction
Domain adaptation (DA) is a critical task in machine learning, where models are adapted from a source domain to
perform well on a different target domain. Conventionally, DA works focus on the closed-set adaptation setting,
where the source and target label space match exactly, to
address covariate shift and potential label distribution shift
[11, 38, 40, 47]. More recently, the generalized prob* Contributed to this work while interning at A*STAR.

Closed-set
w/o Label Dist. Shift

Covariate Shift

Closed-set
w/ Label Dist. Shift

+ Label Distribution
Shift

Open-set
+ Label Space
Shift

Partial-set
Open-partial
Shared classes

Target private classes

Labeled data

Source domain (fully labeled)

Unlabeled data

Target domain (partially labeled)

Figure 1. Adaptation settings in Universal SSDA. Existing SSDA
works conventionally focus on closed-set settings.

lem in unsupervised DA termed ‘Universal DA’ (UniDA)
[4, 32, 46, 49] aims to bridge the gap between labeled
source data and unlabeled target data, and considers challenging settings where there may be label space shift between the two domains. This means that, under UniDA,
there may be source private and target private classes besides common classes shared across the two domains, as in
the open-set, partial-set, and open-partial settings. The universal setup handles practical scenarios where different object classes are present in different environments, or when
new task objectives require collecting new target domain
object classes not present in the source domain. However, since the UniDA setting assumes target data is unlabeled, all target private classes are categorized under a single ‘unknown’ class. Unsupervised domain adaptation is
also known to be prone to negative transfer as target classes
can be mapped to incorrect source classes [17, 48].
In this work, we introduce a new setting to include a
small number of labeled target samples in UniDA such
that methods can provide fine-grained classification of target private class samples and better leverage target information that may be available. While the related semisupervised domain adaptation (SSDA) setting also allows

23912

