This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FedMef: Towards Memory-efficient Federated Dynamic Pruning
Hong Huang1 Weiming Zhuang2 Chen Chen2 Lingjuan Lyu2 *
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Sony AI
hohuang@cityu.edu.hk {weiming.zhuang, chena.chen, lingjuan.lv}@sony.com

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) promotes decentralized training
while prioritizing data confidentiality. However, its application on resource-constrained devices is challenging due to
the high demand for computation and memory resources to
train deep learning models. Neural network pruning techniques, such as dynamic pruning, could enhance model efficiency, but directly adopting them in FL still poses substantial challenges, including post-pruning performance degradation, high activation memory usage, etc. To address
these challenges, we propose FedMef, a novel and memoryefficient federated dynamic pruning framework. FedMef
comprises two key components. First, we introduce the
budget-aware extrusion that maintains pruning efficiency
while preserving post-pruning performance by salvaging
crucial information from parameters marked for pruning
within a given budget. Second, we propose scaled activation pruning to effectively reduce activation memory footprints, which is particularly beneficial for deploying FL
to memory-limited devices. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed FedMef. In particular, it achieves a significant reduction of 28.5% in memory footprint compared to state-of-the-art methods while
obtaining superior accuracy.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as an important
paradigm for the training of machine learning models across
decentralized clients while preserving the confidentiality of
local data [27, 31, 51]. In particular, cross-device FL, as
described in [21], places emphasis on scenarios where FL
clients predominantly consist of edge devices with resource
constraints. Cross-device FL has gained significant attention in academic research and industry applications, fueling a wide range of applications, including Google Keyboard [15, 25], Apple Speech Recognition [38], etc. Despite
its success, the resource-intensive nature of training mod* corresponding author

els, which includes high computational and memory costs,
poses challenges for the deployment of cross-device FL on
resource-constrained devices.
Neural network pruning [14, 19, 33, 43] is a potential solution to improve the efficiency of the model and reduce the
high demand for resources. However, a closer inspection of
some previous work on the application of neural network
pruning to FL [26, 29, 37, 41] reveals a potential pitfall:
They often rely on initial training of dense models, similar
to centralized pruning methodologies [14, 33, 43]. These
federated pruning methods are not suitable for cross-device
FL because the training of dense models still requires high
computation and memory costs on resource-constrained devices.
To address these challenges, recent research has shifted
to federated dynamic pruning [3, 17, 20, 39]. These frameworks derive specialized pruned models by iterative adjustment of sparse on-device models. Devices start with a randomly pruned model, followed by traditional FL training,
and periodically adjust the sparse model structure through
pruning and growing operations [11]. Through iterative
training and adjustments, devices can develop specialized
pruned models bypassing the need to train dense models,
which reduces both computational and memory demands.
However, existing federated dynamic pruning frameworks [3, 17, 20, 39] face two issues: significant postpruning accuracy degradation and substantial activation
memory usage. First, these frameworks cause a significant
decline in accuracy after magnitude pruning because they
hastily eliminate low-magnitude parameters, regardless of
the substantial information they may contain. Such incautious parameter pruning often results in the model’s inability to regain its previous accuracy before the subsequent
pruning iteration, ultimately leading to suboptimal end-oftraining performance. Second, these frameworks fail to reduce the memory footprint of activation. For certain widely
adopted models for edge deployment, like MobileNet [40],
a significant portion of the total memory footprints is allocated to activation. However, current federated dynamic
pruning methods focus primarily on reducing the model
size, overlooking optimization for activation memory.

27548

