This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Snap Video: Scaled Spatiotemporal Transformers for Text-to-Video Synthesis
Willi Menapace1,2,* Aliaksandr Siarohin1 Ivan Skorokhodov1 Ekaterina Deyneka1
Tsai-Shien Chen1,3,* Anil Kag1 Yuwei Fang1 Aleksei Stoliar1 Elisa Ricci2,4
Jian Ren1 Sergey Tulyakov1
Snap Inc.1

University of Trento2

UC Merced3

Fondazione Bruno Kessler4

snap-research.github.io/snapvideo

"Dust fills the air as off-road vehicles tear through a vast desert landscape. [...]"

"[...] corgi dog riding a bike in Times Square. It is wearing sunglasses and a beach hat."

"Atop dramatic cliffs, two warriors engage in a sword fight. [...]"

"[...] a movie set where an otter serves as a film director. [...] raised paws shouting 'Action!' [...] "

"In an empty parking lot, film a professional car drifting exhibition. [...]"

"A cowboy panda riding on the back of a lion, hand-held camera."

"In the vastness of space, starships engage in a cosmic clash. [...]"

"[...] a cat donned in a chef's hat expertly kneads dough [...]"

Figure 1. Samples produced by the proposed text-to-video generation method for a selection of prompts. Thanks to joint spatiotemporal
video modeling, our generator can synthesize temporally coherent videos with large motion (left) while retaining the semantic control
capabilities typical of large-scale text-to-video generators (right). See the Website for additional samples.

Abstract
Contemporary models for generating images show remarkable quality and versatility. Swayed by these advantages, the research community repurposes them to generate
videos. Since video content is highly redundant, we argue
that naively bringing advances of image models to the video
generation domain reduces motion fidelity, visual quality
and impairs scalability. In this work, we build Snap Video,
a video-first model that systematically addresses these challenges. To do that, we first extend the EDM framework to
take into account spatially and temporally redundant pixels and naturally support video generation. Second, we
show that a U-Net—a workhorse behind image generation—scales poorly when generating videos, requiring significant computational overhead. Hence, we propose a new
transformer-based architecture that trains 3.31 times faster
than U-Nets (and is ⇠4.5 faster at inference). This allows
us to efficiently train a text-to-video model with billions of

parameters for the first time, reach state-of-the-art results
on a number of benchmarks, and generate videos with substantially higher quality, temporal consistency, and motion
complexity. The user studies showed that our model was
favored by a large margin over the most recent methods.

1. Introduction
Creating and sharing visual content is one of the key ways
for people to express themselves in the digital world. Accessible to only professionals in the past, the capability to
create [30, 40, 43, 69] and edit [6, 37, 42] images with stunning quality and realism was unlocked to everyone by the
advent of large text-to-image models and their variations.
Fueled by this progress, large-scale text-to-video models [4, 13, 21, 48, 62] are rapidly advancing too. Current large-scale diffusion-based video generation frame⇤ Work performed while interning at Snap Inc.

7038

