This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From a Bird’s Eye View to See: Joint Camera and Subject Registration
without the Camera Calibration
Zekun Qian1 , Ruize Han2,3†, Wei Feng1 , Song Wang4
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
City University of Hong Kong 4 University of South Carolina
1

{clarkqian, han ruize, wfeng}@tju.edu.cn, songwang@cec.sc.edu

Abstract
We tackle a new problem of multi-view camera and subject registration in the bird’s eye view (BEV) without pregiven camera calibration, which promotes the multi-view
subject registration problem to a new calibration-free stage.
This greatly alleviates the limitation in many practical applications. However, this is a very challenging problem
since its only input is several RGB images from different
first-person views (FPVs), without the BEV image and the
calibration of the FPVs, while the output is a unified plane
aggregated from all views with the positions and orientations of both the subjects and cameras in a BEV. For this
purpose, we propose an end-to-end framework solving camera and subject registration together by taking advantage
of their mutual dependence, whose main idea is as below: i) creating a subject view-transform module (VTM) to
project each pedestrian from FPV to a virtual BEV, ii) deriving a multi-view geometry-based spatial alignment module
(SAM) to estimate the relative camera pose in a unified BEV,
iii) selecting and refining the subject and camera registration results within the unified BEV. We collect a new largescale synthetic dataset with rich annotations for training
and evaluation. Additionally, we also collect a real dataset
for cross-domain evaluation. The experimental results show
the remarkable effectiveness of our method. The code and
proposed datasets are available at BEVSee.

1. Introduction
There are just three problems in computer vision: registration, registration, and registration.
– Takeo Kanade
Registration is an important task in computer vision. In this
work, we study a new and challenging problem of camera
and person registration in the BEV without camera calibra† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. An illustration of the multi-view camera and subject
registration problem.

tion. Specifically, as shown in Figure 1, given the multiview images for a multi-person scene, we aim to generate
the position and orientation of every person (referred to as
subject in this paper) and camera in BEV.
This problem is practical for the multi-view camera
multi-human scene analysis, which has many applications
such as video surveillance, social scene understanding, etc.
In this case, the bird’s eye view, also called the top view, is
a good way to observe the whole scene. In BEV, we can obtain the global spatial layout and trajectories of all the persons in the scene without mutual occlusion, which is very
useful in many typical scenarios including the automatic
driving [15, 42, 43, 46, 57], outdoor human detection [4, 13]
and complementary-view crowd analysis [21, 22].
A popular research problem related to this task is the
multi-view human detection [4, 13, 29, 30, 53], which
projects the subjects detected from each view to their locations on the ground plane and then generate an occupancy
map in the bird’s eye view. Note that, these methods all require the pre-given camera calibration parameters among
the multi-view cameras as input, which, however, limits the
applications of the method in many scenes. Another series of research focuses on the complementary-view multihuman analysis using a top-view camera (e.g., on a UAV)
and several first-person-view cameras [20–23]. The main
limitation of these methods is that the usage of a top-view
camera carried by a drone is not easy to deploy. Similarly,
BEV detection in the automatic driving area also relies on
the given camera calibration or depth sensor, e.g., LiDAR.

863

