This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Estimation of Image-matching Uncertainty in Visual Place Recognition
Mubariz Zaffar
ME, TU Delft
The Netherlands

Liangliang Nan
ABE, TU Delft
The Netherlands

Julian F. P. Kooij
ME, TU Delft
The Netherlands

M.Zaffar@tudelft.nl

Liangliang.Nan@tudelft.nl

J.F.P.Kooij@tudelft.nl

Abstract
In Visual Place Recognition (VPR) the pose of a query
image is estimated by comparing the image to a map of
reference images with known reference poses. As is typical for image retrieval problems, a feature extractor maps
the query and reference images to a feature space, where a
nearest neighbor search is then performed. However, till recently little attention has been given to quantifying the confidence that a retrieved reference image is a correct match.
Highly certain but incorrect retrieval can lead to catastrophic failure of VPR-based localization pipelines. This
work compares for the first time the main approaches for
estimating the image-matching uncertainty, including the
traditional retrieval-based uncertainty estimation, more recent data-driven aleatoric uncertainty estimation, and the
compute-intensive geometric verification. We further formulate a simple baseline method, “SUE”, which unlike the
other methods considers the freely-available poses of the
reference images in the map. Our experiments reveal that
a simple L2-distance between the query and reference descriptors is already a better estimate of image-matching uncertainty than current data-driven approaches. SUE outperforms the other efficient uncertainty estimation methods, and its uncertainty estimates complement the computationally expensive geometric verification approach. Future
works for uncertainty estimation in VPR should consider
the baselines discussed in this work.

1. Introduction
Visual Place Recognition (VPR) is the problem of identifying a previously visited place given a query camera image
and a map of geo-tagged reference images [28]. It has applications in vehicle localization [57], 3D modeling [1], image
search [46], and loop-closure in Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping (SLAM) [8, 28].
VPR is typically approached as an image retrieval problem, transforming images into feature vectors in a latent feature space where an efficient nearest neighbor search com-

Figure 1. The Precision-Recall curves on the Pittsburgh dataset [4]
for the three common categories of VPR uncertainty estimation
methods (RUE, DUE, GV), and for our proposed baseline SUE
which uniquely considers spatial locations of the top-K references.
The global image descriptors [9] are fixed for all methods except
BTL [50]. The only difference is the confidence given by each
uncertainty estimation method to the best-matched reference descriptors for the corresponding queries. The legend lists the Areaunder-the-Precision-Recall-curves. As GV methods are two to
three orders of magnitude more computationally expensive than
the others, they are plotted as dotted lines. Surprisingly, simple
L2-distance in feature space is a better estimate of VPR uncertainty than recent deep learning-based uncertainty estimates. SUE
outperforms all other efficient uncertainty estimation methods.

pares the query to all references. The pose of the query
image is then approximated to be the same as that of the retrieved nearest neighbor references. Since successful VPR
requires a good image representation that is robust to viewpoint and/or appearance changes [16, 28, 30], the field has
benefited from advances in deep representation learning.
However, two images with similar visual content could
still originate from geographically far-apart areas, a concept
referred to as perceptual-aliasing in VPR [16]. For example, images with mostly sky could match many locations

17743

