This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cyclic Learning for Binaural Audio Generation and Localization
Zhaojian Li, Bin Zhao, and Yuan Yuan*
School of Artificial Intelligence, OPtics and ElectroNics, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
zj lee@mail.nwpu.edu.cn, {binzhao111, y.yuan1.ieee}@gmail.com

Abstract
Binaural audio is obtained by simulating the biological structure of human ears, which plays an important
role in artificial immersive spaces. A promising approach
is to utilize mono audio and corresponding vision to synthesize binaural audio, thereby avoiding expensive binaural audio recording. However, most existing methods directly use the entire scene as a guide, ignoring the correspondence between sounds and sounding objects. In this
paper, we advocate generating binaural audio using finegrained raw waveform and object-level visual information
as guidance. Specifically, we propose a Cyclic Locatingand-UPmixing (CLUP) framework that jointly learns visual sounding object localization and binaural audio generation. Visual sounding object localization establishes the
correspondence between specific visual objects and sound
modalities, which provides object-aware guidance to improve binaural generation performance. Meanwhile, the
spatial information contained in the generated binaural audio can further improve the performance of sounding object localization. In this case, visual sounding object localization and binaural audio generation can achieve cyclic
learning and benefit from each other. Experimental results demonstrate that on the FAIR-Play benchmark dataset,
our method is significantly ahead of the existing baselines
in multiple evaluation metrics (STFT↓: 0.787 vs. 0.851,
ENV↓: 0.128 vs. 0.134, WAV↓: 5.244 vs. 5.684, SNR↑:
7.546 vs. 7.044).

1. Introduction
Hearing and vision are the most important ways for humans
to perceive the world. We are capable of associating different sounds with objects through unconscious learning [19].
Simultaneously, we can easily decode the spatial properties
of the sound and locate the sounding object in visual scenes,
since the acquired sound is binaural [1, 42]. Therefore, the
semantic and spatial information conveyed by hearing plays
* Corresponding author

Sounding Object-Aware Cyclic Learning
Visual Sounding Object
Localization

Mono Audio

Image

Binaural Upmix Audio
Generation
Generated Binaural Audio

Localized Sounding Objects

Mono Audio

Image

Figure 1. Illustration of our core idea on establishing a link between visual sounding object localization and binaural upmix audio generation. Building upon this connection, the two tasks
achieve cyclic learning and promote each other.

an important role in visual scene perception.
Visual sounding object localization aims to locate sounding objects in the visual scene. In the case of mono audio, sounding object localization mainly relies on semantic
alignment between audio and visual modalities [15, 29, 37].
Binaural audio is recorded through an artificial head prosthesis, which closely simulates human auditory mapping.
Compared with mono audio, the rich spatial information
contained in binaural audio can further improve sounding
object localization [33]. However, the recording of binaural audio requires professional equipments and knowledge,
resulting in higher costs and limiting its applications.
The semantic and spatial information contained in visual modality is also beneficial to restore the binaural spatial sense of mono audio [31]. Therefore, it is a promising
way to leverage visual modalities to guide the generation
model to upmix mono audio into binaural audio [6, 22, 24].
However, existing binaural audio generation methods are
not capable of generating high-fidelity results, they cannot well preserve object information and accurately model
sounding object-driven generative expressions. Most existing methods [6, 7, 24, 26, 45, 50] directly learn scene
drivers to reconstruct the spatial sense of sounds. Although
the scene contains semantic and spatial information of the
sounding objects, it also brings interference of silent objects
and background. These ambiguous information may lead to

26669

