This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Motion2VecSets: 4D Latent Vector Set Diffusion
for Non-rigid Shape Reconstruction and Tracking
Wei Cao1 * ‡ Chang Luo1 * Biao Zhang2
1

Technical University of Munich

2

Matthias Nießner1

Jiapeng Tang1†

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology

https://vveicao.github.io/projects/Motion2VecSets

Figure 1. We present Motion2VecSets, a 4D diffusion model for dynamic surface reconstruction from sparse, noisy, or partial point cloud
sequences. Compared to the existing state-of-the-art method CaDeX [25], our method can reconstruct more plausible non-rigid object
surfaces with complicated structures and achieve more robust motion tracking.

Abstract
We introduce Motion2VecSets, a 4D diffusion model for
dynamic surface reconstruction from point cloud sequences.
While existing state-of-the-art methods have demonstrated
success in reconstructing non-rigid objects using neural
field representations, conventional feed-forward networks
encounter challenges with ambiguous observations from
noisy, partial, or sparse point clouds. To address these
challenges, we introduce a diffusion model that explicitly
learns the shape and motion distribution of non-rigid objects through an iterative denoising process of compressed
latent representations. The diffusion-based priors enable
more plausible and probabilistic reconstructions when handling ambiguous inputs. We parameterize 4D dynamics
with latent sets instead of using global latent codes. This
novel 4D representation allows us to learn local shape and
deformation patterns, leading to more accurate non-linear
motion capture and significantly improving generalizability to unseen motions and identities. For more temporallycoherent object tracking, we synchronously denoise deformation latent sets and exchange information across multiple frames. To avoid computational overhead, we designed
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author.
‡ Work done during master’s thesis.

an interleaved space and time attention block to alternately
aggregate deformation latents along spatial and temporal
domains. Extensive comparisons against state-of-the-art
methods demonstrate the superiority of our Motion2VecSets
in 4D reconstruction from various imperfect observations.

1. Introduction
Our world, dynamic in its 4D nature, demands an increasingly sophisticated understanding and simulation of our
living environment. This offers significant potential for
practical applications, including Virtual Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR), and robotic simulations. There have
been notable advances in 3D object modeling, particularly
in representations through parametric models [27, 30, 36,
45, 67]. Unfortunately, these template-based models are
not effectively suited to capture the 4D dynamics of general non-rigid objects, due to the assumption of a fixed template mesh. Model-free approaches [25, 32, 52] represent
a significant advance by using coordinate-MLP representations for deformable object reconstruction with arbitrary
topologies and non-unified structures. However, these stateof-the-art methods still encounter challenges when facing
ambiguous observations of noisy, sparse, or partial point
clouds since it is an ill-posed problem where multiple pos-

20496

