This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unifying Automatic and Interactive Matting with Pretrained ViTs
Zixuan Ye

Wenze Liu He Guo Yujia Liang Chaoyi Hong* Hao Lu Zhiguo Cao
School of AIA, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{yezixuan,wzliu,hguo01,yjl,cyhong,hlu,zgcao}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

Interactive Matting
(MAM, MatAny..)

Automatic and interactive matting largely improve image matting by respectively alleviating the need for auxiliary input and enabling object selection. Due to different
settings on whether prompts exist, they either suffer from
weakness in instance completeness or region details. Also,
when dealing with different scenarios, directly switching between the two matting models introduces inconvenience and
higher workload. Therefore, we wonder whether we can alleviate the limitations of both settings while achieving unification to facilitate more convenient use. Our key idea is
to offer saliency guidance for automatic mode to enable its
attention to detailed regions, and also refine the instance
completeness in interactive mode by replacing the binary
mask guidance with a more probabilistic form. With different guidance for each mode, we can achieve unification
through adaptable guidance, defined as saliency information in automatic mode and user cue for interactive one. It
is instantiated as candidate feature in our method, an automatic switch for class token in pretrained ViTs and average
feature of user prompts, controlled by the existence of user
prompts. Then we use the candidate feature to generate a
probabilistic similarity map as the guidance to alleviate the
over-reliance on binary mask. Extensive experiments show
that our method can adapt well to both automatic and interactive scenarios with more light-weight framework. Code
available at github.com/coconut/SMat.

1. Introduction
Image matting, as a fundamental task in computer vision
with wide application scenarios, has developed rapidly in
deep-learning era. As a milestone work for deep image
matting, DIM [30] first introduces an end-to-end network to
solve α from an ill-posed equation. Following the paradigm
of DIM, subsequent work [7, 16, 19–21, 28] also takes
trimap as additional input towards high-quality alpha mattes. While there is unanimity that trimap can significantly
* Corresponding author.

Automatic Matting
Visual Prompt

(AIM, GFM, HATT..)

Point Scribble
Box

Mask

Smart Matting
(ours)

Figure 1. A path to unify automatic and interactive matting
while addressing the weaknesses. Previous methods address the
two types of image matting in separate structures, and show suboptimal results on either object completeness or region details. We
propose a unified structure for more convenient use, and address
their certain weakness for better performance.

enhance precision, this labour-consuming guidance is not
desired. Therefore, some researchers replace trimap with
more easy interactions like click [29] and scribble [32].
Based on the simplified interaction, they further explore
the possibility of object selection, then interactive matting
emerges. The success of SAM [9] lifts interactive matting to
a new level by providing an intermediate mask result given
interactions. Instead of simplifying the interactions, another
stream of work tries to entirely discard the requirement of
guidance, delving into automatic matting [3, 12, 13, 25, 36].
The two types of methods have their own focuses which
leads to different strengths. As shown in Fig. 1, due to
the effort made to find salient objects, automatic methods
have better global awareness, and are easier to depict complete instances than interactive methods do (the feet of bird),
but fail in detail compensation (tail feather); while interactive methods user prompts thus easily focus on details, but
loses completeness caused by over-reliance on binary intermediate mask guidance (Fig. 2). Also, when facing different applications, we have to turn to different models, where
the model switch will additionally increase heavy workload
and inconvenience. Therefore, to combine the advantages
of two modes and facilitate more convenient use, we desire a unified solution for interactive matting and automatic
matting and overcome their certain limitations.

25585

