This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hyperbolic Learning with Synthetic Captions for Open-World Detection
Fanjie Kong1 *, Yanbei Chen2†, Jiarui Cai2 , Davide Modolo2
1
Duke University 2 AWS AI Labs
fk43@duke.edu,

{yanbec,cjiarui,dmodolo}@amazon.com

Abstract
Open-world detection poses significant challenges, as it
requires the detection of any object using either object class
labels or free-form texts. Existing related works often use
large-scale manual annotated caption datasets for training, which are extremely expensive to collect. Instead, we
propose to transfer knowledge from vision-language models (VLMs) to enrich the open-vocabulary descriptions automatically. Specifically, we bootstrap dense synthetic captions using pre-trained VLMs to provide rich descriptions
on different regions in images, and incorporate these captions to train a novel detector that generalizes to novel concepts. To mitigate the noise caused by hallucination in synthetic captions, we also propose a novel hyperbolic visionlanguage learning approach to impose a hierarchy between
visual and caption embeddings. We call our detector “HyperLearner”. We conduct extensive experiments on a wide
variety of open-world detection benchmarks (COCO, LVIS,
Object Detection in the Wild, RefCOCO) and our results
show that our model consistently outperforms existing stateof-the-art methods, such as GLIP, GLIPv2 and Grounding
DINO, when using the same backbone.

1. Introduction
An intelligent perception model of our visual world requires the open-world generalizability of understanding any
object. To enable such generalizability, recent advances
in object detection integrate vision models with natural
language models to enrich their open-world knowledge
[15, 23, 46, 56, 59, 61]. Most of these works [15, 46, 56, 61]
consider the open-vocabulary setting in which a novel object is specified by its class label (e.g., panda). Other works
[23, 59] cast detection as a generalized localization task and
consider a more challenging open-set setting in which objects are described by free-form texts (e.g., a black-andwhite giant bear). In this work, we tackle the task of detecting and localizing any object using both class labels and
* Work done during an internship with AWS AI Labs.
† Corresponding author.

dog

a dog is sitting quietly
dog on the grass

dog

panda

Seen object space
a furry black-and-white bear
panda is sitting and eating bamboo

a black-andwhite giant bear

a black-andwhite giant bear

a traditional temple

a traditional temple

Open-world object space
annotations

a dog is sitting
quietly on the grass

a furry black-andwhite bear is sitting
and eating bamboo

synthetic captions

Figure 1. We tackle the task of detecting seen and unseen objects
using keywords (e.g., panda) or free-form texts (e.g., a black-andwhite giant bear) in open world. We exploit synthetic captions
from pre-trained caption models to bring rich open-world knowledge for training. As synthetic captions may be noisy, we propose
to align visual features with text embeddings in a structural hierarchy to learn robustly and effectively from these captions.

free-form texts (Figure 1). We refer to this challenging task
as “open-world detection”.
To improve generalization in open world, existing detection methods [28, 56, 59] utilize language descriptions from
large-scale image captioning datasets (e.g., MS-COCO captions [30], conceptual captions [42]) for training. These descriptions are however expensive to manually annotate [30]
or design human-crafted data cleaning pipeline to process
alt-text [42]. To overcome this limitation, we propose to
leverage recent advanced vision-language models to bootstrap machine-generated captions automatically. We collect
these synthetic captions on different regions of an image
to generate a dense understanding of all its concepts: from
rich semantic information of known/seen objects (e.g., their
attributes, states, actions and interactions) to diverse openvocabulary descriptions of new concepts. Our intuition is
that by aligning the detector features with these rich semantics, we can boost the model capability of understanding and
recognizing any object, including novel ones.

16762

