This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LASA: Instance Reconstruction from Real Scans using A Large-scale
Aligned Shape Annotation Dataset
Haolin Liu1,2∗ , Chongjie Ye1,2∗ , Yinyu Nie3 , Yingfan He1,2 , Xiaoguang Han2,1†
∗

1

FNii, CUHKSZ

†

equal contribution
2

corresponding author
3

SSE, CUHKSZ

Technical University of Munich

gap-lab-cuhk-sz.github.io/LASA

Figure 1. We introduce LASA, a Large-scale Aligned Shape Annotation Dataset containing 10,412 unique object CAD models aligned with
920 real-world scene scans. Supported by LASA, we achieve state-of-the-art in real-world object reconstruction and 3D object detection.

Abstract
Instance shape reconstruction from a 3D scene involves
recovering the full geometries of multiple objects at the semantic instance level. Many methods leverage data-driven
learning due to the intricacies of scene complexity and significant indoor occlusions. Training these methods often
requires a large-scale, high-quality dataset with aligned
and paired shape annotations with real-world scans. Existing datasets are either synthetic or misaligned, restricting
the performance of data-driven methods on real data. To
this end, we introduce LASA, a Large-scale Aligned Shape
Annotation Dataset comprising 10,412 high-quality CAD
annotations aligned with 920 real-world scene scans from
ArkitScenes, created manually by professional artists. On
this top, we propose a novel Diffusion-based Cross-Modal
Shape Reconstruction (DisCo) method. It is empowered by
a hybrid feature aggregation design to fuse multi-modal inputs and recover high-fidelity object geometries (see Fig. 1).
Besides, we present an Occupancy-Guided 3D Object Detection (OccGOD) method and demonstrate that our shape

annotations provide scene occupancy clues that can further
improve 3D object detection. Supported by LASA, extensive
experiments show that our methods achieve state-of-theart performance in both instance-level scene reconstruction
and 3D object detection tasks.

1. Introduction
The widespread use of hand-held RGB-D sensors has facilitated the effortless acquisition of indoor scene scans. However, these scans often suffer from noises and incompleteness due to limitations in sensor accuracy, the complexity
of indoor environments, and occlusion among objects. This
further limits its applications in scenarios such as VR/AR
and 3D industry where a complete and high-quality reconstruction is desired. This shortage absorbs great attention in
3D vision and graphics community, particularly in the realm
of indoor instance-level scene reconstruction. In this task,
the objective is to reconstruct the shapes of observed objects
based on 3D scans or images captured by sensors. Many
advances [8, 36, 56, 58, 61] have been seen by leveraging the power of deep learning methods for this task. They

20454

