This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffHuman: Probabilistic Photorealistic 3D Reconstruction of Humans
Akash Sengupta1,2 *

Thiemo Alldieck1
Nikos Kolotouros1
1
Andrei Zanfir
Cristian Sminchisescu1
1

Image

Google Research

2

University of Cambridge

Front Albedo and Geometry

Back Albedo and Geometry

Sample 1

Sample 1

Sample 2

Enric Corona1

Sample 2

Front Shading

Sample 1

Sample 2

Figure 1. DiffHuman predicts a probability distribution over 3D human reconstructions conditioned on a single monocular RGB image.
This enables us to sample multiple plausible, diverse and input-consistent reconstructions during inference. Samples from DiffHuman
demonstrate a high level of geometric and colour-wise detail, particularly in unseen and uncertain regions of the human body surface.

Abstract
We present DiffHuman, a probabilistic method for photorealistic 3D human reconstruction from a single RGB image.
Despite the ill-posed nature of this problem, most methods
are deterministic and output a single solution, often resulting in a lack of geometric detail and blurriness in unseen or
uncertain regions. In contrast, DiffHuman predicts a probability distribution over 3D reconstructions conditioned on an
input 2D image, which allows us to sample multiple detailed
3D avatars that are consistent with the image. DiffHuman is
implemented as a conditional diffusion model that denoises
pixel-aligned 2D observations of an underlying 3D shape
representation. During inference, we may sample 3D avatars
by iteratively denoising 2D renders of the predicted 3D representation. Furthermore, we introduce a generator neural network that approximates rendering with considerably reduced
runtime (55× speed up), resulting in a novel dual-branch
diffusion framework. Our experiments show that DiffHuman
can produce diverse and detailed reconstructions for the
parts of the person that are unseen or uncertain in the input
image, while remaining competitive with the state-of-the-art
when reconstructing visible surfaces.

1. Introduction
Photorealistic 3D reconstruction of humans from a single
image is a central problem for a wide range of applications.
* Work done as an intern at Google Research.

Avatar creation for virtual and mixed reality, games, movie
production, or fitness and health applications all benefit from
reliable and easy-to-use 3D human reconstruction. However,
monocular 3D reconstruction is ill-posed: depth-ambiguities,
(self)-occlusion, and unobserved body parts make it infeasible to reconstruct the true, veridical 3D shape and appearance
of the subject. In fact, there exist an infinite number of 3D
scenes that could have produced a given image; although not
all of them would represent plausible human and clothing
geometry, and realistic interplay between physical albedo
and lighting. Yet, existing methods [5, 10, 50, 63] still treat
the problem as a one-to-one mapping and return just one
plausible 3D solution. Simply assuming that this single solution is correct can lead to failures in downstream usages
of the 3D reconstruction. Moreover, deterministic methods
often produce detail-less reconstructions of unobserved or
uncertain surface regions, e.g. the back of a person. This is a
well-known effect of applying deterministic training losses to
ill-posed learning problems [8, 11, 37], which causes predictions to fall back towards the mean of the underlying training
distribution when faced with ambiguity. The mean may not
have high probability in a multi-modal distribution and often
represents blurry and over-smooth 3D reconstructions.
In this work, we overcome the shortcomings of deterministic methods by predicting a distribution over possible
3D human reconstructions. Our method DiffHuman uses a
single input image to condition a denoising diffusion model
[18], which generates pixel-aligned front and back observa-

1439

