This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PortraitBooth:
A Versatile Portrait Model for Fast Identity-preserved Personalization
Xu Peng1,2 , Junwei Zhu3 , Boyuan Jiang3 , Ying Tai4 , Donghao Luo3 , Jiangning Zhang3 ,
Wei Lin1,2 , Taisong Jin1,2† , Chengjie Wang3 , Rongrong Ji1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, China.
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China. 3 Tencent Youtu Lab.
4
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, China.
{penglingxiao,lvvviolette}@stu.xmu.edu.cn, tyshiwo@gmail.com
{junweizhu,byronjiang,michaelluo,vtzhang,jasoncjwang}@tencent.com
{jintaisong,rrji}@xmu.edu.cn
Reference

FastComposer

PortraitBooth

A woman holding a bottle of perfume

Reference

FastComposer

PortraitBooth

A man and a man, both wearing suspicious expressions, in a dimly lit room

A woman Funko pop

A man and a woman smiling in front of a bar

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of PortraitBooth and FastComposer on action, style, expression editing, multi-subject generation,
and identity preservation, all without any test-time tuning.

Abstract
Recent advancements in personalized image generation
using diffusion models have been noteworthy. However,
existing methods suffer from inefficiencies due to the requirement for subject-specific fine-tuning. This computationally intensive process hinders efficient deployment, limiting practical usability. Moreover, these methods often
grapple with identity distortion and limited expression diversity. In light of these challenges, we propose PortraitBooth, an innovative approach designed for high efficiency,
robust identity preservation, and expression-editable textto-image generation, without the need for fine-tuning. PortraitBooth leverages subject embeddings from a face recognition model for personalized image generation without
fine-tuning. It eliminates computational overhead and mit† Corresponding Author.

igates identity distortion. The introduced dynamic identity
preservation strategy further ensures close resemblance to
the original image identity. Moreover, PortraitBooth incorporates emotion-aware cross-attention control for diverse
facial expressions in generated images, supporting textdriven expression editing. Its scalability enables efficient
and high-quality image creation, including multi-subject
generation. Extensive results demonstrate superior performance over other state-of-the-art methods in both single
and multiple image generation scenarios. Our project page
is at https://portraitbooth.github.io.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed remarkable progress in text-toimage synthesis [4, 22, 29, 41], propelled by the emergence
of diffusion models [6, 15, 16, 31, 47]. Pre-trained textto-image generation models have opened up new avenues

27080

