This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Automated Movie Trailer Generation
Dawit Mureja Argaw1,2 Mattia Soldan1 Alejandro Pardo1 Chen Zhao1 *
Fabian Caba Heilbron3 Joon Son Chung2 Bernard Ghanem1
1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
Ground truth trailer shots

Abstract
Movie trailers are an essential tool for promoting films
and attracting audiences. However, the process of creating
trailers can be time-consuming and expensive. To streamline this process, we propose an automatic trailer generation framework that generates plausible trailers from a full
movie by automating shot selection and composition. Our
approach draws inspiration from machine translation techniques and models the movies and trailers as sequences of
shots, thus formulating the trailer generation problem as a
sequence-to-sequence task. We introduce Trailer Generation Transformer (TGT), a deep-learning framework utilizing an encoder-decoder architecture. TGT movie encoder
is tasked with contextualizing each movie shot representation via self-attention, while the autoregressive trailer decoder predicts the feature representation of the next trailer
shot, accounting for the relevance of shots’ temporal order in trailers. Our TGT significantly outperforms previous
methods on a comprehensive suite of metrics.

1. Introduction
Movie trailers are essential marketing tools for the film industry, generating anticipation by showcasing captivating
scenes, storylines, and cast members. They enable studios
to fuel marketing campaigns and build interest ahead of a
movie’s release. For audiences, trailers serve as decisionmaking tools, offering a condensed preview of the film’s
content. Despite their importance, creating trailers is costly,
time-consuming, and demands expert knowledge.
The process of creating a trailer can be broadly divided
into two stages1 . In the first stage, video editors immerse
themselves in the entire movie, viewing all the shots. They
carefully select relevant trailer shots and arrange them in a
specific order to craft an engaging flow and rhythm for the
movie trailer (see Fig. 1, top row). This is a time-consuming
and tedious process as the editor has to sort through an ex* Corresponding author.
1 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zkEXtwCL684

2

KAIST

3

Adobe Research

Positive predicted trailer shot

Negative predicted trailer shot
Time

…

…

…

Movie:

…

…

…

Classification /
Ranking trailer:

…

…

…

Movie:

…

…

…

Movie:

Original
Trailer:

Autoregressive
trailer (ours):

Figure 1. Trailer Generation Problem and Solutions. The top
row depicts the movie and expert-created trailer. The process composes shots from the movie in non-chronological order to create a
compelling and intriguing story. Depicted in the central row are
the classification/ranking strategies that classify/rank each shot in
the movie independently (classification) or with limited relative
interaction (ranking). The bottom row represents our approach
which can reason over the entire input movie sequence before producing a provisional trailer with non-chronological shots order.

tensive collection of movie shots [38]. The second stage involves fine-editing which incorporates dialogue and sound
modeling into the trailer. This work delves into the domain of Automatic Trailer Generation (ATG) with the aim
of streamlining the first stage, i.e. shot selection and sequencing, to create a trailer montage from a given full movie
(see Fig. 1, bottom row).
ATG has remained a relatively underexplored problem
mainly due to the complexity of the task and the lack
of well-established benchmarks. Nevertheless, few prior
works [6, 23, 32, 38] have made efforts to tackle this challenging task. These works have approached trailer generation in different ways. Some works [23, 32] have framed
it as a binary classification problem, where each shot in a

7445

