This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unbiased Faster R-CNN for Single-source Domain Generalized Object Detection
Yajing Liu1,2,3 , Shijun Zhou1,2,3 , Xiyao Liu1,2 , Chunhui Hao1,2 , Baojie Fan4 , Jiandong Tian1,2 *
1
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{liuyajing,zhoushijun,liuxiyao,haochunhui,tianjd}@sia.cn, jobfbj@gmail.com

Abstract
Single-source domain generalization (SDG) for object
detection is a challenging yet essential task as the distribution bias of the unseen domain degrades the algorithm performance significantly. However, existing methods attempt
to extract domain-invariant features, neglecting that the biased data leads the network to learn biased features that are
non-causal and poorly generalizable. To this end, we propose an Unbiased Faster R-CNN (UFR) for generalizable
feature learning. Specifically, we formulate SDG in object
detection from a causal perspective and construct a Structural Causal Model (SCM) to analyze the data bias and feature bias in the task, which are caused by scene confounders
and object attribute confounders. Based on the SCM, we design a Global-Local Transformation module for data augmentation, which effectively simulates domain diversity and
mitigates the data bias. Additionally, we introduce a Causal
Attention Learning module that incorporates a designed attention invariance loss to learn image-level features that
are robust to scene confounders. Moreover, we develop a
Causal Prototype Learning module with an explicit instance
constraint and an implicit prototype constraint, which further alleviates the negative impact of object attribute confounders. Experimental results on five scenes demonstrate
the prominent generalization ability of our method, with an
improvement of 3.9% mAP on the Night-Clear scene.

1. Introduction
The problem of distribution shift in unseen domains often
arises during the deployment of perception systems, leading to a notable decline in the model’s performance [3, 34].
Consequently, domain generalization [6, 19, 37, 50] has
emerged as a branch of transfer learning, which aims at
generalizing the knowledge from multiple source domains
to the unseen target domain. Single-source domain gener* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparison between vanilla Faster R-CNN (FR) [33]
(top) and our proposed Unbiased Faster R-CNN (bottom). For
vanilla FR [33], the biased distribution of the input data leads the
network to learn biased features that favor the seen environment
and are poorly generalizable to unseen test environments. The
feature bias can be attributed to the image-level attention bias and
object-level prototype bias. Our method mitigates the data bias
in the input space and further learns unbiased attention and prototypes in the representation space.

alization (SDG) is a special case of domain generalization
where there is only one source domain [31, 43, 51] and it
focuses on exploring the robustness of the model under different image corruptions.
The existing two methods for SDG in object detection
adopt different generalization strategies on Faster R-CNN
[33]. The domain-invariant feature learning-based method
[44] explicitly decomposes domain-invariant features and
domain-specific features by imposing constraints on the
network, without relying on data augmentation techniques.
And the data augmentation-based method [38] perturbs the
data distribution and increases the diversity of input data to
enhance model generalization ability.
However, both of these strategies have certain limita-

28838

