This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JRDB-PanoTrack: An Open-world Panoptic Segmentation and Tracking
Robotic Dataset in Crowded Human Environments
Duy Tho Le1 *, Chenhui Gou1 *, Stavya Datta1 , Hengcan Shi1†,
Ian Reid2,3 , Jianfei Cai1 , Hamid Rezatofighi1
1
Monash University, 2 MBZUAI, 3 University of Adelaide,
{tho.le1, chenhui.gou, hengcan.shi}@monash.edu
* Equal

contribution, † Corresponding author

https://jrdb.erc.monash.edu/dataset/panotrack

Figure 1. A panoramic frame (bottom) and panoptic annotation (top) from our JRDB-PanoTrack dataset. Our dataset features multi-label
panoptic annotations, highlighted by the striped areas where multiple objects coexist. JRDB-PanoTrack also provides consistent tracking
IDs for all thing classes across long periods of occlusion.

Abstract
Autonomous robot systems have attracted increasing research attention in recent years, where environment understanding is a crucial step for robot navigation, human-robot
interaction, and decision. Real-world robot systems usually collect visual data from multiple sensors and are required to recognize numerous objects and their movements
in complex human-crowded settings. Traditional benchmarks, with their reliance on single sensors and limited
object classes and scenarios, fail to provide the comprehensive environmental understanding robots need for accurate navigation, interaction, and decision-making. As
an extension of JRDB dataset, we unveil JRDB-PanoTrack,
a novel open-world panoptic segmentation and tracking
benchmark, towards more comprehensive environmental
perception. JRDB-PanoTrack includes (1) various data involving indoor and outdoor crowded scenes, as well as

comprehensive 2D and 3D synchronized data modalities;
(2) high-quality 2D spatial panoptic segmentation and temporal tracking annotations, with additional 3D label projections for further spatial understanding; (3) diverse object classes for closed- and open-world recognition benchmarks, with OSPA-based metrics for evaluation. Extensive
evaluation of leading methods shows significant challenges
posed by our dataset.

1. Introduction
With the increasing demands for autonomous robots in
human-crowded environments, environment understanding
becomes paramount, which serves as a vital step in many
robotic systems, such as navigation and human-robot interaction. Specifically, human-centric environment understanding can be mainly divided into two aspects: spatial
and temporal understanding. Spatial understanding aims to

22325

