This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlowDiffuser: Advancing Optical Flow Estimation with Diffusion Models
Ao Luo1,2 , Xin Li3 , Fan Yang3 , Jiangyu Liu2 , Haoqiang Fan2 , and Shuaicheng Liu4,2 *
1
2
3
Southwest Jiaotong University
Megvii Technology
G42
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
Input Pair

Abstract
Optical flow estimation, a process of predicting pixelwise displacement between consecutive frames, has commonly been approached as a regression task in the age of
deep learning. Despite notable advancements, this de facto
paradigm unfortunately falls short in generalization performance when trained on synthetic or constrained data. Pioneering a paradigm shift, we reformulate optical flow estimation as a conditional flow generation challenge, unveiling FlowDiffuser — a new family of optical flow models that
could have stronger learning and generalization capabilities. FlowDiffuser estimates optical flow through a ‘noiseto-flow’ strategy, progressively eliminating noise from randomly generated flows conditioned on the provided pairs.
To optimize accuracy and efficiency, our FlowDiffuser incorporates a novel Conditional Recurrent Denoising Decoder (Conditional-RDD), streamlining the flow estimation
process. It incorporates a unique Hidden State Denoising (HSD) paradigm, effectively leveraging the information
from previous time steps. Moreover, FlowDiffuser can be
easily integrated into existing flow networks, leading to significant improvements in performance metrics compared to
conventional implementations. Experiments on challenging benchmarks, including Sintel and KITTI, demonstrate
the effectiveness of our FlowDiffuser with superior performance to existing state-of-the-art models. Code is available
at https://github.com/LA30/FlowDiffuser.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation remains a pivotal research domain,
with its significance highlighted by a wide range of critical
applications. This task aims to establish per-pixel correspondences between consecutive frames, resulting in a twodimensional vector field that illustrates pixel displacement.
In the contemporary deep learning paradigm, this challenge
is predominantly framed as a regression task: neural models are trained to infer the optical flow vectors directly from
* Corresponding author

Cost Volume

Output

BackBone

(a)

Cost Volume

(b)

Output

BackBone

Input Pair

Figure 1. Idea illustration. Conventional optical flow models (a)
map frames directly to flow fields. In contrast, FlowDiffuser (b)
generates flow through a reverse denoising process.

sequential image data [17, 36, 41, 49, 50]. Starting with
the groundbreaking end-to-end model FlowNet [12], the research community has actively sought improvements along
two main dimensions: i) the augmentation of feature encoding capabilities via more robust backbones, transitioning from ResNet to Transformer, to extract increasingly discriminative feature representations [8, 45, 51]; and ii) the
integration of advanced decoding techniques, such as the
recurrent scheme with 4D cost volume [41] or transformerbased motion aggregation [19, 25] and cost modeling [15],
to refine the regression accuracy. Fundamentally, current
studies are predominantly characterized by a shared focus
on devising effective techniques that improve the correspondence mapping between sequential frames and their resultant optical flow vectors.
Notwithstanding the notable performance of the established paradigm in optical flow estimation, it is burdened by intrinsic constraints due to its discriminative nature. Firstly, prevalent models fail to explicitly capture
the underlying probabilistic distribution that characterizes
the dense correspondence field of the flow, consequently
struggling with complex motion dynamics. Secondly, challenges like occlusion, motion blur, and brightness changes
hinder discriminative models in optical flow tasks. These

19167

