This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AUEditNet: Dual-Branch Facial Action Unit Intensity Manipulation with
Implicit Disentanglement
Shiwei Jin 1 , Zhen Wang 2 , Lei Wang 2 , Peng Liu 2 , Ning Bi 2 , Truong Nguyen 1
1
ECE Dept. UC San Diego, 2 Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.
{sjin, tqn001}@eng.ucsd.edu, {zhewang, wlei, peli, nbi}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
Facial action unit (AU) intensity plays a pivotal role in
quantifying fine-grained expression behaviors, which is an
effective condition for facial expression manipulation. However, publicly available datasets containing intensity annotations for multiple AUs remain severely limited, often featuring a restricted number of subjects. This limitation places
challenges to the AU intensity manipulation in images due
to disentanglement issues, leading researchers to resort to
other large datasets with pretrained AU intensity estimators
for pseudo labels. In addressing this constraint and fully
leveraging manual annotations of AU intensities for precise
manipulation, we introduce AUEditNet. Our proposed model
achieves impressive intensity manipulation across 12 AUs,
trained effectively with only 18 subjects. Utilizing a dualbranch architecture, our approach achieves comprehensive
disentanglement of facial attributes and identity without necessitating additional loss functions or implementing with
large batch sizes. This approach offers a potential solution to
achieve desired facial attribute editing despite the dataset’s
limited subject count. Our experiments demonstrate AUEditNet’s superior accuracy in editing AU intensities, affirming
its capability in disentangling facial attributes and identity
within a limited subject pool. AUEditNet allows conditioning
by either intensity values or target images, eliminating the
need for constructing AU combinations for specific facial
expression synthesis. Moreover, AU intensity estimation, as a
downstream task, validates the consistency between real and
edited images, confirming the effectiveness of our proposed
AU intensity manipulation method.

1. Introduction
Facial action units (AUs), serving as anatomical indicators
of facial muscle movements, have been effectively utilized
as conditions for fine-grained facial expression editing in
images [20, 29]. The manipulation of AU intensities offers
advantages such as objective quantification on a six-integer-

level ordinal scale defined by the Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [8], the ability to generate over 7000 combinations in observed facial expressions with a small number
of AUs (30) [33], and the potentials for continuous intensity manipulation, instead of the category-based expression
editing [6]. However, public datasets containing intensity
annotations for over 10 AUs are constrained by limited subject counts, and frame-level AU intensity annotation requires
expert involvement and extensive works. As a result, current AU intensity manipulation methods [20, 29, 40] often
resort to the pretrained AU intensity estimator [3] to obtain
predicted annotations for datasets with larger subject pools,
sidestepping the reliance on expert-labeled datasets with a
restricted number of subjects.
On the other hand, the semantic richness in latent space
and high-quality generation capability of StyleGAN [18]
have facilitated the development of facial attribute editing
methods [4, 7, 11, 21, 36] that enable targeted modifications without affecting other attributes and identity. However, searching unified editing directions in the latent space
for attribute editing typically requires substantial data from
numerous subjects to disentangle the target attributes from
others and identity. Limited number of subjects may lead to
overfitting issues and poor generalization to new faces.
Considering these, it is challenging to search disentangled
editing directions for manipulating intensities of multiple
AUs based on the data from limited subjects. To address
this, we propose a method to manipulate intensities of 12
AUs within the W + latent space [1] of StyleGAN [18] for
high-resolution face image synthesis using only 18 subjects’
data. Specifically, we introduce a novel pipeline designed
to enforce disentanglement within the network, even with a
dataset containing a limited number of subjects compared
to the number of target facial attributes we aim to edit. This
approach offers a potential solution to achieve desired facial
attribute editing despite the dataset’s limited subject count.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
• Achieve accurate AU intensity manipulation in highresolution synthesized face images conditioned by AU
intensity values or target images without requiring net-

2104

