This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeCoTR: Enhancing Depth Completion with 2D and 3D Attentions
Yunxiao Shi

Manish Kumar Singh Hong Cai
Qualcomm AI Research∗

Fatih Porikli

{yunxshi, masi, hongcai, fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach that harnesses both 2D and 3D attentions to enable highly accurate
depth completion without requiring iterative spatial propagations. Specifically, we first enhance a baseline convolutional depth completion model by applying attention to 2D
features in the bottleneck and skip connections. This effectively improves the performance of this simple network and
sets it on par with the latest, complex transformer-based
models. Leveraging the initial depths and features from this
network, we uplift the 2D features to form a 3D point cloud
and construct a 3D point transformer to process it, allowing
the model to explicitly learn and exploit 3D geometric features. In addition, we propose normalization techniques to
process the point cloud, which improves learning and leads
to better accuracy than directly using point transformers
off the shelf. Furthermore, we incorporate global attention
on downsampled point cloud features, which enables longrange context while still being computationally feasible. We
evaluate our method, DeCoTR, on established depth completion benchmarks, including NYU Depth V2 and KITTI,
showcasing that it sets new state-of-the-art performance.
We further conduct zero-shot evaluations on ScanNet and
DDAD benchmarks and demonstrate that DeCoTR has superior generalizability compared to existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Depth is crucial for 3D perception in various downstream
applications, such as autonomous driving, augmented and
virtual reality, and robotics [1, 2, 8, 9, 11, 33–35, 43, 50,
51]. However, sensor-based depth measurement is far from
perfect. Such measurements often exhibit sparsity, low resolution, noise interference, and incompleteness. Various
factors, including environmental conditions, motion, sensor
power constraints, and the presence of specular, transparent,
wet, or non-reflective surfaces, contribute to these limitations. Consequently, the task of depth completion, aimed at
∗ Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

generating dense and accurate depth maps from sparse measurements alongside aligned camera images, has emerged
as a pivotal research area [4, 5, 24, 26, 27, 29, 41, 45].
Thanks to the advances in deep learning, there has been
significant progress in depth completion. Earlier papers
leverage convolutional neural networks to perform depth
completion with image guidance and achieve promising
results [3, 27, 37]. In order to improve accuracy, researchers have studied various spatial propagation methods [4, 24, 25, 29], which performs further iterative processing on top of depth maps and features computed by an
initial network. Most existing solutions build on this in the
last stage of their depth completion pipeline to improve performance [17, 45]. These propagation algorithms, however,
focus on 2D feature processing and do not fully exploit the
3D nature of the problem. A few recent papers utilize transformers for depth completion [32, 45]. However, they apply
transformer operations mainly to improve feature learning
on the 2D image plane and fail to achieve acceptable accuracy without employing spatial propagation.
Several studies have looked into harnessing 3D representation more comprehensively. For instance, [18, 49] construct a point cloud from the input sparse depth, yet coping
with extreme sparsity poses challenges in effective feature
learning. Another approach, as seen in [26], uplifts 2D features to 3D by using the initial dense depth predicted by
a simple convolutional network, but it is impeded by the
poor accuracy of the initial network and requires dynamic
propagations to attain acceptable accuracy. Very recently,
researchers have proposed employing transformers for 3D
feature learning in depth completion [44]; however, this
work applies transformer layers to extremely sparse points,
which is ineffective for learning informative 3D features.
Here, we introduce DeCoTR to perform feature learning
in full 3D. It accomplishes this by constructing a dense feature point cloud derived from completed depth values obtained from an initial network and subsequently applying
transformer processing to these 3D points. To do this properly, it is essential to have reasonably accurate initial depths.
As such, we first enhance a commonly used convolutionbased initial depth network, S2D [27], by integrating trans-

10736

