This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GPS-Gaussian: Generalizable Pixel-wise 3D Gaussian Splatting for Real-time
Human Novel View Synthesis
Shunyuan Zheng†,1 , Boyao Zhou2 , Ruizhi Shao2 , Boning Liu2 , Shengping Zhang∗,1,3 ,
Liqiang Nie1 , Yebin Liu2
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Tsinghua University 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{sawyer0503, s.zhang}@hit.edu.cn, nieliqiang@gmail.com
{bzhou22, liuboning, liuyebin}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, shaorz20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

PSNR:24.85
2K@25FPS

GT

PSNR:23.21
1K@5FPS

Ours

PSNR:21.82
1K@15FPS

ENeRF

FloRen

PSNR:22.85
1K@ - FPS

3D-GS

Figure 1. High-fidelity and real-time novel view synthesis (NVS). Our proposed method synthesizes 2K-resolution novel views of
unseen human performers in real-time without any fine-tuning or optimization. The performance outperforms the state-of-the-art feedforward NVS methods ENeRF [19], FloRen [47] and 3D-GS [12], which are representative approaches in implicit neural human rendering,
image-based human rendering and per-subject optimization, respectively. We only mark the running efficiency for feed-forward methods.

Abstract
We present a new approach, termed GPS-Gaussian, for
synthesizing novel views of a character in a real-time manner. The proposed method enables 2K-resolution rendering under a sparse-view camera setting. Unlike the original Gaussian Splatting or neural implicit rendering methods that necessitate per-subject optimizations, we introduce
Gaussian parameter maps defined on the source views and
regress directly Gaussian Splatting properties for instant
novel view synthesis without any fine-tuning or optimization. To this end, we train our Gaussian parameter regression module on a large amount of human scan data, jointly
with a depth estimation module to lift 2D parameter maps
to 3D space. The proposed framework is fully differentiable
and experiments on several datasets demonstrate that our
† Work done during an internship at Tsinghua University.
∗ Corresponding author.

method outperforms state-of-the-art methods while achieving an exceeding rendering speed. The code is available at
https://github.com/aipixel/GPS-Gaussian.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis (NVS) is a critical task that aims to
produce photo-realistic images at novel viewpoints from
source images captured by multi-view camera systems. Human NVS, as its subfield, could contribute to 3D/4D immersive scene capture of sports broadcasting, stage performance and holographic communication, which demands
real-time efficiency and 3D consistent appearances. Previous attempts [5, 36] synthesize novel views through a
weighted blending mechanism [61], but they typically rely
on dense input views or precise proxy geometry. Under
sparse-view camera settings, it remains a formidable challenge to render high-fidelity images for NVS.

19680

