This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Call to Reflect on Evaluation Practices for Age Estimation:
Comparative Analysis of the State-of-the-Art and a Unified Benchmark
Jakub Paplhám
Department of Cybernetics
Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Czech Technical University in Prague

Vojtěch Franc
Department of Cybernetics
Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Czech Technical University in Prague

paplhjak@fel.cvut.cz

xfrancv@cmp.felk.cvut.cz

Abstract
Comparing different age estimation methods poses a challenge due to the unreliability of published results stemming
from inconsistencies in the benchmarking process. Previous studies have reported continuous performance improvements over the past decade using specialized methods; however, our findings challenge these claims. This paper identifies two trivial, yet persistent issues with the currently used
evaluation protocol and describes how to resolve them. We
offer an extensive comparative analysis for state-of-the-art
facial age estimation methods. Surprisingly, we find that
the performance differences between the methods are negligible compared to the effect of other factors, such as facial alignment, facial coverage, image resolution, model architecture, or the amount of data used for pretraining. We
use the gained insights to propose using FaRL as the backbone model and demonstrate its effectiveness on all public
datasets. We make the source code and exact data splits
public on GitHub and in the supplementary material.

1. Introduction
Age estimation has received significant interest in recent
years. However, a closer examination of the evaluation process reveals two underlying issues. First, no standardized
data splits are defined for most public datasets, and the used
splits are rarely made public, making the results irreproducible. Second, methods often modify multiple components of the age estimation system, making it unclear which
modification is responsible for the performance gains.
This paper aims to critically analyze the evaluation practices in age estimation research, highlight the issues, and
appeal to the community to follow good evaluation practices to resolve them. We benchmark and fairly compare
recent deep-learning methods for age estimation from facial images. We focus on state-of-the-art methods that

adapt a generic architecture by changing its last layer or
the loss function to suit the age estimation task. Although
this may appear restrictive, it is essential to note that most
of the methods proposed in the field fall into this category
(≈ 70%). By comparing methods that modify only a small
part of the network, we aim to ensure a fair evaluation, as
the remaining setup can be kept identical. Besides the usual
intra-class performance, we also evaluate their cross-dataset
generalization, which has been neglected in the age prediction literature so far. Surprisingly, we find that the influence
of the loss function and the decision layer on the results,
usually the primary component that distinguishes different
methods, is negligible compared to other factors.
Contributions
• We show that existing evaluation practices in age estimation do not provide consistent results. This leads to obstacles for researchers aiming to advance prior work and
for practitioners striving to pinpoint the most effective approach for their application.
• We define a proper evaluation protocol, offer an extensive
comparative analysis for state-of-the-art facial age estimation methods, and publish our code.
• We show that the performance difference caused by using
a different decision layer or training loss is significantly
smaller than that caused by other parts of the prediction
pipeline.
• We identify that the amount of data used for pre-training
is the most influential factor and use the observation to
propose using FaRL [30] as the backbone architecture.
We demonstrate its effectiveness on public datasets.

2. Issues with Current Evaluation Practices
2.1. Data Splits
Publications focused on age estimation evaluate their methods on several datasets [1, 4, 20, 21, 23, 25, 29]. The most

1196

