This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompt Learning via Meta-Regularization
Jinyoung Park, Juyeon Ko, Hyunwoo J. Kim*
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
{lpmn678, juyon98, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Pre-trained vision-language models have shown impressive success on various computer vision tasks with their
zero-shot generalizability. Recently, prompt learning approaches have been explored to efficiently and effectively
adapt the vision-language models to a variety of downstream tasks. However, most existing prompt learning methods suffer from task overfitting since the general knowledge of the pre-trained vision language models is forgotten while the prompts are finetuned on a small data set
from a specific target task. To address this issue, we propose a Prompt Meta-Regularization (ProMetaR) to improve the generalizability of prompt learning for visionlanguage models. Specifically, ProMetaR meta-learns both
the regularizer and the soft prompts to harness the taskspecific knowledge from the downstream tasks and taskagnostic general knowledge from the vision-language models. Further, ProMetaR augments the task to generate multiple virtual tasks to alleviate the meta-overfitting.
In addition, we provide the analysis to comprehend how
ProMetaR improves the generalizability of prompt tuning
in the perspective of the gradient alignment. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that our ProMetaR improves
the generalizability of conventional prompt learning methods under base-to-base/base-to-new and domain generalization settings. The code of ProMetaR is available at
https://github.com/mlvlab/ProMetaR.

1. Introduction
Foundational vision-language models (VLMs) have established their precedence in various computer vision applications such as object detection [10, 12, 15, 76], image
classification [52, 57, 72], segmentation [42], and captioning [37, 45, 75]. Represented by CLIP [52] and
ALIGN [24], these models are pre-trained on millions of
image-text pairs with contrastive loss, creating a shared,
well-aligned joint embedding space for vision and language. They have demonstrated their generalization abilities in zero-shot image recognition and object detection.
* is the corresponding author.

CoOp

CoCoOp

IVLP

ProMetaR (Ours)

Zero-shot CLIP

Zero-shot CLIP

(a) Base class performance.

(b) New class performance.

Figure 1. Performance comparison of ProMetaR with prompt
learning methods (Zero-shot CLIP, CoOp, CoCoOp, IVLP (base
method), and ProMetaR (Ours)) under the base-to-base/base-tonew setting. We measure average accuracy on the base classes (a)
and new classes (b) over 11 datasets. The red dotted line indicates
the performance of the zero-shot CLIP.

Despite the effectiveness of VLMs on zero-shot image
recognition, they suffer from time-consuming manual text
prompting for each task, which is inefficient and requires
human efforts and prior knowledge. Prompt tuning methods such as Context Optimization (CoOp) [78] have arisen
as a new paradigm that uses a small number of learnable
vectors (soft prompts) instead of manual prompting. They
efficiently and effectively adapt models to downstream tasks
by optimizing only a small number of learnable vectors (soft
prompts) while keeping VLMs frozen. In recent, some
works [26, 32] further enhance the performance by applying
prompt tuning to both image and text modalities. Prompt
tuning methods enhance traditional generalization capabilities showing good performance on trained tasks with only
a few samples. However, as the soft prompts tend to prioritize task-specific knowledge, they easily overfit the target
task and show poor task generalization abilities. In other
words, they have difficulty in generalizing on new tasks, resulting in worse performance than CLIP in data-deficient
settings. From Figure 1, standard prompt learning methods (CoOp, CoCoOp, and IVLP) show worse performance

26940

