This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GOAT-Bench: A Benchmark for Multi-Modal Lifelong Navigation
Mukul Khanna1⇤ Ram Ramrakhya1⇤ Gunjan Chhablani1 Sriram Yenamandra1 Theophile Gervet2
Matthew Chang3 Zsolt Kira1 Devendra Singh Chaplot4 Dhruv Batra1 Roozbeh Mottaghi5
Georgia Institute of Technology 2 Carnegie Mellon University
3
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 4 Mistral AI 5 University of Washington
mukulkhanna.github.io/goat-bench
1

Figure 1. We study the Go to Any Thing (GOAT) task, which involves agents navigating to a sequence of open vocabulary goals specified
through any of the three modalities – category name, a language description, or an image. We propose GOAT-Bench, a benchmark for the
GOAT task, where we evaluate modular and monolithic, explicit and implicit map-based navigation approaches. In the above example, we
task the agent with sequentially navigating to 1) a recliner chair (from a closed set of k categories), 2) the oven shown in the picture, 3) “the
white book on the coffee table in the living room”, and some other objects in the scene. The goal of the benchmark is to facilitate progress
towards building such universal, multi-modal, lifelong agents.

Abstract
The Embodied AI community has made significant strides in
visual navigation tasks, exploring targets from 3D coordinates, objects, language descriptions, and images. However,
these navigation models often handle only a single input
modality as the target. With the progress achieved so far, it is
time to move towards universal navigation models capable
of handling various goal types, enabling more effective user
⇤ Equal contribution

interaction with robots. To facilitate this goal, we propose
GOAT-Bench, a benchmark for the universal navigation task
referred to as GO to AnyThing (GOAT). In this task, the
agent is directed to navigate to a sequence of targets specified by the category name, language description, or image in
an open-vocabulary fashion. We benchmark monolithic RL
and modular methods on the GOAT task, analyzing their performance across modalities, the role of explicit and implicit
scene memories, their robustness to noise in goal specifications, and the impact of memory in lifelong scenarios.

16373

