This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Multi-scale Network with Learnable Discrete Wavelet Transform
for Blind Motion Deblurring
†2

Xinyu Zhang

1

Hanlin Bai

Xin Gao∗1,2 Tianheng Qiu∗2,3,4
Kang Liu1 Xuan Huang†4 Hu Wei4 Guoying Zhang†1 Huaping Liu2
∗

1

Equal Contribution

†

Coresponding Author

China University of Mining & Technology-Beijing 2 Tsinghua University
3
University of Science and Technology of China
4
Hefei Institutes of Physical Science,Chinese Academy of Sciences
Abstract

Coarse-to-fine schemes are widely used in traditional
single-image motion deblur; however, in the context of deep
learning, existing multi-scale algorithms not only require
the use of complex modules for feature fusion of low-scale
RGB images and deep semantics, but also manually generate low-resolution pairs of images that do not have sufficient
confidence. In this work, we propose a multi-scale network
based on single-input and multiple-outputs(SIMO) for motion deblurring. This simplifies the complexity of algorithms
based on a coarse-to-fine scheme. To alleviate restoration
defects impacting detail information brought about by using a multi-scale architecture, we combine the characteristics of real-world blurring trajectories with a learnable
wavelet transform module to focus on the directional continuity and frequency features of the step-by-step transitions between blurred images to sharp images. In conclusion, we propose a multi-scale network with a learnable
discrete wavelet transform (MLWNet), which exhibits stateof-the-art performance on multiple real-world deblurred
datasets, in terms of both subjective and objective quality
as well as computational efficiency. Our code is available
on https://github.com/thqiu0419/MLWNet.

1. Introduction
Most current top-performing single-image blind deblurring
algorithms are based on DNNs, which can be structurally
categorized into single-scale [2, 10, 12, 28, 29, 42] and
multi-scale approaches [3, 9, 13, 27, 37]. Compared to
single-scale methods, multi-scale methods are built on the
idea of moving from coarse-to-fine, and thus they decompose the challenging single-image blind deblurring problem
into easier-to-solve sub-problems to restore the blurred image step-by-step.
Earlier DNNs exploiting the coarse-to-fine concept usually employ estimators of different scales to produce re-

Figure 1. Performance comparison on the RealBlur-J [23] test
dataset in terms of PSNR and GMACs. Our proposed MLWNet
achieves superiority in comparison with other state-of-the-arts.

stored images gradually [20, 21, 27]. However, not only
is the extracted semantic information not sufficiently representative, but the use of the same complexity at different
scales may lead to redundant computations; More advanced
multi-scale algorithms [3] use a global encoder-decoder,
which significantly reduces the algorithm’s runtime, multiple upsampling and downsampling leads to insufficient
restoration of detailed information, and therefore such algorithms require the introduction of additional fusion modules
to encode input images for fusion with deeper semantics.
In addition, existing multi-scale algorithms use multipleinput and multiple-output (MIMO) architectures, which require the introduction of manually constructed downsampled image pairs, and usually employ simple interpolation
algorithms to generate low-resolution images for the sake
of efficiency, which is obviously not reliable.
We note that the gradual insertion of images used by existing coarse-to-fine algorithms is redundant. Referring to
numerous algorithms [6, 8, 15, 17, 26, 31] that are widely
used in downstream tasks, the network starts with a single
input and also extracts features at different scales. These
12733

