This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-vocabulary object 6D pose estimation
Jaime Corsetti1,2
1

Fondazione
Bruno Kessler

Davide Boscaini1
2

University
of Trento

3

Andrea Cavallaro4,5

Changjae Oh3

Queen Mary University
of London

{jcorsetti,dboscaini,poiesi}@fbk.eu

4

c.oh@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
We introduce the new setting of open-vocabulary object
6D pose estimation, in which a textual prompt is used to
specify the object of interest. In contrast to existing approaches, in our setting (i) the object of interest is specified solely through the textual prompt, (ii) no object model
(e.g., CAD or video sequence) is required at inference, and
(iii) the object is imaged from two RGBD viewpoints of different scenes. To operate in this setting, we introduce a
novel approach that leverages a Vision-Language Model to
segment the object of interest from the scenes and to estimate its relative 6D pose. The key of our approach is a
carefully devised strategy to fuse object-level information
provided by the prompt with local image features, resulting in a feature space that can generalize to novel concepts.
We validate our approach on a new benchmark based on
two popular datasets, REAL275 and Toyota-Light, which
collectively encompass 34 object instances appearing in
four thousand image pairs. The results demonstrate that
our approach outperforms both a well-established handcrafted method and a recent deep learning-based baseline in estimating the relative 6D pose of objects in different scenes. Code and dataset are available at https:
//jcorsetti.github.io/oryon.

1. Introduction
Accurate 6D pose estimation is fundamental for a wide
range of applications, such as robot manipulation [9], autonomous driving [28] and augmented reality [29]. While
recent works achieve high degree of pose estimation accuracy, even in cluttered scenes [6, 23, 46] and with challenging symmetric objects [12], most are instance-level
pose estimation models, which are trained and tested with
the same set of objects [40, 46]. Generalizable or oneshot [2, 39, 42] pose estimation methods remove the above
limitation by training a model on a diverse set of objects using recent large-scale datasets (e.g. ShapeNet6D [50] and

Idiap Research Institute

5

EPFL

andrea.cavallaro@epfl.ch

Depth
RGB

Q

Fabio Poiesi1

A

Depth
RGB

A
or

object driven (state of the art)

a brown open laptop
prompt driven (ours)

Figure 1. Our open-vocabulary setting enables the estimation of
the pose of an object captured in two distinct scenes. State-ofthe-art generalizable 6D pose estimation methods from RGB on
RGBD images typically depend on the object CAD model [2] or a
video sequence of the object at test time [24, 42] as a reference (A)
to compute the object pose in the query image (Q). In contrast, our
method uses a textual prompt to guide the pose estimation process,
and requires a single view as reference.

MegaPose [20]), and test on novel objects without constraints about shape or category. However, model-based
methods still require a model of the novel object at test
time [2, 20, 39], while methods defined as model-free require a set of reference views [19, 47] or a video [13, 24, 42]
of the novel object, and additional preprocessing. Such
methods are unsuitable when novel objects are not physically available, as a video sequence cannot be acquired.
In this paper, we introduce a new 6D pose estimation
formulation that changes the assumptions of previous approaches (Fig. 1), by using a textual prompt to identify the
object of interest. To accomplish this, we integrate in the
architecture a Vision-Language Model (VLM) to identify
the object of interest from the two scenes and to estimate
its relative 6D pose. We name our approach Oryon (Openvocabulary object pose estimation). The proposed new formulation uses textual information (prompt) provided by the
user to not only localize the object of interest in a cluttered
scene, but also to guide our VLM to focus on points which

18071

