This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PDF: A Probability-Driven Framework for Open World 3D Point Cloud
Semantic Segmentation
Jinfeng Xu, Siyuan Yang, Xianzhi Li *, Yuan Tang, Yixue Hao, Long Hu, Min Chen
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{jinfengx, reedyoung, xzli, yuan tang, yixuehao, hulong, minchen2012}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing point cloud semantic segmentation networks
cannot identify unknown classes and update their knowledge, due to a closed-set and static perspective of the
real world, which would induce the intelligent agent to
make bad decisions. To address this problem, we propose
a Probability-Driven Framework (PDF)1 for open world
semantic segmentation that includes (i) a lightweight Udecoder branch to identify unknown classes by estimating
the uncertainties, (ii) a flexible pseudo-labeling scheme to
supply geometry features along with probability distribution
features of unknown classes by generating pseudo labels,
and (iii) an incremental knowledge distillation strategy to
incorporate novel classes into the existing knowledge base
gradually. Our framework enables the model to behave like
human beings, which could recognize unknown objects and
incrementally learn them with the corresponding knowledge. Experimental results on the S3DIS and ScanNetv2
datasets demonstrate that the proposed PDF outperforms
other methods by a large margin in both important tasks of
open world semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning for 3D point clouds
has attracted increasing interest due to its great potential
in various applications, such as virtual/augmented reality,
robotics, autonomous driving, etc. Taking advantage of the
emergence of high-quality datasets [2, 3, 5, 9] and advances
in point cloud networks [21, 33, 34, 41, 44], the semantic segmentation task for point clouds has achieved promising performance in several important metrics. Most existing
methods work under the strong assumption that the world is
closed-set and static, which supposes that all the object categories remain consistent in both the training and inference
stages. However, the assumption is not valid for many dy* Corresponding author
1 Code available at: https://github.com/JinfengX/PointCloudPDF.

Figure 1. The closed-set model MC continuously improves its
open-world capabilities by successively finetuning to open-set
model MO and open-world MI with the help of open-set semantic segmentation (OSS) task and incremental learning (IL)
task, where the proposed pseudo-labeling scheme and incremental
knowledge distillation strategy are employed, respectively.

namic real-world scenarios in which unknown object classes
will be encountered outside the learning process. Intelligent
agents could make wrong decisions under a closed-set design due to incorrect recognition of unknown classes. Moreover, the agent cannot update its knowledge base under a
static perception of the world, while humans can continuously extend their learned knowledge without forgetting.
These problems limit the closed-set and static methods to
particular scenarios.
The open world semantic segmentation (OWSS) addresses the above issues by introducing two tasks: 1) openset semantic segmentation (OSS) to recognize the known
objects and identify unknown objects simultaneously; 2) incremental learning (IL) to update knowledge of the model
without retraining from scratch when information about the
identified unknown classes would be accessible. Notably,
the OSS focuses on identifying unknown classes not present
during training, while OWSS addresses both unknown identification and continuous learning when novel classes with
ground-truth labels are provided in IL task. Thus, OWSS
can be considered as an extension of OSS. Fig. 1 shows the

5977

