This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

How to Handle Sketch-Abstraction in Sketch-Based Image Retrieval?
Subhadeep Koley1,2

Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Aneeshan Sain1 Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1
Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.

{s.koley, a.bhunia, a.sain, p.chowdhury, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk
https://subhadeepkoley.github.io/AbstractAway
R

A

G

R

A

Existing

Encoder
Query

Ours
G

R

A

G

R

Abstraction
Identification

A
Encoder
Query

Retrieval

Feature Matrix
Embedder

Pre-trained
StyleGAN

Retrieval

Only during training

G

Figure 1. Left: Freehand sketches exhibit varied levels of abstraction – G : good, R : reasonable, A : abstract. Right: Unlike existing
feature vector embedding, we learn a feature matrix representation in the joint embedding space, regularised by a pre-trained StyleGAN’s
disentangled latent space, and an abstraction-aware retrieval loss. The abstraction identification head dynamically decides the rowdimension of the matrix embedding based on the query sketch abstraction/completeness.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel abstraction-aware
sketch-based image retrieval framework capable of handling sketch abstraction at varied levels. Prior works
had mainly focused on tackling sub-factors such as drawing style and order, we instead attempt to model abstraction as a whole, and propose feature-level and retrieval
granularity-level designs so that the system builds into its
DNA the necessary means to interpret abstraction. On
learning abstraction-aware features, we for the first-time
harness the rich semantic embedding of pre-trained StyleGAN model, together with a novel abstraction-level mapper that deciphers the level of abstraction and dynamically
selects appropriate dimensions in the feature matrix correspondingly, to construct a feature matrix embedding that
can be freely traversed to accommodate different levels of
abstraction. For granularity-level abstraction understanding, we dictate that the retrieval model should not treat
all abstraction-levels equally and introduce a differentiable
surrogate Acc.@q loss to inject that understanding into
the system. Different to the gold-standard triplet loss, our
Acc.@q loss uniquely allows a sketch to narrow/broaden
its focus in terms of how stringent the evaluation should be
– the more abstract a sketch, the less stringent (higher q).
Extensive experiments depict our method to outperform existing state-of-the-arts in standard SBIR tasks along with
challenging scenarios like early retrieval, forensic sketchphoto matching, and style-invariant retrieval.

1. Introduction
Unquestionably the biggest difference between sketches
and photos lies with that of abstraction – sketches are ab-

stract depictions, photos being lifelike [39, 42, 69]. Abstraction in sketches is formed by many interlacing factors
such as drawing skill, style, culture and subjective interpretation [13, 20, 40, 41, 47]. As a result, human sketches typically exhibit a large variation in terms of abstraction-levels
– from good (art-trained), to reasonable (you), and those
highly abstract (me!), as shown in Fig. 1(left).
The sketch community had been on a quest to tackle abstraction since inception [5, 47, 48, 56, 79], however mainly
focusing on one sub-element at once (e.g., style [56]). This
paper attempts for the first time to tackle sketch abstraction
as a whole, for the problem of fine-grained sketch-based image retrieval (FG-SBIR) [8, 9, 12, 18, 19, 57, 58]. The end
result is an abstraction-aware retrieval model that flexibly
adapts to different levels of sketch abstraction while maintaining performance – it takes the abstraction away.
We operate under two guiding principles to tackle abstraction – on feature level, and on retrieval granularity – all
to ensure our system has in its DNA means to accommodate
all abstract forms of human sketches. On the former, we desire a flexible feature embedding that dynamically attends to
the varying levels of abstraction. That is, under a highly abstract input sketch, we would like to return coarser features
to conduct sketch-photo matching, and vice versa for those
less abstract (more detailed). On the latter, we dictate that
our system builds into its understanding, that retrieval granularity (i.e., how fine-grained the retrieval is) is negatively
correlated with sketch abstraction-level. This is intuitive –
one can not reasonably expect a rough contour sketch of a
shoe, to magically retrieve a specific Jordan trainer.
To engineer the said abstraction-aware feature embed-

16859

