This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiPrompT: Disentangled Prompt Tuning for
Multiple Latent Domain Generalization in Federated Learning
Sikai Bai1∗ , Jie Zhang2∗ , Song Guo1† ,
Shuaicheng Li , Jingcai Guo2 , Jun Hou3 , Tao Han1 , Xiaocheng Lu1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University,
3
SenseTime Research
3 †‡

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a powerful
paradigm for learning from decentralized data, and federated domain generalization further considers the test
dataset (target domain) is absent from the decentralized
training data (source domains). However, most existing
FL methods assume that domain labels are provided during
training, and their evaluation imposes explicit constraints
on the number of domains, which must strictly match the
number of clients. Because of the underutilization of numerous edge devices and additional cross-client domain annotations in the real world, such restrictions may be impractical and involve potential privacy leaks. In this paper, we propose an efficient and novel approach, called
Disentangled Prompt Tuning (DiPrompT), a method that
tackles the above restrictions by learning adaptive prompts
for domain generalization in a distributed manner. Specifically, we first design two types of prompts, i.e., global
prompt to capture general knowledge across all clients
and domain prompts to capture domain-specific knowledge.
They eliminate the restriction on the one-to-one mapping
between source domains and local clients. Furthermore, a
dynamic query metric is introduced to automatically search
the suitable domain label for each sample, which includes
two-substep text-image alignments based on prompt tuning without labor-intensive annotation. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate that our DiPrompT
achieves superior domain generalization performance over
state-of-the-art FL methods when domain labels are not
provided, and even outperforms many centralized learning
methods using domain labels.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) is an emerging privacy-preserving
machine-learning technique [26], which enables multiple
∗ Equal contribution, † Corresponding authors, ‡ Project leader

Client 1

Client 2

Client 3

Client 4

Server

Cartoon

Real World

Sketch

403.86

70.59

Cartoon

Target

1878.98

307.92

(70.59)

(a) Diversified Source domains
G-Prompt
1.0

D-Prompt 1
G-Prompt

D-Prompt 1
D-Prompt 2
D-Prompt 3

(b) Training Stage in clients-side

0.2

D-Prompt 2

0.7

D-Prompt 3

0.1

Prediction

(c) Test Stage in Server-side

Figure 1. The motivation example and our main idea. (a) When
clients outnumber source domains, learning domain-invariant features may become challenging due to imbalanced contributions
across domains/clients. Note that the contribution imbalance of
local data is measured through its feature distances with the target domain. (b) DiPrompT separates domain-specific features and
general knowledge during local training. (c) DiPrompT adaptive
ensembles for generic and valuable specific knowledge for better
target domain prediction during inference.

clients (e.g., mobile devices or organizations) to collaboratively learn a global model without exchanging their private data. However, a practical concern with conventional
FL methods is that they usually ignore the possible domain
shift between training data (source domains) and test data
(target domain) [1], which can incur poor performance on
unseen target domains due to domain discrepancies.
Recently, some research efforts have attempted to incorporate domain generalization into the FL framework. For
example, FedDG [21] shares the amplitude spectrum of images among local clients for medical image segmentation.
FedSR [29] builds a simple algorithm that utilizes two local regularizers for domain generalization. These methods extract domain-invariant features across all source domains. Nevertheless, most of these methods only focus on
domain-invariant features across clients, and they rely on
the assumption of one-to-one mapping of client and domain.

27284

