This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unleashing Unlabeled Data: A Paradigm for Cross-View Geo-Localization
Guopeng Li1 , Ming Qian2 , Gui-Song Xia1,2,†
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University 2 State Key Lab. LIESMARS, Wuhan University
{guopengli, mingqian, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn

(B) Unsupervised CVGL

1. Introduction
Large-area Cross-View Geo-Localization (CVGL) aims to
determine the localization of ground images by retrieving
the most similar GPS-tagged satellite images [53]. The
easy availability of open-source GPS-tagged satellite images, such as Google Maps, helps users get accurate ground
localization at a low cost [9, 40] and provides CVGL with
great potential for various real-life applications, including
person localization, automatic navigation, and augmented
reality [9, 21, 27].
However, existing CVGL methods are usually supervised training with ground-truth correspondences of
Ground images (Grds) and Satellite images (Sats), known as
SCVGL. This label-driven nature brings some practical limitations. Firstly, obtaining accurately located ground images
requires expensive devices (e.g., lidar devices [11, 19]), and
† Corresponding author

Chair?

Bike?

Ground

This paper investigates the effective utilization of unlabeled data for large-area cross-view geo-localization
(CVGL), encompassing both unsupervised and semisupervised settings. Common approaches to CVGL rely on
ground-satellite image pairs and employ label-driven supervised training. However, the cost of collecting precise
cross-view image pairs hinders the deployment of CVGL in
real-life scenarios. Without the pairs, CVGL will be more
challenging to handle the significant imaging and spatial
gaps between ground and satellite images. To this end, we
propose an unsupervised framework including a cross-view
projection to guide the model for retrieving initial pseudolabels and a fast re-ranking mechanism to refine the pseudolabels by leveraging the fact that “the perfectly paired
ground-satellite image is located in a unique and identical
scene”. The framework exhibits competitive performance
compared with supervised works on three open-source
benchmarks. Our code and models will be released on
https://github.com/liguopeng0923/UCVGL.

Alarm?

Satellite

(A) Unsupervised Image Retrieval

Abstract

(C) Average similarity scores of k-th retrieved images

(1) UReID

(2) UIR

(3) CVGL

Figure 1. Task Settings. (A): Unsupervised Image Retrieval [16]
has object-level images and applies class-level clusters by class semantics. (B): Unsupervised CVGL has scene-level images and applies cross-view alignments by spatial correspondences (i.e., green
lines). Compared with supervised CVGL, GPS labels and paired
annotations (i.e., correspondences between ground and satellite
images) are not accessible in UCVGL. (C): Common image retrievals are class-level (e.g., UReID [15] and UIR [16]), but
CVGL [9] aims to align cross-view images in the same scene,
which is fine-grained instance-level [9]. The Top-k most similar
images are more discriminative without class semantics in CVGL.

matching ground and satellite images brings extra human
costs [51]. Secondly, numerous non-corresponding ground
and satellite images without GPS tags are available online
but cannot be directly used for SCVGL. Lastly, SCVGL requires re-annotation for new or changed scenes, increasing
the cost of human effort and resources. Given these limitations, an important question arises: can we uncover hidden
correlations from cross-view images without label information? This motivates us to study how to utilize unlabeled
data to start a retrieval system for CVGL.
Regrettably, just as a ship needs a compass to find its
way, without labels, the model may lose its optimized direction. This phenomenon is usually called cold-start problem [26] for un- and semi-supervised learning.

16719

