This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RNb-NeuS: Reflectance and Normal-based Multi-View 3D Reconstruction
Baptiste Brument1, *
Robin Bruneau1,2, *
Yvain Quéau3
Jean Mélou1
François Bernard Lauze2
Jean-Denis Durou1
Lilian Calvet4
1

IRIT, UMR CNRS 5505, Toulouse, France
2
DIKU, Copenhagen, Denmark
3
Normandie Univ, UNICAEN, ENSICAEN, CNRS, GREYC, Caen, France
4
OR-X, Balgrist Hospital, University of Zurich, Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract
This paper introduces a versatile paradigm for integrating multi-view reflectance (optional) and normal maps
acquired through photometric stereo. Our approach employs a pixel-wise joint re-parameterization of reflectance
and normal, considering them as a vector of radiances
rendered under simulated, varying illumination. This reparameterization enables the seamless integration of reflectance and normal maps as input data in neural volume
rendering-based 3D reconstruction while preserving a single optimization objective. In contrast, recent multi-view
photometric stereo (MVPS) methods depend on multiple,
potentially conflicting objectives. Despite its apparent simplicity, our proposed approach outperforms state-of-the-art
approaches in MVPS benchmarks across F-score, Chamfer
distance, and mean angular error metrics. Notably, it significantly improves the detailed 3D reconstruction of areas
with high curvature or low visibility.

1. Introduction
Automatic 3D reconstruction is pivotal in various fields,
such as archaeological and cultural heritage (virtual reconstruction), medical imaging (surgical planning), virtual and
augmented reality, games and film production.
Multi-view stereo (MVS) [5], which retrieves the geometry of a scene seen from multiple viewpoints, is the most
famous 3D reconstruction solution. Coupled with neural
volumetric rendering (NVR) techniques [22], it effectively
handles complex structures and self-occlusions. However,
dealing with non-Lambertian scenes remains a challenge
due to the breakdown of the underlying brightness consistency assumption. The problem is also ill-posed in certain
configurations e.g., poorly textured scene [25] or degener* Equal contributions. brument.bcb@gmail.com / rb@di.ku.dk

Figure 1. One image from DiLiGenT-MV’s Buddha dataset [12],
and 3D reconstruction results from several recent MVPS methods:
[11, 26, 27] and ours. The latter provides the fine details closest to
the ground truth (GT), while being remarkably simpler.

ate viewpoints configurations with limited baselines. Moreover, despite recent efforts in this direction [13], recovering
the thinnest geometric details remains difficult under fixed
illumination. In such a setting, estimating the reflectance of
the scene also remains a challenge.
On the other hand, photometric stereo (PS) [24], which
relies on a collection of images acquired under varying
lighting, excels in the recovery of high-frequency details
under the form of normal maps. It is also the only photographic technique that can estimate reflectance. And,
with the recent advent of deep learning techniques [8], PS
gained enough maturity to handle non-Lambertian surfaces
and complex illumination. Yet, its reconstruction of geometry’s low frequencies remains suboptimal.

5230

