This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3DInAction: Understanding Human Actions in 3D Point Clouds
Yizhak Ben-Shabat1,2
1

Oren Shrout2

Australian National University

2

Stephen Gould1

Technion, Israel Institute of Technology

sitzikbs@technion.ac.il, shrout.oren@campus.technion.ac.il, stephen.gould@anu.edu.au
https://github.com/sitzikbs/3dincaction

Figure 1. t-patches for action recognition. We propose a new representation for dynamic 3D point clouds. Termed t-patches, these
are locally evolving point cloud sets aggregated over time. Learning features over t-patches provides an improved temporal point cloud
representation for action understanding.

Abstract
We propose a novel method for 3D point cloud action recognition. Understanding human actions in RGB
videos has been widely studied in recent years, however,
its 3D point cloud counterpart remains under-explored despite the clear value that 3D information may bring. This
is mostly due to the inherent limitation of the point cloud
data modality—lack of structure, permutation invariance,
and varying number of points—which makes it difficult to
learn a spatio-temporal representation. To address this limitation, we propose the 3DinAction pipeline that first estimates patches moving in time (t-patches) as a key building block, alongside a hierarchical architecture that learns
an informative spatio-temporal representation. We show
that our method achieves improved performance on existing
datasets, including DFAUST and IKEA ASM. Code is publicly available at https://github.com/sitzikbs/3dincaction.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we address the task of action recognition
from 3D point cloud sequences. We propose a novel
pipeline wherein points are grouped into temporally evolv-

ing patches that capture discriminative action dynamics.
Our work is motivated by the massive growth of online media, mobile and surveillance cameras that have enabled the
computer vision community to develop many data-driven
action-recognition methods [5, 12, 26, 31], most of which
rely on RGB video data. Recently, commodity 3D sensors
are gaining increased momentum, however, the 3D point
cloud modality for action recognition has yet been underexploited due to the scarcity of 3D action-labeled data.
In many cases, a pure RGB video-based inference may
not be enough and incorporating other modalities like geometry is required. This is especially necessary for safety
critical applications such as autonomous systems, where
redundancy is crucial, or in scenarios where the video is
heavily degraded (e.g., due to poor lighting). Some approaches incorporate geometrical information implicitly,
e.g., through intermediate pose estimation [7]. This often
entails extra steps that require more time and resources and
is still limited to video input. Therefore a more explicit approach is desirable.
3D sensors provide an alternative modality in the form of
point clouds sampled on the environment. Despite the vast
research on 3D vision and learning, even static 3D point
cloud datasets are significantly smaller than their RGB im-

19978

