This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual DETRs for Multi-Label Temporal Action Detection
Yuhan Zhu1* Guozhen Zhang1* Jing Tan2 Gangshan Wu1 Limin Wang1,3,†
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 Shanghai AI Lab
https://github.com/MCG-NJU/DualDETR

Abstract
Temporal Action Detection (TAD) aims to identify the
action boundaries and the corresponding category within
untrimmed videos. Inspired by the success of DETR in
object detection, several methods have adapted the querybased framework to the TAD task. However, these approaches primarily followed DETR to predict actions at the
instance level (i.e., identify each action by its center point),
leading to sub-optimal boundary localization. To address
this issue, we propose a new Dual-level query-based TAD
framework, namely DualDETR, to detect actions from both
instance-level and boundary-level. Decoding at different
levels requires semantics of different granularity, therefore
we introduce a two-branch decoding structure. This structure builds distinctive decoding processes for different levels, facilitating explicit capture of temporal cues and semantics at each level. On top of the two-branch design, we
present a joint query initialization strategy to align queries
from both levels. Specifically, we leverage encoder proposals to match queries from each level in a one-to-one manner. Then, the matched queries are initialized using position
and content prior from the matched action proposal. The
aligned dual-level queries can refine the matched proposal
with complementary cues during subsequent decoding. We
evaluate DualDETR on three challenging multi-label TAD
benchmarks. The experimental results demonstrate the superior performance of DualDETR to the existing state-ofthe-art methods, achieving a substantial improvement under
det-mAP and delivering impressive results under seg-mAP.

1. Introduction
Temporal Action Detection (TAD) [4, 13, 25–27, 45, 55, 64]
is one of the fundamental tasks in video understanding [10–
12, 22, 44, 50, 57, 59, 62, 65], with a wide range of
real-world applications in video editing [18], sports ana*: Equal Contribution. †: Corresponding author (lmwang@nju.edu.cn).

: Match&Initialization
: One-to-One Align

: “TalkToCamera”
: “GolfSwing”

: Encoder Feature
(After Partition)

Boundary Level (Start)
Boundary Level (End)
Instance Level

Boundary
Query Group

Boundary-Level
Decoding
Mutual
Refine

Instance
Query Group

Instance-Level
Decoding

Proposals

Scores

Figure 1. DualDETR operates at both the instance level and
boundary level (start, end) by using two groups of queries, with
each group corresponding to one level. To capture specific semantics at each level, we introduce a two-branch decoding structure.
This structure separates the decoding process for each level, allowing queries from each group to focus on their corresponding
encoder feature map. Furthermore, we propose a query alignment
strategy equipped with joint initialization. This strategy aligns the
queries from two groups by matching them with the same detection goal, as denoted by the bidirectional arrow.

lytics [16, 23], surveillance footage analysis [56], and autonomous driving [1]. TAD aims to identify the starting
and ending time of human actions, and simultaneously recognize the corresponding action categories. To address the
complex real-world application scenario for TAD, we focus on the complicated Multi-label Temporal Action Detection (Multi-label TAD) [6–8, 46, 48], where diverse actions
from different categories co-exist in untrimmed videos, often with significant temporal overlaps.
Inspired by the success of DETR [2] in object detection, several approaches [21, 31, 40, 45–47] adopted the
query-based detection pipeline and used a sparse set of
learnable decoder queries to directly predict actions without
NMS post-processing. These approaches commonly follow DETR to detect actions from the instance level. They
identify each action by its center point and predict duration
based on offsets. Although instance-level detection bene-

18559

