This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SIRA: Scalable Inter-frame Relation and Association for Radar Perception
Ryoma Yataka1,2 , Pu Wang1 , Petros Boufounos1 , Ryuhei Takahashi2
1
Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
2
Information Technology R&D Center, Mitsubishi Electric Corporation, Kanagawa 247-8501, Japan
{yataka,pwang,petrosb}@merl.com, Takahashi.Ryuhei@ab.MitsubishiElectric.co.jp

1. Introduction
Automotive perception involves the interpretation of the external driving environment and internal vehicle cabin conditions with an array of perception sensors to achieve robust safety and driving autonomy [40]. Compared to optical camera and lidar sensors, radar is cost-effective, friendly
to sensor maintenance and calibration, and has distinct advantages in providing long-range perception capabilities in
adverse weather and lighting conditions [59].
Nevertheless, a notable limitation of radar-based automotive perception is its low spatial resolution in the azimuth
and elevation domains, and its inherent noise including multipath reflection, ghost targets, and motion blur. As a result, its ability to detect and track objects lags behind the

✔

✔

ID: 1

ID: 2 ID: 1

TempoRadar

Conventional radar feature extraction faces limitations
due to low spatial resolution, noise, multipath reflection,
the presence of ghost targets, and motion blur. Such limitations can be exacerbated by nonlinear object motion, particularly from an ego-centric viewpoint. It becomes evident
that to address these challenges, the key lies in exploiting
temporal feature relation over an extended horizon and enforcing spatial motion consistency for effective association.
To this end, this paper proposes SIRA (Scalable Inter-frame
Relation and Association) with two designs. First, inspired
by Swin Transformer, we introduce extended temporal relation, generalizing the existing temporal relation layer from
two consecutive frames to multiple inter-frames with temporally regrouped window attention for scalability. Second,
we propose motion consistency track with the concept of a
pseudo-tracklet generated from observational data for better trajectory prediction and subsequent object association.
Our approach achieves 58.11 mAP@0.5 for oriented object
detection and 47.79 MOTA for multiple object tracking on
the Radiate dataset, surpassing previous state-of-the-art by
a margin of +4.11 mAP@0.5 and +9.94 MOTA, respectively.

SIRA

Abstract

✔

ID: 1

ID: 2

✔

ID: 1

✘

ID: 1 ID: 2

ID: 1

ID: 2

Figure 1. Conventional radar perception pipelines such as TempoRadar [27] (Bottom Row) rely on a limited number (one or two) of
frames and the limited time horizon may lead to incorrect featurelevel and object-level association (e.g., t = T − 1) and propagate
to subsequent frames (e.g., t = T ). In contrast, SIRA (Top Row)
accounts for joint spatio-temporal consistency over an extended
temporal horizon (e.g., all 3 frames here), allowing for more accurate association in nonlinear motion scenarios even in an egocentric viewpoint.

requirements for fully autonomous driving capabilities. Recently, standalone radar-only perception has been investigated in [1, 14, 27, 28, 38, 39, 60]. Li et al. [27] proposed a
framework called TempoRadar to study temporal attention
to features from 2 ego-centric bird-eye-view (BEV) radar
frames. It has shown promising performance gains when
evaluated on the large-scale open Radiate [47] dataset.
However, such limitations can be exacerbated by nonlinear object motion, particularly from an ego-centric BEV.
In particular, low frame rates result in significant influence
from the nonlinearity of object motion, leading to frequent
tracking errors. Conventional radar perception pipelines
such as TempoRadar enables prediction based on information from the previous frame, but in the case of objects with
fast and nonlinear motion within radar frames, such information is inadequate (Bottom of Fig. 1). Although applying
Kalman filter (KF [24])-based algorithms [4, 8, 12, 62], is
possible, radar perception is difficult to relate accurately due

15024

