This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InstantBooth: Personalized Text-to-Image Generation without Test-Time
Finetuning
Jing Shi∗

Wei Xiong∗ Zhe Lin Hyun Joon Jung
Adobe Inc.
∗ Equal Contribution

{jingshi,wxiong,zlin,hjung}@adobe.com

Input 5 images of person

Input 2 images of cat

A photo of "!
woman in the
swimming pool

A photo of "!
woman, backview,
in the sunset

A photo of "!
A photo of mysterious
woman opening
the arm besides the A photo of "! woman "! woman witcher at
night
blue sea
piloting a fight jet

A photo of "! cat
swimming in the
swimming pool

A photo of "! cat in
a bucket

A Ukiyo-e painting
of "! cat

A charcoal sketch of A photo of "! cat as
"! cat
a bull dog

Figure 1. Personalized images generated by our model given different prompts. On both the “person” and “cat” categories, our model can
generate text-aligned, identity-preserved, and high-fidelity images of the input concept. V̂ is a placeholder word representing the input
subject. We name our model InstantBooth as it does not require test-time model finetuning.

Abstract
Recent advances in personalized image generation have
enabled pre-trained text-to-image models to learn new concepts from specific image sets. However, these methods often necessitate extensive test-time finetuning for each new
concept, leading to inefficiencies in both time and scalability. To address this challenge, we introduce InstantBooth, an innovative approach leveraging existing textto-image models for instantaneous text-guided image personalization, eliminating the need for test-time finetuning.
This efficiency is achieved through two primary innovations. Firstly, we utilize an image encoder that transforms
input images into a global embedding to grasp the general
concept. Secondly, we integrate new adapter layers into
* Listing order of the first two authors is random. Both Jing and Wei
have made significant contributions to the idea design, experiment implementation, result evaluation, and paper writing.

the pre-trained model, enhancing its ability to capture intricate identity details while maintaining language coherence. Significantly, our model is trained exclusively on textimage pairs, without reliance on concept-specific paired images. When benchmarked against existing finetuning-based
personalization techniques like DreamBooth and TextualInversion, InstantBooth not only shows comparable proficiency in aligning language with image, maintaining image quality, and preserving the identity but also boasts
a 100-fold increase in generation speed. Project Page:
https://jshi31.github.io/InstantBooth/

1. Introduction
Recent advances in personalized image generation have enabled text-to-image models [2, 4, 7, 8, 10, 14, 16, 24, 27,
28, 34] to learn a new concept from a small set of images
then create images of that concept in different poses, perspectives, styles, and scenes. Fig. 1 shows examples gener-

8543

