This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Person-in-WiFi 3D: End-to-End Multi-Person 3D Pose Estimation with Wi-Fi
Kangwei Yan1 , Fei Wang1 ,* Bo Qian1 , Han Ding1 , Jinsong Han2 , Xing Wei1
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
2
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China
{yankangwei,qb90531}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn {feynmanw,dinghan,weixing}@xjtu.edu.cn,hanjinsong@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Wi-Fi signals, in contrast to cameras, offer privacy protection and occlusion resilience for some practical scenarios such as smart homes, elderly care, and virtual reality.
Recent years have seen remarkable progress in the estimation of single-person 2D pose, single-person 3D pose,
and multi-person 2D pose. This paper takes a step forward by introducing Person-in-WiFi 3D, a pioneering Wi-Fi
system that accomplishes multi-person 3D pose estimation.
Person-in-WiFi 3D has two main updates. Firstly, it has a
greater number of Wi-Fi devices to enhance the capability
for capturing spatial reflections from multiple individuals.
Secondly, it leverages the Transformer for end-to-end estimation. Compared to its predecessor, Person-in-WiFi 3D is
storage-efficient and fast. We deployed a proof-of-concept
system in 4m × 3.5m areas and collected a dataset of over
97K frames with seven volunteers. Person-in-WiFi 3D attains 3D joint localization errors of 91.7mm (1-person),
108.1mm (2-person), and 125.3mm (3-person), comparable
to cameras and millimeter-wave radars. The project page
is at https://aiotgroup.github.io/Person-in-WiFi-3D.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation is a critical technology with broad
applications in areas like elderly care, virtual reality, and
smart homes. To achieve precise pose estimation, researchers have explored various methods, including cameras [2, 6, 18, 26, 33], radars [1, 13, 15, 23, 39], and Wi-Fi
signals [10, 21, 22, 28, 29, 41]. Among these, camera-based
solutions are most extensively studied, supported by a large
research community and a wealth of labeled and unlabeled
data. This has led to the development of well-known frameworks like convolutional pose machines [33], OpenPose [2],
AlphaPose [6], Hourglasses network [18], HRNet [26], and
more. However, camera solutions are not always applicable due to their dependence on proper lighting conditions
* Corresponding author.

and field of view. They also struggle in severe occlusion
scenarios. Additionally, cameras capturing sensitive information such as identity and appearance can lead to privacy
concerns in scenarios where privacy is paramount.
Unlike camera-based solutions, Wi-Fi methods are resilient to occlusions and do not capture sensitive personal
details, making them well-suited for indoor scenarios. Current Wi-Fi solutions have advanced in estimating singleperson 2D/3D poses. This process involves a regression
problem, mapping Wi-Fi signal variations, caused by an individual’s movements and presence, to their corresponding
2D/3D pose coordinates. For instance, WiSPPN [28] predicts 2D keypoint coordinates using pose adjacent matrix
similarity loss. Similarly, MetaFi++ [41] estimates 2D coordinates employing mean squared error loss. In singleperson 3D pose estimation, solutions like WiPose [10],
Winect[21], and GoPose [22] also utilize mean squared error to learn 3D coordinates. In the case of Wi-Fi-based
multi-person pose estimation, it’s challenging to distinctly
segment individuals from 1-dimensional (1D) Wi-Fi signals. Addressing this, Person-in-WiFi [29] adopts techniques from OpenPose [2], initially regressing keypoint
heatmaps and part affinity fields, and then associating these
with individuals. One alternative approach is Densepose
from Wi-Fi [7], which transforms 1D Wi-Fi signals to
1280×720×3 image-like tensors under the supervision of
synchronized images. This method may favor overfitting
colors in training scenes, such as the color of subjects’
clothing and surrounding objects, as Wi-Fi signals do not
inherently capture color information.
Up to now, multi-person 3D pose estimation using WiFi signals remains an unsolved challenge. In our initial attempt to evolve Person-in-WiFi into a 3D version for 14
keypoints, we represented multi-person poses with 3D keypoint heatmaps ∈ 14 × 64 × 64 × 64 and 3D part affinity
fields ∈ 42 × 64 × 64 × 64. We replaced 2D operations, like
convolutions in Person-in-WiFi, with 3D counterparts, and
modified the pose-processing algorithms to produce 3D coordinates from the 3D heatmaps and fields. However, this
deep network failed to converge. We identified six major

969

