This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Teeth-SEG: An Efficient Instance Segmentation Framework for Orthodontic
Treatment based on Multi-Scale Aggregation and Anthropic Prior Knowledge
Bo Zou *
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Shaofeng Wang *
Capital Medical Universty
Beijing, China

Hao Liu
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

zoub21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

2939108747@ccmu.edu.cn

liuh22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Gaoyue Sun
Imperial College London
London, England

Yajie Wang
Tsinghua University, LargeV .Inc
Beijing, China

FeiFei Zuo
LargeV .Inc
Beijing, China

gaoyue.sun22@imperial.ac.uk

yj-wang18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

zuofeifei@largev.com

Chengbin Quan
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Youjian Zhao †
Tsinghua University, Zhongguancun Laboratory
Beijing, China

quancb@tsinghua.edu.cn

zhaoyoujian@tsinghua.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Abstract
Teeth localization, segmentation, and labeling in 2D images have great potential in modern dentistry to enhance
dental diagnostics, treatment planning, and populationbased studies on oral health. However, general instance
segmentation frameworks are incompetent due to 1) the subtle differences between some teeth’ shapes (e.g., maxillary
first premolar and second premolar), 2) the teeth’s position
and shape variation across subjects, and 3) the presence of
abnormalities in the dentition (e.g., caries and edentulism).
To address these problems, we propose a ViT-based framework named TeethSEG, which consists of stacked MultiScale Aggregation (MSA) blocks and an Anthropic Prior
Knowledge (APK) layer. Specifically, to compose the two
modules, we design a unique permutation-based upscaler
to ensure high efficiency while establishing clear segmentation boundaries with multi-head self/cross-gating layers
to emphasize particular semantics meanwhile maintaining
the divergence between token embeddings. Besides, we collect the first open-sourced intraoral image dataset IO150K,
which comprises over 150k intraoral photos, and all photos
are annotated by orthodontists using a human-machine hybrid algorithm. Experiments on IO150K demonstrate that
our TeethSEG outperforms the state-of-the-art segmentation models on dental image segmentation.
∗ Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

Our code and dataset will be available at https://zoubo9034.
github.io/TeethSEG/

Malocclusion, caries, and periodontal disease are the three
most common oral cavity diseases, especially the global incidence of malocclusion is a staggering 82.2% [8]. Malocclusion is the misalignment between teeth, jaws, and craniofacial bones caused by genetic or environmental factors during a child’s growth. According to the World Dental Federation (FDI), approximately 3.5 billion people worldwide
suffer from malocclusion [14], which affects oral health, increasing the risk of caries, periodontal disease, and maxillofacial trauma, also affecting chewing, swallowing, breathing, and pronunciation. Orthodontic treatment is the primary means to cure malocclusion. It utilizes an orthodontic
appliance to exert force on teeth in specific directions so
that teeth can gradually move and finally achieve the goal
of aligning the teeth, reaching the optimal occlusal function,
and improving the appearance of the maxillofacial area.
The use of digital technology in oral orthodontics [15,
18, 24–28, 46] has become a popular trend. One of the
most widely used applications is integrating artificial intelligence technology to segment oral models and recognize
tooth positions automatically. This integration significantly
improves the efficiency of treatment plan design and reduces labor costs. Currently, all publicly available intraoral
scan data (e.g., [6, 11]) and most teeth segmentation techniques [2, 12, 13, 29, 39] are in 3D space. Although 3D
data provides more accurate maxillofacial structure recordings of patients, collecting 3D data is expensive as it requires costly equipment and trained professionals. Furthermore, processing 3D data is challenging and requires high

11601

