This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMA: Multi-Modal Adapter for Vision-Language Models
Lingxiao Yang1 , Ru-Yuan Zhang2 , Yanchen Wang3 , Xiaohua Xie1*
1
Sun Yat-sen University, 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 3 Stanford University
{yanglx9, xiexiaoh6}@mail.sysu.edu.cn,ruyuanzhang@gmail.com, ppwang@stanford.edu

Abstract
Pre-trained Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have
served as excellent foundation models for transfer learning in diverse downstream tasks. However, tuning VLMs
for few-shot generalization tasks faces a discrimination —
generalization dilemma, i.e., general knowledge should be
preserved and task-specific knowledge should be fine-tuned.
How to precisely identify these two types of representations
remains a challenge. In this paper, we propose a MultiModal Adapter (MMA) for VLMs to improve the alignment
between representations from text and vision branches.
MMA aggregates features from different branches into a
shared feature space so that gradients can be communicated
across branches. To determine how to incorporate MMA,
we systematically analyze the discriminability and generalizability of features across diverse datasets in both the vision and language branches, and find that (1) higher layers contain discriminable dataset-specific knowledge, while
lower layers contain more generalizable knowledge, and (2)
language features are more discriminable than visual features, and there are large semantic gaps between the features of the two modalities, especially in the lower layers.
Therefore, we only incorporate MMA to a few higher layers of transformers to achieve an optimal balance between
discrimination and generalization. We evaluate the effectiveness of our approach on three tasks: generalization to
novel classes, novel target datasets, and domain generalization. Compared to many state-of-the-art methods, our MMA
achieves leading performance in all evaluations. Code is at
https://github.com/ZjjConan/Multi-Modal-Adapter

1. Introduction
Deep networks trained on large-scale datasets [10, 81] have
greatly boosted the performance on many vision tasks, such
as image classification [13, 19, 27, 37, 56, 64, 66], object detection [17, 24, 53, 54, 83], semantic segmentation
[6, 42, 63, 79], and person re-identification [59, 69, 75, 76].
* Corresponding Author

Vision-Language Models (VLMs) [1, 28, 30, 50, 68, 70,
71, 74] have recently been introduced as a class of foundation models. They adopt a holistic approach by jointly
processing visual and textual information, thereby fostering a shared understanding of the complex interplay between images and language. In order to establish a cohesive
representation space, where positive pairs (i.e., related images and texts) are brought together and negative pairs (i.e.,
unrelated instances) are separated, VLMs are often trained
from extensive web-scale datasets, e.g., 400 million imagetext pairs used in Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining
(CLIP) [50]. After training on such large-scale data, VLMs
often show good generalization ability across diverse downstream tasks without task-specific tuning.
Despite their effectiveness, the massive number of parameters of VLMs makes it difficult to fine-tune them for
downstream tasks, especially when only a few data are
available in the target domains (i.e., few-shot generalization settings). To effectively adapt these pre-trained VLMs,
prompt engineering [50] has become pivotal. Prompt engineering refers to the process of crafting input queries to
guide models toward desired outputs. For example, in CLIP
[50], a collection of handcrafted text prompts, such as “a
photo of a <category>” or “a bad photo of a <category>”,
are input for the text encoder to compute category-wise embeddings. Then, these embeddings are matched with the
visual embeddings encoded by the image encoder to predict
the output class. However, designing good prompts requires
rich expert knowledge and enormous time. To circumvent
this, many researchers add learnable prompts either into the
text [4, 67, 84, 85] or the image encoder [51, 61], or both
of them [33]. During model training, only the prompts are
optimized, while the whole pre-trained VLMs are frozen.
Therefore, prompt learning has gained prominence as it offers a more practical approach to tailor pre-trained VLMs
for different downstream tasks.
Besides prompt learning, an alternative approach is to
construct lightweight modules, called as adapters, to adapt
large-scale pre-trained models [5, 7, 8, 16, 25, 26, 45, 58] to
different downstream tasks. In contrast to prompt learning,
adapters are shallow networks that enhance model gener-

23826

