This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AnySkill: Learning Open-Vocabulary Physical Skill for Interactive Agents
Jieming Cui1,2˚ , Tengyu Liu2˚ , Nian Liu2,3˚ , Yaodong Yang1 , Yixin Zhu1, , Siyuan Huang2,
1

Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
3

2

National Key Laboratory of General Artificial Intelligence, BIGAI

School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications

https://anyskill.github.io
Sit down, bent torso,
legs folded at knees

Raise two arms

Kick the white ball
(side view)

Kick, left leg forward,
right leg retreats

Kick the white ball
(front view)

Waltz dance, left foot
step backward, right
hand extends

Raise arm, open the door
(rear view)

Figure 1. Diverse motions generated by AnySkill conditioned on various instructions. When provided with an open-vocabulary text
description of a motion, AnySkill is adept at learning natural and flexible motions that closely align with the description, facilitated
by an image-based reward mechanism. Additionally, AnySkill demonstrates proficiency in learning interactions with dynamic objects,
showcasing its versatile motion generation capabilities.

Abstract
Traditional approaches in physics-based motion generation, centered around imitation learning and reward shaping,
often struggle to adapt to new scenarios. To tackle this limitation, we propose AnySkill, a novel hierarchical method
that learns physically plausible interactions following openvocabulary instructions. Our approach begins by developing
a set of atomic actions via a low-level controller trained
via imitation learning. Upon receiving an open-vocabulary
textual instruction, AnySkill employs a high-level policy
that selects and integrates these atomic actions to maximize
the CLIP similarity between the agent’s rendered images
and the text. An important feature of our method is the use of

image-based rewards for the high-level policy, which allows
the agent to learn interactions with objects without manual
reward engineering. We demonstrate AnySkill’s capability to generate realistic and natural motion sequences in
response to unseen instructions of varying lengths, marking
it the first method capable of open-vocabulary physical skill
learning for interactive humanoid agents.

1. Introduction
Confronted with a soccer ball, an individual might engage
in various actions such as kicking, dribbling, passing, or
shooting. This interaction capability is feasible even for
someone who has only observed soccer games, never having

852

