This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TokenHMR: Advancing Human Mesh Recovery with
a Tokenized Pose Representation
Sai Kumar Dwivedi1, * Yu Sun2,∗
1

Priyanka Patel1

Yao Feng1,2,3

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

2

Michael J. Black1

Meshcapade

3

ETH Zurich

Figure 1. Existing methods for 3D human pose and shape (HPS) regression (e.g. HMR2.0 [11]) estimate bodies that are either imagealigned or have accurate 3D pose, but not both. We show that this is a fundamental trade-off for existing methods. To address this,
TokenHMR, introduces a novel loss, Threshold-Adaptive Loss Scaling (TALS), and a discrete token-based pose representation of 3D pose.
With these, TokenHMR achieves state-of-the-art accuracy on multiple in-the-wild 3D benchmarks. The circled regions compare poses.

Abstract
We address the problem of regressing 3D human pose
and shape from a single image, with a focus on 3D accuracy. The current best methods leverage large datasets
of 3D pseudo-ground-truth (p-GT) and 2D keypoints, leading to robust performance. With such methods, however,
we observe a paradoxical decline in 3D pose accuracy with
increasing 2D accuracy. This is caused by biases in the
p-GT and the use of an approximate camera projection
model. We quantify the error induced by current camera
models and show that fitting 2D keypoints and p-GT accurately causes incorrect 3D poses. Our analysis defines
the invalid distances within which minimizing 2D and p-GT
losses is detrimental. We use this to formulate a new loss,
“Threshold-Adaptive Loss Scaling” (TALS), that penalizes
gross 2D and p-GT errors but not smaller ones. With such a
* Equal contribution

loss, there are many 3D poses that could equally explain the
2D evidence. To reduce this ambiguity we need a prior over
valid human poses but such priors can introduce unwanted
bias. To address this, we exploit a tokenized representation
of human pose and reformulate the problem as token prediction. This restricts the estimated poses to the space of valid
poses, effectively improving robustness to occlusion. Extensive experiments on the EMDB and 3DPW datasets show
that our reformulated loss and tokenization allows us to
train on in-the-wild data while improving 3D accuracy over
the state-of-the-art. Our models and code are available for
research at https://tokenhmr.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
We address the problem of regressing 3D human pose
and shape (HPS) from a single image. Recent methods [3, 11, 31, 48] are increasingly accurate on this task.

1323

