This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.
Textual Expression

A photo of a clear, unobstructed, and frontal face
with exaggerated expression under extreme lighting,
q
which is of [ hi ] quality.

hiq = [bad, poor, fair, good, excellent]

Joint Learning with Multi-Quality Factors
CLIP Embedding Space
Blur

ET

Confidence Calibration
MLP

Merged-Factor
Distribution
Confidence-Calibrated
Quality Distribution

Occlusion

Confidence

Refine

CLIP

CLIB-FIQA: Face Image Quality Assessment with Confidence Calibration
CLIP

EI

Lighting

Focal Loss LMFL

Predicted Quality
Distribution

Text Encoder

Multilayer perceptron

Fu-Zhao Ou1
Chongyi Li2, 3
Shiqi Wang1
Sam Kwong4
1
2
City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, China
Nankai University, Tianjin, China
3
4
G
NKIARI (Shenzhen-Futian), Shenzhen, China
Lingnan University, Hong Kong SAR, China
EMD Loss LEMD

!

Dataset

Face Image

Quality Anchor

Quality Distribution

FR Classification Space
fuzhao.ou@my.cityu.edu.hk
lichongyi@nankai.edu.cn

Image Encoder

Text Embedding

Well-trained
FR Model

Image Embedding

Frozen

Positive Center

Learnable

Nearest Negative
Center

shiqwang@cityu.edu.hk

samkwong@ln.edu.hk

https://github.com/oufuzhao/CLIB-FIQA

Abstract
Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA) is pivotal for
guaranteeing the accuracy of face recognition in unconstrained environments. Recent progress in deep qualityfitting-based methods that train models to align with quality anchors, has shown promise in FIQA. However, these
methods heavily depend on a recognition model to yield
quality anchors and indiscriminately treat the confidence of
inaccurate anchors as equivalent to that of accurate ones
during the FIQA model training, leading to a fitting bottleneck issue. This paper seeks a solution by putting forward the Confidence-Calibrated Face Image Quality Assessment (CLIB-FIQA) approach, underpinned by the synergistic interplay between the quality anchors and objective
quality factors such as blur, pose, expression, occlusion,
and illumination. Specifically, we devise a joint learning
framework built upon the vision-language alignment model,
which leverages the joint distribution with multiple quality
factors to facilitate the quality fitting of the FIQA model.
Furthermore, to alleviate the issue of the model placing excessive trust in inaccurate quality anchors, we propose a
confidence calibration method to correct the quality distribution by exploiting to the fullest extent of these objective
quality factors characterized as the merged-factor distribution during training. Experimental results on eight datasets
reveal the superior performance of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA) aims at predicting
the quality of face images to reflect the variability in sample recognizability, thereby ensuring consistent accuracy for
face recognition systems in uncontrolled real-world environments [7, 47, 50]. In line with standards for biometric quality assessment [2, 19], face recognizability is influThis work is partially supported by the Hong Kong Innovation and
Technology Commission (InnoHK Project CIMDA), the Research Grant
Council (RGC) of Hong Kong General Research Fund (GRF) under Grant
11209819, Grant 11203820, and Grant 11203220, the CityU Applied Research Grant 9667255, and in part by the Strategic Interdisciplinary Research Grant Project 7020055.

Proposed Scheme
Quality
Factors

Joint Distribution of
Quality Factors

Merged-Factor
Distribution

Occlusion
Blur
Pose

FIQA
Model
Quality Anchor

FR
Model

Quality FittingDriven Solution

Quality
Distribution

ConfidenceCalibrated Quality
Distribution

Figure 1. Illustration of the core idea of previous and the proposed FIQA schemes. Previous Quality Fitting-Driven Solution
only considers the quality anchor provided by the dependent Face
Recognition (FR) model. Our Proposed Scheme engages various
quality factors to both facilitate the training of the FIQA model
and calibrate the confidence of the quality distribution.

enced by specific quality factors, such as blur, pose, expression, occlusion, and illumination. These quality factors play
an essential role in the effectiveness of recognition systems
and are also key considerations in FIQA.
Nevertheless, in the era of deep learning, the evolution
of FIQA is primarily shaped by strategies that exploit quality anchors for quality fitting [8, 12, 13, 21, 44, 64] or
compute quality scores derived from the embedding property [5, 6, 38, 55, 56]. Herein, although quality-fitting-based
FIQA training schemes have demonstrated promising performance [8, 44, 64] in recent years, they rest upon an assumption during training that quality anchors obtained from
the dependent recognition model possess the same level of
confidence. Regrettably, this assumption is flawed due to inconsistent quality variation among different classes within
the training set. For instance, for samples with relatively
low intra-class quality variation, their quality anchors may
tend to be overall higher because of the minor fluctuations
in intra-class recognition features. These inaccurate anchors
will further lead to the fitting bottleneck challenge during
the training of the FIQA model.
A potentially effective strategy is to utilize quality factors to aid in the training of the FIQA model. This is because the judgment of quality factors can be executed independently from the recognition model, thereby offering
objective quality information [3, 30]. In the prior deep
method, FaceQnet [21], diverse quality factors are collated

1694

