This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SODA: Bottleneck Diffusion Models for Representation Learning
Drew A. Hudson⋆
Andrew Jaegle

Daniel Zoran

James L. McClelland

Mateusz Malinowski
Loic Matthey

Andrew K. Lampinen

Felix Hill

Alexander Lerchner

Google DeepMind

Figure 1. Latent Interpolations. SODA learns to encode images into compact latent representations. By traversing its latent space, we
can interpolate between images, morphing from one image category to another and smoothly transitioning between semantic attributes.

Abstract
We introduce SODA, a self-supervised diffusion model,
designed for representation learning. The model incorporates an image encoder, which distills a source view into a
compact representation, that, in turn, guides the generation
of related novel views. We show that by imposing a tight
bottleneck between the encoder and a denoising decoder,
and leveraging novel view synthesis as a self-supervised objective, we can turn diffusion models into strong representation learners, capable of capturing visual semantics in an
unsupervised manner. To the best of our knowledge, SODA
is the first diffusion model to succeed at ImageNet linearprobe classification, and, at the same time, it accomplishes
reconstruction, editing and synthesis tasks across a wide
range of datasets. Further investigation reveals the disentangled nature of its emergent latent space, that serves as an
effective interface to control and manipulate the produced
images. All in all, we aim to shed light on the exciting and
promising potential of diffusion models, not only for image
generation, but also for learning rich and robust representations. See our website at soda-diffusion.github.io.

1. Introduction
What I cannot create, I do not understand.
– Richard P. Feynman

Synthesis, the ability to create, is considered among the
highest manifestations of learning [1, 2]. As opposed to
passive analysis of a text or an image, conceiving them out
of thin air involves profound understanding of the underly⋆ Main contributor. The paper presents the findings of Drew’s internship project at Google DeepMind, hosted by Felix Hill and Alexander Lerchner. Contact: dorarad@google.com; lerchner@google.com.

ing factors and intricate generative processes that give rise
to the final product [3]. Indeed, learning to write in a new
language is often more challenging than reading it. Figuring
out the solution to a math problem is fundamentally harder
than verifying it [4]. And just as the chef learns more about
the culinary arts than the diner to prepare a tasty meal, and
the novelist knows more about narrative structures than the
reader to tell a good story, the artist better grasps perspective
and composition to craft a breathtaking masterpiece.
Analogously, in AI, the recent years have witnessed remarkable progress at the generative domain, with largescale diffusion modeling proving to be a powerful and flexible technique that can create vivid imagery of astonishing
realism and incredible detail. And yet, while the vast majority of research harnesses these models for the straightforward goal of synthesis or editing alone [5–17], only little
attention has been given to their representational capacity
[18–20], leaving this promising direction rather unexplored.
Surely, models that can weave from scratch such rich depictions of high fidelity, likely learn much along the way about
the underlying properties, processes, and components that
make up the resulting pictures. How then can we leverage
this untapped potential of diffusion models for the purpose
of representation learning, and extract the knowledge they
acquire for the benefit of downstream tasks?
Motivated to achieve this aim, we present SODA, a selfsupervised diffusion model, designed for both perception
and synthesis. It couples an image encoder with the classic
diffusion decoder [5], both trained in tandem for novel view
generation [21] – a task we choose to employ here, not only
for its own sake, but as a self-supervised objective. The
encoder transforms an input view into a concise latent representation, which then guides the denoising of an output
view, by modulating the decoder’s activations.
This setup introduces a desirable information bottleneck

23115

