This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Intensity-Robust Autofocus for Spike Camera
Yongsheng Xiao2,† You Zhou3 Zhen Cheng4 Bo Xiong1, * Zhaofei Yu1
Tiejun Huang1
1
Peking University Nanchang Hangkong University2 Nanjing University3 Tsinghua University4
Project page: https://github.com/Onetism/saf-code
Zhiyuan Ye2

Spike cameras, a novel neuromorphic visual sensor, can
capture full-time spatial information through spike stream,
offering ultra-high temporal resolution and an extensive dynamic range. Autofocus control (AC) plays a pivotal role
in a camera to efficiently capture information in challenging real-world scenarios. Nevertheless, due to disparities
in data modality and information characteristics compared
to frame stream and event stream, the current lack of efficient AC methods has made it challenging for spike cameras to adapt to intricate real-world conditions. To address this challenge, we introduce a spike-based autofocus framework that includes a spike-specific focus measure
called spike dispersion (SD), which effectively mitigates the
influence of variations in scene light intensity during the
focusing process by leveraging the spike camera’s ability
to record full-time spatial light intensity. Additionally, the
framework integrates a fast search strategy called spikebased golden fast search (SGFS), allowing rapid focal positioning without the need for a complete focus range traversal. To validate the performance of our method, we have
collected a spike-based autofocus dataset (SAD) containing synthetic data and real-world data under varying scene
brightness and motion scenarios. Experimental results on
these datasets demonstrate that our method offers state-ofthe-art accuracy and efficiency. Furthermore, experiments
with data captured under varying scene brightness levels
illustrate the robustness of our method to changes in light
intensity during the focusing process.

* X.Bo is the corresponding author. † Contributed equally. This
work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China (Grant No.62371006, 62261040, 62176003, 62088102, 62071219),
the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (Grant No.2023TQ0006,
GZC20230057), Beijing Nova Program (Grant No.20230484362)
and Beijing Natural Science Foundation (Grant No.3242008).
1

qing1286765276@gmail.com, {xiongbo, yuzf12,
tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn, 2 {2204085400063@stu.,
xysfly@}nchu.edu.cn, 3 zhouyou@nju.edu.cn,
4
zcheng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

1. Introduction
The spike camera is an innovative neuro-inspired visual
sensor developed based on the sampling mechanism of the
fovea centralis region in primate retinas [1], providing exceptionally high temporal resolution and a broad dynamic
range. This makes it well-suitable for various tasks in
high-speed imaging [2] and computational vision [1], such
as optical flow estimation [3], depth estimation [4], superresolution [5], and object tracking [6]. The success of these
tasks relies heavily on the camera’s capability to capture
reliable information, a factor significantly influenced by
the camera’s focusing performance. Generally, images
obtained at the focused position contain clearer texture
information compared to those at defocused positions
(Fig.
1d).1 A robust autofocus control (AC) is crucial for
Figure
enabling the spike camera to achieve reliable perception in
high-speed motion scenarios.
(a)
Spike
camera

Control system

Light
source

(b)

Fluctuating
Intensity

Light
Intensity

Abstract

( )

(c)
Scenes
Varifocal
lens photons
(d)
spike

image

Defocused result

Spike-based
Focus Search
Optimal Focus
Position

Spike-based
Focus
Measure

Changqing Su1,†

spike

image

Focus result

Lens position
spike

image

Defocused result

Figure 1. (a) A spike camera is equipped with a varifocal lens controlled by the control system, and can continuously record variations in scene illumination, emitting spike at a specific frequency.
(b) The temporal changes in scene illumination, which determine
the spike emission frequency of the spike camera, typically exhibit
fluctuations. (c) The proposed spike-based measure and spikebased focus search methods can still perform well in scenarios
with fluctuations in scene illumination. (d) The intensity of light at
the defocused position is higher compared to the focused position,
and the focused spike image is sharper and more informative than
the defocused one.

25018

