This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain-Agnostic Mutual Prompting for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Zhekai Du1 , Xinyao Li1 , Fengling Li2 , Ke Lu1 , Lei Zhu3 , Jingjing Li 1
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China;
2
University of Technology Sydney; 3 Tongji University
{zhekaid, xinyao326}@std.uestc.edu.cn, lijin117@yeah.net

Abstract
Conventional Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA)
strives to minimize distribution discrepancy between domains, which neglects to harness rich semantics from data
and struggles to handle complex domain shifts. A promising
technique is to leverage the knowledge of large-scale pretrained vision-language models for more guided adaptation. Despite some endeavors, current methods often learn
textual prompts to embed domain semantics for source and
target domains separately and perform classiﬁcation within
each domain, limiting cross-domain knowledge transfer.
Moreover, prompting only the language branch lacks ﬂexibility to adapt both modalities dynamically. To bridge
this gap, we propose Domain-Agnostic Mutual Prompting (DAMP) to exploit domain-invariant semantics by mutually aligning visual and textual embeddings. Speciﬁcally, the image contextual information is utilized to prompt
the language branch in a domain-agnostic and instanceconditioned way. Meanwhile, visual prompts are imposed based on the domain-agnostic textual prompt to elicit
domain-invariant visual embeddings. These two branches
of prompts are learned mutually with a cross-attention module and regularized with a semantic-consistency loss and
an instance-discrimination contrastive loss. Experiments
on three UDA benchmarks demonstrate the superiority of
DAMP over state-of-the-art approaches 1 .

1. Introduction
Labeling scarcity is a perennial problem in deep learning,
as collecting abundant labeled data can be expensive, timeconsuming, or even infeasible [31, 58]. Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) serves as a promising approach to
leverage the knowledge from a well-labeled source domain
to beneﬁt the task on an unlabeled target domain, where the
two domains have similar semantics but different data distributions [7, 16, 45].
1 Code is available at: https://github.com/TL-UESTC/DAMP.

Limited knowledge transfer

Existing Methods
Source Domain

Target Domain
Clipart monitor

Art monitor

Art chair

(domain) (class)

Art tv

Clipart tv

DAPrompt : w/o source: 74.1

w/ source: 74.5 (Office-Home, ResNet-50)

Instanceconditioned
textual
prompting

Our Method

Clipart chair

Domaininvariant
visual
prompting

chair

monitor

tv

DAMP: w/o source: 76.3

w/ source: 78.2 (Office-Home, ResNet-50)

Semantic Embeddings
Source Domain

Target Domain

Visual Embeddings
Domain-agnostic

Figure 1. Top: exsiting prompt-based methods (e.g., DAPrompt
[8]) only learn textual prompts to embed semantics for each domain and perform classiﬁcation separately, which limits crossdomain knowledge transfer and feature alignment. Bottom: our
method learns both textual and visual prompts mutually to make
both modalities of embeddings domain-invariant, thus enabling
better utilization of source knowledge and ﬂexibility alignment.

Conventional UDA methods typically bridge the domain
gap by minimizing the distribution discrepancy, through
either moment matching [16, 21, 25, 26, 33] or adversarial learning [5, 7, 27, 36]. However, roughly aligning
two domains can result in distorted semantic structure and
less class discriminability in learned feature representations
[2, 42]. Besides, prior works use numerical labels for training and inference, which discard rich semantics behind categories, leading to sub-optimal adaptation when handling
complex categories and domain shifts.
Recently, large-scale pre-trained Vision-Language Models (VLMs) have demonstrated impressive successes in various downstream tasks [10, 13, 35, 54]. By pre-training on
tremendous image-text pairs, these models learn transferable multimodal representations that align images and texts
in a joint embedding space. In particular, the Contrastive
Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) model [34] encodes

23375

