This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAPLM: A Real-World Large-Scale Vision-Language Benchmark for
Map and Traffic Scene Understanding
Xu Cao1,2 *, Tong Zhou1 *, Yunsheng Ma3 *, Wenqian Ye4 , Can Cui3 , Kun Tang1 , Zhipeng Cao1
Kaizhao Liang5 , Ziran Wang3 , James M. Rehg2 , Chao Zheng1†
1
Tencent T Lab 2 University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 3 Purdue University
4
University of Virginia 5 SambaNova Systems, Inc.
xucao2@illinois.edu, chrisczheng@tencent.com

Abstract
Vision-language generative AI has demonstrated remarkable promise for empowering cross-modal scene understanding of autonomous driving and high-definition
(HD) map systems. However, current benchmark datasets
lack multi-modal point cloud, image, and language data
pairs. Recent approaches utilize visual instruction learning and cross-modal prompt engineering to expand visionlanguage models into this domain. In this paper, we propose a new vision-language benchmark that can be used
to finetune traffic and HD map domain-specific foundation
models. Specifically, we annotate and leverage large-scale,
broad-coverage traffic and map data extracted from huge
HD map annotations, and use CLIP and LLaMA-2 / Vicuna to finetune a baseline model with instruction-following
data. Our experimental results across various algorithms
reveal that while visual instruction-tuning large language
models (LLMs) can effectively learn meaningful representations from MAPLM-QA, there remains significant room
for further advancements. To facilitate applying LLMs and
multi-modal data into self-driving research, we will release
our visual-language QA data, and the baseline models at
GitHub.com/LLVM-AD/MAPLM.

1. Introduction
Recent breakthroughs in large language models (LLMs),
with their incredible ability to reason [63] and interact with
various tools [48], promise to bring a significant shift in the
landscape of human-agent interaction [55, 65, 74]. They
have also led to growing interest in multi-modal visionlanguage models (VLMs) [58, 78], which integrate and enhance the reasoning capabilities of LLMs with images, 3D
LiDAR point clouds, videos, and audio and perform various
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

Figure 1. Panoramic 2D images, 3D LiDAR point cloud, and HD
map annotations in MAPLM.

tasks such as image captioning, visual question answering
(VQA), scene understanding. Besides, VLMs are used to
align and map language with visual content, allowing language to play an important role in analyzing other signals
and passing information to downstream LLMs [33].
In the autonomous driving (AD) industry, VLMs and
LLMs have the potential to understand traffic scenes, thus
enhancing the driving decision-making process and humanAI interaction of AD systems [10, 11, 22, 26, 76, 86]. By
training on vast amounts of traffic scene data, they can glean
insights from complex multi-modal driving resources such
as map data, traffic laws, and incident reports [9]. This allows them to refine a vehicle’s navigation and planning with
safety and efficiency parameters, adapting to dynamic road
conditions with an understanding that closely mirrors human intuition [4, 61].
However, while successful in the general domains, the
current version of VLMs is less effective for traffic and
driving scenarios as traffic data-text pairs contain diverse
modalities across 3D LiDAR point clouds, panoramic 2D
images, information from high-definition (HD) maps, are
drastically different from the contexts and question-answer

21819

