This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GenN2N: Generative NeRF2NeRF Translation
Xiangyue Liu1

Kunming Luo1

Ping Tan1† Li Yi2,3,4†

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Tsinghua University
3
Shanghai Artiﬁcial Intelligence Laboratory 4 Shanghai Qi Zhi Institute

Colorization

Text-driven Editing

1

Han Xue2

Output 1

Output 2

Output 3

Input

Input zoom in

Output

Output zoom in

Input

Output 1

Output 2

Output 3

View 1

View 2

View 3

View 4

Inpainting

Super-resolution

Input

Figure 1. We introduce GenN2N, a uniﬁed framework for NeRF-to-NeRF translation, enabling a range of 3D NeRF editing tasks, including
text-driven editing, colorization, super-resolution, inpainting, etc. We show at least two rendering views of edited NeRF scenes at inference
time. Given a 3D NeRF scene, GenN2N can produce high-quality editing results with suitable multi-view consistency.

Abstract
We present GenN2N, a uniﬁed NeRF-to-NeRF translation framework for various NeRF translation tasks such as
text-driven NeRF editing, colorization, super-resolution, inpainting, etc. Unlike previous methods designed for individual translation tasks with task-speciﬁc schemes, GenN2N
achieves all these NeRF editing tasks by employing a plugand-play image-to-image translator to perform editing in
the 2D domain and lifting 2D edits into the 3D NeRF space.
Since the 3D consistency of 2D edits may not be assured,
we propose to model the distribution of the underlying 3D
edits through a generative model that can cover all possible edited NeRFs. To model the distribution of 3D edited
NeRFs from 2D edited images, we carefully design a VAEGAN that encodes images while decoding NeRFs. The la† Corresponding authors.

tent space is trained to align with a Gaussian distribution
and the NeRFs are supervised through an adversarial loss
on its renderings. To ensure the latent code does not depend on 2D viewpoints but truly reﬂects the 3D edits, we
also regularize the latent code through a contrastive learning scheme. Extensive experiments on various editing tasks
show GenN2N, as a universal framework, performs as well
or better than task-speciﬁc specialists while possessing ﬂexible generative power. More results on our project page:
https://xiangyueliu.github.io/GenN2N/.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, Neural radiance ﬁelds
(NeRFs) [23] have brought a promising paradigm in
the realm of 3D reconstruction, 3D generation, and novel
view synthesis due to their unparalleled compactness,

5105

