This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multimodal Pathway: Improve Transformers with Irrelevant Data from Other
Modalities
Yiyuan Zhang1

Xiaohan Ding2 Kaixiong Gong1 Yixiao Ge2 Ying Shan2 Xiangyu Yue1 *
1
MMLab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent AI Lab

yiyuanzhang.ai@gmail.com, xiaohding@gmail.com, xyyue@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

https://ailab-cvc.github.io/M2PT/
Abstract
We propose to improve transformers of a specific modality with irrelevant data from other modalities, e.g., improve
an ImageNet model with audio or point cloud datasets. We
would like to highlight that the data samples of the target
modality are irrelevant to the other modalities, which distinguishes our method from other works utilizing paired (e.g.,
CLIP) or interleaved data of different modalities. We propose a methodology named Multimodal Pathway - given a
target modality and a transformer designed for it, we use an
auxiliary transformer trained with data of another modality and construct pathways to connect components of the
two models so that data of the target modality can be processed by both models. In this way, we utilize the universal
sequence-to-sequence modeling abilities of transformers
obtained from two modalities. As a concrete implementation, we use a modality-specific tokenizer and task-specific
head as usual but utilize the transformer blocks of the auxiliary model via a proposed method named Cross-Modal
Re-parameterization, which exploits the auxiliary weights
without any inference costs. On the image, point cloud,
video, and audio recognition tasks, we observe significant
and consistent performance improvements with irrelevant
data from other modalities. The code and models are available at https://github.com/AILab-CVC/M2PT.

1. Introduction
Transformers [12, 14, 36, 37] are widely adopted in various tasks across modalities, such as text classification [8],
object detection [3], point cloud analysis [47], and audio spectrogram recognition [16]. Apart from numerous
unimodal tasks, transformers are also effective on multimodal data, e.g., CLIP [32] uses image-text pairs to achieve
* Corresponding Author

superior performance in image recognition. Transformers’ success in multiple modalities demonstrates their abilities to universally establish sequence-to-sequence modeling, given the input sequences (i.e., tokens) which can be
seen as the universal embeddings of data of multiple modalities [3, 12, 16, 46, 47]. For brevity, we refer to such ability
as the universal modeling ability.
We would like to note that CLIP [32] represents the significant success of a methodology that improves a model’s
performance on a certain modality (i.e., image) with the
help of data from another modality (i.e., text), but the limitation is also apparent - the data samples from the two
modalities must be relevant (e.g., paired, in this case).
This limitation seems so inevitable that it hardly attracts
research interest from the literature. Taking another two
modalities, image and audio, as an example, we may expect
that training with image-audio pairs may help the model
recognize images (if we build a dataset with enough imageaudio pairs and re-design the model to use the audio labels as the supervision, just like CLIP does with imagetext pairs), but it seems hard to believe that a pure audio
dataset would improve a model’s performance on ImageNet classification without any relevance between the
audio and image samples.
In this paper, we propose to improve a transformer’s performance on a certain modality even with irrelevant data
from another modality, as shown in Figure 1. The motivation is that we can see a training process on a certain modality as converting the data of the modality to sequences (i.e.,
tokens) and establishing sequence-to-sequence mappings
with the transformer blocks. For a specific modality, we
reckon that the trained model has knowledge encoded in the
sequence-to-sequence modeling that can facilitate another
modeling process whose input sequences are obtained from
another modality. In other words, apart from the obvious
modality-specific knowledge acquired through training on
a specific modality, we seek the modality-complementary
knowledge of sequence-to-sequence modeling in transformers and will show that it does exist.
6108

