This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FADES: Fair Disentanglement with Sensitive Relevance
Taeuk Jang, Xiaoqian Wang*
Purdue University
465 Northwestern Ave, West Lafayette, IN 47907, USA
{jang141@,joywang}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Learning fair representation in deep learning is essential
to mitigate discriminatory outcomes and enhance trustworthiness. However, previous research has been commonly established on inappropriate assumptions prone to unrealistic counterfactuals and performance degradation. Although
some proposed alternative approaches, such as employing
correlation-aware causal graphs or proxies for mutual information, these methods are less practical and not applicable in general. In this work, we propose FAir DisEntanglement with Sensitive relevance (FADES), a novel approach
that leverages conditional mutual information from the information theory perspective to address these challenges.
We employ sensitive relevant code to direct correlated information between target labels and sensitive attributes by
imposing conditional independence, allowing better separation of the features of interest in the latent space. Utilizing
an intuitive disentangling approach, FADES consistently
achieves superior performance and fairness both quantitatively and qualitatively with its straightforward structure. Specifically, the proposed method outperforms existing works in downstream classification and counterfactual
generations on various benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models have made great accomplishments
in various applications including style transfer [54], video
generation [5], image translation [22], text-to-image generation [9], etc. Among them, variational autoencoder (VAE)
based models [21, 26, 38] significantly contributed to the
evolution of deep learning and generative models by offering a better understanding of the latent space and stable performance. Although VAEs have been widely adopted due
to the compactness and robustness of the learned representation, there is plenty of room for improvement in various
* Corresponding author. This work was partially supported by NSF IIS
#1955890, IIS #2146091.

aspects. One of the highlighted areas is fairness since preventing discrimination is crucial to gaining trustworthiness
of deep learning models in practice.
While deep models achieve superior performance by exploiting high dimensional latent representation, the deep
representations are susceptible to absorbing spurious correlations with sensitive information [29, 30, 41], which can
lead to potential fairness violations and biased outcomes.
To address the problem, a line of work was proposed to
learn fair representations. Some [29, 46] proposed to learn
latent representation that is invariant to sensitive information, while others [6, 10] aimed to disentangle the latent
features into two subsets: target (non-sensitive) and sensitive codes. This is often done by introducing regularization terms for fair representation learning in addition to performance objectives. Specifically, fair disentanglement approaches minimize mutual information between the subsets
[3] to separate the target label and sensitive information.
However, we argue that achieving such fair disentanglement is unattainable under data bias, which is one of
the prevalent causes of fairness violations. Many datasets
[11, 27] contain discriminatory labels that are influenced
by societal biases and stereotypes, which are unfavorable to
certain demographics [39]. This leads to an unwanted correlation between the target and sensitive attributes in practice.
When this correlation is overlooked, the fairness and performance goals of the disentanglement methods contradict
each other and cannot be achieved simultaneously. Specifically, the fairness goal aims at learning target and sensitive
codes to be independent, while the performance goal pursues perfectly recovering the target and sensitive information from the respective codes. However, when the target
label and sensitive attribute are inherently correlated, it is
impossible to achieve both goals at the same time.
Moreover, some features may contain both sensitive and
target information, making it difficult to protect sensitive
information while making accurate predictions in practice
[13]. This makes the objective of previous works, which
aimed to learn perfectly separable subsets, unattainable. For
instance, in the hair color estimation task from portraits
12067

