This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language-aware Visual Semantic Distillation for Video Question Answering
Bo Zou *
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China

Chao Yang *
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Shanghai, China

Yu Qiao
Shanghai AI Laboratory
Shanghai, China

zoub21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

yangchao@pjlab.org.cn

qiaoyu@pjlab.org.cn

Chengbin Quan
Tsinghua University
Beijing, China
quancb@tsinghua.edu.cn

Youjian Zhao †
Tsinghua University
Zhongguancun Laboratory
Beijing, China
zhaoyoujian@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Significant progress in video question answering
(VideoQA) have been made thanks to thriving large imagelanguage pretraining frameworks. Although image-language
models can efficiently represent both video and language
branches, they typically employ goal-free vision perception
and do not interact vision with language well during the
answer generation, thus omitting crucial visual cues. In
this paper, we are inspired by the human recognition and
learning pattern and propose VideoDistill, a framework
with language-aware (i.e., goal-driven) behavior in both
vision perception and answer generation. VideoDistill generates answers only from question-related visual embeddings
and follows a thinking-observing-answering approach that
closely resembles human behavior, distinguishing it from previous research. Specifically, we develop a language-aware
gating mechanism to replace the standard cross-attention,
avoiding language’s direct fusion into visual representations.
We incorporate this mechanism into two key components of
the entire framework. The first component is a differentiable
sparse sampling module, which selects frames containing the
necessary dynamics and semantics relevant to the questions.
The second component is a vision refinement module that
merges existing spatial-temporal attention layers to ensure
extracting multi-grained visual semantics associated with
the questions. We conduct evaluations on various challenging video question-answering benchmarks, and VideoDistill
achieves state-of-the-art performance in both general and
long-form VideoQA datasets. In Addition, we verify that
VideoDistill can effectively alleviate the utilization of language shortcut solutions in the EgoTaskQA dataset.
∗ Equal contribution, † Corresponding author

This work was done during an internship at Shanghai AI Lab.

Figure 1. Challenges of goal-free VideoQA models. They can not
efficiently handle (a) Long-term dependencies, (b) Multi-events,
and (c) Multi-scale semantics in the videos. They also suffer from
(d) language prior phenomenon in training question-answer pairs.

1. Introduction
In recent years, large-scale video-and-language pretraining
has seen remarkable progress. Most modern video-language
understanding models [4, 15, 26, 31, 35, 36, 50] independently encode uni-modality and then fuse them. Human
motion perception studies [5, 17, 53] suggest that humans
perceive motion and environments as goal-driven behavior.
This discrepancy leads to several issues, especially in longform video understanding.
First, goal-free video representation struggles with longterm dependencies and multi-event reasoning. While enabled by progress in cross-modal pretraining[29, 43, 46]
and datasets[39, 40], current methods excel at question an-

27113

