This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sparse Global Matching for Video Frame Interpolation with Large Motion
Chunxu Liu1,⇤ Guozhen Zhang1,⇤ Rui Zhao2 Limin Wang1,3,
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
2
3
SenseTime Research
Shanghai AI Lab
https://sgm-vfi.github.io

Abstract

!#

!#

Large motion poses a critical challenge in Video Frame
Interpolation (VFI) task. Existing methods are often constrained by limited receptive fields, resulting in sub-optimal
performance when handling scenarios with large motion. In
this paper, we introduce a new pipeline for VFI, which can
effectively integrate global-level information to alleviate issues associated with large motion. Specifically, we first
estimate a pair of initial intermediate flows using a highresolution feature map for extracting local details. Then, we
incorporate a sparse global matching branch to compensate for flow estimation, which consists of identifying flaws
in initial flows and generating sparse flow compensation
with a global receptive field. Finally, we adaptively merge
the initial flow estimation with global flow compensation,
yielding a more accurate intermediate flow. To evaluate the
effectiveness of our method in handling large motion, we
carefully curate a more challenging subset from commonly
used benchmarks. Our method demonstrates the state-ofthe-art performance on these VFI subsets with large motion.

Refine Net

Refine Net

Flow
Estimation

Flow
Estimation

Local
Feature
Extractor

Local
Feature
Extractor

!! , !"

!! , !"

"!→# , "!→$
Sparse
Global
Matching
"!!→# , "!!→$

(b)

(a)

Overlay of $# , $$
Initial Intermediate
Motion Magnitude Range
Flow Estimation "!!→# , "!!→$
(92.0, 393.9)

After Sparse Global Matching:
Shifted Flow Fix &!→#

Merged Flow

"!→#

Difference Map

%#

Synthesized $!
with (right) and without (left)
Sparse Global Matching Block

(c)

1. Introduction
Video Frame Interpolation (VFI) seeks to generate the intermediate frame from a given pair of inference frames, which
has received increasing attention. It has various real-life applications, such as creating slow motion videos [3, 10, 13],
video compression [12, 33] and novel view synthesis [1, 7,
38]. Currently, flow-based algorithms occupy a prominent
position [9, 17, 18, 26, 28, 30, 37] in VFI task, where the
flow from the target frame to the input frames, namely, intermediate flow, is explicitly estimated for warping input
frames to the target frame.
Nevertheless, existing optical flow [11, 32, 34] algorithms cannot be directly applied to estimate intermediate flows due to the absence of the target frame. To
*: Equal Contribution.

: Corresponding author (lmwang@nju.edu.cn).

Figure 1. (a) Our framework without sparse global matching, pretrained on small motion dataset, for capturing local details.
(b) Our framework with sparse global matching, fine-tuned on
large motion dataset, for capturing global large motion. (c) Key
components in our algorithm, illustrating the effect of our sparse
global matching branch. (Using Ours-1/4-Points, from Table 1.)

address this, many algorithms first estimate the bidirectional flow between two input frames and then generate intermediate optical flows using various flow reversal techniques [13, 15, 19, 24, 29, 35, 39]. Alternatively, recent algorithms directly estimate the intermediate flow with
proper supervision [9, 17, 37] and achieve improved performance on datasets where small-to-medium motions are
prevalent [27].
However, real-world video frame interpolation encounters various complex challenges, with the problem of handling large motion being particularly prominent. In scenar-

19125

