This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InstaGen: Enhancing Object Detection by Training on Synthetic Dataset
Chengjian Feng1 Yujie Zhong1 Zequn Jie1,† Weidi Xie2,† Lin Ma1
1
Meituan Inc. 2 CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
https://fcjian.github.io/InstaGen

Figure 1. (a) The synthetic images generated from Stable Diffusion and our proposed InstaGen, which can serve as a dataset synthesizer
for sourcing photo-realistic images and instance bounding boxes at scale. (b) On open-vocabulary detection, training on synthetic images
demonstrates significant improvement over CLIP-based methods on novel categories. (c) Training on the synthetic images generated from
InstaGen also enhances the detection performance in close-set scenario, particularly in data-sparse circumstances.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel paradigm to enhance
the ability of object detector, e.g., expanding categories
or improving detection performance, by training on synthetic dataset generated from diffusion models. Specifically,
we integrate an instance-level grounding head into a pretrained, generative diffusion model, to augment it with the
ability of localising instances in the generated images. The
grounding head is trained to align the text embedding of
category names with the regional visual feature of the diffusion model, using supervision from an off-the-shelf object
detector, and a novel self-training scheme on (novel) categories not covered by the detector. We conduct thorough
experiments to show that, this enhanced version of diffusion
model, termed as InstaGen, can serve as a data synthesizer, to enhance object detectors by training on its generated samples, demonstrating superior performance over
existing state-of-the-art methods in open-vocabulary (+4.5
AP) and data-sparse (+1.2 ∼ 5.2 AP) scenarios.

1. Introduction
Object detection has been extensively studied in the field
of computer vision, focusing on the localization and categorization of objects within images [3, 5, 12, 26, 27]. The
common practise is to train the detectors on large-scale im†: corresponding author.

age datasets, such as MS-COCO [20] and Object365 [30],
where objects are exhaustively annotated with bounding
boxes and corresponding category labels. However, the procedure for collecting images and annotations is often laborious and time-consuming, limiting the datasets’ scalability.
In the recent literature, text-to-image diffusion models
have demonstrated remarkable success in generating highquality images [28, 29], that unlocks the possibility of training vision systems with synthetic images. In general, existing text-to-image diffusion models are capable of synthesizing images based on some free-form text prompt, as
shown in the first row of Figure 1a. Despite being photorealistic, such synthesized images can not support training
sophisticated systems, that normally requires the inclusion
of instance-level annotations, e.g., bounding boxes for object detection in our case. In this paper, we investigate a
novel paradigm of dataset synthesis for training object detector, i.e., augmenting the text-to-image diffusion model to
generate instance-level bounding boxes along with images.
To begin with, we build an image synthesizer by finetuning the diffusion model on existing detection dataset.
This is driven by the observation that off-the-shelf diffusion models often generate images with only one or two objects on simplistic background, training detectors on such
images may thus lead to reduced robustness in complex
real-world scenarios. Specifically, we exploit the existing
detection dataset, and subsequently fine-tune the diffusion
model with the image-caption pairs, constructed by taking

14121

