This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpecNeRF: Gaussian Directional Encoding for Specular Reflections
Li Ma1,2 Vasu Agrawal2 Haithem Turki2,3 Changil Kim2
Chen Gao2 Pedro Sander1 Michael Zollhöfer2 Christian Richardt2
1

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
Meta Reality Labs 3 Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Neural radiance fields have achieved remarkable performance in modeling the appearance of 3D scenes. However,
existing approaches still struggle with the view-dependent
appearance of glossy surfaces, especially under complex
lighting of indoor environments. Unlike existing methods,
which typically assume distant lighting like an environment
map, we propose a learnable Gaussian directional encoding
to better model the view-dependent effects under near-field
lighting conditions. Importantly, our new directional encoding captures the spatially-varying nature of near-field
lighting and emulates the behavior of prefiltered environment maps. As a result, it enables the efficient evaluation of
preconvolved specular color at any 3D location with varying
roughness coefficients. We further introduce a data-driven
geometry prior that helps alleviate the shape radiance ambiguity in reflection modeling. We show that our Gaussian
directional encoding and geometry prior significantly improve the modeling of challenging specular reflections in
neural radiance fields, which helps decompose appearance
into more physically meaningful components.

1. Introduction
Neural radiance fields (NeRFs) have emerged as a popular
scene representation for novel-view synthesis [34, 45, 51].
By training a neural network based on sparse observations
of a 3D scene, NeRF-like representations are able to synthesize novel views with photorealistic visual quality. In
particular, with a scalable model design, such as InstantNGP
[36], NeRFs are able to model room-scale 3D scenes with
extraordinary detail [53]. However, existing approaches typically only manage to model mild view-dependent effects
like those seen on nearly diffuse surfaces. When encountering highly view-dependent glossy surfaces, NeRFs struggle
to model the high-frequency changes when the viewpoint
changes. Instead, they tend to “fake” specular reflections by
placing them behind surfaces, which may result in poor view
interpolation and “foggy” geometry [47]. Moreover, fake

Reflection
direction

Gaussian dir.
encoding

Integrated dir.
encoding

Fourier dir.
encoding

Ours

Ref-NeRF

NeRF

View
direction Normal

Ground Truth

Figure 1. We propose a Gaussian directional encoding that leads
to better modeling of specular reflections under near-field lighting
conditions. In contrast, the integrated directional encoding utilized
in Ref-NeRF [47] and Fourier directional encoding in NeRF [34]
exhibit suboptimal performance under similar conditions.

reflections are not viable if one can look behind the surface,
as NeRF can no longer hide the reflections there.
Accurately modeling and reconstructing specular reflections presents notable challenges, especially for room-scale
scenes. Physically correct reflection modeling involves pathtracing many rays for every single pixel, which is impractical
for NeRF-like volumetric scene representations, primarily
due to the large computational requirements to shade a single
pixel. Consequently, an efficient approximation of the reflection shading is needed for a feasible modeling of reflections.
Existing works [14, 47] address this challenge by incorporating heuristic modules inspired by real-time image-based
lighting (IBL) [35] techniques, such as explicit ray bounce
computations to enhance NeRF’s capability to simulate reflections, and integrated directional encoding to simulate
appearance change under varying surface roughness.
While these improvements have shown to be effective in
modeling specular reflections for NeRFs, they are limited
to object-level reconstruction under distant lighting, which
assumes the object is lit by a 2D environment map. They
work poorly for modeling near-field lighting, where the corresponding environment map varies spatially. The issue is
that existing methods rely on directional encodings to embed ray directions for generating view-dependent reflections.

21188

