This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SPAD: Spatially Aware Multi-View Diffusers
Yash Kant1,2,4 , Aliaksandr Siarohin2 , Ziyi Wu1,4 , Michael Vasilkovsky2 , Guocheng Qian2,3 ,
Jian Ren2 , Riza Alp Guler2 , Bernard Ghanem3 , Sergey Tulyakov2 , Igor Gilitschenski1,4
1
University of Toronto, 2 Snap Research, 3 KAUST, 4 Vector Institute
https://yashkant.github.io/spad/

Abstract
We present SPAD, a novel approach for creating consistent multi-view images from text prompts or single images. To enable multi-view generation, we repurpose a pretrained 2D diffusion model by extending its self-attention
layers with cross-view interactions, and fine-tune it on a
high quality subset of Objaverse. We find that a naive extension of the self-attention proposed in prior work (e.g., MVDream) leads to content copying between views. Therefore,
we explicitly constrain the cross-view attention based on
epipolar geometry. To further enhance 3D consistency, we
utilize Plücker coordinates derived from camera rays and
inject them as positional encoding. This enables SPAD to
reason over spatial proximity in 3D well. Compared to concurrent works that can only generate views at fixed azimuth
and elevation (e.g., MVDream, SyncDreamer), SPAD offers
full camera control and achieves state-of-the-art results in
novel view synthesis on unseen objects from the Objaverse
and Google Scanned Objects datasets. Finally, we demonstrate that text-to-3D generation using SPAD prevents the
multi-face Janus issue.

1. Introduction
3D content generation holds great importance in a wide
range of applications, such as gaming, virtual reality, or
robotics. Yet, the creation of high-quality 3D assets remains a time-consuming endeavor even for seasoned 3D
artists. Recent years have witnessed the emergence of generative models capable of creating 3D objects from a single
or several 2D images, or just text inputs. Early methods in
this field directly train models such as Variational Auto Encoders (VAEs) [41] and Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [27] on 3D shapes [1, 49, 96, 98]. These methods
produce results with lower resolution to manage computational demands and have limited diversity due to the small
scale of training dataset. Later approaches explored differ* Equal advising

entiable rendering to learn 3D GANs from monocular images [7, 8, 14, 26, 51, 55, 76, 77]. These methods improved
resolution, but only show impressive results on relatively
few categories (e.g., ShapeNet [10] furniture).
Recent advances in Diffusion Models (DMs) have revolutionized the field of 2D image generation [21, 34, 54].
Trained on billions of image-text data, state-of-the-art models [64, 66] learn generic object priors that enable highquality and generalizable text-guided image generation. Recent works thus seek to leverage such 2D priors to generate
3D objects. One line of research proposes to optimize a
NeRF [50] model by distilling a pre-trained text-to-image
DM via Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) [59, 90]. This
enables single-view 3D reconstruction [19, 48, 60] and direct text-to-3D synthesis [36, 44, 93]. However, these methods lack understanding of the underlying object structures.
The 2D prior provided by pre-trained DMs only considers
one view at each optimization step, ignoring the geometric
relationship across views. Even with hand-crafted prompts
specifying explicit viewpoints [59],these methods continue
to exhibit 3D inconsistencies, exemplified by issues such as
the multi-faced Janus problem.
A natural solution is to equip 2D diffusion models with
3D understanding. Zero-1-to-3 [45] proposes to condition
Stable Diffusion [64] with one view and generate another
one given the relative camera pose. However, conditioning
in Zero-1-to-3 is performed by simply concatenating the input view, while disregarding any geometric priors. An alternate approach based on depth warping was proposed in
iNVS [39]. It shows that given an accurate depth map, one
can establish dense correspondences between two views.
This allows DMs to reconstruct high-quality novel views.
Unfortunately, the generation quality of iNVS heavily relies on the precision of depth maps, while monocular depth
estimation in itself is an unsolved problem.
Recent works [83, 102] have observed that Stable Diffusion can be utilized to obtain accurate image correspondences. Self-attention layers of text-to-image DMs can be
directly used for establishing correspondences within the
same image [87]. An interesting question to consider is

10026

