This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EgoGen: An Egocentric Synthetic Data Generator
Gen Li1 Kaifeng Zhao1 Siwei Zhang1 Xiaozhong Lyu1
Mihai Dusmanu2 Yan Zhang1 Marc Pollefeys1,2 Siyu Tang1
1

ETH Zürich 2 Microsoft
https://ego-gen.github.io/

RGB

RGB with Motion Blur

Depth

Surface Normal

Segmentation Mask

World Position

Figure 1. EgoGen: a scalable synthetic data generation system for egocentric perception tasks, with rich multi-modal data and accurate
annotations. We simulate camera rigs for head-mounted devices (HMDs) and render from the perspective of the camera wearer with various
sensors. Top to bottom: middle and right camera sensors in the rig. Left to right: photo-realistic RGB image, RGB with simulated motion
blur, depth map, surface normal, segmentation mask, and world position for fisheye cameras widely used in HMDs.

Abstract
Understanding the world in first-person view is fundamental in Augmented Reality (AR). This immersive perspective brings dramatic visual changes and unique challenges
compared to third-person views. Synthetic data has empowered third-person-view vision models, but its application to
embodied egocentric perception tasks remains largely unexplored. A critical challenge lies in simulating natural
human movements and behaviors that effectively steer the
embodied cameras to capture a faithful egocentric representation of the 3D world. To address this challenge, we
introduce EgoGen, a new synthetic data generator that can
produce accurate and rich ground-truth training data for
egocentric perception tasks. At the heart of EgoGen is a
novel human motion synthesis model that directly leverages egocentric visual inputs of a virtual human to sense
the 3D environment. Combined with collision-avoiding motion primitives and a two-stage reinforcement learning approach, our motion synthesis model offers a closed-loop so-

lution where the embodied perception and movement of the
virtual human are seamlessly coupled. Compared to previous works, our model eliminates the need for a pre-defined
global path, and is directly applicable to dynamic environments. Combined with our easy-to-use and scalable data
generation pipeline, we demonstrate EgoGen’s efficacy in
three tasks: mapping and localization for head-mounted
cameras, egocentric camera tracking, and human mesh recovery from egocentric views. EgoGen will be fully opensourced, offering a practical solution for creating realistic
egocentric training data and aiming to serve as a useful tool
for egocentric computer vision research.

1. Introduction
The analysis of visual input from front-facing egocentric
cameras is crucial for applications that benefit from a firstperson perspective, mirroring the natural human experience [23, 43, 115]. AR devices, for instance, can utilize
this viewpoint to amplify user immersion. Such cameras
can also cater to individual preferences, providing custom

14497

