This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SplattingAvatar: Realistic Real-Time Human Avatars
with Mesh-Embedded Gaussian Splatting
Zhijing Shao1,2
Zhaolong Wang2
Zhuang Li2
Duotun Wang1
2
2
1,3
Xiangru Lin
Yu Zhang
Mingming Fan
Zeyu Wang1,3
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
Prometheus Vision Technology Co., Ltd.
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Final Render

Mesh

Final Render

Gaussians
Final Render

Final Render

Gaussians
Mesh

(a) Monocular Video Input

(b) Learned Gaussian Splatting Embedding on Mesh

(c) Animatable Avatar

(d) Real-Time Rendering in Unity

Figure 1. Overview of SplattingAvatar featuring Mesh-Embedded Gaussian Splatting. Our method takes (a) monocular videos as input,
while employing (b) a trainable embedding technique for Gaussian-Mesh association. (c) Animated by mesh through the learned embedding,
the Gaussians render into high-fidelity human avatars. (d) SplattingAvatar demonstrates real-time rendering capabilities in Unity, achieving
over 300 FPS on an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU and 30 FPS on an iPhone 13 (images captured in action).

Abstract
We present SplattingAvatar, a hybrid 3D representation
of photorealistic human avatars with Gaussian Splatting embedded on a triangle mesh, which renders over 300 FPS on a
modern GPU and 30 FPS on a mobile device. We disentangle
the motion and appearance of a virtual human with explicit
mesh geometry and implicit appearance modeling with Gaussian Splatting. The Gaussians are defined by barycentric
coordinates and displacement on a triangle mesh as Phong
surfaces. We extend lifted optimization to simultaneously optimize the parameters of the Gaussians while walking on the
triangle mesh. SplattingAvatar is a hybrid representation of
virtual humans where the mesh represents low-frequency motion and surface deformation, while the Gaussians take over
the high-frequency geometry and detailed appearance. Unlike existing deformation methods that rely on an MLP-based
linear blend skinning (LBS) field for motion, we control the
rotation and translation of the Gaussians directly by mesh,
which empowers its compatibility with various animation

techniques, e.g., skeletal animation, blend shapes, and mesh
editing. Trainable from monocular videos for both full-body
and head avatars, SplattingAvatar shows state-of-the-art rendering quality across multiple datasets. Code and data are
available at https://github.com/initialneil/
SplattingAvatar.

1. Introduction
The demand for personalized, photorealistic, and animatable human avatars that render in real-time spans a wide
array of applications, including gaming [48], extended reality (XR) storytelling [10, 19], and tele-presentation [22, 24].
As the quest for digital realism intensifies, practitioners face
a growing challenge: improving the quality of 3D human
models often means increasing the complexity of these models. This is typically achieved by adding more polygons,
layering skin textures [5], and integrating advanced hair systems [42]. However, these enhancements invariably lead to

1606

