This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GAvatar: Animatable 3D Gaussian Avatars with Implicit Mesh Learning
Ye Yuan∗

Xueting Li∗

Yangyi Huang

Shalini De Mello Koki Nagano
NVIDIA
https://nvlabs.github.io/GAvatar

Jan Kautz

Umar Iqbal

Avatar Animation

3D Gaussian Avatar Generation and Mesh Extraction

Figure 1. GAvatar synthesizes high-fidelity 3D animatable avatars from text prompts. Our novel primitive-based implicit Gaussian representation enables efficient avatar animation (100 fps, 1K resolution) and also extracts a highly detailed mesh from learned 3D Gaussians.

Abstract
Gaussian splatting has emerged as a powerful 3D representation that harnesses the advantages of both explicit
(mesh) and implicit (NeRF) 3D representations. In this
paper, we seek to leverage Gaussian splatting to generate
realistic animatable avatars from textual descriptions, addressing the limitations (e.g., flexibility and efficiency) imposed by mesh or NeRF-based representations. However,
a naive application of Gaussian splatting cannot generate
high-quality animatable avatars and suffers from learning
instability; it also cannot capture fine avatar geometries
and often leads to degenerate body parts. To tackle these
problems, we first propose a primitive-based 3D Gaussian
representation where Gaussians are defined inside posedriven primitives to facilitate animation. Second, to stabilize and amortize the learning of millions of Gaussians,
we propose to use neural implicit fields to predict the
* Equal contribution.

Gaussian attributes (e.g., colors). Finally, to capture fine
avatar geometries and extract detailed meshes, we propose
a novel SDF-based implicit mesh learning approach for 3D
Gaussians that regularizes the underlying geometries and
extracts highly detailed textured meshes. Our proposed
method, GAvatar, enables the large-scale generation of diverse animatable avatars using only text prompts. GAvatar
significantly surpasses existing methods in terms of both appearance and geometry quality, and achieves extremely fast
rendering (100 fps) at 1K resolution.

1. Introduction
Digital avatars play an essential role in numerous applications, from augmented and virtual reality to gaming, movie
production, and synthetic data generation [8, 20, 21, 35, 44,
51–53]. However, highly realistic and animatable avatars
are extremely difficult to create at scale due to the complexity and diversity of character geometries and appearances.
Traditional approaches rely on manual modeling and rig-

896

