This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

State Space Models for Event Cameras
Nikola Zubić, Mathias Gehrig, Davide Scaramuzza
Robotics and Perception Group, University of Zurich, Switzerland

Previous work

50

Evaluation of SSM, RVT, and GET-Transformer on Gen1 and 1 Mpx Test Datasets

45

Event
Repr.

RNN

40

Out

35

mAP [%]

slow training

Our work

30
25
20
15

Event
Repr.

SSM

Out

RVT-Gen1
RVT-1Mpx
GET-T-Gen1
GET-T-1Mpx

5
0

fast training

Models & Datasets

10

SSM-Gen1 (ours)
SSM-1Mpx (ours)

20

40

80

100

Frequency [Hz]

200

Figure 1. Top-Left Previous works [12, 29] use RNN architectures with convolutional or attention mechanisms to train models that have
superior performance on downstream tasks. However, the use of RNNs leads to slower training and the learned weights only generalize
well to data deployed at the same frequency as that used at training time. Bottom-Left We solve this problem by utilizing SSMs for
temporal aggregation, which enables faster training by either utilizing the S4 model [16] or S5 [36] parallel scans. By their nature, these
models allow deployment at different frequencies than those used at training time since they have a learnable timescale parameter. Right
Our SSM-based models achieve an average performance drop between training and testing frequencies of 3.31 mAP averaged on both
Gen1 [7] and 1 Mpx [29] datasets, while RVT [12] and GET [28] have a drop of 21.25 and 24.53 mAP, respectively.

Abstract
Today, state-of-the-art deep neural networks that process
event-camera data first convert a temporal window of events
into dense, grid-like input representations. As such, they
exhibit poor generalizability when deployed at higher inference frequencies (i.e., smaller temporal windows) than
the ones they were trained on. We address this challenge
by introducing state-space models (SSMs) with learnable
timescale parameters to event-based vision. This design
adapts to varying frequencies without the need to retrain
the network at different frequencies. Additionally, we investigate two strategies to counteract aliasing effects when
deploying the model at higher frequencies. We comprehensively evaluate our approach against existing methods
based on RNN and Transformer architectures across various benchmarks, including Gen1 and 1 Mpx event camera
datasets. Our results demonstrate that SSM-based models train 33% faster and also exhibit minimal performance
degradation when tested at higher frequencies than the

training input. Traditional RNN and Transformer models
exhibit performance drops of more than 20 mAP, with SSMs
having a drop of 3.31 mAP, highlighting the effectiveness of
SSMs in event-based vision tasks.

1. Introduction
Event cameras emerged as a class of sensor technologies that noticeably deviate from the operational mechanics of conventional frame-based cameras [9]. While standard frame-based cameras [42] capture full-frame luminance levels at fixed intervals, event cameras record perpixel relative brightness changes in a scene at the time they
occur. The output is, therefore, an asynchronous stream of
events in a four-dimensional spatio-temporal space. Each
event is represented by its spatial coordinates on the pixel
array, the temporal instance of the occurrence, and its polarity, which denotes the direction of the brightness change
and encapsulates the increase or decrease in luminance. The

5819

