This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised 3D Structure Inference from Category-Specific Image Collections
Weikang Wang

Dongliang Cao

Florian Bernard

University of Bonn, Germany

Figure 1. Our method detects consistent and reasonable 3D structure for general object categories from a single 2D image. For training,
our method only requires a collection of images from the same category without any additional information.

Abstract
Understanding 3D object structure from image collections of general object categories remains a long-standing
challenge in computer vision. Due to the high relevance
of image keypoints (e.g. for graph matching, controlling
generative models, scene understanding, etc.), in this work
we specifically focus on inferring 3D structure in terms
of sparse keypoints. Existing 3D keypoint inference approaches rely on strong priors, such as spatio-temporal consistency, multi-view images of the same object, 3D shape
priors (e.g. templates, skeleton), or supervisory signals
e.g. in the form of 2D keypoint annotations. In contrast,
we propose the first unsupervised 3D keypoint inference approach that can be trained for general object categories
solely from an inhomogeneous image collection (containing
different instances of objects from the same category). Our
experiments show that our method not only improves upon
unsupervised 2D keypoint inference, but more importantly,
it also produces reasonable 3D structure for various object
categories, both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
Understanding 3D object structure from 2D images is a fundamental problem in computer vision that has been studied

for decades. A range of different 3D structure representations have been considered, including keypoints [14, 25, 59,
69], meshes [55, 56, 62], and voxels [35, 45, 47]. Among
these, keypoint-based 3D structure representations have the
strong advantage that they are simple and flexible, while at
the same time being highly relevant for diverse downstream
tasks. However, obtaining 3D keypoints from 2D images is
hard due to unknown depth, pose variations, different appearance, and the lack of explicit geometric information.
Due to these difficulties, prior works mostly focus on 2D
keypoints detection instead of 3D [9, 12, 31, 36, 66].
In this work we investigate whether it is possible to directly obtain 3D keypoints without using any explicit supervision. Our work is motivated by the fact that 2D image
keypoints are observations of points in 3D space that are
projected onto the 2D image plane. By explicitly understanding and inferring 3D geometry we are able to improve
upon the quality of detected keypoints. Specifically, we
experimentally demonstrate that projecting our predicted
3D keypoints onto the image plane leads to more reliable
2D keypoints compared to existing 2D keypoint predictors.
Moreover, our method can serve the increasing amount of
tasks that rely on 3D keypoints, e.g. 3D structure-aware
generative models [58], 3D avatar generation [34], or 3D
reconstruction [55, 56]. Despite keypoint prediction being a
well-studied problem in the 2D domain, 3D keypoint inference is under-explored and we thus specifically contribute

10704

