This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fixed Point Diffusion Models
Xingjian Bai *
University of Oxford

Luke Melas-Kyriazi *†
University of Oxford

xingjianbai@gmail.com

lukemk@robots.ox.ac.uk

Diffusion Transformer (DiT): 674M Parameters

Fixed Point Diffusion Model (FPDM): 85M Parameters

Figure 1. Fixed Point Diffusion Model (FPDM) is a novel and highly efficient approach to image generation with diffusion models. FPDM integrates an
implicit fixed point layer into a denoising diffusion model, converting the sampling process into a sequence of fixed point equations. Our model significantly
decreases model size and memory usage while improving performance in settings with limited sampling time or computation. We compare our model, trained
at a 256 ⇥ 256 resolution against the state-of-the-art DiT [38] on four datasets (FFHQ, CelebA-HQ, LSUN-Church, ImageNet) using compute equivalent to
20 DiT sampling steps. FPDM (right) demonstrates enhanced image quality with 87% fewer parameters and 60% less memory during training.

Abstract
We introduce the Fixed Point Diffusion Model (FPDM),
a novel approach to image generation that integrates the
concept of fixed point solving into the framework of diffusionbased generative modeling. Our approach embeds an implicit fixed point solving layer into the denoising network
of a diffusion model, transforming the diffusion process
into a sequence of closely-related fixed point problems.
Combined with a new stochastic training method, this approach significantly reduces model size, reduces memory
usage, and accelerates training. Moreover, it enables the
development of two new techniques to improve sampling
efficiency: reallocating computation across timesteps and
reusing fixed point solutions between timesteps. We conduct extensive experiments with state-of-the-art models on
ImageNet, FFHQ, CelebA-HQ, and LSUN-Church, demonstrating substantial improvements in performance and efficiency. Compared to the state-of-the-art DiT model [38],
FPDM contains 87% fewer parameters, consumes 60% less
memory during training, and improves image generation
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author.

quality in situations where sampling computation or time is
limited. Our code and pretrained models are available at
https://lukemelas.github.io/fixed-point-diffusion-models/.

1. Introduction
The field of image generation has experienced significant
recent advancements driven by the development of largescale diffusion models [23, 37, 38, 41, 47, 48]. Key to these
advancements have been increased model size, computational power, and the collection of extensive datasets [4, 12,
16, 25, 45, 46, 54], collectively contributing to a marked
improvement in generation performance.
Despite these strides, the core principles of diffusion networks have remained largely unchanged since their development [23]. They typically consist of a fixed series of neural
network layers, either with a UNet architecture [42] or, more
recently, a vision transformer architecture [14, 51]. However,
as diffusion models are increasingly deployed in production,
especially on mobile and edge devices, their large size and
computational costs pose significant challenges.
This paper introduces the Fixed Point Diffusion Model
(FPDM), which integrates an implicit fixed point solving
layer into the denoising network of a diffusion model. In
19430

