This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Eclipse: Disambiguating Illumination and Materials using Unintended Shadows
Dor Verbin1 Ben Mildenhall1 Peter Hedman1
Jonathan T. Barron1 Todd Zickler1,2 Pratul P. Srinivasan1
1
Google Research 2 Harvard University
Albedo

Illumination and occluders

X

XXX

(b) No decomposition

(a) Problem setup

Albedo

(d) Our method

Illumination and occluders

(c) No occluders

XXX

(e) Ground truth

Figure 1. (a) We exploit unintended shadows cast by camera operators (or other unobserved moving occluders) to recover high-fidelity
environment lighting and object materials from a set of images. Without modeling such unobserved occluders, prior methods can only: (b)
recover convolved lighting without explicit material decomposition [31]; or (c) exploit lighting occlusions that occur internally among the
observed objects [37]. (d) We show that additionally modeling and recovering external, unobserved occluders enables lighting and material
reconstructions that are closer to ground truth (e).

Abstract
Decomposing an object’s appearance into representations of its materials and the surrounding illumination is
difficult, even when the object’s 3D shape is known beforehand. This problem is especially challenging for diffuse objects: it is ill-conditioned because diffuse materials severely
blur incoming light, and it is ill-posed because diffuse materials under high-frequency lighting can be indistinguishable from shiny materials under low-frequency lighting. We
show that it is possible to recover precise materials and
illumination—even from diffuse objects—by exploiting unintended shadows, like the ones cast onto an object by the
photographer who moves around it. These shadows are a
nuisance in most previous inverse rendering pipelines, but
here we exploit them as signals that improve conditioning
and help resolve material-lighting ambiguities. We present
a method based on differentiable Monte Carlo ray tracing
that uses images of an object to jointly recover its spatiallyvarying materials, the surrounding illumination environment, and the shapes of the unseen light occluders who inadvertently cast shadows upon it.

1. Introduction
In this work, we show that the long-standing inverse rendering problem of recovering an object’s material properties
and the surrounding illumination environment from a set
of images can greatly benefit from considering the effects
of unobserved moving light occluders, such as the camera
operator, which partially block incoming light and inadvertently cast shadows onto the object being imaged.
Joint recovery of materials and lighting is a challenging task because the BRDF (bidirectional reflectance distribution function, which represents how a material at any
point on an object’s surface maps from incoming to outgoing light) acts as a directional filter on incoming light.
BRDFs for specular (shiny) materials act as all-pass directional filters, while BRDFs for diffuse materials act as lowpass directional filters. As a result, inverse rendering is fundamentally ambiguous since a shiny object illuminated by
blurry lighting can be indistinguishable from a diffuse object illuminated by sharp lighting (Figure 2). Furthermore,
since diffuse materials act as low-pass filters and strongly
blur incoming light, even the simpler problem of recovering lighting from images of a known diffuse material can be

77

