This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

KTPFormer: Kinematics and Trajectory Prior Knowledge-Enhanced
Transformer for 3D Human Pose Estimation

1

Jihua Peng1,2
Yanghong Zhou1
P. Y. Mok1,2, *
2
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University Laboratory for Artificial Intelligence in Design
{ji-hua.peng,yanghong.zhou}@connect.polyu.hk, tracy.mok@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
This paper presents a novel Kinematics and Trajectory
Prior Knowledge-Enhanced Transformer (KTPFormer),
which overcomes the weakness in existing transformerbased methods for 3D human pose estimation that the
derivation of Q, K, V vectors in their self-attention mechanisms are all based on simple linear mapping. We propose
two prior attention modules, namely Kinematics Prior Attention (KPA) and Trajectory Prior Attention (TPA) to take
advantage of the known anatomical structure of the human
body and motion trajectory information, to facilitate effective learning of global dependencies and features in the
multi-head self-attention. KPA models kinematic relationships in the human body by constructing a topology of kinematics, while TPA builds a trajectory topology to learn the
information of joint motion trajectory across frames. Yielding Q, K, V vectors with prior knowledge, the two modules enable KTPFormer to model both spatial and temporal correlations simultaneously. Extensive experiments on
three benchmarks (Human3.6M, MPI-INF-3DHP and HumanEva) show that KTPFormer achieves superior performance in comparison to state-of-the-art methods. More
importantly, our KPA and TPA modules have lightweight
plug-and-play designs and can be integrated into various
transformer-based networks (i.e., diffusion-based) to improve the performance with only a very small increase in
the computational overhead. The code is available at:
https://github.com/JihuaPeng/KTPFormer.

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation aims to predict the 3D coordinates of human body joints from the input of either monocular 2D images or video sequences. Because of the strong
ties to action recognition [20, 21], human-robot interaction
[13, 33] and virtual reality [9], the research of 3D human
pose estimation has received considerable attention in re* Corresponding author

+
Simulated Spatial
Global Topology

Spatial Local Topology

Kinematics Topology

+

Simulated Temporal
Global Topology
Temporal Local Topology

Joint Motion Trajectory Topology

Figure 1. Top: the spatial local topology (fixed) plus the simulated spatial global topology (learnable) to form the kinematics
topology (learnable). Bottom: the temporal local topology (fixed)
plus the simulated temporal global topology (learnable) to form
the joint motion trajectory topology (learnable).

cent years. Transformer, a deep learning architecture, has
revolutionized first in natural language processing (NLP)
and later in other areas such as computer vision since its
introduction in 2017 [36]. The name ’transformer’ comes
from the fact that these architectures use a self-attention
mechanism to transform layers of inputs into layers of outputs in a way that allows the model to focus on (attend to)
certain inputs. In terms of 3D pose estimation, the transformer first processes an input video into a sequence of tokens, the basic units of processing namely 2D poses, and
then models the spatial-temporal relationship between tokens using multi-head self-attention (MHSA) mechanism.
The existing works of transformer-based methods for 3D
human pose estimation [17, 18, 30, 34, 42, 44, 46] mainly
focus on developing novel transformer encoders. They
model either the spatial correlation between joints within
each frame and the pose-to-pose or joint-to-joint temporal
correlation across frames. Regardless of spatial or temporal
MHSA calculation, the present transformer-based methods
all use linear embedding where 2D pose sequence are tokenized into high dimensional features and treated uniformly

1123

