This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SinSR: Diffusion-Based Image Super-Resolution in a Single Step
Yufei Wang1,2† , Wenhan Yang3 , Xinyuan Chen2∗ , Yaohui Wang2 , Lanqing Guo1 ,
Lap-Pui Chau4 , Ziwei Liu1 , Yu Qiao2 , Alex C. Kot1 , Bihan Wen1∗
1
Nanyang Technological University 2 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3
PengCheng Laboratory 4 The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Abstract
While super-resolution (SR) methods based on diffusion
models exhibit promising results, their practical application
is hindered by the substantial number of required inference
steps. Recent methods utilize the degraded images in the
initial state, thereby shortening the Markov chain. Nevertheless, these solutions either rely on a precise formulation
of the degradation process or still necessitate a relatively
lengthy generation path (e.g., 15 iterations). To enhance inference speed, we propose a simple yet effective method for
achieving single-step SR generation, named SinSR. Specifically, we first derive a deterministic sampling process from
the most recent state-of-the-art (SOTA) method for accelerating diffusion-based SR. This allows the mapping between
the input random noise and the generated high-resolution
image to be obtained in a reduced and acceptable number
of inference steps during training. We show that this deterministic mapping can be distilled into a student model
that performs SR within only one inference step. Additionally, we propose a novel consistency-preserving loss to simultaneously leverage the ground-truth image during the
distillation process, ensuring that the performance of the
student model is not solely bound by the feature manifold of
the teacher model, resulting in further performance improvement. Extensive experiments conducted on synthetic and
real-world datasets demonstrate that the proposed method
can achieve comparable or even superior performance compared to both previous SOTA methods and the teacher model,
in just one sampling step, resulting in a remarkable up to
×10 speedup for inference. Our code will be released at
https://github.com/wyf0912/SinSR/.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) aims to reconstruct a highresolution image from a given low-resolution (LR) counterpart [45]. Recently, diffusion models, known for their
effectiveness in modeling complex distributions, have gained
† Work done as an intern at Shanghai AI Lab. ∗ Corresponding authors.

(a) Input LR image (MUSIQ↑: 23.89)

(b) ResShift-1 (47.43)

(c) ResShift-5 (40.32)

(d) ResShift-15 (62.83)

(e) Ours-1 (68.05)

Figure 1. A comparison between the most recent SOTA method
ResShift [46] for the acceleration of diffusion-based SR and the
proposed method. We achieve on-par or even superior perceptual
quality using only one inference step. (“-N” behind the method
name represents the number of inference steps, and the value in the
bracket is the quantitative result measured by MUSIQ↑ [15].)

widespread adoption and demonstrated remarkable performance in SR tasks, particularly in terms of perceptual quality.
Specifically, current strategies for employing diffusion
models can be broadly categorized into two streams: concatenating the LR image to the input of the denoiser in the
diffusion models [32, 33], and adjusting the inverse process
of a pre-trained diffusion model [4, 5, 14]. Despite achieving
promising results, both strategies encounter computational
efficiency issues. Notably, the initial state of these conditional diffusion models is a pure Gaussian noise without using the prior knowledge from the LR image. Consequently, a
substantial number of inference steps are required to achieve
satisfactory performance, significantly hindering the practical applications of diffusion-based SR techniques.
Efforts have been made to enhance the sampling efficiency of diffusion models, leading to various techniques
proposed [22, 28, 37]. However, in the realm of low-level
vision where maintaining high fidelity is critical, these techniques often fall short as they achieve acceleration at the
cost of performance. More recently, innovative techniques
have emerged to reformulate the diffusion process in image
restoration tasks, focusing on improving the signal-to-noise
ratio of the initial diffusion state and thereby shorten the

25796

