This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards a Simultaneous and Granular Identity-Expression Control in
Personalized Face Generation
Renshuai Liu1,2 , Bowen Ma2 , Wei Zhang2 ,
Zhipeng Hu , Changjie Fan2 , Tangjie Lv2 , Yu Ding2 ∗, Xuan Cheng1 ∗
1
School of Informatics, Xiamen University
2
Virtual Human Group, Netease Fuxi AI Lab
2

Identity

Prompt:

Input

woman,age 20 years
old,ponytail,smile,hoodie,portrait,(masterpiece, best quality,
highres),

Negative Prompt:

Negative Prompt:

(worst quality:2),(low quality:1.8),(normal quality:1.6),bad-hands5,

Compression artifacts, bad art, worst quality, low quality, plastic, fake, bad limbs,
conjoined, featureless, bad features, incorrect objects, watermark, logo

[anxiety]

Identity

Prompt:

RAW Photograph, Henry Cavill as The Witcher, dark fantasy, piercing hazel eyes, dark
forest at night, slayed monsters, detailed skin with visible pores, insane intricate
detail, award winning art, raytracing, sharp focus, 8k, hdr, masterpiece, photography,
dslr, kodachrome, 35mm photograph, analog film, professional, highly detailed

[dismay]

[grief]

[enjoyment]

[contentment]

[excitement]

Output

Figure 1. Our framework takes three inputs: a prompt describing the background, a selfie photo uploaded by the user, and a text related to
the fine-grained expression labels. The generated faces well match the inputted triples and exhibit fine-grained expression synthesis.

Abstract
In human-centric content generation, the pre-trained
text-to-image models struggle to produce user-wanted portrait images, which retain the identity of individuals while
exhibiting diverse expressions. This paper introduces our
efforts towards personalized face generation. To this end,
we propose a novel multi-modal face generation framework, capable of simultaneous identity-expression control
and more fine-grained expression synthesis. Our expression
control is so sophisticated that it can be specialized by the
fine-grained emotional vocabulary. We devise a novel diffusion model that can undertake the task of simultaneously
face swapping and reenactment. Due to the entanglement
of identity and expression, separately and precisely controlling them within one framework is a nontrivial task, thus has
not been explored yet. To overcome this, we propose several innovative designs in the conditional diffusion model,
including balancing identity and expression encoder, imWork done when Renshuai Liu was an intern at Netease Fuxi AI Lab
∗ Co-corresponding Authors.

proved midpoint sampling, and explicitly background conditioning. Extensive experiments have demonstrated the
controllability and scalability of the proposed framework, in
comparison with state-of-the-art text-to-image, face swapping, and face reenactment methods.

1. Introduction
The research community has been striving to improve controllability in the generation of face images tailored to user
preferences. A common practice in controllable generation
and manipulation is to use different modalities as conditioning in a face generator model, such as texts [23, 26, 29, 43,
46], reference images [5, 22, 27, 45], segmentation masks
[12, 21, 34] and audios [32, 54, 55].
Although these methods have realized the ability to control the local features and global attributes in a face, the simultaneous control of identity and expression in a specific
background has not been fully explored, which involves
three important high-level attributes (i.e. identity, expression, and background) to determine a face image. Since
identity and expression are highly entangled, it’s challeng-

2114

