This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantics, Distortion, and Style Matter: Towards Source-free UDA for Panoramic
Segmentation

1

Xu Zheng1 Pengyuan Zhou3 Athanasios V. Vasilakos4 Lin Wang1,2 *
AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ) 2 Dept. of CSE, HKUST 3 Aarhus University 4 University of Agder
zhengxu128@gmail.com, pengyuan.zhou@ece.au.dk, th.vasilakos@gmail.com, linwang@ust.hk
Project Page: https://vlislab22.github.io/360SFUDA/

Abstract
This paper addresses an interesting yet challenging
problem– source-free unsupervised domain adaptation
(SFUDA) for pinhole-to-panoramic semantic segmentation–
given only a pinhole image-trained model (i.e., source) and
unlabeled panoramic images (i.e., target). Tackling this
problem is nontrivial due to the semantic mismatches, style
discrepancies, and inevitable distortion of panoramic images.
To this end, we propose a novel method that utilizes Tangent
Projection (TP) as it has less distortion and meanwhile slits
the equirectangular projection (ERP) with a fixed FoV to
mimic the pinhole images. Both projections are shown effective in extracting knowledge from the source model. However, the distinct projection discrepancies between source
and target domains impede the direct knowledge transfer;
thus, we propose a panoramic prototype adaptation module (PPAM) to integrate panoramic prototypes from the extracted knowledge for adaptation. We then impose the loss
constraints on both predictions and prototypes and propose
a cross-dual attention module (CDAM) at the feature level
to better align the spatial and channel characteristics across
the domains and projections. Both knowledge extraction
and transfer processes are synchronously updated to reach
the best performance. Extensive experiments on the synthetic and real-world benchmarks, including outdoor and
indoor scenarios, demonstrate that our method achieves significantly better performance than prior SFUDA methods
for pinhole-to-panoramic adaptation.

1. Introduction
The comprehensive scene perception abilities of 360◦ cameras have made them highly popular for applications, such
as autonomous driving [1]. In contrast to pinhole cameras that capture 2D planer images with a limited fieldof-view (FoV), 360◦ cameras offer a much wider FoV of
* Corresponding author.

Pinhole Domain
70° Fov

Panoramic Domain
360° Fov

Semantics
Distortion

❌

Style

Domain
Gaps

Source
Pre-train
Source
Model

Knowledge

❓ Extraction
❓

Knowledge
Adaptation

Target
Model

Figure 1. We address a new problem of achieving source-free
pinhole-to-panoramic adaptation for segmentation.

360◦ × 180◦ . As a result, research on panoramic semantic
segmentation [42, 43, 46, 48, 49] has been actively explored
to achieve dense scene understanding for intelligent systems.
Generally, the spherical data captured by the 360◦ cameras is always projected into 2D planar representations, e.g.,
Equirectangular Projection (ERP), to be aligned with the
existing imaging pipeline [1] while preserving the omnidirectional information 1 . However, ERP suffers from the
inevitable distortion and object deformation due to the nonuniformly distributed pixels [59]. Meanwhile, learning effective panoramic segmentation models is often impeded by the
lack of large precisely labeled datasets due to the difficulty
of annotation. For these reasons, some unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) methods [49, 50, 59] have been proposed
to transfer the knowledge from the pinhole image domain
to the panoramic image domain. In some crucial application scenarios, e.g., autonomous driving, source datasets are
not always accessible due to privacy and commercial issues,
such as data portability and transmission costs. One typical
example is the recent large model, SAM [19], which brings
significant progress in instance segmentation for pinhole images; however, the source datasets are too large (10TB) to
be reused in end-tasks, such as [20].
1 In this paper, omnidirectional and panoramic images are interchangeably used, and ERP images often indicate panoramic images.

27885

