This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Puff-Net: Efficient Style Transfer with Pure Content and Style Feature Fusion
Network
Sizhe Zheng, Pan Gao*, Peng Zhou, Jie Qin*
College of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics
{162100101, pan.gao, zhoupeng23, jie.qin}@nuaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Style transfer aims to render an image with the artistic features of a style image, while maintaining the original structure. Various methods have been put forward for
this task, but some challenges still exist. For instance, it
is difficult for CNN-based methods to handle global information and long-range dependencies between input images,
for which transformer-based methods have been proposed.
Although transformers can better model the relationship between content and style images, they require high-cost hardware and time-consuming inference. To address these issues, we design a novel transformer model that includes
only the encoder, thus significantly reducing the computational cost. In addition, we also find that existing style
transfer methods may lead to images under-stylied or missing content. In order to achieve better stylization, we design a content feature extractor and a style feature extractor, based on which pure content and style images can be
fed to the transformer. Finally, we propose a novel network
termed Puff-Net, i.e., pure content and style feature fusion
network. Through qualitative and quantitative experiments,
we demonstrate the advantages of our model compared to
state-of-the-art ones in the literature. The code is available
at https://github.com/ZszYmy9/Puff-Net.

1. Introduction
As personalized expression gains popularity, people increasingly seek to transform images into new artistic styles.
Imagine turning a plain landscape photo into an oil painting
or a snapshot into an Impressionist-inspired image. This
technology, known as Style Transfer in computer vision,
offers possibilities for artistic expression. It captures and
blends the essence of artistic styles into different images,
creating pieces that merge original content with artistic
styles.
Early style transfer methods primarily relied on opti* Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Comparison of different models based on loss and capacity, with the loss being a combination of 60% content loss and
40% style loss. Our model shows a favorable balance between
capacity and loss. Details can be found in the Method and Experiments sections.

mization algorithms which minimize the differences between the input image and the reference image. However, the high computational complexity of these methods greatly limited their practical applications. With technological advancements, image style transfer techniques
based on direct inference have made significant progress.
The method introduced by Gatys et al. [11], which employs convolutional neural networks (CNN), extracts features of content and style from different layers of a pretrained CNN model. This approach has significantly reduced computational complexity and spurred a wave of related research, including developments like AdaIN [12],
Avatar [24], SANet [21], and MAST [5]. Despite the
achievements of these CNN-based inference methods for
image style transfer, they still face limitations. They depend on convolution operations to capture image features,
and their performance is limited when the network layers
are insufficient to capture global information. On the other
hand, as the number of layers increases, the content details

8059

