This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PikeLPN: Mitigating Overlooked Inefficiencies of Low-Precision
Neural Networks
Marina Neseem* ,†1 , Conor McCullough2 , Randy Hsin2 , Chas Leichner2 , Shan Li2 , In Suk Chong2 ,
Andrew Howard2 , Lukasz Lew2 , Sherief Reda1 , Ville-Mikko Rautio2 , and Daniele Moro†2
1

Brown University, 2 Google

Abstract

1. Introduction
Quantization has long been established as a method to decrease the precision of neural network weights and activations effectively, resulting in smaller models and acceler* Work done during internship at Google.
† Corresponding authors: marina neseem@brown.edu

and danielemoro@google.com
1 Pike is a slim fast fish, LPN stands for Low-Precision Network.

Low-Precision Models

Top-1 Accuracy on ImageNet (%)

Low-precision quantization is recognized for its efficacy
in neural network optimization. Our analysis reveals that
non-quantized elementwise operations which are prevalent
in layers such as parameterized activation functions, batch
normalization, and quantization scaling dominate the inference cost of low-precision models. These non-quantized
elementwise operations are commonly overlooked in SOTA
efficiency metrics such as Arithmetic Computation Effort
(ACE) [46]. In this paper, we propose ACEv2 - an extended version of ACE which offers a better alignment with
the inference cost of quantized models and their energy
consumption on ML hardware. Moreover, we introduce
PikeLPN1 , a model that addresses these efficiency issues by
applying quantization to both elementwise operations and
multiply-accumulate operations. In particular, we present a
novel quantization technique for batch normalization layers
named QuantNorm which allows for quantizing the batch
normalization parameters without compromising the model
performance. Additionally, we propose applying Double
Quantization where the quantization scaling parameters
are quantized. Furthermore, we recognize and resolve the
issue of distribution mismatch in Separable Convolution
layers by introducing Distribution-Heterogeneous Quantization which enables quantizing them to low-precision.
PikeLPN achieves Pareto-optimality in efficiency-accuracy
trade-off with up to 3× efficiency improvement compared to
SOTA low-precision models.

75

PikeLPN-3X
PikeLPN-2X

70
65

PikeLPN-1X

PROFIT

Ours

PikeLPN-6X

PokeBNN-1x
MobileNet-8b
MeliusNet-42
PokeBNN-0.75x
ReActNet
Real-to-Binary
PokeBNN-0.5x MeliusNet-29
Bi-RealNet-34

60
Bi-RealNet-18
55

MobiNet
XNOR-Net
101

ACEv2 (Billion)

102

Figure 1. Accuracy vs ACEv2 of PikeLPN and SOTA lowprecision neural networks. ACEv2 is an efficiency metric that
estimates the cost of arithmetic operations during inference.

ated processing [11]. Recent studies have shown impressive
results in image classification tasks, making the use of lowprecision quantization (i.e., 4 bits or fewer) increasingly
popular [28, 33, 34, 46]. In these compact models, convolutional and fully connected layers are typically constrained
to 4-bit precision or even less, while precision is maintained
at higher levels in other layers of the network. For example, the state-of-the-art (SOTA) binary network PokeBNN
[46] binarizes the convolutional layers of ResNet-50 [15],
and to avoid accuracy loss, they incorporate extra skip connections, extra batch normalization layers, and parameterized activation functions (DPReLU) that are executed in
high precision. As illustrated in Figure 2, while this strategy significantly reduces the cost of multiply-accumulate
(MAC) operations, it shifts the energy burden to the elementwise operations within these remaining high-precision
layers. Although there are fewer of these elementwise operations, they use more energy because they are still in high
precision. This indicates a critical area of optimization to
improve the overall efficiency of low-precision models.

15996

