This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DetCLIPv3: Towards Versatile Generative Open-vocabulary Object Detection
Lewei Yao1,2 , Renjie Pi1 , Jianhua Han2 , Xiaodan Liang3 ,
Hang Xu2† , Wei Zhang2 , Zhenguo Li2 , Dan Xu1†
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
3

Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University

OV
object
detection

Object
hierarchical
label
generation

Figure 1. The versatility of DetCLIPv3 supports both open-vocabulary object detection (OVD) and the generation of hierarchical object
labels. Top: when provided with extracted noun phrases from image-text pair captions as input, DetCLIPv3 can detect a broad spectrum
of visual concepts. Bottom: In the absence of predefined categories as input, DetCLIPv3 detects potential objects and generates multigranularity hierarchical labels for them, formatted as ’phrase | category | parent category’. DetCLIPv3 offers a more comprehensive
interpretation of objects, significantly expanding the application scope of OVD systems. Zoom in for the best viewing.

Abstract
Existing open-vocabulary object detectors typically require a predefined set of categories from users, significantly confining their application scenarios. In this paper, we introduce DetCLIPv3, a high-performing detector
that excels not only at both open-vocabulary object detection, but also generating hierarchical labels for detected objects. DetCLIPv3 is characterized by three core designs:
1. Versatile model architecture: we derive a robust openset detection framework which is further empowered with
generation ability via the integration of a caption head.
2. High information density data: we develop an autoannotation pipeline leveraging visual large language model
to refine captions for large-scale image-text pairs, providing rich, multi-granular object labels to enhance the training. 3. Efficient training strategy: we employ a pre-training
stage with low-resolution inputs that enables the object captioner to efficiently learn a broad spectrum of visual concepts from extensive image-text paired data. This is followed by a fine-tuning stage that leverages a small number of high-resolution samples to further enhance detection performance. With these effective designs, DetCLIPv3
demonstrates superior open-vocabulary detection performance, e.g., our Swin-T backbone model achieves a notable
† Corresponding author: xu.hang@huawei.com, danxu@cse.ust.hk

47.0 zero-shot fixed AP on the LVIS minival benchmark,
outperforming GLIPv2, GroundingDINO, and DetCLIPv2
by 18.0/19.6/6.6 AP, respectively. DetCLIPv3 also achieves
a state-of-the-art 19.7 AP in dense captioning task on VG
dataset, showcasing its strong generative capability.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in open-vocabulary object detection (OVD)
has achieved the ability to identify and localize a diverse
range of objects [2, 11, 12, 20, 27, 34, 54, 55, 62]. However,
these models are limited by their reliance on a predefined
object category list during inference, which hinders their
usage in practical scenarios.
In contrast to current open-vocabulary object detection
(OVD) methods that recognizes objects solely based on category names, human cognition demonstrates much more
versatility. As illustrated in Figure 2, humans are able to understand objects from different granularities, in a hierarchical manner. This multi-level recognition ability showcases
the rich visual understanding that humans possess, which is
yet to be achieved in contemporary OVD systems.
To address the above limitations, we introduce DetCLIPv3, a novel object detector that enhances the scope of
open-vocabulary object detection. DetCLIPv3 is able to not
only recognize objects based on provided category names
but also generate hierarchical labels for each detected ob-

27391

