This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LocLLM: Exploiting Generalizable Human Keypoint Localization
via Large Language Model
Dongkai Wang
Shiyu Xuan Shiliang Zhang
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
{dongkai.wang, slzhang.jdl}@pku.edu.cn, shiyu xuan@stu.pku.edu.cn

Abstract
The capacity of existing human keypoint localization
models is limited by keypoint priors provided by the training data. To alleviate this restriction and pursue more general model, this work studies keypoint localization from a
different perspective by reasoning locations based on keypiont clues in text descriptions. We propose LocLLM, the
first Large-Language Model (LLM) based keypoint localization model that takes images and text instructions as inputs and outputs the desired keypoint coordinates. LocLLM
leverages the strong reasoning capability of LLM and clues
of keypoint type, location, and relationship in textual descriptions for keypoint localization. To effectively tune LocLLM, we construct localization-based instruction conversations to connect keypoint description with corresponding
coordinates in input image, and fine-tune the whole model
in a parameter-efficient training pipeline. LocLLM shows
remarkable performance on standard 2D/3D keypoint localization benchmarks. Moreover, incorporating language
clues into the localization makes LocLLM show superior
flexibility and generalizable capability in cross dataset keypoint localization, and even detecting novel type of keypoints unseen during training† .

1. Introduction
Human keypoint localization aims to locate target keypoints
from input person image and is a fundamental task in computer vision and graphics. It has a wide range of applications in human pose estimation [26, 31–33] and facial
landmark detection [23], etc. Existing keypoint localization
methods typically utilize powerful neural networks, e.g.,
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [26, 37] or Vision
Transformer (ViT) [38] to either directly regress keypoint
coordinates [11] or estimate the keypoint heatmaps [26, 37]
to perform localization. Those methods learn keypoint pri† Project page: https://github.com/kennethwdk/LocLLM

Image:

Back
bone

Nose

[0.406,0.156]

Hip

[0.621,0.478]

Knee

[0.406,0.638]

…

Image:

Pre-trained LLM

The nose is the central, protruding feature

Text: on their face, located just above the upper

[0.406,0.156]

lip. Please locate nose coordinates.

Figure 1. Upper: The conventional keypoint localization methods [11, 37, 38] encodes keypoint prior provided by the training
set into model architecture and refers to encoded prior for keypoint localization. Bottom: The proposed LLM-based keypoint
localization method refers to keypoint type, location, and relationship descriptions, and utilizes pre-trained powerful LLM [17, 43]
to predict keypoint coordinates. Our method is more general to
locate novel keypoints cross datasets, as textual descriptions can
be provided flexibly.

ors encoded in the training set into the backbone, e.g., along
channel dimension in the last layer. This design reinforces
the model responses on keypoints encoded in the backbone,
but limits the generalization capability to detect keypoints
in unseen human pose from different dataset, or to handle
novel type of keypoint not included in the training set.
To alleviate the restriction by the training set and pursue
a more general model, this work aims to perform keypoint
localization from a different perspective, i.e., by referring
to clues in textual descriptions that can be flexibly acquired.
Inspired by the Large Language Model (LLM) [17, 43], we
describe keypoint location through natural language and utilize the powerful reasoning capability of LLM for keypoint
localization. Previous localization methods need to refer to
encoded keypoint priors in network architecture, which is

614

