This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Distilled Masked Auto-Encoders are Efficient Video Anomaly Detectors
Nicolae-Cătălin Ristea1,2,⋄ , Florinel-Alin Croitoru1,⋄ , Radu Tudor Ionescu1,3, *, Marius Popescu1,3,
Fahad Shahbaz Khan4,5 , Mubarak Shah6
1
University of Bucharest, Romania, 2 NUST Politehnica Bucharest, Romania,
3
SecurifAI, Romania, 4 MBZ University of Artificial Intelligence, UAE,
5
Linköping University, Sweden, 6 University of Central Florida, US
Add synthetic anomalies*

1. Introduction
In recent years, research on abnormal event detection in
video gained significant traction [1, 10, 17, 18, 26–28, 36,
38, 43, 44, 49, 52, 57, 58, 61, 62, 65, 69, 76, 78, 80, 83, 87,
90, 95, 97–100], due to its utter importance in video surveillance. Despite the growing interest, video anomaly detection remains a complex task, owing its complexity to the
fact that abnormal situations are context-dependent and do
not occur very often. This makes it very difficult to collect
a representative set of abnormal events for training state-ofthe-art deep learning models in a fully supervised manner.
To showcase the rarity and reliance on context of anomalies, we refer to the vehicle ramming attacks carried out by
terrorists against pedestrians. As soon as a car is steered
* corresp. author: raducu.ionescu@gmail.com; ⋄ equal contribution

t

Mask tokens*

Tokenize

t-1

(*) with some probability
Shared
encoder

Classification
head

Student decoder

Teacher decoder

Predicted frame

Predicted frame

Predicted
label

Weight
tokens

[CLS] token

Ground-truth frame

0.93
Cross-entropy
loss

We propose an efficient abnormal event detection model
based on a lightweight masked auto-encoder (AE) applied
at the video frame level. The novelty of the proposed model
is threefold. First, we introduce an approach to weight
tokens based on motion gradients, thus shifting the focus
from the static background scene to the foreground objects.
Second, we integrate a teacher decoder and a student decoder into our architecture, leveraging the discrepancy between the outputs given by the two decoders to improve
anomaly detection. Third, we generate synthetic abnormal
events to augment the training videos, and task the masked
AE model to jointly reconstruct the original frames (without anomalies) and the corresponding pixel-level anomaly
maps. Our design leads to an efficient and effective model,
as demonstrated by the extensive experiments carried out on
four benchmarks: Avenue, ShanghaiTech, UBnormal and
UCSD Ped2. The empirical results show that our model
achieves an excellent trade-off between speed and accuracy, obtaining competitive AUC scores, while processing
1655 FPS. Hence, our model is between 8 and 70 times
faster than competing methods. We also conduct an ablation study to justify our design. Our code is freely available
at: https://github.com/ristea/aed-mae.

Training data

Estimate motion
magnitude of tokens

Abstract

Predicted map

Predicted map

Self-distillation loss

True anomaly map
Reconstruction loss

Figure 1. Our masked auto-encoder for abnormal event detection
based on self-distillation. At training time, some video frames
are augmented with synthetic anomalies. The teacher decoder
learns to reconstruct original frames (without anomalies) and predict anomaly maps. The student decoder learns to reproduce the
teacher’s output. Motion gradients are aggregated at the token
level and used as weights for the reconstruction loss. Red dashed
lines represent steps executed only during training.

on the sidewalk, it becomes an abnormal event. Hence, the
place where the car is driven (street versus sidewalk) determines the normal or abnormal label of the action, i.e. the
label depends on context. Furthermore, there are less than
200 vehicle ramming attacks registered to date1 , confirming
1 https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vehicle-ramming_
attack

15984

