This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Multimodal Models are In-Context Learners
Quan Sun1∗

Yufeng Cui1∗ Xiaosong Zhang1∗ Fan Zhang1∗ Qiying Yu2,1∗ Yueze Wang1
Yongming Rao1 Jingjing Liu2 Tiejun Huang1,3 Xinlong Wang1†

1 Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence
∗

2 Tsinghua University

equal contribution

†

3 Peking University

project lead

code & models: https://github.com/baaivision/Emu

Abstract
The human ability to easily solve multimodal tasks in
context (i.e., with only a few demonstrations or simple instructions), is what current multimodal systems have largely
struggled to imitate. In this work, we demonstrate that the
task-agnostic in-context learning capabilities of large multimodal models can be significantly enhanced by effective
scaling-up. We introduce Emu2, a generative multimodal
model with 37 billion parameters, trained on large-scale
multimodal sequences with a unified autoregressive objective. Emu2 exhibits strong multimodal in-context learning
abilities, even emerging to solve tasks that require on-the-fly
reasoning, such as visual prompting and object-grounded
generation. The model sets a new record on multiple multimodal understanding tasks in few-shot settings. When
instruction-tuned to follow specific instructions, Emu2 further achieves new state-of-the-art on challenging tasks such
as question answering benchmarks for large multimodal
models and open-ended subject-driven generation. These
achievements demonstrate that Emu2 can serve as a base
model and general-purpose interface for a wide range of
multimodal tasks. Code and models are publicly available
to facilitate future research.

1. Introduction
Multimodal tasks [25, 41] encompass anything involving
understanding and generation in single or multiple modalities [5, 19, 58], which can be highly diverse and longtail. Previous multimodal systems largely rely on designing task-specific architecture and collecting a sizable supervised training set, both of which are difficult to scale, particularly when this process needs to be repeated for each new
task encountered. By contrast, humans can solve a new task
in context, i.e., with only a few demonstrations or simple
† Correspondence to wangxinlong@baai.ac.cn

instructions – a capability that current multimodal models
have yet to learn.
Recently, generative pretrained language models have
demonstrated strong in-context learning abilities [11, 21,
73]. By training a 37-billion-parameter model Emu2 and
thoroughly evaluating it on diverse multimodal tasks, we
demonstrate that a scaled-up multimodal generative pretrained model can harness similar in-context learning abilities and effectively generalize to unseen multimodal tasks.
Emu2 is trained with a unified autoregressive objective:
predict-the-next-multimodal-element (either visual embeddings or textual tokens). In this unified generative pretraining process, large-scale multimodal sequences (e.g., text,
image-text pairs, and interleaved image-text-video) are used
for model training.
We measure Emu2’s capabilities of learning from a few
examples or instructions on standard multimodal datasets,
as well as new tasks unseen in the training set. Specifically,
Emu2 is evaluated under two scenarios: (a) few-shot setting, where we allow as many examples as possible to fit
the context window of the model; and (b) instruction tuning, where the model is tuned to follow specific instructions.
Emu2 achieves promising results in the few-shot setting
on a wide range of vision-language tasks. For example, it
demonstrates state-of-the-art few-shot performance on multiple visual question-answering datasets. We observe a performance improvement when the number of examples in
context increases. Figure 1 illustrates Emu2’s strong multimodal reasoning capabilities for tasks in the wild, e.g.,
recognition and counting in a specific format. Emu2 also
learns to follow visual prompting in context (e.g., the circles
laid on the images in Figure 1), even although it struggles
at a smaller scale or at zero shot.
As Emu2 is inherently equipped to handle interleaved
text-image-video at both input and output, it serves as
a powerful and versatile base model for diverse multimodal tasks, by following specific task instructions. For
example, after instruct tuning with conversational data,
14398

