This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SleepVST: Sleep Staging from Near-Infrared Video Signals
using Pre-Trained Transformers
Jonathan F. Carter* 1,2 João Jorge2 Oliver Gibson2 Lionel Tarassenko1
1

Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Oxford
2
Oxehealth Ltd., Oxford

Abstract
Advances in camera-based physiological monitoring
have enabled the robust, non-contact measurement of respiration and the cardiac pulse, which are known to be indicative of the sleep stage. This has led to research into
camera-based sleep monitoring as a promising alternative to “gold-standard” polysomnography, which is cumbersome, expensive to administer, and hence unsuitable for
longer-term clinical studies. In this paper, we introduce
SleepVST, a transformer model which enables state-of-theart performance in camera-based sleep stage classification (sleep staging). After pre-training on contact sensor
data, SleepVST outperforms existing methods for cardiorespiratory sleep staging on the SHHS and MESA datasets,
achieving total Cohen’s kappa scores of 0.75 and 0.77 respectively. We then show that SleepVST can be successfully
transferred to cardio-respiratory waveforms extracted from
video, enabling fully contact-free sleep staging. Using a
video dataset of 50 nights, we achieve a total accuracy of
78.8% and a Cohen’s κ of 0.71 in four-class video-based
sleep staging, setting a new state-of-the-art in the domain.

1. Introduction
Accurate sleep monitoring is critical for the diagnosis of
sleep disorders and the discovery of novel treatments and
biomarkers. Poor sleep is broadly linked with a number
of health conditions, including cardiovascular diseases such
as diabetes and hypertension [15]. Additionally, there are
links between specific sleep stages and neurodegenerative
conditions, such as a decrease in non-rapid-eye-movement
stage 3 (N3) sleep with Alzheimer’s disease [23].
Overnight video polysomnography (vPSG), the “goldstandard” [52] technique for sleep monitoring, requires the
* jcarter@robots.ox.ac.uk

use of a large number of contact sensors including electrodes placed on the scalp (EEG), near the eyes (EOG),
and under the chin (EMG) of the patient. Human experts
(polysomnographers) must then review the recorded data,
classifying the patient’s sleep into five stages at 30-second
intervals (epochs) and annotating other important events
such as leg movements and apnoeas. This manual process
often takes multiple hours to complete.
Experts primarily rely on characteristic patterns in
brain activity measured from the EEG to classify sleep
stages [20]. However, sleep stage information is also encoded in measures of autonomic activity, including cardiac [48] and respiratory signals [19], and body movements [68]. This has led to the development of methods
for automatically classifying sleep stages from sensors that
measure these parameters, such as smartwatches [63].
Prior work has shown that these physiological parameters can also be measured using video cameras [18, 65, 66],
leading to the development of methods for classifying sleep
stages entirely from video input [6, 35, 60]. Camerabased methods have particular promise as part of a multipurpose sleep monitoring system. For example, within elderly care settings, in addition to classifying sleep stages,
they could also be used to detect specific sleep movement
disorders [18], which are linked with conditions such as
Parkinson’s, and which are typically distinguished via manual video review [51]. They could also be used to detect
falls [12], one of the leading causes of injury and mortality
amongst elderly individuals.
State-of-the-art video-based sleep staging [6] has used
the heart rate (HR) and breathing rate (BR) derived from
video to perform sleep staging. However, these rates are
typically measured as averages over time, losing higher
frequency inter-pulse and inter-breath interval information.
EEG- [40] and wearable-based [22] sleep staging methods
have both been improved by using raw waveforms as inputs,
rather than derived quantities e.g. signal features [37, 45].

12479

