This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OmniVec2 - A Novel Transformer based Network for Large Scale
Multimodal and Multitask Learning
Siddharth Srivastava, Gaurav Sharma
Typeface
{siddharth.srivastava, gaurav}@typeface.ai

Abstract
We present a novel multimodal multitask network and
associated training algorithm. The method is capable of
ingesting data from approximately 12 different modalities
namely image, video, audio, text, depth, point cloud, time
series, tabular, graph, X-ray, infrared, IMU, and hyperspectral. The proposed approach utilizes modality specialized tokenizers, a shared transformer architecture, and
cross-attention mechanisms to project the data from different modalities into a unified embedding space. It addresses multimodal and multitask scenarios by incorporating modality-specific task heads for different tasks in
respective modalities. We propose a novel pretraining
strategy with iterative modality switching to initialize the
network, and a training algorithm which trades off fully
joint training over all modalities, with training on pairs
of modalities at a time. We provide comprehensive evaluation across 25 datasets from 12 modalities and show state
of the art performances, demonstrating the effectiveness of
the proposed architecture, pretraining strategy and adapted
multitask training.

1. Introduction
Extracting meaningful representations from data is a central task in machine learning. Majority of the approaches
proposed are usually specialized for specific modalities and
tasks. The development of methods capable of handling
multiple modalities, in a holistic way, has been an active
topic of research recently [21, 34, 35, 45, 63, 105]. Multi
task learning has a large body of literature [10], but has been
traditionally limited to tasks from single modality. Learning
a unified network that trains shared parameters across diverse tasks in different modalities, like image, video, depth
maps, audio, has been shown to be more robust and give
better generalization and reduce overfitting to a single task
or modality [1, 24] cf. unimodal networks. Such joint learning also enables more efficient use of available labeled data

across various modalities, potentially reducing the need for
extensive labeling in specific modalities for particular tasks.
In the present work, we extend such line of research and
propose a multimodal multitask method which learns embeddings in a shared space across different modalities and
then employs task specific sub-networks for solving specific
tasks in specific modalities. The method utilizes a common transformer based bottleneck block to map the input
to embeddings in a shared space, thus incorporating knowledge from multiple tasks associated with different respective modalities. This structure leads to learning of very robust representations informed and regularized by all tasks
and modalities together. The embeddings are then used by
the task heads to make required predictions.
Previous research in generalized multimodal learning
falls into three main categories. First, there are methods that
process multiple heterogeneous modalities such as images,
3D, and audio, directly without using separate encoders for
each modality, learning representations directly from these
inputs [34, 35]. Second, some approaches use modality specific encoders and then learn generalized embeddings, for
data from each modality, based on a unified objective in
the latent space [5]. Third, there are methods focused on
knowledge sharing across different modalities, employing
either a single common encoder [21] or distinct encoders
for each modality [1]. Our work aligns more closely with
the third type of approaches, while incorporating elements
from the first. We employ modality specific tokenizers and
encoders, and have a bottleneck shared transformer backbone. Tokenization is tailored to each modality, drawing
inspiration from the Uni-Perceiver model but with key modifications detailed in Sec. 3. After tokenization, transformer
based network is used to obtain initial representations for
the modalities which are passed through fully connected
layers and then fused together with cross attention module. The fused representation then passes through the transformer backbone. The features from the transformer are
then individually fused with original modality features using cross attention and are in turn fed to the modality specific task head.

27412

