This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VSCode: General Visual Salient and Camouflaged Object Detection
with 2D Prompt Learning
Ziyang Luo1 Nian Liu2,∗ Wangbo Zhao3 Xuguang Yang1 Dingwen Zhang1
Deng-Ping Fan5,6 Fahad Khan2,4 Junwei Han1,7,∗
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
National University of Singapore 4 CVL, Linköping University 5 TBI Center, CS, Nankai University
6
Nankai International Advanced Research Institute (SHENZHEN FUTIAN)
7
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
Task

Abstract

Visual salient object detection (SOD) and camouflaged object detection (COD) are two interconnected yet unique tasks.
The goal of SOD is to identify prominent objects within an
image that significantly contrast with their surroundings [5],
which can be used to promote segmentation [46, 111], detection [94], and Part-Object Relational visual saliency [57, 58].
While COD focuses on identifying objects concealed within
their environment. These objects intentionally blend in by
sharing structural or textural similarities with their surroundings [15]. Despite the seemingly different definitions of SOD
and COD, they both belong to the realm of binary segmentation and share some vital fundamental similarities, such as
* Corresponding author: Nian Liu (liunian228@gmail.com) and Junwei
Han (junweihan2010@gmail.com)

RGB SOD

RGB COD

RGB-T SOD

RGB

VSOD

COD Tasks
RGB-D COD

VCOD

COD

1. Introduction

SOD

Salient object detection (SOD) and camouflaged object
detection (COD) are related yet distinct binary mapping
tasks. These tasks involve multiple modalities, sharing commonalities and unique cues. Existing research often employs
intricate task-specific specialist models, potentially leading
to redundancy and suboptimal results. We introduce VSCode, a generalist model with novel 2D prompt learning, to
jointly address four SOD tasks and three COD tasks. We utilize VST as the foundation model and introduce 2D prompts
within the encoder-decoder architecture to learn domain
and task-specific knowledge on two separate dimensions. A
prompt discrimination loss helps disentangle peculiarities
to benefit model optimization. VSCode outperforms state-ofthe-art methods across six tasks on 26 datasets and exhibits
zero-shot generalization to unseen tasks by combining 2D
prompts, such as RGB-D COD. Source code has been available at https://github.com/Sssssuperior/VSCode.

SOD Tasks
RGB-D SOD

Depth

Thermal

Flow

Domain

Figure 1. Relationship of SOD, COD, and multimodal tasks.
Each specific task is seen as a combination of two dimensions, i.e.
domain (RGB/Depth/Thermal/Flow) and task (SOD/COD).

objectness and structuredness.
To cater to various scenarios, both SOD and COD have
given rise to several sub-tasks with different modalities,
including RGB SOD [83, 108], RGB COD [27, 66, 101],
RGB-D SOD [42, 71], RGB-D COD [92], and RGB-T SOD
[80, 107]. By leveraging optical flow maps, Video SOD
(VSOD) [44, 91] and VCOD [10, 36] tasks can also be seen
as a combination of two modalities. The relationship of
SOD, COD, and multimodal tasks is shown in Figure 1,
where each specific task can be considered as a combination
of two dimensions, i.e. domain and task. Although these
multimodal tasks differ in the complementary cues they employ, these modalities share some key commonalities. For
instance, depth, thermal, and optical flow maps often show
obvious objectness as in RGB images.
Although previous CNN-based [10, 61, 71, 77, 86, 109]
and transformer-based [54, 116] approaches have effectively
addressed these tasks and achieved favorable results, they
usually rely on meticulously designed models to tackle each
task individually. Designing models specifically for individual tasks can be problematic since the training data of
one task is typically limited. Task-specific specialist models

17169

