This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Recognition in Portrait Mode
Mingfei Han2,1,3,4 *
1

Linjie Yang1

Bytedance

Xiaojie Jin1
Jiashi Feng1
Heng Wang1
2
ReLER Lab, AAII, UTS 3 Data61, CSIRO
https://mingfei.info/PMV/

Xiaojun Chang2,4
4

MBZUAI

Abstract
The creation of new datasets often presents new challenges for video recognition and can inspire novel ideas
while addressing these challenges. While existing datasets
mainly comprise landscape mode videos, our paper seeks to
introduce portrait mode videos to the research community
and highlight the unique challenges associated with this
video format. With the growing popularity of smartphones
and social media applications, recognizing portrait mode
videos is becoming increasingly important. To this end, we
have developed the first dataset dedicated to portrait mode
video recognition, namely PortraitMode-400. The taxonomy of PortraitMode-400 was constructed in a data-driven
manner, comprising 400 fine-grained categories, and rigorous quality assurance was implemented to ensure the accuracy of human annotations. In addition to the new dataset,
we conducted a comprehensive analysis of the impact of
video format (portrait mode versus landscape mode) on
recognition accuracy and spatial bias due to the different
formats. Furthermore, we designed extensive experiments
to explore key aspects of portrait mode video recognition,
including the choice of data augmentation, evaluation procedure, the importance of temporal information, and the
role of audio modality. Building on the insights from our
experimental results and the introduction of PortraitMode400, our paper aims to inspire further research efforts in
this emerging research direction.

1. Introduction
Most efforts in video recognition have focused on improving the accuracy and efficiency of different models and
architectures on public benchmarks. Over the past two
decades, there has been a dramatic shift in the types of video
recognition models, starting from bags of features [34, 41,
42, 45, 49, 54–56], moving on to convolutional neural networks [8, 13, 14, 22, 33, 52, 53, 58, 59, 65, 66], and more
recently, vision transformers [1, 2, 4, 7, 12, 30, 32, 35,
* Work is done during an internship at ByteDance.

PortraitMode-400

Figure 1. A glance of PortraitMode-400, which is the first dataset
dedicated to portrait mode video recognition. It covers videos
from 9 domains and 400 specific categories. We show video samples (left to right, top to down) for aerial yoga, riding neck, partner
dancing (pop music), acrobatics, cooking fish soup, catching crab,
styling hair with hairpins and opening mystery card packs, from
different domains of our dataset.

36, 40, 67]. With the evolution of various models, video
datasets have played a crucial role in driving each generation of models. The introduction of each video dataset has
guided the research community to focus on new challenges.
We have moved from using datasets collected in controlled
environments (e.g., KTH [43], Weizmann [5]) to more realistic videos (e.g., UCF101 [46], HMDB51 [27]), and now
to large-scale web video datasets (e.g., Kinetics-700 [9],
HowTo100M [37]).
While existing video datasets are mostly built on landscape mode videos, portrait mode videos have become increasingly more popular on major social media applications. The shift from landscape mode to portrait mode is
not just changing the aspect ratios of the videos. It has significant implications for the types of content that are created and the spatial bias inherent in the data. Portrait mode
videos bring in distinct challenges for video recognition as
well. For example, they tend to focus more on the subject
(i.e., typically humans) with much less background context,

21831

