This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Seg2Reg: Differentiable 2D Segmentation to 1D Regression Rendering for 360
Room Layout Reconstruction
Cheng Sun1
Wei-En Tai2
Yu-Lin Shih2
Kuan-Wei Chen2
2
2
Yong-Jing Syu
Kent Selwyn The
Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,3
Hwann-Tzong Chen2,4
1

NVIDIA

2

National Tsing Hua University

3

4

National Taiwan University

Abstract
State-of-the-art single-view 360◦ room layout reconstruction methods formulate the problem as a high-level
1D (per-column) regression task. On the other hand, traditional low-level 2D layout segmentation is simpler to learn
and can represent occluded regions, but it requires complex
post-processing for the targeting layout polygon and sacrifices accuracy. We present Seg2Reg to render 1D layout
depth regression from the 2D segmentation map in a differentiable and occlusion-aware way, marrying the merits
of both sides. Specifically, our model predicts floor-plan
density for the input equirectangular 360◦ image. Formulating the 2D layout representation as a density field enables us to employ ‘flattened’ volume rendering to form
1D layout depth regression. In addition, we propose a
novel 3D warping augmentation on layout to improve generalization. Finally, we re-implement recent room layout
reconstruction methods into our codebase for benchmarking and explore modern backbones and training techniques
to serve as the strong baseline. The code is at https:
//PanoLayoutStudio.github.io .

1. Introduction
Room layout estimation is one of the fundamental vision
problems toward scene understanding. The goal is to reconstruct the outermost room structure, usually comprising the floor, ceiling, walls, and sometimes columns and
beams. Room layout is crucial in various indoor tasks, such
as holistic 3D reconstruction [22, 45, 47, 49], image synthesis [10, 41], floor-plan estimation [4, 33], and extreme baseline SfM [14, 32]. Automatic layout annotation for panoramas is also a sought-after feature in real estate portals.
Traditional deep-learning methods view room-layout estimation as semantic segmentation tasks for perspective images [15, 21, 50] or panoramas [31, 43, 52, 53]. The downside of previous segmentation-based methods is that they
need heuristic post-processing steps, which introduce errors

Aeolus Robotics

Regression methods
2D-to-1D
network

Per-column reg.

Geometry
projection
Primary-view
layout

Segmentation methods
2D-to-2D
network

Non-differentiable
post-processing
Complete layout
Differentiable Seg2Reg

Ours

2D-to-2D
network
Primary view

Primary-view layout

⋮

⋮

Sampled views

Secondary layouts

Union
Complete layout

Density map

Figure 1. Regression methods directly predict layout geometry. A powerful 2D-to-1D decoder is essential to capture highlevel cues within an image column. The regressed layout pertains solely to the visible region from the camera origin (dubbed
primary-view layout). Segmentation methods predict lower-level
per-pixel probabilities of layout facades, corners, and boundaries.
While capable of modeling occluded regions, they require a nondifferentiable post-heuristic to convert segmentation to layout geometry. Our proposed Seg2Reg aims to synergize the strengths
of both. We re-formulate 2D layout representation as 2D density
field via projecting pixels onto the floor or ceiling. We use the
classical volume rendering technique to render depth on the density map, which is differentiable and occlusion-aware. The 1D
depth maps rendered from the primary view and the sampled secondary views directly outline the layout polygons.

and gaps between the training objective and the targeted
layout outcomes. Recent advancements in 360◦ roomlayout estimation involve training deep models to regress
the boundary [34, 35] or distance to layout wall [18, 37] for
each image column (i.e., 1D regression). The regressed geometry information can then be directly projected onto the
floor to form a layout floor-plan polygon. Despite achieving
state-of-the-art accuracy, regression-based methods require

10435

