This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language Embedded 3D Gaussians for Open-Vocabulary Scene Understanding
Jin-Chuan Shi1 Miao Wang1,2* Hao-Bin Duan1 Shao-Hua Guan1
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory

“LEGO”

Ground Truth

MAX

“Plant”

LERF

PSNR: 25.749
FPS: 0.04
mAP: 0.688

3DOVS

PSNR: 25.782
FPS: 0.17
mAP: 0.550

Ours

PSNR: 29.826
FPS: 89
mAP: 0.815

MIN

Figure 1. We present Language Embedded 3D Gaussians, a novel scene representation for open-vocabulary querying. The top row
visualizes the original image, novel view synthesis result with query relevancy and PCA of learned semantic features. The bottom row
compares our method with other language-embedded representations. The right-side bar maps relevancy values to heatmap colors. Our
method achieves better fidelity and query accuracy while rendering at higher frame rates.

Abstract
Open-vocabulary querying in 3D space is challenging
but essential for scene understanding tasks such as object localization and segmentation. Language-embedded
scene representations have made progress by incorporating language features into 3D spaces. However, their efficacy heavily depends on neural networks that are resourceintensive in training and rendering. Although recent 3D
Gaussians offer efficient and high-quality novel view synthesis, directly embedding language features in them leads
to prohibitive memory usage and decreased performance.
In this work, we introduce Language Embedded 3D Gaussians, a novel scene representation for open-vocabulary
query tasks. Instead of embedding high-dimensional raw
semantic features on 3D Gaussians, we propose a dedicated
quantization scheme that drastically alleviates the memory requirement, and a novel embedding procedure that
* Corresponding author.

achieves smoother yet high accuracy query, countering the
multi-view feature inconsistencies and the high-frequency
inductive bias in point-based representations. Our comprehensive experiments show that our representation achieves
the best visual quality and language querying accuracy
across current language-embedded representations, while
maintaining real-time rendering frame rates on a single
desktop GPU. Project page: https : / / buaavrcg .
github.io/LEGaussians/.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRFs) [2, 3, 32, 57] and 3D
Gaussian Splatting [20] has advanced the development of
efficient and high-quality 3D scene novel view synthesis
from multi-view images. Nevertheless, these representations solely encapsulate geometric and appearance details without any semantic information. To bridge this
gap, language-embedded neural representations [21, 22]
try to integrate semantic information from multi-view im-

5333

