This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Making Vision Transformers Truly Shift-Equivariant
Renan A. Rojas-Gomez1
Teck-Yian Lim1
Minh N. Do1,2
Raymond A. Yeh3
1
2
Department of Electrical Engineering, UIUC
VinUni-Illinois Smart Health Center, UIUC
3
Department of Computer Science, Purdue University
{renanar2, tlim11, minhdo}@illinois.edu

Abstract
In the field of computer vision, Vision Transformers (ViTs)
have emerged as a prominent deep learning architecture.
Despite being inspired by Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs), ViTs are susceptible to small spatial shifts in the
input data – they lack shift-equivariance. To address this
shortcoming, we introduce novel data-adaptive designs for
each of the ViT modules that break shift-equivariance, such
as tokenization, self-attention, patch merging, and positional
encoding. With our proposed modules, we achieve perfect
circular shift-equivariance across four prominent ViT architectures: Swin, SwinV2, CvT, and MViTv2. Additionally,
we leverage our design to further enhance consistency under standard shifts. We evaluate our adaptive ViT models
on image classification and semantic segmentation tasks.
Our models achieve competitive performance across three
diverse datasets, showcasing perfect (100%) circular shift
consistency while improving standard shift consistency.1

1. Introduction
Vision Transformers (ViTs) [11, 12, 20, 24, 25, 48] have
become a strong alternative to convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) in computer vision, superseding their dominance in
image classification and becoming the state-of-the-art model
on ImageNet [9]. Unlike the original Transformer [44] proposed for natural language processing (NLP), ViTs incorporate suitable inductive biases for computer vision. Consider
image classification, where an input shift does not change
the underlying image label, i.e., the task is shift-invariant.
Several ViTs accredited shift-invariance as the motivation for the proposed architecture. Wu et al. [48] state that
their ViT model brings “desirable properties of CNNs to the
ViT architecture (i.e. shift, scale, and distortion invariance).”
Similarly, Liu et al. [24] found that “inductive bias that encourages certain translation invariance is still preferable for
general-purpose visual modeling.” While existing ViTs in1 Project website: https://renanrojasg.github.io/shifteq_vit.

rayyeh@purdue.edu

corporate such design elements, they still exhibit sensitivity
to spatial input shifts. This motivates us to explore design
principles towards shift-invariance and equivariance in ViTs.
This work delves into the core building blocks of ViTs
and introduces a novel framework that guarantees perfect
circular shift-equivariance within each module. This encompasses redesigned versions of the tokenization, self-attention,
patch merging, and positional encoding modules. Our approach involves performing an input-dependent alignment,
meaning each module’s behavior adapts to the input. Consequently, we denote our modules as (A)daptive. We rigorously
show that our adaptive modules are provably circularly shiftequivariant and realizable in practical scenarios.
The proposed data-adaptive design enables the construction of truly circularly shift-invariant ViTs for image classification and truly circularly shift-equivariant ViTs for semantic segmentation, achieving 100% circular shift consistency.
Furthermore, it fosters improvements in standard shift consistency while maintaining competitive performance on both
image classification and semantic segmentation tasks.
To demonstrate the practical value of our framework,
we conduct experiments across various ViT architectures
and datasets. These include well-established benchmarks
for image classification (CIFAR-10/100 [18] and ImageNet)
and semantic segmentation (ADE20K [56]). We empirically
show that our design improves shift consistency and achieve
competitive performance on four prominent ViT architectures: Swin [24], SwinV2 [25], CvT [48], and MViTv2 [20].
Our contributions are as follows:
• We introduce a data-adaptive design for key ViT modules –
tokenization, self-attention, patch merging, and positional
encoding – provably achieving circular shift-equivariance.
• By leveraging our adaptive modules, we construct ViT
models that achieve perfect (100%) end-to-end circular
shift consistency, while also improving standard shift consistency, as shown on four established architectures.
• Extensive image classification and semantic segmentation experiments showcase the effectiveness of our dataadaptive design in achieving improved consistency and
accuracy under both circular and standard shifts.

5568

