This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Clustering for Protein Representation Learning
Ruijie Quan, Wenguan Wang,* Fan Ma, Hehe Fan, Yi Yang
ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University
https://github.com/QUANRJ/ClusteringPRL

Abstract
Protein representation learning is a challenging task that
aims to capture the structure and function of proteins from
their amino acid sequences. Previous methods largely ignored the fact that not all amino acids are equally important
for protein folding and activity. In this article, we propose
a neural clustering framework that can automatically discover the critical components of a protein by considering
both its primary and tertiary structure information. Our
framework treats a protein as a graph, where each node represents an amino acid and each edge represents a spatial or
sequential connection between amino acids. We then apply
an iterative clustering strategy to group the nodes into clusters based on their 1D and 3D positions and assign scores
to each cluster. We select the highest-scoring clusters and
use their medoid nodes for the next iteration of clustering,
until we obtain a hierarchical and informative representation of the protein. We evaluate on four protein-related
tasks: protein fold classification, enzyme reaction classification, gene ontology term prediction, and enzyme commission number prediction. Experimental results demonstrate
that our method achieves state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Proteins are one of the most fundamental elements in living organisms and make significant contributions to nearly
all fundamental biological processes in the cell. Composed
of one or several chains of amino acids [63, 70], proteins
fold into specific conformations to enable various biological functionalities [31]. A multi-level structure of proteins begins with the primary structure, which is defined
by the sequence of amino acids forming the protein backbone [69]. The secondary structure is determined by hydrogen bonds between distant amino acids in the chain, resulting in substructures such as ↵-helices and -sheets [75].
Tertiary structure arises from folding of secondary structures, determined by interactions between side chains of
* Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang.

amino acids [9]. Lastly, the quarternary structure describes
the arrangement of polypeptide chains in a multi-subunit
arrangement [13]. Understanding the structure and function
of proteins [22, 23, 30, 38, 80, 81, 94] is crucial in elucidating their role in biological processes and developing new
therapies and treatments for a variety of diseases.
While a protein’s conformation and function are primarily determined by its amino acid sequence, it is important
to recognize that not all amino acids contribute equally to
these aspects. In fact, certain amino acids, known as the
critical components, play the primary role in determining
a protein’s shape and function [8, 18, 26, 41, 60, 61, 86].
Sometimes, even a single amino acid substitution can significantly impact a protein’s overall structure and function [41, 60]. For example, sickle cell anemia results from
a single amino acid change in hemoglobin, causing it to
form abnormal fibers that distort red blood cell shape. Besides, the critical components of a protein’s primary structure are essential for its biological activity. For instance,
any of the first 24 amino acids of the adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) molecule is necessary for its biological
activity, whereas removing all amino acids between 25-39
has no impact [61, 86]. Also, proteins with the same critical components perform the same function, e.g., the insulin
A and B chains in various mammals contain 24 invariant
amino acid residues necessary for insulin function, while
differences in the remaining amino acid residues do not impact insulin function [8, 26]. In addition, proteins from the
same family often have long stretches of similar amino acid
sequences within their primary structure [18], suggesting
that only a small portion of amino acids that differentiate
these proteins are the critical components.
Motivated by the fact that certain amino acids play a
more critical role in determining a protein’s structure and
function than the others [8, 18, 26, 41, 60, 61, 86], we devise a neural clustering framework for protein representation learning. Concretely, it progressively groups amino
acids so as to find the most representative ones for protein classification. During each iteration, our algorithm proceeds three steps: spherical cluster initialization (SCI), cluster representation extraction (CRE), and cluster nomination

319

