This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Mirrored Influence Hypothesis: Efficient Data Influence Estimation by
Harnessing Forward Passes
Myeongseob Ko1

Feiyang Kang1

Weiyan Shi2

1

2

Virginia Tech

Ming Jin1

Zhou Yu2

Ruoxi Jia1

Columbia University

{myeongseob, fyk, jinming, ruoxijia}@vt.edu, {ws2634, zy2461}@columbia.edu

Abstract
Large-scale black-box models have become ubiquitous
across numerous applications. Understanding the influence
of individual training data sources on predictions made by
these models is crucial for improving their trustworthiness.
Current influence estimation techniques involve computing
gradients for every training point or repeated training on
different subsets. These approaches face obvious computational challenges when scaled up to large datasets and
models.
In this paper, we introduce and explore the Mirrored Influence Hypothesis, highlighting a reciprocal nature of influence between training and test data. Specifically, it suggests that evaluating the influence of training data on test
predictions can be reformulated as an equivalent, yet inverse problem: assessing how the predictions for training
samples would be altered if the model were trained on specific test samples. Through both empirical and theoretical
validations, we demonstrate the wide applicability of our
hypothesis. Inspired by this, we introduce a new method
for estimating the influence of training data, which requires
calculating gradients for specific test samples, paired with
a forward pass for each training point. This approach can
capitalize on the common asymmetry in scenarios where
the number of test samples under concurrent examination
is much smaller than the scale of the training dataset, thus
gaining a significant improvement in efficiency compared to
existing approaches. We demonstrate the applicability of
our method across a range of scenarios, including data attribution in diffusion models, data leakage detection, analysis of memorization, mislabeled data detection, and tracing
behavior in language models.

1. Introduction
As the popularity of large-scale, black-box machine learning models continues to surge across diverse applications,
the need for transparency—an understanding of the factors

driving their predictive behaviors—becomes increasingly
critical. These models are learned from training data, and as
such, an important step towards achieving transparency lies
in estimating the influence of individual training data points
on the model’s predictions.
Extensive research on training data influence estimation
has been conducted over the years [16, 18, 22, 27, 29]. Despite the diversity of techniques, they all fundamentally revolve around a central idea of assessing the counterfactual
impact of a training data source:
How would the prediction on specific test points
change if we removed a training source? (P1)
One line of approaches [16] focuses on the direct evaluation of the counterfactual impact, i.e., by retraining a
model on the set excluding the training source and measuring the change in the prediction. Besides the obvious computational overhead, such evaluation results suffer from a low signal-to-noise ratio due to the stochasticity
in widely-used learning algorithms and are largely inconsistent across different runs [37]. To magnify the change
caused by removing a single source, existing techniques
mostly involve retraining models on smaller subsets of the
training data and measuring a source’s influence by aggregating its contribution to different subsets not containing the
source [11, 12, 17]. While these methods produce more
consistent influence scores, they are infeasible for largescale models.
Another line of approaches bypasses the need for retraining by estimating the influence through the final trained
model or intermediate checkpoints reached during the training process [22, 29]. In particular, they evaluate a training
point’s influence using the corresponding gradient of the final model or checkpoints, which effectively represents the
local changes made by introducing the point into training.
However, calculating gradients is not only time-intensive
but also memory-inefficient compared to forward pass [26].
In our tests, it took up to 10.92 times longer and used 5.36
times more memory than inference for the Vision Trans-

26286

