This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Investigating Compositional Challenges in Vision-Language Models for Visual
Grounding
*Yunan Zeng 1,2,3
1

Yan Huang 1,2 Jinjin Zhang 3 Zequn Jie 3 Zhenhua Chai 3 †Liang Wang 1,2
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC)
2
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
Meituan
yunan.zeng@cripac.ia.ac.cn

{yhuang, wangliang}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

{zhangjinjin05, chaizhenhua}@meituan.com

zequn.nus@gmail.com

Abstract
Pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) have
achieved high performance on various downstream tasks,
which have been widely used for visual grounding tasks
in a weakly supervised manner. However, despite the performance gains contributed by large vision and language
pre-training, we find that state-of-the-art VLMs struggle
with compositional reasoning on grounding tasks. To
demonstrate this, we propose Attribute, Relation, and Priority grounding (ARPGrounding) benchmark to test VLMs’
compositional reasoning ability on visual grounding tasks.
ARPGrounding contains 11,425 samples and evaluates the
compositional understanding of VLMs in three dimensions:
1) attribute, denoting comprehension of objects’ properties;
2) relation, indicating an understanding of relation between
objects; 3) priority, reflecting an awareness of the part of
speech associated with nouns. Using the ARPGrounding
benchmark, we evaluate several mainstream VLMs. We
empirically find that these models perform quite well
on conventional visual grounding datasets, achieving
performance comparable to or surpassing state-of-the-art
methods but showing strong deficiencies in compositional
reasoning. Furthermore, we propose a composition-aware
fine-tuning pipeline, demonstrating the potential to leverage cost-effective image-text annotations for enhancing the
compositional understanding of VLMs in grounding tasks.
Code is available at link.

1. Introduction
Vision-language models (VLMs) have achieved high
performance on various downstream tasks, including many
zero-shot learning and text-guided vision tasks [2, 4, 19,
* Work was done during the author’s internship at Meituan.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Typical examples of testing compositional understanding of CLIP on visual grounding task. CLIP encounters challenges
in discerning the authentic object from deceptive ones. (Left)
CLIP is misled by a dog of a distinct color. (Right) CLIP is misled
by an object within the phrase. Both instances suggest a deficiency
in CLIP’s grasp of compositional structure.

21, 34, 41]. Many endeavors leverage the intrinsic visuallinguistic alignment representation within these models and
integrate VLMs with explainability methods [37, 52] for
image localization tasks. This approach serves to alleviate
the significant time and cost required for dense manual annotation, particularly in tasks such as weakly supervised visual grounding [13, 20, 39, 40], weakly supervised segmentation [23, 25] and open-vocabulary segmentation [24, 46].
Visual grounding is a pivotal task in vision-language. We
adopt the widely used Grad-CAM [37] algorithm, integrating it into VLMs without introducing additional complexity. Our methodology unveils that VLMs can attain state-ofthe-art results in weakly supervised visual grounding tasks
through the application of explainability techniques.
However, we find VLMs encounter challenges in
grounding while compositional reasoning is involved. As
shown in Figure 1, CLIP exhibits difficulty distinguishing

14141

