This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Benchmarking the Robustness of Temporal Action Detection Models
Against Temporal Corruptions
Runhao Zeng1,2 , Xiaoyong Chen3 , Jiaming Liang3 , Huisi Wu3 , Guangzhong Cao3∗ , Yong Guo4 *
1
Artificial Intelligence Research Institute, Shenzhen MSU-BIT University, China,
2
Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macao Joint Laboratory for Emotional Intelligence and Pervasive Computing,
3
Shenzhen University 4 South China University of Technology
Action Instance

Abstract

1. Introduction
Temporal action detection (TAD), an essential aspect of
video understanding, seeks to pinpoint action locations and
identify action categories in untrimmed videos. Despite
* Corresponding author

One Corrupted Frame

75
mAP (tIoU=0.5) %

Temporal action detection (TAD) aims to locate action positions and recognize action categories in long-term
untrimmed videos. Although many methods have achieved
promising results, their robustness has not been thoroughly
studied. In practice, we observe that temporal information
in videos can be occasionally corrupted, such as missing or
blurred frames. Interestingly, existing methods often incur
a significant performance drop even if only one frame is affected. To formally evaluate the robustness, we establish
two temporal corruption robustness benchmarks, namely
THUMOS14-C and ActivityNet-v1.3-C. In this paper, we
extensively analyze the robustness of seven leading TAD
methods and obtain some interesting findings: 1) Existing
methods are particularly vulnerable to temporal corruptions, and end-to-end methods are often more susceptible
than those with a pre-trained feature extractor; 2) Vulnerability mainly comes from localization error rather than classification error; 3) When corruptions occur in the middle of
an action instance, TAD models tend to yield the largest
performance drop. Besides building a benchmark, we further develop a simple but effective robust training method
to defend against temporal corruptions, through the FrameDrop augmentation and Temporal-Robust Consistency loss.
Remarkably, our approach not only improves robustness but
also yields promising improvements on clean data. We believe that this study will serve as a benchmark for future
research in robust video analysis. Source code and models are available at https://github.com/AlvinZeng/temporal-robustness-benchmark.

65
55
45
35

-6.21
-3.61

-3.19

-6.32
-4.48 -3.97

Clean Video
1-Frame Corruption
-1.48
-4.63 -1.08

*

Figure 1. The mAP gap of temporal action detection methods
when testing on clean and corrupted videos. * and # denote the
video features extracted by I3D and VideoMAEv2, respectively.
Other methods follow an end-to-end manner. Existing TAD methods incur a significant mAP drop of more than 1.08% even when
only one frame is corrupted in an action instance on THUMOS14 dataset, highlighting a prevailing lack of robustness towards temporal corruptions.

the fruitful progress in this mission, the robustness of these
methods against corruptions remains largely unexplored. If
TAD models are very vulnerable to corruptions, it would become particularly problematic when applying them in various practical contexts, including autonomous driving, security monitoring, and robotics. To verify this, we conduct a
preliminary experiment in which we introduce corruptions
to a single frame within an action instance, simulating the
phenomenon of “Black Frame” [17] that can occur during
data transmission. Remarkably, as shown in Figure 1, the
performance of existing TAD methods drops significantly,
no matter what kind of features are used or whether the
model is trained end-to-end. This outcome reveals that corrupting even a single frame in an action instance disrupts the
temporal continuity of the video and damages the temporal
information. The poor performance of existing models un-

18263

