This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SynSP: Synergy of Smoothness and Precision in Pose Sequences Refinement
Tao Wang∗1 , Lei Jin∗†1 , Zheng Wang2 , Jianshu Li3 , Liang Li4 ,
Fang Zhao5 , Yu Cheng6 , Li Yuan7 , Li Zhou7 , Junliang Xing8 , Jian Zhao9,10
1
4

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, 2 Wuhan University, 3 Ant Group,

Institute of computing technology Chinese Academy of Sciences, 5 Nanjing University, 6 National University of Singapore,
7

Peking University, 8 Tsinghua University, 9 China Telecom Institute of AI, 10 Northwestern Polytechnical University

wangtao@bupt.edu.cn, jinlei@bupt.edu.cn, wangzwhu@whu.edu.cn, jianshu@u.NUS.edu,
liang.li@ict.ac.cn, zhaofang0627@gmail.com, e0321276@u.nus.edu, yuanli-ece@pku.edu.cn,
zhouli2025@126.com, jlxing@tsinghua.edu.cn, jian zhao@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Predicting human pose sequences via existing pose estimators often encounters various estimation errors. Motion refinement methods aim to optimize the predicted human pose sequences from pose estimators while ensuring
minimal computational overhead and latency. Prior investigations have primarily concentrated on striking a balance
between the two objectives, i.e., smoothness and precision,
while optimizing the predicted pose sequences. However,
it has come to our attention that the tension between these
two objectives can provide additional quality cues about the
predicted pose sequences. These cues, in turn, are able
to aid the network in optimizing lower-quality poses. To
leverage this quality information, we propose a motion refinement network, termed SynSP, to achieve a Synergy of
Smoothness and Precision in the sequence refinement tasks.
Moreover, SynSP can also address multi-view poses of
one person simultaneously, fixing inaccuracies in predicted
poses through heightened attention to similar poses from
other views, thereby amplifying the resultant quality cues
and overall performance. Compared with previous methods, SynSP benefits from both pose quality and multi-view
information with a much shorter input sequence length,
achieving state-of-the-art results among four challenging
datasets involving 2D, 3D, and SMPL pose representations
in both single-view and multi-view scenes. Github code:
https://github.com/InvertedForest/SynSP.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation [4, 16, 21, 37] has been widely used
in automatic driving, human-computer interaction, motion
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this research. † Lei Jin is corre-

sponding author.

(a)

(b)

subtract

frames

(c)

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. (a): The x-axis represents the ratio of weights for Precision and Smoothness loss in the
training process of SynSP, while the y-axis represents the value of
MPJPE (Precision) and Acceleration error (Smoothness). These
two errors exhibit a conflicting relationship. (b): Diff1 denotes the
difference between the predicted sequence (from pose estimator)
and the gound-truth sequence, and Diff2 denotes the difference between two output sequences from training SynSP with a loss ratio
of 0.5 and 5, respectively. We notice that the trends of Diff1 and
Diff2 are roughly the same in (b). (c): A larger value of Diff1 indicates lower prediction quality for the predicted sequences. For
example, the left ankle of the person in the middle picture of (c) is
occluded, making it difficult for the pose estimator to infer.

analysis, etc. Although current methods have achieved outstanding performance, both image-based and video-based
pose estimators still sometimes exhibit noticeable errors in

1824

