This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Sign Actors: A diffusion model for 3D sign language production from text
Vasileios Baltatzis1 , Rolandos Alexandros Potamias1 , Evangelos Ververas1 ,
Guanxiong Sun2 , Jiankang Deng1 , Stefanos Zafeiriou1
1

Imperial College London, 2 Queen’s University Belfast

{vasileios.baltatzis18, r.potamias, e.ververas16, j.deng16, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk,
gsun02@qub.ac.uk

Figure 1. The proposed method takes raw text as input and generates a realistic and coherent motion of its corresponding sign language
translation. From top to bottom: the input text, the ground truth sign language video (shown just for reference), and the generated motion.

Abstract
Sign Languages (SL) serve as the primary mode of communication for the Deaf and Hard of Hearing communities.
Deep learning methods for SL recognition and translation
have achieved promising results. However, Sign Language
Production (SLP) poses a challenge as the generated motions must be realistic and have precise semantic meaning.
Most SLP methods rely on 2D data, which hinders their realism. In this work, a diffusion-based SLP model is trained
on a curated large-scale dataset of 4D signing avatars and
their corresponding text transcripts. The proposed method
can generate dynamic sequences of 3D avatars from an unconstrained domain of discourse using a diffusion process
formed on a novel and anatomically informed graph neural network defined on the SMPL-X body skeleton. Through
quantitative and qualitative experiments, we show that the
proposed method considerably outperforms previous methods of SLP. This work makes an important step towards realistic neural sign avatars, bridging the communication gap
between Deaf and hearing communities.1
1 Project page: https://baltatzisv.github.io/neural-sign-actors/

1. Introduction
Sign language (SL) is a form of language in which visualmanual modalities are used instead of spoken words to convey meaning. It is the predominant form of communication
for more than 70 million Deaf and Hard of Hearing people around the world. Akin to verbal languages, SLs have
extremely rich vocabulary and grammar, yet the complexities differ drastically [55]. To enable effective visual communication, they consist of both manual and non-manual
components [35]. The manual modality encompasses hand
articulation, orientation, position, and motion, while nonmanual elements include arm movements and facial expressions [6]. Whilst it is possible to convey some meaning using just hand articulations, expressiveness is limited since
non-manual elements often convey emotions [3, 55].
Recently, several methods have been proposed to bridge
the domain gap between sign and spoken languages. Most
methods focus on Sign Language Recognition (SLR) which
includes the translation of a specific sign to its corresponding meaning, as well as Sign Language Translation (SLT)
that extends SLR to the translation of a sign sequence to
its spoken word equivalent. This is usually tackled using
glosses [10, 14, 15, 28], which are simplified mid-level

1985

