This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Artist-Friendly Relightable and Animatable Neural Heads
Yingyan Xu1,2
Prashanth Chandran2
Sebastian Weiss2
Markus Gross1,2
Gaspard Zoss2
Derek Bradley2
1
2
ETH Zürich
DisneyResearch|Studios
{yingyan.xu,grossm}@inf.ethz.ch

{prashanth.chandran,sebastian.weiss,gaspard.zoss,derek.bradley}@disneyresearch.com

Abstract
An increasingly common approach for creating photorealistic digital avatars is through the use of volumetric neural fields. The original neural radiance field (NeRF) allowed
for impressive novel view synthesis of static heads when
trained on a set of multi-view images, and follow up methods
showed that these neural representations can be extended to
dynamic avatars. Recently, new variants also surpassed the
usual drawback of baked-in illumination in neural representations, showing that static neural avatars can be relit in any
environment. In this work we simultaneously tackle both the
motion and illumination problem, proposing a new method
for relightable and animatable neural heads. Our method
builds on a proven dynamic avatar approach based on a
mixture of volumetric primitives, combined with a recentlyproposed lightweight hardware setup for relightable neural
fields, and includes a novel architecture that allows relighting dynamic neural avatars performing unseen expressions
in any environment, even with nearfield illumination and
viewpoints.

1. Introduction
Creating realistic digital avatars of real people has many
applications, for example in video games, films, VR experiences and telepresence. Original methods involved scanning
and tracking geometry and appearance properties from one
or more cameras and then applying a traditional graphics
rendering pipeline to generate novel images. The challenge
lies in the fact that avatars consist of several complex components like skin, eyes, teeth, and hair, each with complex
material properties that are difficult to acquire and render
realistically. As such, there has been a recent push towards
neural representations of avatars, which forego triangles and
texture maps and bypass traditional ray-tracers in exchange
for neural rendering, where the avatar is represented by a
neural network that can be queried at render-time, with equal
handling of skin, eyes, teeth and hair in a single model.

The original Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [29] representation laid the ground work for creating neural avatars that
could be re-rendered photo-realistically from novel viewpoints. NeRFs are trained on large collections of images and
represent a static scene as an MLP that is queried multiple
times during volume rendering. Since the advent of NeRFs,
several extended representations have emerged, which aim
to increase the rendering speed [30], create NeRF avatars
from smart phones [31], morph between neural avatars [47],
or create generative neural heads [4].
An important component for the adoption of neural
avatars is the ability to represent motion, which is not possible with the original neural field approaches. To account
for this, researchers have devised extended neural representations like Neural Volumes [24], NeRFBlendShapes [9],
NeRSemble [19] and a Mixture of Volumetric Primitives
(MVP) [25], which aim to learn dynamic representations of
human heads from video data.
A second important aspect of digital avatars is the ability to relight the head in any novel illumination. As with
addressing the motion requirement, dedicated architectures
have been proposed to address the relightability requirement,
such as NeLFs [43], NRTFs [26] and ReNeRF [50], which
can reliably relight neural representations of static scenes.
In order to have the most flexible and artist-friendly neural
head avatars they should be both animatable and relightable.
In this work we propose a new architecture for neural head
avatars that can be relit to match any distant environment
map or nearfield light sources, while at the same time providing full dynamic control over the facial shape. This allows
both the playback of captured performances as well as the
generation of novel artistically-created performances (e.g.
driven by rig controls, retargeting or input video tracking), all
with full control over the scene illumination and viewpoint.
Our approach is to build on a dynamic avatar representation that uses a Mixture of Volumetric Primitives (MVP) [25],
which achieves efficient rendering of animatable neural
heads with high visual quality. The idea of MVP is to decode the geometry and appearance of a person-specific facial

2457

