This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Memory Networks:
A Versatile Adaptation Approach for Vision-Language Models
Yabin Zhang1,2

Wenjie Zhu1 Hui Tang3 Zhiyuan Ma1
1
2
3
HKPolyU
OPPO
HKUST

Kaiyang Zhou4
4
HKBU

Lei Zhang1,2, *

{csybzhang,cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Contrastive vision-language pre-training [20, 27, 44, 64]
has shown promising results in various downstream vision
tasks, including 2D/3D perception [69, 74] and generation
* Corresponding author.

﻿ Our DMN

Accuracy (%)

With the emergence of pre-trained vision-language models like CLIP, how to adapt them to various downstream
classification tasks has garnered significant attention in recent research. The adaptation strategies can be typically
categorized into three paradigms: zero-shot adaptation,
few-shot adaptation, and the recently-proposed trainingfree few-shot adaptation. Most existing approaches are tailored for a specific setting and can only cater to one or two
of these paradigms. In this paper, we introduce a versatile adaptation approach that can effectively work under all
three settings. Specifically, we propose the dual memory
networks that comprise dynamic and static memory components. The static memory caches training data knowledge, enabling training-free few-shot adaptation, while the
dynamic memory preserves historical test features online
during the testing process, allowing for the exploration
of additional data insights beyond the training set. This
novel capability enhances model performance in the fewshot setting and enables model usability in the absence of
training data. The two memory networks employ the same
flexible memory interactive strategy, which can operate in
a training-free mode and can be further enhanced by incorporating learnable projection layers. Our approach is
tested across 11 datasets under the three task settings. Remarkably, in the zero-shot scenario, it outperforms existing methods by over 3% and even shows superior results
against methods utilizing external training data. Additionally, our method exhibits robust performance against natural distribution shifts. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/YBZh/DMN .

Zero-shot methods
Few-shot methods
Training-free few-shot methods

68

﻿APE-T

66

﻿Tip-Adapter-F

﻿ Our DMN-TF
64

Our ﻿DMN-ZS
﻿APE

﻿Tip-X
62 ﻿Tip-Adapter
CALIP
60 CLIP
0
!"!"

﻿Clip-Adapter

﻿CoOp
﻿CoCoOp
TPT

!"!#

!"!$

!"%

(Test-Time) Training GFLOPs

!"$

Figure 1. Illustration of the classification accuracy, (test-time)
training GFLOPs, and learning parameters on zero-shot and 16shot ImageNet classification. The icon sizes denote the number of
learnable parameters. Our method is unique in its ability to work
for all three task settings with superior results.

[6, 48]. Among these models, CLIP [44] is arguably the
most representative one due to its simplicity and effectiveness. Leveraging a vast collection of image-text pairs from
the Internet, CLIP aligns features across modalities, leading
to notable zero-shot classification capabilities. To further
enhance its performance on downstream tasks, numerous
adaptation strategies have emerged, primarily employing
frozen CLIP encoders in zero-shot and few-shot settings.
Most existing approaches are tailored for one specific
task setting. Specifically, enhanced zero-shot performance
is achieved by exploring additional insights from the test
sample itself [14, 51] or via enhanced text prompts [38, 43].
In the few-shot setting, researchers typically insert adaptive parameters (e.g., Prompt [22, 74], Adapter [13], and
Residual [65]) into the pre-trained vision-language models
and optimize these parameters using labeled training data.
Recently, a training-free variant of few-shot adaptation has
been proposed for resource-constrained applications [68].

28718

