This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Zero-Shot Structure-Preserving Diffusion Model for
High Dynamic Range Tone Mapping
Ruoxi Zhu1,∗ , Shusong Xu2,3,∗ , Peiye Liu2,3 , Sicheng Li2,3 , Yanheng Lu2,3 ,
Dimin Niu2,3 , Zihao Liu2,3 , Zihao Meng2,3 , Zhiyong Li2,3 , Xinhua Chen1 , Yibo Fan1,†
1
Fudan University, 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group, 3 Hupan Lab
rxzhu22@m.fudan.edu.cn

Linearly Scaled HDR Image

Vinker et al. (GAN-Based)

Proposed

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of previous state-of-the-art [33] with our method.

Abstract
Tone mapping techniques, aiming to convert high dynamic
range (HDR) images to high-quality low dynamic range
(LDR) images for display, play a more crucial role in
real-world vision systems with the increasing application
of HDR images. However, obtaining paired HDR and
high-quality LDR images is difficult, posing a challenge
to deep learning based tone mapping methods. To overcome this challenge, we propose a novel zero-shot tone
mapping framework that utilizes shared structure knowledge, allowing us to transfer a pre-trained mapping model
from the LDR domain to HDR fields without paired training data. Our approach involves decomposing both the
LDR and HDR images into two components: structural information and tonal information. To preserve the original
image’s structure, we modify the reverse sampling process
of a diffusion model and explicitly incorporate the structure information into the intermediate results. Additionally,
for improved image details, we introduce a dual-control
network architecture that enables different types of conditional inputs to control different scales of the output. ExThis work was supported in part by the National Key R&D Program of China
(2023YFB4502802), in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
(62031009), in part by the “Ling Yan” Program for Tackling Key Problems in Zhejiang Province (No.2022C01098), in part by Alibaba Innovative Research (AIR) Program, in part by Alibaba Research Fellow (ARF) Program, in part by the Fudan-ZTE
Joint Lab, in part by CCF-Alibaba Innovative Research Fund For Young Scholars.
∗
contribute equally. † Yibo Fan is the corresponding author.

perimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, surpassing previous state-of-the-art methods both
qualitatively and quantitatively. Moreover, our model exhibits versatility and can be applied to other low-level vision tasks without retraining. The code is available at
https://github.com/ZSDM-HDR/Zero-Shot-Diffusion-HDR.

1. Introduction
Tone mapping, a long-standing computer vision task, focuses on imaging high dynamic range (HDR) scenes by
converting HDR images to high-quality low dynamic range
(LDR) images. Unlike LDR, HDR images typically possess
a wider bitwidth, resulting in greater diversity in the distribution of pixel values, which captures more information especially in extreme cases such as backlit scenes. While human eyes effortlessly perceive both HDR and LDR scenes,
general displayers struggle to accurately present the abundant information contained in HDR images. Therefore, the
crucial task of mapping this high range visual information
into LDR spaces with both natural appearance and accurate
structure becomes imperative for real-world vision systems.
In recent years, there has been a rise in the use of
deep learning-based methods for tone mapping. However, obtaining the ideal paired training data is particularly challenging due to the inherent difficulty in capturing both HDR and high-quality LDR images for natural

26130

