This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Absolute Pose from One or Two Scaled and Oriented Features
Jonathan Ventura1 Zuzana Kukelova2 Torsten Sattler3 Dániel Baráth4
1
Department of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Cal Poly, San Luis Obispo
2
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
3
Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics, Czech Technical University in Prague
4
Department of Computer Science, Computer Vision and Geometry Group, ETH Zürich

Abstract
Keypoints used for image matching often include an estimate of the feature scale and orientation. While recent work
has demonstrated the advantages of using feature scales
and orientations for relative pose estimation, relatively little work has considered their use for absolute pose estimation. We introduce minimal solutions for absolute pose
from two oriented feature correspondences in the general
case, or one scaled and oriented correspondence given a
known vertical direction. Nowadays, assuming a known direction is not particularly restrictive as modern consumer
devices, such as smartphones or drones, are equipped with
Inertial Measurement Units (IMU) that provide the gravity direction by default. Compared to traditional absolute pose methods requiring three point correspondences,
our solvers need a smaller minimal sample, reducing the
cost and complexity of robust estimation. Evaluations on
large-scale and public real datasets demonstrate the advantage of our methods for fast and accurate localization
in challenging conditions. Code is available at https:
//github.com/danini/absolute-pose-fromoriented-and-scaled-features.

1. Introduction
The goal of absolute pose estimation is to determine the six
degrees-of-freedom (6DOF) pose of an image from visual
measurements. Absolute pose estimation is a core problem in computer vision with many applications, e.g., visual
localization [51], object recognition [18], Structure-fromMotion [53] and SLAM [11], and augmented reality [56].
The typical approach to absolute pose estimation is to
obtain 2D-3D point correspondences by matching keypoints in a query image to 3D points in a scene and then
computing the query image pose using a perspective-threepoint (P3P) algorithm [15] inside a robust optimization
loop, such as random sample consensus (RANSAC) [17] or
more modern variants [6, 13]. The number of random sam-

ples required for RANSAC grows with both the outlier ratio
and the minimal sample size exponentially. Thus, especially
in difficult image matching situations where the outlier ratio is high, reducing the minimal sample size can lead to
improvements in pose estimation speed and accuracy.
The P3P method relies on having at least three 2D observations in the query image of 3D points in the scene.
Since the 3D scene points are typically obtained through
triangulation, the 3D points are usually associated with 2D
points in the reference images. Therefore, it is typical to
have 2D-2D correspondences between the query image and
reference images in addition to 2D-3D correspondences between the query image and the point cloud [48, 49]. These
2D-2D matches provide extra information for the absolute
pose problem, which we exploit in our work to reduce the
sample size needed for the pose estimation.
Previous work has examined how to reduce the minimal
sample size for absolute pose by various means, such as introducing external pose information from an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) [25, 55], or leveraging extra information about the point correspondences such as local affine
frames [24]. In particular, Ventura et al. showed that it is
possible to compute the absolute pose from a single affine
correspondence and an estimate of the surface normal at the
3D point [57]. However, affine covariant features are less
commonly used as they are comparably expensive to compute, whereas the most widely-used feature detectors produce scale and orientation estimates [34, 47].
In this paper, we focus on designing absolute pose
solvers that leverage scaled and oriented features, such as
SIFT [33], to reduce the sample size. This is a highly practical scenario as most of the popular feature detectors output
more than just the point locations by default. Our method
is based on the equations connecting absolute pose to affine
correspondences derived by Ventura et al. [57], and those
relating affine features to scaled and oriented ones as established by Barath and Kukelova [5].
We derive novel constraints on the absolute pose from
scaled and oriented features. Leveraging the proposed con-

20870

