This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spatial-Aware Regression for Keypoint Localization
Dongkai Wang Shiliang Zhang
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University
{dongkai.wang, slzhang.jdl}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Regression-based keypoint localization shows advantages of high efficiency and better robustness to quantization errors than heatmap-based methods. However, existing regression-based methods discard the spatial location
prior in input image with a global pooling, leading to inferior accuracy and are limited to single instance localization tasks. We study the regression-based keypoint localization from a new perspective by leveraging the spatial location prior. Instead of regressing on the pooled feature,
the proposed Spatial-Aware Regression (SAR) maintains the
spatial location map and outputs spatial coordinates and
confidence score for each grid, which are optimized with
a unified objective. Benefited by the location prior, these
spatial-aware outputs can be efficiently optimized, resulting
in better localization performance. Moreover, incorporating spatial prior makes SAR more general and can be applied into various keypoint localization tasks. We test the
proposed method in 4 keypoint localization tasks including
single/multi-person 2D/3D pose estimation, and the wholebody pose estimation. Extensive experiments demonstrate
its promising performance, e.g., consistently outperforming
recent regressions-based methods† .

1. Introduction
Keypoint localization aims to locate target keypoints from
an input image and is a fundamental task in the field of
computer vision. It has a wide range of applications in human pose estimation [21, 26–28] and facial landmark detection [19], et al. Existing methods for keypoint localization can be summarized into two categories: heatmapbased [21, 29, 31] and regression-based [10, 23, 25], respectively. Regression-based method directly adopts neural
network to learn the mapping from input RGB image to keypoint coordinates. Heatmap-based method uses a probability map (also referred as heatmap) to encode the likelihood
† Project page: https://github.com/kennethwdk/SAR

backbone

pooling

regression

backbone

heatmap

argmax

backbone

SAR

selection

Figure 1. Illustration of (Top) regression-based method, (Middle)
standard heatmap-based method, and (Bottom) the proposed SAR
for keypoint localization.

of the target location and retrieves it by selecting location
with the highest probability.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, heatmap-based method selects pre-defined points on heatmaps as localization results, which are easy to optimize.
However, lowresolution heatmap leads to high quantization error and
high-resolution heatmap enlarges the computation and storage cost. Regression-based method is more efficient and
robust to quantization error, but is hard to optimize and
commonly achieve inferior performance. One reason is that
conventional regression destroys the spatial location information of the feature map by a global pooling, thus cannot
provide a good initialization for the following regression.
This design also limits the application of regression to differentiate and locate multiple keypoints of the same type,
e.g., multi-person pose estimation.
This work is motivated to facilitate the regression-based
localization by embedding spatial location prior into regression. Grids in the extracted feature map provide different starting points for regression, making them fitted to
locate different keypoints. Regressing from different starting points also introduces duplicate predictions, and we do
not know which grids produce the best localization results.
Prior works [5, 18] assume the results of grids near the
target location are accurate and select them via a separate
classification branch. We argue that this heuristic design
is not optimal in all cases, e.g., for occluded or truncated

624

