This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TE-TAD: Towards Full End-to-End Temporal Action Detection via
Time-Aligned Coordinate Expression
Ho-Joong Kim1

Jung-Ho Hong1

Heejo Kong2

Seong-Whan Lee1⇤

Dept. of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
Dept. of Brain and Cognitive Engineering, Korea University, Seoul, Korea
1

2

{hojoong kim, jungho-hong, hj kong, sw.lee}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate that the normalized coordinate expression is a key factor as reliance on handcrafted components in query-based detectors for temporal action detection (TAD). Despite significant advancements towards an end-to-end framework in object detection, query-based detectors have been limited in achieving full end-to-end modeling in TAD. To address this issue, we propose TE-TAD, a full end-to-end temporal action detection transformer that integrates time-aligned coordinate expression. We reformulate coordinate expression
utilizing actual timeline values, ensuring length-invariant
representations from the extremely diverse video duration
environment. Furthermore, our proposed adaptive query
selection dynamically adjusts the number of queries based
on video length, providing a suitable solution for varying
video durations compared to a fixed query set. Our approach not only simplifies the TAD process by eliminating
the need for hand-crafted components but also significantly
improves the performance of query-based detectors. Our
TE-TAD outperforms the previous query-based detectors
and achieves competitive performance compared to stateof-the-art methods on popular benchmark datasets. Code is
available at: https://github.com/Dotori-HJ/TE-TAD

1. Introduction
Temporal action detection (TAD) plays an essential role in
video understanding and its numerous real-world applications, such as video surveillance, video summarization, and
video retrieval. TAD aims to recognize and localize actions
within untrimmed video sequences by identifying the class
labels with precise start and end times of action instances.
Recently, TAD methods can be mainly divided by three approaches: anchor-based [3, 15, 16, 21, 23, 31, 34], anchorfree [6, 14, 27, 32], and query-based [18, 26, 28] detector.
Query-based detectors, inspired by DETR [4], have attracted interest because of their potential to eliminate reliance on hand-crafted components, such as the sliding win*Corresponding author

Figure 1. Performance comparison of query-based detectors
across various feature coverages on THUMOS14, demonstrating how extending the feature coverage impacts detection performance, as measured by mean Average Precision (mAP@AVG).
The full end-to-end setting that without coverage constraints is denoted by 1.

dow and non-maximum suppression (NMS). This potential
derives from adopting a set-prediction mechanism, which
aims to provide an end-to-end detection process by utilizing a one-to-one matching paradigm. Despite these advantages, query-based detectors encounter significant challenges in two aspects: (1) they show decreased performance
when dealing with extended temporal coverage, often making them a less favorable option compared to anchor-free
detectors, and (2) due to limited extended temporal coverage, the reliance on the sliding window approach leads to
redundant proposals and necessitates the use of NMS.
To demonstrate these issues, we conduct experiments by
increasing the feature coverages on existing query-based
detectors. Fig. 1 demonstrates the change in performance
across various feature coverage. Except for unrestricted feature coverage denoted by 1, feature coverage is calculated
from the window size of the sliding window method. As
shown in the graph, even though wide feature coverage is
beneficial to capturing longer context, the performance of
existing query-based detectors diminishes in mean Average
Precision (mAP) as feature coverage increments. This result indicates that there are significant limitations to querybased detectors in scalability to temporal length, despite efforts to address long durations [32] in TAD.

18837

