This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HybridNeRF: Efficient Neural Rendering via Adaptive Volumetric Surfaces
Haithem Turki1, 2 Vasu Agrawal1
Peter Kontschieder1 Deva Ramanan2
1

Meta Reality Labs

2

Samuel Rota Bulò1
Michael Zollhöfer1

Lorenzo Porzi1
Christian Richardt1

Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Neural radiance fields provide state-of-the-art view synthesis
quality but tend to be slow to render. One reason is that they
make use of volume rendering, thus requiring many samples (and model queries) per ray at render time. Although
this representation is flexible and easy to optimize, most
real-world objects can be modeled more efficiently with surfaces instead of volumes, requiring far fewer samples per
ray. This observation has spurred considerable progress in
surface representations, such as signed distance functions,
but these may struggle to model semi-opaque and thin structures. We propose a method, HybridNeRF, that leverages the
strengths of both representations by rendering most objects
as surfaces while modeling the (typically) small fraction
of challenging regions volumetrically. We evaluate HybridNeRF against the challenging Eyeful Tower dataset [38]
along with other commonly used view synthesis datasets.
When comparing to state-of-the-art baselines, including recent rasterization-based approaches, we improve error rates
by 15–30% while achieving real-time framerates (at least 36
FPS) for virtual-reality resolutions (2K⇥2K). Project page:
https://haithemturki.com/hybrid-nerf/.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in volumetric rendering of neural radiance
fields [22] (NeRFs) have led to significant progress towards
photorealistic novel-view synthesis. However, while NeRFs
provide state-of-the-art rendering quality, they remain slow
to render.
Efficiency. We seek to construct a representation that enables high-quality efficient rendering, which is necessary for
immersive applications, such as augmented reality or virtual
teleconferencing.
While recent rasterization-based techniques, such as mesh
baking [5, 40] or Gaussian splatting [14], are very efficient,
they still struggle to capture transparent or fine structures,
and view-dependent effects (like reflections or specularities),
respectively. Instead, we focus on NeRF’s standard ray cast-

RGB

Surfaceness

NeRF
(⇡40 samples / ray)

HybridNeRF
(⇡8 samples / ray)

Figure 1. HybridNeRF. We train a hybrid surface–volume representation via surfaceness parameters that allow us to render most of
the scene with few samples. We track Eikonal loss as we increase
surfaceness to avoid degrading quality near fine and translucent
structures (such as wires). On the bottom, we visualize the number
of samples per ray (brighter is higher). Our model renders in high
fidelity at 2K⇥2K resolution at real-time frame rates.

ing paradigm, and propose techniques that enable a better
speed–quality trade-off.
Rendering. We start with the observation that neural implicit surface representations, such as signed distance functions (SDFs), which were originally proposed to improve the
geometry quality of NeRFs via regularization [35, 39], can
also be used to dramatically increase efficiency by requiring
fewer samples per ray. In the limit, only a single sample on
the surface is required. In practice, renderers still need to
identify the location of the target sample(s), which can be
done by generating samples via an initial proposal network
[2] or other techniques, such as sphere tracing [20].
Surfaceness. While surface-based neural fields are convenient for rendering, they often struggle to reconstruct scenes
with thin structures or view-dependent effects, such as reflec-

19647

