This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MULTIFLOW : Shifting Towards Task-Agnostic Vision-Language Pruning

Matteo Farina1 Massimiliano Mancini1 Elia Cunegatti1
Gaowen Liu2 Giovanni Iacca1 Elisa Ricci1, 3
1

University of Trento

2

Cisco Research

Abstract

3

Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Task-Specific VLM Pruning (current)
CAPTIONING

Pruned
VLM

Dense VLM
“A plate of food and
a glass of liquid.”

“How many street
lights do you see?”

VQA

✂

Corresponding author: m.farina@unitn.it.

RETRIEVAL

“a cat lying down
on a bicycle seat.”

✂

Large-scale vision-language models (VLMs) [38–40, 53]
show remarkable transfer learning capabilities and achieve
state-of-the-art results in multiple vision-language tasks after fine-tuning with task-specific data and little architectural changes. However, these practical advantages come
at the price of a huge number of parameters, e.g., in the

✂

1. Introduction

Pruned
VLM

“a brown tower
with a clock on top.”

Pruned
VLM
Pruned

VLM

“One.”

Task-Agnostic Vision-Language Pruning (ours)
CAPTIONING

✂

While excellent in transfer learning, Vision-Language
models (VLMs) come with high computational costs due to
their large number of parameters. To address this issue, removing parameters via model pruning is a viable solution.
However, existing techniques for VLMs are task-specific,
and thus require pruning the network from scratch for each
new task of interest. In this work, we explore a new direction: Task-Agnostic Vision-Language Pruning (TA-VLP).
Given a pretrained VLM, the goal is to find a unique pruned
counterpart transferable to multiple unknown downstream
tasks. In this challenging setting, the transferable representations already encoded in the pretrained model are
a key aspect to preserve. Thus, we propose Multimodal
Flow Pruning (MULTIFLOW), a first, gradient-free, pruning framework for TA-VLP where: (i) the importance of a
parameter is expressed in terms of its magnitude and its information flow, by incorporating the saliency of the neurons it connects; and (ii) pruning is driven by the emergent (multimodal) distribution of the VLM parameters after
pretraining. We benchmark eight state-of-the-art pruning
algorithms in the context of TA-VLP, experimenting with
two VLMs, three vision-language tasks, and three pruning
ratios. Our experimental results show that MULTIFLOW
outperforms recent sophisticated, combinatorial competitors in the vast majority of the cases, paving the way towards addressing TA-VLP. The code is publicly available
at https://github.com/FarinaMatteo/multiflow .

Prun
VL

Pruned
VLM

Dense VLM
“a group of buildings
under nice blue sky.”

RETRIEVAL

VQA

Figure 1. The conceptual difference between existing VLM pruning methods [58, 65] and our proposed Task-Agnostic VisionLanguage Pruning. While existing pruning methods use taskspecific knowledge, hence requiring pruning the dense model from
scratch for different tasks, we propose to shift the perspective and
formalize TA-VLP, which only requires pruning once.

order of hundreds of millions [39], hindering deployment
in memory-constrained devices. A solution to this problem
is to reduce the network size via pruning [23], a compression technique whose aim is to explicitly remove network
parameters. In the context of VLMs, existing approaches
perform pruning for specific downstream tasks [58, 65],
where the obtained pruned models achieve good transfer
learning performance once fine-tuned. Critically, this requires re-pruning the model from scratch if the downstream
task changes. This is not only time-consuming, but fur-

16185

