This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-correcting LLM-controlled Diffusion Models
Tsung-Han Wu*

Long Lian*

Joseph E. Gonzalez
UC Berkeley

Boyi Li†

Trevor Darrell†

Figure 1. Existing diffusion-based text-to-image generators (e.g., DALL-E 3 [16]) generally struggle to precisely generate images that
correctly align with complex input prompts, especially for the ones that require numeracy and spatial relationships. Our Self-correcting
LLM-controlled Diffusion (SLD) framework empowers these diffusion models to automatically and iteratively rectify inaccuracies through
applying a set of latent space operations (addition, deletion, repositioning, etc.), resulting in enhanced text-to-image alignment.

Abstract
Text-to-image generation has witnessed significant progress
with the advent of diffusion models. Despite the ability
to generate photorealistic images, current text-to-image
diffusion models still often struggle to accurately interpret
and follow complex input text prompts. In contrast to
existing models that aim to generate images only with their
best effort, we introduce Self-correcting LLM-controlled
Diffusion (SLD). SLD is a framework that generates an image from the input prompt, assesses its alignment with the
prompt, and performs self-corrections on the inaccuracies
in the generated image. Steered by an LLM controller, SLD
turns text-to-image generation into an iterative closed-loop
process, ensuring correctness in the resulting image. SLD is
not only training-free but can also be seamlessly integrated
with diffusion models behind API access, such as DALL-E
3, to further boost the performance of state-of-the-art
diffusion models. Experimental results show that our
approach can rectify a majority of incorrect generations,
particularly in generative numeracy, attribute binding, and
spatial relationships. Furthermore, by simply adjusting the
instructions to the LLM, SLD can perform image editing
tasks, bridging the gap between text-to-image generation
*Equal contribution.

† Equal advising.

and image editing pipelines. Our code is available at:
https://self-correcting-llm-diffusion.github.io.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image generation has made remarkable advancements, especially with the advent of diffusion models.
However, these models often struggle with interpreting
complex input text prompts, particularly those that require
skills such as understanding the concept of numeracy, spatial relationships, and attribute binding with multiple objects. Despite the astonishing scaling of model sizes and
training data, these challenges, as illustrated in Fig. 1, are
still present in state-of-the-art open-source and proprietary
diffusion models.
Several research and engineering efforts aim to overcome these limitations. For instance, methods such as
DALL-E 3 [16] focus on the diffusion training process and
incorporate high-quality captions into the training data at a
massive scale. However, this approach not only incurs substantial costs but also frequently falls short in generating
accurate images from complicated user prompts, as shown
in Fig. 1. Other work harnesses the power of external models for a better understanding of the prompt in the inference
process before the actual image generation. For example,
[6, 11] leverages Large Language Models (LLMs) to pre-

6327

