This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MADTP: Multimodal Alignment-Guided Dynamic Token Pruning for
Accelerating Vision-Language Transformer
Jianjian Cao1

Peng Ye1 Shengze Li1 Chong Yu2 Yansong Tang3
Jiwen Lu4 Tao Chen1†
1
School of Information Science and Technology, Fudan University
2
Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University
3
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

Abstract
Vision-Language Transformers (VLTs) have shown great
success recently, but are meanwhile accompanied by heavy
computation costs, where a major reason can be attributed
to the large number of visual and language tokens. Existing token pruning research for compressing VLTs mainly
follows a single-modality-based scheme yet ignores the
critical role of aligning different modalities for guiding
the token pruning process, causing the important tokens
for one modality to be falsely pruned in another modality branch. Meanwhile, existing VLT pruning works also
lack the flexibility to dynamically compress each layer
based on different input samples. To this end, we propose
a novel framework named Multimodal Alignment-Guided
Dynamic Token Pruning (MADTP) for accelerating various VLTs. Specifically, we first introduce a well-designed
Multi-modality Alignment Guidance (MAG) module that
can align features of the same semantic concept from different modalities, to ensure the pruned tokens are less important for all modalities. We further design a novel Dynamic Token Pruning (DTP) module, which can adaptively
adjust the token compression ratio in each layer based on
different input instances. Extensive experiments on various benchmarks demonstrate that MADTP significantly reduces the computational complexity of kinds of multimodal
models while preserving competitive performance. Notably,
when applied to the BLIP model in the NLVR2 dataset,
MADTP can reduce the GFLOPs by 80% with less than
4% performance degradation. The code is available at
https://github.com/double125/MADTP.

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Transformers (VLTs) have taken multimodal learning domain by storm due to their superior per† Corresponding authors. Email: eetchen@fudan.edu.cn

Figure 1. Comparison between our MADTP and other compression methods for the BLIP model tested on the NLVR2 dataset.
STP represents the Static Token Pruning method, and MAG denotes our Multi-modality Alignment Guidance module.

formance on various multimodal tasks, including Visual
Reasoning [23], Image Captioning [28], Image-Text Retrieval [22], and Visual Question Answering (VQA) [1].
However, these models [6, 24–26, 33], such as CLIP [33]
and BLIP [25], inevitably suffer from expensive computational costs due to their complex architecture, large parameters, and numerous tokens, which restrict their real-world
applications and deployments.
To release this limitation, a few works have attempted to
accelerate the VLT models. As a pioneer, Upop [35] suggests a unified parameter pruning strategy for compressing
VLTs, allowing for simultaneous pruning of submodules
across diverse modalities. Recently, considering the token
number plays a dominant role in the total computation cost,
several studies have put more effort into accelerating VLTs
via pruning tokens. ELIP [17] introduces a vision token
pruning method to remove less influential tokens based on
the supervision of language outputs. CrossGET [36] implements token pruning by selectively eliminating redundant

15710

