This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Snapshot Lidar: Fourier embedding of amplitude and phase for single-image
depth reconstruction
Sarah Friday1 *, Yunzi Shi1 *, Yaswanth Cherivirala, Vishwanath Saragadam2 , Adithya Pediredla1
1
Dartmouth College, 2 University of California, Riverside

AMCW-ToF Lidar

Off-axis holography

( , ) −

quadrature technique

phase from quadrature

sensor

( , )

0.0

-0.5

signal

-1.0
-1.5
reference

-2.0

Fourier transform of hologram

rolling shutter for off-axis

snapshot technique

phase from snapshot
0.0
-0.5

-1.0
hologram

-1.5

twin

-2.0

Figure 1. We propose a novel snapshot Lidar imaging system that is inspired by off-axis holography techniques. (1st col.) Off-axis
holography uses oblique illumination to separate the hologram and its twin in Fourier space. (2nd col.) We leverage the rolling-shutter
effect of amplitude modulated continuous wave time-of-flight (AMCW-ToF) cameras to emulate the off-axis principle, thereby separating
the time-of-flight hologram and its twin in Fourier space. (3rd col.) The conventional operation of AMCW-ToF Lidars requires four
measurements, whereas our technique is 4x faster, improving both the data bandwidth and temporal resolution. (4th col.) Reconstructed
phase (that encodes depth) from measurements—The reconstructions are quite similar even with 4x fewer measurements.

Abstract
Amplitude modulated continuous-wave time-of-flight
(AMCW-ToF) cameras are finding applications as flash Lidars in autonomous navigation, robotics, and AR/VR applications. A conventional CW-ToF camera requires illuminating the scene with a temporally varying light source
and demodulating a set of quadrature measurements to recover the scene’s depth and intensity. Capturing the four
measurements in sequence renders the system slow, invariably causing inaccuracies in depth estimates due to motion in the scene or the camera. To mitigate this problem,
we propose a snapshot Lidar that captures amplitude and
phase simultaneously as a single time-of-flight hologram.
Uniquely, our approach requires minimal changes to existing CW-ToF imaging hardware. To demonstrate the efficacy
of the proposed system, we design and build a lab prototype,
and evaluate it under varying scene geometries, illumina-

tion conditions, and compare the reconstructed depth measurements against conventional techniques. We rigorously
evaluate the robustness of our system on diverse real-world
scenes to show that our technique results in a significant reduction in data bandwidth with minimal loss in reconstruction accuracy. As high-resolution CW-ToF cameras are becoming ubiquitous, increasing their temporal resolution by
four times enables robust real-time capture of geometries of
dynamic scenes.

1. Introduction
Amplitude modulated continous-wave time-of-flight
(AMCW-ToF) cameras, also known as correlation-based
time-of-flight or indirect time-of-flight cameras, are used
as flash Lidars to compute scene depth, and are used in
autonomous navigation, robotics [6, 13], and augmented
reality [8]. AMCW-ToF cameras operate by projecting a

25203

