This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HomoFormer: Homogenized Transformer for Image Shadow Removal
Jie Xiao1 Xueyang Fu1† Yurui Zhu1 Dong Li1 Jie Huang1 Kai Zhu2 Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Alibaba Group
ustchbxj@mail.ustc.edu.cn xyfu@ustc.edu.cn

The spatial non-uniformity and diverse patterns of
shadow degradation conflict with the weight sharing manner of dominant models, which may lead to an unsatisfactory compromise. To tackle with this issue, we present
a novel strategy from the view of shadow transformation
in this paper: directly homogenizing the spatial distribution of shadow degradation. Our key design is the random
shuffle operation and its corresponding inverse operation.
Specifically, random shuffle operation stochastically rearranges the pixels across spatial space and the inverse operation recovers the original order. After randomly shuffling,
the shadow diffuses in the whole image and the degradation appears in a homogenized way, which can be effectively processed by the local self-attention layer. Moreover, we further devise a new feed forward network with
position modeling to exploit image structural information.
Based on these elements, we construct the final local window based transformer named HomoFormer for image
shadow removal. Our HomoFormer can enjoy the linear complexity of local transformers while bypassing challenges of non-uniformity and diversity of shadow. Extensive
experiments are conducted to verify the superiority of our
HomoFormer across public datasets. Code is available at
https://github.com/jiexiaou/HomoFormer.

1. Introduction
Shadow is ubiquitous in images captured under natural
scenes when the light sources are partially or fully blocked.
However, shadow not only impairs the visual quality of images but imposes severe limitations on various subsequent
downstream vision tasks, e.g., object tracking [40] and detection [36], face recognition [56], etc. Hence, it is significant to restore clean images from their shaded counterparts.
One of main obstacles of image de-shadowing is that the
spatial distribution of shadow degradation is non-uniform
and the patterns of shadow are diverse. These character† Corresponding author.

non-shadowed

Abstract

ed
ow
had
s
ed
e
l
adow
litt
st sh
almo

non-uniform
distribution

weight
totally shadowed
sharing
inverse
shuffle

random
shuffle

homogenized
distribution
weight
sharing

Figure 1. Schematic illustration of challenges posed by nonuniform distribution of shadow. Non-uniformity imposes a constraint to weight sharing models, where they struggle to seek for a
compromise among regions of various degenerated degrees. Random shuffle creates a homogenized distribution, laying the foundation for the weight-sharing local self-attention.

istics make shadow very hard to be modeled by dominant
models, such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) and
window based Transformers [34]. It is caused by the inherent weight sharing property of those models. The build-in
weight sharing property determines that they have to utilize
a single set of parameters to cover shadow cases of complex degraded degree, which may lead to an unsatisfactory
compromise. Fig. 1 illustrates this idea schematically.
To overcome this challenge, one straightforward solution
is to choose advanced models, which are capable of modeling interactions with spatial heterogeneity. In other words,
the desired model is anticipated to take an adaptive action
relying on the concrete content of shadows. A competitive
candidate is vanilla vision transformers [4, 10], which, by
leveraging the global self-attention, are capable of process-

25617

