This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SuperNormal: Neural Surface Reconstruction
via Multi-View Normal Integration
Xu Cao

Takafumi Taketomi
CyberAgent

{xu cao, taketomi takafumi}@cyberagent.co.jp

Abstract
We present SuperNormal, a fast, high-fidelity approach
to multi-view 3D reconstruction using surface normal maps.
With a few minutes, SuperNormal produces detailed surfaces on par with 3D scanners. We harness volume rendering to optimize a neural signed distance function (SDF)
powered by multi-resolution hash encoding. To accelerate
training, we propose directional finite difference and patchbased ray marching to approximate the SDF gradients numerically. While not compromising reconstruction quality,
this strategy is nearly twice as efficient as analytical gradients and about three times faster than axis-aligned finite
difference. Experiments on the benchmark dataset demonstrate the superiority of SuperNormal in efficiency and accuracy compared to existing multi-view photometric stereo
methods. On our captured objects, SuperNormal produces
more fine-grained geometry than recent neural 3D reconstruction methods. Our code is available at https://
github.com/CyberAgentAILab/SuperNormal.

Multi-view posed normal maps

Ours (51 secs)

18 normal maps

Scanner
[EinScan SE]

Ours (5 mins)

Scanner [Rexcan CS+] PS-NeRF (8 hrs)

NeuS2 (5 mins)

~100 images

1. Introduction

Figure 1.
(Top) From multi-view surface normal maps,
SuperNormal recovers fine-grained surface details comparable to
3D scanners while being orders of magnitude faster than the existing MVPS method PS-NeRF [31]. (Bottom) Using normal maps
produces more faithful high-frequency details than the MVSbased method NeuS2 [30], although both use multi-resolution hash
encoding [20].

Recovering high-quality 3D geometry of real-world objects from their multi-view images is a long-standing challenge in computer vision. Recently, neural implicit surfacebased methods have shown remarkable reconstruction results. Compared to traditional multi-view stereo (MVS)
methods [25], neural methods are more robust to viewdependent observations and textureless surfaces [29]. Furthermore, the reconstruction procedure has become highly
efficient [30] by introducing multi-resolution hash coding [20]. However, even though this spatial encoding allows fine-grained geometry to be represented, shape reconstruction from multi-view images tends to smooth out highfrequency surface details, as shown in Fig. 1 bottom right.
Multi-view photometric stereo (MVPS), on the other
hand, aims to recover pixel-level high-frequency surface
detail by introducing additional lighting conditions during

the image acquisition [9]. In a typical workflow, a surface normal map is first recovered for each view, recording per-pixel surface orientation information. The normal
maps estimated at different viewpoints are then fused into a
3D model, also known as multi-view normal integration [5].
However, existing normal fusion methods struggle to reflect
the details of the normal maps in the shape of the recovered 3D model. Moreover, the reconstruction process takes
hours even when only a few low-resolution normal maps are
used [4, 31]. Due to the lack of a fast and accurate multiview normal fusion method, current multi-view photometric
stereo results remain unsatisfactory.
This paper presents SuperNormal to unite the best of
both worlds. Normal maps with pixel-level surface details
are utilized to exploit the expressive power and efficiency

20581

