This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Motion Diversification Networks
Hee Jae Kim Eshed Ohn-Bar
Boston University
{hjkim37, eohnbar}@bu.edu

Latent Space

Abstract

Start

Sampled Future End Poses

CVAE

We introduce Motion Diversification Networks, a novel
framework for learning to generate realistic and diverse 3D
human motion. Despite recent advances in deep generative
motion modeling, existing models often fail to produce samples that capture the full range of plausible and natural 3D
human motion within a given context. The lack of diversity
becomes even more apparent in applications where subtle
and multi-modal 3D human forecasting is crucial for safety,
such as robotics and autonomous driving. Towards more realistic and functional 3D motion models, we highlight limitations in existing generative modeling techniques, particularly in overly simplistic latent code sampling strategies. We
then introduce a transformer-based diversification mechanism that learns to effectively guide sampling in the latent
space. Our proposed attention-based module queries multiple stochastic samples to flexibly predict a diverse set of latent codes which can be subsequently decoded into motion
samples. The proposed framework achieves state-of-theart diversity and accuracy prediction performance across
a range of benchmarks and settings, particularly when used
to forecast intricate in-the-wild 3D human motion within
complex urban environments. Our models, datasets, and
code are available at https://mdncvpr.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Humans can seamlessly navigate intricate environments by
anticipating and planning over a diverse range of possible futures, i.e., potential future behaviors of those around
them [6, 52, 79]. Particularly for complex, long-term scenarios that are filled with ambiguity and uncertainty, such as
autonomous driving in dense social settings, modeling a diverse set of subtle future motions could mean the difference
between a cautiously safe maneuver and a catastrophe. For
instance, drivers may slow down for the mere possibility of
a child abruptly crossing the street, e.g., due to an upcoming
narrow sidewalk or a construction zone [19]. Within such
safety-critical scenarios, even slight hand gestures or visual
scanning could signal intent and thus provide crucial cues

DLow
MDN
(Ours)

Figure 1. Our Motion Diversification Network (MDN) Captures Diverse Data Modes. The proposed framework produces
highly diverse 3D human motion through a novel diversification
module, as shown for an example starting pose on the right. We
also visualize the t-SNE-based embedding [58] derived from the
latent space of 3D motion data samples, showing higher coverage of data modes compared to baseline generative models
(CVAE [32] and DLow [79]).

for predicting future pose and trajectory [30, 49, 52, 66, 76].
In this work, we are interested in designing expressive generative models that are capable of fully characterizing and
predicting such natural and nuanced multi-modal 3D motion in realistic contexts.
Even within the controlled motion captured settings in
which articulated 3D human motion synthesis is generally
studied, i.e., with minimal surrounding context and restrictive social dynamics [7, 25, 26, 38, 39, 41, 45, 55, 63, 70],
generating 3D human motion that is both diverse and realistic remains a difficult task and often results in a tradeoff [3, 65, 72, 78, 79]. For instance, diffusion-based techniques have recently been shown to improve the realism
of generated motion samples [3, 49], yet lead to reduced
overall sample diversity [3, 53, 57]. Introducing stochastic sampling mechanisms, such as in Variational Autoencoding (VAE) [2, 10, 12, 21, 22, 32, 36, 42, 56, 71, 84],
similarly fails to cover the full spectrum of human motion
as the underlying likelihood-based sampling tends to emphasize the major modes in the data [72, 79]. While prior
methods have attempted to mitigate the issue of mode collapse by introducing affine or simple learnable mechanisms
in the latent space [72, 79], these can be difficult to optimize
and only provide limited diversity within more rare modes,
as these may be poorly captured by the latent representa-

1650

