This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Device-Wise Federated Network Pruning
Shangqian Gao∗1 , Junyi Li∗2 , Zeyu Zhang∗3 , Yanfu Zhang4 , Weidong Cai5 , Heng Huang2†
1
Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh,
2
Computer Science, University of Maryland College Park,
3
Information, University of Arizona, 4 Computer Science, College of William and Mary,
5
School of Computer Science, University of Sydney

Abstract
Neural network pruning, particularly channel pruning,
is a widely used technique for compressing deep learning
models to enable their deployment on edge devices with
limited resources. Typically, redundant weights or structures are removed to achieve the target resource budget.
Although data-driven pruning approaches have proven to be
more effective, they cannot be directly applied to federated
learning (FL), which has emerged as a popular technique
in edge computing applications, because of distributed and
confidential datasets. In response to this challenge, we design a new network pruning method for FL. We propose
device-wise sub-networks for each device, assuming that the
data distribution is similar within each device. These subnetworks are generated through sub-network embeddings
and a hypernetwork. To further minimize memory usage and
communication costs, we permanently prune the full model
to remove weights that are not useful for all devices. During
the FL process, we simultaneously train the device-wise subnetworks and the base sub-network to facilitate the pruning
process. We then finetune the pruned model with device-wise
sub-networks to regain performance. Moreover, we provided
the theoretical guarantee of convergence for our method.
Our method achieves better performance and resource tradeoff than other well-established network pruning baselines, as
demonstrated through extensive experiments on CIFAR-10,
CIFAR-100, and TinyImageNet.

1. Introduction
Machine learning algorithms often rely on large amounts of
data, but privacy restrictions can prevent data from being
easily shared across different organizations. For instance,
hospitals may have isolated data that are limited in size
† This work was partially supported by NSF IIS 2347592, 2347604,
2348159, 2348169, DBI 2405416, CCF 2348306, CNS 2347617.
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

and cannot be used to train a high-quality model with good
predictive accuracy. Collaboration between organizations to
train a machine learning model on their combined data can
lead to better results, but sharing data is often not possible
due to privacy policies and regulations [1]. This problem of
‘data islands’ is not limited to hospitals and can be found in
other areas such as finance, government, and supply chains.
Federated learning [42, 49, 74] has emerged as a popular
research topic in the machine learning and computer vision
communities as a solution to these issues.
Convolution Neural Networks (CNNs) have achieved remarkable success in various computer vision tasks[35, 56,
61], but to address real-world challenges, recent CNNs have
become wider and deeper, leading to improved performance
on various benchmarks. However, this increased capacity
comes at the cost of higher computational and storage requirements, which prohibit CNNs from being deployed on
edge devices. Consequently, numerous efforts [17, 55] have
been made to reduce the size of CNNs to enable their deployment on mobile and embedded devices. Among different
directions, weight pruning [18] and structural pruning [38]
are two major ways to reduce the model size. Network
pruning methods have achieved promising results. However,
most existing methods do not consider heterogeneous (noniid) local data distributions. Instead, they upload local data
to the server to train and prune the model based on the whole
dataset.
There are several existing works [21, 27, 37, 52, 60]
on network pruning under non-iid local data distributions. These methods mainly focus on weight pruning.
SCBFwP [60] tries to perform channel pruning under non-iid
data distributions, but they mostly rely on channel norms as
the importance score, and they did not show how to scale
their method to larger CNNs. Our method is designed to
perform channel pruning given a certain computational budget (measured in FLOPs) on each device. Because, unlike
weight pruning, channel pruning can achieve acceleration
and compression without any post-processing steps.
Previous research [22, 76] show that data-driven pruning

12342

