This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Analyzing and Improving the Training Dynamics of Diffusion Models
Tero Karras
NVIDIA

Miika Aittala
NVIDIA

Jaakko Lehtinen
NVIDIA, Aalto University

Janne Hellsten
NVIDIA

Timo Aila
NVIDIA

Samuli Laine
NVIDIA

Abstract

FID
20

Diffusion models currently dominate the field of datadriven image synthesis with their unparalleled scaling to
large datasets. In this paper, we identify and rectify several
causes for uneven and ineffective training in the popular
ADM diffusion model architecture, without altering its highlevel structure. Observing uncontrolled magnitude changes
and imbalances in both the network activations and weights
over the course of training, we redesign the network layers
to preserve activation, weight, and update magnitudes on expectation. We find that systematic application of this philosophy eliminates the observed drifts and imbalances, resulting
in considerably better networks at equal computational complexity. Our modifications improve the previous record FID
of 2.41 in ImageNet-512 synthesis to 1.81, achieved using
fast deterministic sampling.
As an independent contribution, we present a method for
setting the exponential moving average (EMA) parameters
post-hoc, i.e., after completing the training run. This allows
precise tuning of EMA length without the cost of performing
several training runs, and reveals its surprising interactions
with network architecture, training time, and guidance.

1. Introduction
High-quality image synthesis based on text prompts, example images, or other forms of input has become widely
popular thanks to advances in denoising diffusion models [21, 46, 62–65, 70]. Diffusion-based approaches produce high-quality images while offering versatile controls
[8, 17, 20, 44, 75] and convenient ways to introduce novel
subjects [12, 56], and they also extend to other modalities
such as audio [38, 51], video [5, 22, 24], and 3D shapes
[42, 50, 52, 61]. A recent survey of methods and applications is given by Yang et al. [71].
On a high level, diffusion models convert an image of
pure noise to a novel generated image through repeated
application of image denoising. Mathematically, each de-

ADM

Previous, no guidance
Previous, with guidance
Ours, no guidance
Ours, with guidance

10

DiT-XL/2
ADM-U
ADM

5
RIN

XS

DiT-XL/2

3
XS

S

VDM++
VDM++
StyleGAN-XL

M
L

S
2

M
L
50

ADM-U

U-ViT, L

100

200

XL XXL
XL XXL
500

1000

2000

Model complexity (gigaflops per evaluation), ImageNet-512

Figure 1. Our contributions significantly improve the quality of
results w.r.t. model complexity, surpassing the previous state-of-theart with a 5× smaller model. In this plot, we use gigaflops per single
model evaluation as a measure of a model’s intrinsic computational
complexity; a similar advantage holds in terms of parameter count,
as well as training and sampling cost (see Appendix A).

noising step can be understood through the lens of score
matching [26], and it is typically implemented using a U-Net
[21, 55] equipped with self-attention [69] layers. Since we
do not contribute to the theory behind diffusion models, we
refer the interested reader to the seminal works of SohlDickstein et al. [62], Song and Ermon [64], and Ho et al.
[21], as well as to Karras et al. [33], who frame various
mathematical frameworks in a common context.
Despite the seemingly frictionless scaling to very large
datasets and models, the training dynamics of diffusion models remain challenging due to the highly stochastic loss function. The final image quality is dictated by faint image
details predicted throughout the sampling chain, and small
mistakes at intermediate steps can have snowball effects in
subsequent iterations. The network must accurately estimate
the average clean image across a vast range of noise levels,
Gaussian noise realizations, and conditioning inputs. Learn-

24174

