This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Synthetic-to-Real Transfer for Stereo Matching
Jiawei Zhang1 , Jiahe Li1 , Lei Huang2 , Xiaohan Yu3 , Lin Gu4,5 , Jin Zheng1 , Xiao Bai1 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of
Complex & Critical Software Environment, Jiangxi Research Institute, Beihang University
2
SKLCCSE, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
3
School of Computing, Macquarie University, Australia 4 RIKEN AIP 5 The University of Tokyo

Abstract
With advancements in domain generalized stereo matching networks, models pre-trained on synthetic data demonstrate strong robustness to unseen domains. However, few
studies have investigated the robustness after fine-tuning
them in real-world scenarios, during which the domain generalization ability can be seriously degraded. In this paper, we explore fine-tuning stereo matching networks without compromising their robustness to unseen domains. Our
motivation stems from comparing Ground Truth (GT) versus Pseudo Label (PL) for fine-tuning: GT degrades, but PL
preserves the domain generalization ability. Empirically,
we find the difference between GT and PL implies valuable information that can regularize networks during finetuning. We also propose a framework to utilize this difference for fine-tuning, consisting of a frozen Teacher, an exponential moving average (EMA) Teacher, and a Student network. The core idea is to utilize the EMA Teacher to measure what the Student has learned and dynamically improve
GT and PL for fine-tuning. We integrate our framework with
state-of-the-art networks and evaluate its effectiveness on
several real-world datasets. Extensive experiments show
that our method effectively preserves the domain generalization ability during fine-tuning. Code is available at:
https://github.com/jiaw-z/DKT-Stereo.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D geometry from 2D images is a fundamental problem in computer vision. Stereo matching is a solution that identifies matching correspondences and recovers depth information through triangulation. With the development of deep learning, stereo matching networks have
shown impressive performance on various benchmarks.
A major obstacle to their applications is the high cost of
collecting real-world annotations. To make up for the lack
* Corresponding author: Xiao Bai (baixiao@buaa.edu.cn).

Pre-train

(a.1)

GT Fine-tune

DKT(ours)

(a.2)
(a) KITTI Fine-tuning

(b) Booster Fine-tuning

Figure 1. Target-domain and cross-domain performance of networks pre-trained on synthetic data, fine-tuned with GT, and with
our method (best visualized in colors). IGEV-Stereo [44] is used as
the baseline model. D1 error (the lower the better) is used for evaluation. (a) and (b) fine-tune networks on the KITTI and Booster
datasets, respectively. Our method achieves great performance
in target and unseen domains simultaneously. We also evaluate
the robustness of KITTI fine-tuned networks on DrivingStereo in
(a.2), where our method is more robust to challenging weather.

of real data, existing networks are commonly pre-trained
on synthetic data. With recent advancements in building
domain generalized networks [7, 17, 21, 55], they have
demonstrated strong robustness to unseen domains. However, as shown in Figure 1, fine-tuning pre-trained networks
in real-world scenarios degrades the domain generalization
ability. We provide visualization results in Figure 2. The
degradation of robustness to unseen scenarios can render
networks unreliable for real-world applications. To solve it,
we explore what degrades the domain generalization ability
of stereo networks during fine-tuning and provide a solution
by combining Ground Truth (GT) with Pseudo Label (PL)
predicted by pre-trained stereo matching networks.
Our exploration stems from the observation that using
PL for fine-tuning stereo matching networks can preserve
the domain generalization ability (cf . Section 3.3.1). Since
there is always a gap between predicted PL and GT, we
consider whether the difference between them implies certain knowledge. We are also motivated by previous studies [9, 14, 57] of knowledge distillation utilizing wrong response to non-target classes, which they refer to as “dark

20247

