This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SemCity: Semantic Scene Generation with Triplane Diffusion
Jumin Lee1 * Sebin Lee1 * Changho Jo2
1

Woobin Im1

KAIST

2

Juhyeong Seon1

Sung-Eui Yoon1

Neosapience, Inc.
Topview

Topview

(c) Scene outpainting
Sensor
observation

(a) Scene generation

SSC

SSC refinement

GT

(b) Semantic scene completion refinement

(d) Scene inpainting

Figure 1. We introduce a diffusion framework, SemCity, designed for generating semantic scenes in real-world outdoor environments as
shown in (a). We extend our diffusion model to various practical tasks: semantic scene completion refinement, scene outpainting, and scene
inpainting. For instance, the comprehensive scenario is displayed in (b) → (c) → (d): the refined scene (SSC refinement) (b) is outpainted
to a broader scene (c); then, an object (in this case, a car) is seamlessly integrated into the scene via our inpainting process (d).

Abstract
We present “SemCity,” a 3D diffusion model for semantic scene generation in real-world outdoor environments.
Most 3D diffusion models focus on generating a single object, synthetic indoor scenes, or synthetic outdoor scenes,
while the generation of real-world outdoor scenes is rarely
addressed. In this paper, we concentrate on generating a
real-outdoor scene through learning a diffusion model on a
real-world outdoor dataset. In contrast to synthetic data,
real-outdoor datasets often contain more empty spaces due
to sensor limitations, causing challenges in learning realoutdoor distributions. To address this issue, we exploit a
triplane representation as a proxy form of scene distributions to be learned by our diffusion model. Furthermore,
we propose a triplane manipulation that integrates seamlessly with our triplane diffusion model. The manipulation
improves our diffusion model’s applicability in a variety
of downstream tasks related to outdoor scene generation
such as scene inpainting, scene outpainting, and semantic
* Both authors contributed equally to this work as co-first authors.

scene completion refinements. In experimental results, we
demonstrate that our triplane diffusion model shows meaningful generation results compared with existing work in
a real-outdoor dataset, SemanticKITTI. We also show our
triplane manipulation facilitates seamlessly adding, removing, or modifying objects within a scene. Further, it also
enables the expansion of scenes toward a city-level scale.
Finally, we evaluate our method on semantic scene completion refinements where our diffusion model enhances predictions of semantic scene completion networks by learning scene distribution. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/zoomin-lee/SemCity.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [16] have emerged as a promising generation tool owing to its state-of-the-art generation results
in image domain [35, 36]. This advance has led to active exploration in extending diffusion models to 3D data
generation across both academic and industrial groups. In
the 3D domain, diffusion models have shown remarkable

28337

