This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

2S-UDF: A Novel Two-stage UDF Learning Method for Robust Non-watertight
Model Reconstruction from Multi-view Images

1

Junkai Deng1,2 Fei Hou1,2 * Xuhui Chen1,2 Wencheng Wang1,2 Ying He3
State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
{dengjk, houfei, chenxh, whn}@ios.ac.cn

GT

Abstract
Recently, building on the foundation of neural radiance
field, various techniques have emerged to learn unsigned
distance fields (UDF) to reconstruct 3D non-watertight
models from multi-view images. Yet, a central challenge
in UDF-based volume rendering is formulating a proper
way to convert unsigned distance values into volume density, ensuring that the resulting weight function remains unbiased and sensitive to occlusions. Falling short on these
requirements often results in incorrect topology or large
reconstruction errors in resulting models. This paper addresses this challenge by presenting a novel two-stage algorithm, 2S-UDF, for learning a high-quality UDF from
multi-view images. Initially, the method applies an easily
trainable density function that, while slightly biased and
transparent, aids in coarse reconstruction. The subsequent
stage then refines the geometry and appearance of the object to achieve a high-quality reconstruction by directly adjusting the weight function used in volume rendering to ensure that it is unbiased and occlusion-aware. Decoupling
density and weight in two stages makes our training stable and robust, distinguishing our technique from existing
UDF learning approaches. Evaluations on the DeepFashion3D, DTU, and BlendedMVS datasets validate the robustness and effectiveness of our proposed approach. In
both quantitative metrics and visual quality, the results indicate our superior performance over other UDF learning techniques in reconstructing 3D non-watertight models
from multi-view images. Our code is available at https:
//bitbucket.org/jkdeng/2sudf/.

1. Introduction
As the success of neural radiance field (NeRF) [29], numerous volume rendering based 3D modeling methods are pro* Corresponding author

yhe@ntu.edu.sg

Ours

NeuralUDF

NeUDF

Figure 1. We learn a UDF from multiview images for nonwatertight model reconstruction. As illustrated in the cross sections of learned UDFs, our learned UDF approximates to the
ground truth. In contrast, the learned UDF of NeuralUDF [25]
is choppy leading to significant artifacts, e.g., unexpected pit. The
learned UDF of NeUDF [23] is almost closed struggling to generate open surface.

posed to learn signed distance fields (SDF) for 3D model reconstruction from multi-view images [7, 34, 36, 40]. These
approaches map signed distance value to a density function,
thereby enabling the use of volume rendering to learn an
implicit SDF representation. To calculate pixel colors, they
compute the weighted sum of radiances along each light
ray. Achieving an accurate surface depiction requires the
density function to meet three essential criteria. Firstly, the
weights, which are derived from the density function, must
reach their maximum value when the distance is zero, ensuring unbiasedness. Secondly, as a ray traverses through the
surface, the accumulated density should tend towards infinity, rendering the surface opaque — a property referred to as
occlusion-awareness. Finally, the density function should
be bounded to prevent numerical issues. The popular SDF
approaches, such as NeuS [34] and VolSDF [40], adopt an
S-shaped density function that meets all these requirements.
While SDF-based methods excel at reconstructing watertight models, they have limitations in representing open
models. This is due to the intrinsic nature of SDF, which

5084

