This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Study of Dropout-Induced Modality Bias on Robustness to Missing Video
Frames for Audio-Visual Speech Recognition
Yusheng Dai† , Hang Chen† , Jun Du† *, Ruoyu Wang† , Shihao Chen† , Haotian Wang† , Chin-Hui Lee‡
†
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
‡
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, America
jundu@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Advanced Audio-Visual Speech Recognition (AVSR) systems have been observed to be sensitive to missing video
frames, performing even worse than single-modality models. While applying the common dropout techniques to the
video modality enhances robustness to missing frames, it
simultaneously results in a performance loss when dealing with complete data input. In this study, we delve into
this contrasting phenomenon through the lens of modality
bias and uncover that an excessive modality bias towards
the audio modality induced by dropout constitutes the fundamental cause. Next, we present the Modality Bias Hypothesis (MBH) to systematically describe the relationship
between the modality bias and the robustness against missing modality in multimodal systems. Building on these findings, we propose a novel Multimodal Distribution Approximation with Knowledge Distillation (MDA-KD) framework
to reduce over-reliance on the audio modality, maintaining performance and robustness simultaneously. Finally,
to address an entirely missing modality, we adopt adapters
to dynamically switch decision strategies. The effectiveness of our proposed approach is evaluated through comprehensive experiments on the MISP2021 and MISP2022
datasets. Our code is available at https://github.
com/dalision/ModalBiasAVSR.

1. Introduction
Audio-Visual Speech Recognition (AVSR) is a multimodal
application inspired by human speech perception. It outperforms single-modality models by incorporating noiseinvariant complementary information from visual cues, especially in noisy environments. Driven by increasingly
large open-source datasets and models [1–4], AVSR has
achieved significant advancements across various bench* Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National Nat-

ural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 62171427.

marks with a simple end-to-end design [5, 6].
Recent research on AVSR focuses on more challenging
real-life scenarios. Techniques such as reinforcement learning [7] and carefully designed fusion architecture [8–10] are
used to accommodate varying noise levels and overlapping
speech. Self-supervised learning [11] and automatic labeling techniques [12] are applied facing insufficient audiovisual pairs. Meanwhile, various synchronization modules
have been developed for audio-visual alignment.[13–15].
However, restricted to the open-source datasets [1, 2, 16],
most studies often assume that each video is recorded in
relatively high quality, without blurring, corruption, or loss.
Moreover, there is growing evidence to suggest that current
advanced AVSR systems are highly susceptible to perturbations in video modality [17, 18], resulting in significant
performance degradation even perform worse than singlemodality models [19, 20].
Missing video modality is a crucial and common problem for AVSR applied in real-life scenarios [1, 17, 19, 20].
It arises from various causes, including losses induced by
network latency or hardware limitations, as well as errors in
lip movement tracking due to occlusion and side-face. Most
researchers utilize dropout techniques 1 on video training
data to improve robustness against missing modalities [19–
23]. It has been demonstrated to effectively mitigate the
out-of-distribution (OOD) issue and alleviate performance
degradation without additional inference consumption or
complex modules. However, it leads to new challenges on
real-life scenarios with low-quality input. In our early experiments on MISP datasets [24, 25], a contradictory phenomenon could be observed in Figure 1: while applying the
dropout strategy to video training data enhance the robustness against missing video modality, it also leads to performance degradation when dealing with complete data input.
1 Distinguished from the classic dropout that randomly deactivates

nodes during neural network training, dropout in this paper specifically
refers to a data augmentation technique that partially or entirely replaces
original video frames with padding frames.

27445

