This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Generalizable Multi-Object Tracking
Zheng Qin1 Le Wang1∗ Sanping Zhou1 Panpan Fu2 Gang Hua3 Wei Tang4
1
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence,
National Engineering Research Center for Visual Information and Applications,
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
Wormpex AI Research 4 University of Illinois at Chicago

Abstract
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) encompasses various
tracking scenarios, each characterized by unique traits. Effective trackers should demonstrate a high degree of generalizability across diverse scenarios. However, existing
trackers struggle to accommodate all aspects or necessitate hypothesis and experimentation to customize the association information (motion and/or appearance) for a given
scenario, leading to narrowly tailored solutions with limited
generalizability. In this paper, we investigate the factors
that influence trackers’ generalization to different scenarios and concretize them into a set of tracking scenario attributes to guide the design of more generalizable trackers.
Furthermore, we propose a “point-wise to instance-wise relation” framework for MOT, i.e., GeneralTrack, which can
generalize across diverse scenarios while eliminating the
need to balance motion and appearance. Thanks to its superior generalizability, our proposed GeneralTrack achieves
state-of-the-art performance on multiple benchmarks and
demonstrates the potential for domain generalization.

1. Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) aims to locate targets and
recognize their identities from a streaming video. It is an essential task for many applications such as autonomous driving [7], robotics [31], and visual surveillance [33]. Despite
great progress in the past few years, the MOT task remains
challenging when the trackers are generalized to diverse application scenarios.
Prior MOT methods mostly follow the tracking-bydetection (TbD) [1, 2, 59] or tracking-by-regression (TbR)
[3, 62] paradigm. TbD methods detect objects in each frame
and then associates objects across frames. TbR methods
also conduct frame-wise object detection, but replaces the
∗ Corresponding author.

data association with a continuous regression of each tracklet to its new position. With rapid advances in object detection, TbD has become the dominant paradigm in the field.
Real-world application scenarios are diverse and characterized by a wide spectrum of different attributes, such
as varying motion complexities, target densities, and frame
rate, as shown in Figure 1. Unfortunately, current MOT
methods heavily depend on extensive prior knowledge or
intricate engineering efforts to excel in specific scenarios,
but they struggle to generalize effectively to different situations. This limitation significantly restricts their utility in
real-world applications.
For TbD, motion-dominated methods [5, 36, 40] are
brittle when encountering irregular motion and substantial
variation in target shape or position; appearance-dominated
methods [13, 38, 52] are prone to failure when facing occlusion, for example, caused by dense crowds or shelters, light
change, and small targets. To overcome these difficulties,
some TbD methods require a manual adjustment of which
information to rely on more in a specific scenario. For example, ByteTrack [59] constructs an affinity matrix based
on motion in MOT17 and MOT20, and based on appearance in BDD100K. Other works [1, 13, 43, 52] directly balance the two affinity matrices with a weighting factor and
adjust it for different scenarios. The limitation in generalizability similarly applies to TbR. For example, Tracktor [3]
cannot handle videos with low frame rates and targets with
large shape or position variation; Centertrack [62] uses the
center point to represent each target, which would become
overwhelming in crowded scenarios. Therefore, there is an
urgent need to develop trackers that effectively generalize
to different scenarios.
In this paper, we first conduct an in-depth analysis of
the tracking scenarios to gain insight into why a particular
tracker’s performance varies significantly in different scenarios. Referring to the performance of previous trackers
on different datasets, we parsed out the tracking scenario attributes as follows: motion complexity, variation amplitude,

18995

