This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learnable Earth Parser: Discovering 3D Prototypes in Aerial Scans
Romain Loiseau1, 2

Elliot Vincent1,3

Mathieu Aubry1

Loic Landrieu1, 2

romain.loiseau@enpc.fr

elliot.vincent@enpc.fr

mathieu.aubry@enpc.fr

loic.landrieu@enpc.fr

1 LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
2 Univ Gustave Eiffel, IGN, ENSG, LASTIG, France
3 INRIA Paris, France

Abstract
We propose an unsupervised method for parsing large
3D scans of real-world scenes with easily-interpretable
shapes. This work aims to provide a practical tool for analyzing 3D scenes in the context of aerial surveying and
mapping, without the need for user annotations. Our approach is based on a probabilistic reconstruction model
that decomposes an input 3D point cloud into a small set
of learned prototypical 3D shapes. The resulting reconstruction is visually interpretable and can be used to perform unsupervised instance and low-shot semantic segmentation of complex scenes. We demonstrate the usefulness
of our model on a novel dataset of seven large aerial LiDAR scans from diverse real-world scenarios. Our approach outperforms state-of-the-art unsupervised methods
in terms of decomposition accuracy while remaining visually interpretable. Our code and dataset are available
at https : / / romainloiseau . fr / learnable earth-parser/.

Large aerial 3D scan
Learnable Earth Parser

Learnable prototypes

Semantic segmentation

1. Introduction
Modern aerial 3D scanning technologies open up unprecedented opportunities for environmental monitoring and economic intelligence. However, their practical use remains
challenging due to the complexity of real-world scenes, the
diversity of usage scenarios, and the difficulty of annotation. Therefore, our aim is to develop an approach that
could help perform diverse tasks—from counting trees in
a forest or identifying the various components of a factory
to measuring the surface of greenhouses or monitor urban
growth—all without human supervision.
To do so, we address two important limitations of existing 3D deep learning methods. First, they are often primarily designed, trained, and tested on synthetic [7, 46, 59, 72]
or highly curated data [2, 30, 39], which fail to capture the
endless variability of the real world. Moreover, they often

Reconstruction

Vegetation

Instance segmentation
Ground

Windturbine

Figure 1. Learnable Earth Parser. Our unsupervised method
takes large aerial 3D scans as input and model them with a small
set of learned 3D prototypes. Our approach is trained without annotation and produce legible decompositions of complex scenes,
which can be used for semantic and instance segmentation.

assume that annotations are available for tasks of interest.
Second, even unsupervised approaches [1, 77] often rely on
learning abstract feature representations, making them difficult to interpret [76]. Although some work has attempted
to decompose 3D shapes into meaningful components without supervision [11, 43, 53, 67], they were all designed on
simple synthetic shapes and none generalizes to real data.
To overcome these limitations, we present the Learnable Earth Parser, an unsupervised deep learning method

27874

