This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SmartRefine: A Scenario-Adaptive Refinement Framework for
Efficient Motion Prediction
Yang Zhou1∗
Hao Shao1,2∗
Letian Wang3
Steven L. Waslander3 Hongsheng Li2,4,5 Yu Liu1,5
1

SenseTime Research
CPII under InnoHK

4

2

CUHK MMLab 3 University of Toronto
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

5

Abstract
Predicting the future motion of surrounding agents is essential for autonomous vehicles (AVs) to operate safely in dynamic, human-robot-mixed environments. Context information, such as road maps and surrounding agents’ states, provides crucial geometric and semantic information for motion behavior prediction. To this end, recent works explore
two-stage prediction frameworks where coarse trajectories
are first proposed, and then used to select critical context
information for trajectory refinement. However, they either
incur a large amount of computation or bring limited improvement, if not both. In this paper, we introduce a novel
scenario-adaptive refinement strategy, named SmartRefine,
to refine prediction with minimal additional computation.
Specifically, SmartRefine can comprehensively adapt refinement configurations based on each scenario’s properties,
and smartly chooses the number of refinement iterations by
introducing a quality score to measure the prediction quality and remaining refinement potential of each scenario.
SmartRefine is designed as a generic and flexible approach
that can be seamlessly integrated into most state-of-the-art
motion prediction models. Experiments on Argoverse (1 &
2) show that our method consistently improves the prediction accuracy of multiple state-of-the-art prediction models.
Specifically, by adding SmartRefine to QCNet, we outperform all published ensemble-free works on the Argoverse 2
leaderboard (single agent track) at submission1 . Comprehensive studies are also conducted to ablate design choices
and explore the mechanism behind multi-iteration refinement. Codes are available at our webpage.

1. Introduction
Predicting the future motion of surrounding agents (e.g., vehicle, cyclist, pedestrian) is crucial for autonomous driving frameworks [11, 22–24, 31] to safely and efficiently
∗ Equal contribution,
1 November 2023.

Corresponding author.

make decisions in a dynamic and human-robot-mixed environment. Context information, such as high-definition maps
(HD maps) and surrounding agents’ states, provides crucial
geometric and semantic information for motion behavior, as
agents’ behaviors are highly dependent on the map topology
and impacted by interaction with surrounding agents. For
instance, vehicles usually move in drivable areas and follow
the direction of lanes, and agents’ interactive cues such as
yielding would inform other agent’s decision-making. As
a result, recent motion prediction models are shown to significantly benefit from delicate context representation designs [2, 9, 13, 30] and context encodings [16, 21, 26]. However, complicated context encodings usually come at a high
computational cost and high memory footprint. Since vehicles are high-speed robots and minimal delay could result in catastrophic accidents, recent advanced state-of-theart methods could have low applicability due to limitations
in mobile computation capacity and the hard real-time requirements of autonomous driving.
By contrast, human drivers can easily predict surrounding
agents’ future behaviors, even if they confront a daunting amount of context information. As implied by neuroscience, humans’ efficient reasoning capabilities benefit
from their selective attention mechanism [17, 19], which
identifies compact context information critical to the task for
efficient reasoning. Similarly, motion prediction models are
shown to be able to produce high-quality predictions with
only a few critical context elements provided, such as only
giving the ground-truth future reference lanes and conducting prediction in the relative coordinates [28, 29, 35]. Therefore, if we can identify the critical context elements, and aggregate more information from these critical inputs to further
refine the predictions, both the computational efficiency and
prediction performance can be significantly improved.
While multiple refinement strategies have been proposed, the
proper design of refinement is non-trivial. [36, 40] apply a
prediction backbone to generate trajectory proposals, which
are then used as anchor trajectories for refinement. While
accuracy improvement is observed, the refinement still em-

15281

