This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-Driven Image Editing via Learnable Regions
Yuanze Lin♠

Input Image

Yi-Wen Chen♣ Yi-Hsuan Tsai⋆ Lu Jiang⋆ Ming-Hsuan Yang♣⋆
♠
University of Oxford ♣ UC Merced ⋆ Google

Edited Image

donuts with ice cream

a blooming flower and dessert

Input Image

Edited Image

Input Image

Edited Image

a cute sloth holds a box

a flowering cherry tree

several lotus flowers growing in the water

a cup of coffee next to the bread

Figure 1. Overview. Given an input image and a language description for editing, our method can generate realistic and relevant images
without the need for user-specified regions for editing. It performs local image editing while preserving the image context.

Abstract
Language has emerged as a natural interface for image
editing. In this paper, we introduce a method for regionbased image editing driven by textual prompts, without the
need for user-provided masks or sketches. Specifically, our
approach leverages an existing pre-trained text-to-image
model and introduces a bounding box generator to identify the editing regions that are aligned with the textual
prompts. We show that this simple approach enables flexible editing that is compatible with current image generation models, and is able to handle complex prompts featuring multiple objects, complex sentences, or lengthy paragraphs. We conduct an extensive user study to compare our
method against state-of-the-art methods. The experiments
demonstrate the competitive performance of our method
in manipulating images with high fidelity and realism that
correspond to the provided language descriptions. Our
project webpage can be found at: https://yuanzelin.me/LearnableRegions_page.

1. Introduction
With the availability of a massive amount of text-image
paired data and large-scale vision-language models, recent
text-driven image synthesis models [8, 32–34, 39, 42, 43,
53, 57, 62] have enabled people to create and manipulate
specific visual contents of realistic images using natural language descriptions in an interactive fashion.
Recent text-driven image editing methods [1, 2, 21, 30,
38, 39, 54] have shown impressive capabilities in editing
realistic images based on natural descriptions, with approaches typically falling into two paradigms: mask-based
or mask-free methods. Mask-based editing approaches [1,
39] are perceived intuitively for local image editing because
they allow users to specify precisely which areas of an image to modify. However, these methods can be laborious, as
they demand users to manually create masks that are sometimes unnecessary, limiting their user experience in many
applications.
In contrast, mask-free editing approaches [6, 9, 21, 38,
54] do not require masks and can directly modify the ap-

7059

