This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrastive Pre-Training with Multi-View Fusion for No-Reference Point Cloud
Quality Assessment
Ziyu Shan1 , Yujie Zhang1 , Qi Yang2 , Haichen Yang1 Yiling Xu1 *
Jenq-Neng Hwang 3 Xiaozhong Xu2 Shan Liu2
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 2 Tencent, 3 University of Washington
1
{shanziyu, yujie19981026, yanghaichen, yl.xu}@sjtu.edu.cn,
2
{chinoyang, shanl}@tencent.com,3 hwang@uw.edu

Abstract
No-reference point cloud quality assessment (NRPCQA) aims to automatically evaluate the perceptual quality of distorted point clouds without available reference,
which have achieved tremendous improvements due to the
utilization of deep neural networks. However, learningbased NR-PCQA methods suffer from the scarcity of labeled
data and usually perform suboptimally in terms of generalization. To solve the problem, we propose a novel contrastive pre-training framework tailored for PCQA (CoPA),
which enables the pre-trained model to learn quality-aware
representations from unlabeled data. To obtain anchors
in the representation space, we project point clouds with
different distortions into images and randomly mix their
local patches to form mixed images with multiple distortions. Utilizing the generated anchors, we constrain the pretraining process via a quality-aware contrastive loss following the philosophy that perceptual quality is closely related
to both content and distortion. Furthermore, in the model
fine-tuning stage, we propose a semantic-guided multi-view
fusion module to effectively integrate the features of projected images from multiple perspectives. Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms the state-of-theart PCQA methods on popular benchmarks. Further investigations demonstrate that CoPA can also benefit existing
learning-based PCQA models.

1. Introduction
Point clouds have emerged as a prominent 3D multimedia representation in diverse scenarios, such as autonomous
driving, digital museum, and immersive gaming [1, 21, 39].
* Corresponding author. This paper is supported in part by National
Natural Science Foundation of China (62371290, U20A20185) and 111
project (BP0719010). The corresponding author is Yiling Xu(e-mail:
yl.xu@sjtu.edu.cn).

Figure 1. Illustration of our contrastive pre-training framework
(CoPA). CoPA first generates anchor by randomly patch-mixing
the projected images from a point cloud with different distortions,
and then pre-trains the model by pulling positive samples closer to
the anchor in the representation space, while pushing distortionwise and content-wise negative samples apart.

These extensive applications stem from the rich information
provided by point clouds (e.g., geometric coordinates, color,
and opacity). Nevertheless, point clouds undergo various
distortions at any stage of their operation cycle (e.g., acquisition, compression, and transmission) before being delivered to the terminals, leading to inevitable quality degradation and perceptual loss. To optimize the quality of experience in practical applications, point cloud quality assessment (PCQA) has become one of the most fundamental and
challenging problems in both industry and academic area.
PCQA methods can be classified into full-reference
(FR), reduced-reference (RR) and no-reference (NR) methods, hinging on the availability of high-quality reference
point clouds. In this paper, we focus on NR-PCQA con1
25942

