This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ParameterNet: Parameters Are All You Need
for Large-scale Visual Pretraining of Mobile Networks
Kai Han1,3,∗ Yunhe Wang1,∗ Jianyuan Guo1,2,∗ Enhua Wu3,4
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 2 The University of Sydney
3
State Key Lab of Computer Science, ISCAS & UCAS
4
Faculty of Science and Technology, University of Macau
{kai.han,yunhe.wang,jianyuan.guo}@huawei.com, weh@ios.ac.cn

Abstract
The large-scale visual pretraining has significantly improve the performance of large vision models. However, we
observe the low FLOPs pitfall that the existing low-FLOPs
models cannot benefit from large-scale pretraining. In this
paper, we introduce a novel design principle, termed ParameterNet, aimed at augmenting the number of parameters in large-scale visual pretraining models while minimizing the increase in FLOPs. We leverage dynamic convolutions to incorporate additional parameters into the networks with only a marginal rise in FLOPs. The ParameterNet approach allows low-FLOPs networks to take advantage of large-scale visual pretraining. Furthermore, we
extend the ParameterNet concept to the language domain to
enhance inference results while preserving inference speed.
Experiments on the large-scale ImageNet-22K have shown
the superiority of our ParameterNet scheme. For example,
ParameterNet-600M can achieve higher accuracy than the
widely-used Swin Transformer (81.6% vs. 80.9%) and has
much lower FLOPs (0.6G vs. 4.5G). The code will be released at https://parameternet.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Thanks to advancements in computational hardware and
data engineering, large-scale visual pretraining has witnessed remarkable progress as a fundamental component
in computer vision. Pretrained vision models act as efficient representation learners, showcasing their utility in
various downstream visual tasks, including image recognition [42, 47], object detection [33, 55] and semantic segmentation [20, 64].
The mainstream pretrained vision models usually requires a large amount of resources including data, parameters and FLOPs. These three key factors heavily in∗ Equal contribution.

fluence the performance and basically follow the scaling
law [62]. The large pretraining data can provide diverse
samples for representation learning. The sizes of these
datasets range from millions [29, 42] to billions [44, 49],
for example, the widely-used ImageNet-22K dataset [42]
consists of 14M images and 21,841 categories. To better
fitting on the large dataset, the model sizes (including both
parameters and FLOPs) are getting larger and larger in recent years, e.g., ViT-G/14 model has 1.8B parameters and
965B FLOPs [62].
The visual applications on mobile devices usually requires fast inference, so it is difficult to deploy the existing pretrained vision models due to the high computational
cost. To address this issue, we empirically study the effect
of FLOPs in large-scale visual pretraining. ImageNet-22K
is adopted as the large-scale pretraining data and ImageNet1K is a relatively small dataset for comparison. The pretrained transformer and CNN models are then finetuned on
ImageNet-1K to evaluate the performance. As shown in
Figure 2 and 3, when model FLOPs gradually increase, the
model accuracy increases consistently. For the high-FLOPs
models, 22K pretrained models outperform 1K ones. However, the low-FLOPs models cannot benifit from large-scale
pretraining, and we called this observation as low FLOPs
pitfall.
In this paper, we construct low-FLOPs ParameterNet by
adding more parameters while maintaining low FLOPs for
large-scale visual pretraining. It is a general design principle and there are various approaches with more parameters and low FLOPs. For instance, here we mainly consider the efficient dynamic convolution which manyfold increase the number of parameters while almost does not
bring in extra FLOPs. The ParameterNet scheme can enable the previous networks to benefit from the large-scale
visual pretraining and overcome the low FLOPs pitfall. In
the experiments, the ImageNet-22K pretrained ParameterNets can improve the performance by about +2% over the

15751

