This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Resolution Limit of Single-Photon LiDAR
Stanley H. Chan†1

Hashan K. Weerasooriya1
Weijian Zhang1
Pamela Abshire2
Istvan Gyongy3
Robert K. Henderson3
1
2
Purdue University, Univ. Maryland College Park, 3 University of Edinburgh

Abstract
Single-photon Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR)
systems are often equipped with an array of detectors for
improved spatial resolution and sensing speed. However,
given a fixed amount of flux produced by the laser transmitter across the scene, the per-pixel Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) will decrease when more pixels are packed in a
unit space. This presents a fundamental trade-off between
the spatial resolution of the sensor array and the SNR received at each pixel. Theoretical characterization of this
fundamental limit is explored. By deriving the photon arrival statistics and introducing a series of new approximation techniques, the Mean Squared Error (MSE) of the
maximum-likelihood estimator of the time delay is derived.
The theoretical predictions align well with simulations and
real data.

1. Introduction
Single-photon LiDAR has a wide range of applications in
navigation and object identification [21, 24–26, 30, 32].
By actively illuminating the scene with a laser pulse of a
known shape, we measure the time delays of single photons upon their return, which correspond to the distance of
the object [4, 19, 36]. The advancement of photo detectors
has significantly improved the resolution of today’s LiDAR
[8, 15, 17, 33, 39–41]. Moreover, algorithms have shown
how to reconstruct both the scene reflectivity and 3D structure [2, 6, 16, 20, 22, 23, 29, 36, 38, 42, 43].
As an imaging device, a photodetector used in LiDAR
faces similar problems as any other CCD or CMOS pixels.
Packing more pixels into a unit space decreases the SNR because the amount of photon flux seen by each pixel diminishes [12]. This fundamental limit is linked to the stochastic nature of the underlying Poisson arrival process of the
photons [11, 37]. Unless noise mitigation schemes are employed [2, 14, 22, 31], there is a trade-off between the number of pixels one can pack in a unit space and the SNR we
will observe at each pixel. The situation can be visualized
in Fig. 1, where we highlight the phenomenon that if we

Figure 1. As we pack more pixels in a unit space, we gain the
spatial resolution with a reduction in the SNR. The goal of this
paper is to understand the trade-off between the two factors.

use many small pixels, the spatial resolution is good but the
per pixel noise caused by the random fluctuation of photons
will be high. The bias and variance trade-off will then lead
to a performance curve that tells us how the accuracy of the
depth estimate will behave as we vary the spatial resolution.
The goal of this paper is to rigorously derive the above
phenomenon. In particular, we want to answer the following question:
Can we theoretically derive, ideally in closed-form, the
mean squared error of the LiDAR depth estimate as a
function of the number of pixels per unit space?
The theoretical analysis presented in this paper is unique
from several perspectives:
• Beyond Single Pixel. The majority of the computer vi-

25307

