This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DART: Implicit Doppler Tomography for Radar Novel View Synthesis
Tianshu Huang*1

John Miller*12
Akarsh Prabhakara1
Tao Jin1
Zico Kolter12
Anthony Rowe12
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Bosch Research

Tarana Laroia1

{tianshu2, jmiller4, aprabhak, taojin, tlaroia, zkolter, agr}@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Simulation is an invaluable tool for radio-frequency
system designers that enables rapid prototyping of various algorithms for imaging, target detection, classification, and tracking. However, simulating realistic radar
scans is a challenging task that requires an accurate model
of the scene, radio frequency material properties, and
a corresponding radar synthesis function. Rather than
specifying these models explicitly, we propose DART —
Doppler Aided Radar Tomography, a Neural Radiance
Field-inspired method which uses radar-specific physics
to create a reflectance and transmittance-based rendering
pipeline for range-Doppler images. We then evaluate DART
by constructing a custom data collection platform and collecting a novel radar dataset together with accurate position and instantaneous velocity measurements from lidarbased localization. In comparison to state-of-the-art baselines, DART synthesizes superior radar range-Doppler images from novel views across all datasets and additionally
can be used to generate high quality tomographic images.1

1. Introduction
Driven by advances in the automotive industry, miniaturized millimeter wave (mmWave) radar chips are becoming
cheaper and more ubiquitous. Boasting a high range resolution and the ability to penetrate light materials, mmWave
radars have proven effective in many application domains
including collision avoidance and driver assistance in automobiles [14, 36, 57, 64, 65], through-occlusion imaging
in airport scanners [30, 68], and vision-denied tracking and
mapping [2, 9, 22, 37, 43].
Because designing, testing, and deploying new radar systems in the real world can be costly, many rapid prototyping
pipelines heavily rely on simulation. Modern radar simula* Equal Contribution.
1 Our implementation, data collection platform, and collected datasets
can be found via our project site: https://wiselabcmu.github.
io/dart/.

Figure 1. DART uses scans from a handheld radar to learn an
implicit tomography of a scene in order to accurately render scans
from novel viewpoints (left). DART’s implicit tomography can
also be sampled to map the radar properties of a scene (right).

tion tools normally require the user to manually specify the
geometry and characteristics of the scene, including all material properties [3]. While other sensors (e.g. lidar) can be
used to scan an environment and produce a mesh or voxel
map, they cannot capture radar-specific material properties
that are crucial for generating realistic radar scans. Thus, in
practice, this results in greatly simplified environment models due to the difficulty of meticulously surveying a scene
and generating (or annotating) a model by hand.
We envision a more intelligent, data-driven approach to
scene modeling for radar simulation where a user can carry
a handheld radar sensor through a static environment and
automatically generate a model suitable for accurate simulation of that environment. To this end, we frame the radar
simulation problem as one of novel view synthesis: using
several radar measurements of a scene to simulate what a

24118

