This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BigGait: Learning Gait Representation You Want by Large Vision Models
Dingqiang Ye1,2∗ , Chao Fan1,2 ,* Jingzhe Ma1,2 , Xiaoming Liu3 , and Shiqi Yu1,2†
1

Research Institute of Trustworthy Autonomous System, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen, China
3
Michigan State University, Michigan, United States
{11810121, 12131100, 12031127}@mail.sustech.edu.cn, liuxm@cse.msu.edu, yusq@sustech.edu.cn

Abstract
Gait recognition stands as one of the most pivotal remote identification technologies and progressively expands
across research and industry communities. However, existing gait recognition methods heavily rely on task-specific
upstream driven by supervised learning to provide explicit
gait representations like silhouette sequences, which inevitably introduce expensive annotation costs and potential error accumulation. Escaping from this trend, this
work explores effective gait representations based on the
all-purpose knowledge produced by task-agnostic Large Vision Models (LVMs) and proposes a simple yet efficient gait
framework, termed BigGait. Specifically, the Gait Representation Extractor (GRE) within BigGait draws upon design principles from established gait representations, effectively transforming all-purpose knowledge into implicit gait
representations without requiring third-party supervision
signals. Experiments on CCPG, CAISA-B* and SUSTech1K
indicate that BigGait significantly outperforms the previous methods in both within-domain and cross-domain tasks
in most cases, and provides a more practical paradigm
for learning the next-generation gait representation. Finally, we delve into prospective challenges and promising
directions in LVMs-based gait recognition, aiming to inspire future work in this emerging topic. The source code
is available at https://github.com/ShiqiYu/
OpenGait.

1. Introduction
Vision-based gait recognition aims to identify individuals
based on their unique walking patterns. Compared to other
biometric modalities like face, fingerprint, and iris, gait
stands out for its non-intrusive nature and the ability to identify individuals at long distances without the need for active
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

1) Gait Representation
Learning
Upstream
Model

2) Gait Metric
Learning
Gait
Representation

Previous:

Segmentation /
Pose / Parsing /
SMPL Model
Estimation

Large

Downstream
Model

❌ Task-specific
❌ Supervised
Find Representation

Ours:
✅ All-purpose

Vision
Model

✅ Self-supervised
You Want

Figure 1. The upstream and downstream parts of existing gait
recognition methods are responsible for gait representation and
metric learning, respectively.

cooperation. These distinctive advantages make gait recognition exceptionally suitable for a range of security applications, like suspect tracking and identity investigation [34].
Existing gait recognition methods [3, 27–29, 31, 50, 51,
53] heavily depend on upstream tasks driven by supervised
learning, as illustrated by Fig. 1. These tasks encompass a
range of objectives, including, but not limited to, pedestrian
segmentation [45], human parsing [32], body posture [2],
and SMPL [33] model estimation. In general, the upstream
model serves the purpose of providing task-specific priors
to filter out the gait-irrelevant cues within walking videos,
especially for RGB-encoded background and texture characteristics. Next, some inductive biases may be utilized to
refine the intermediate gait representation, ranging from basic operations like size alignment [42], coordinate normalization [15] to sophisticated ones like making the silhouette
edges differentiable [28] and enforcing the appearance reconstruction [27, 50]. Briefly, existing gait representations
are largely predetermined by upstream supervised tasks.

200

