This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

XScale-NVS: Cross-Scale Novel View Synthesis
with Hash Featurized Manifold
Guangyu Wang1 , Jinzhi Zhang1 , Fan Wang2 , Ruqi Huang1†, Lu Fang1†
Tsinghua University1 , Alibaba Group2

(a) Meta Representation [39] (b) 3D Gaussian Splatting [16]

(c) ZipNeRF [5]

(d) Ours (Micro-scale)

(e) Ours (Macro-scale)

Figure 1. We propose hash featurized manifold representation for high-fidelity cross-scale neural rendering of real-world large-scale scenes.
Compared to the recent advances [5, 16, 39], our method synthesizes novel views with unprecedented levels of realism. Please zoom in to
see the high-quality details.

Abstract
We propose XScale-NVS for high-fidelity cross-scale
novel view synthesis of real-world large-scale scenes. Existing representations based on explicit surface suffer from
discretization resolution or UV distortion, while implicit
volumetric representations lack scalability for large scenes
due to the dispersed weight distribution and surface ambiguity. In light of the above challenges, we introduce hash
featurized manifold, a novel hash-based featurization coupled with a deferred neural rendering framework. This approach fully unlocks the expressivity of the representation
by explicitly concentrating the hash entries on the 2D manifold, thus effectively representing highly detailed contents
independent of the discretization resolution. We also introduce a novel dataset, namely GigaNVS, to benchmark
cross-scale, high-resolution novel view synthesis of realworld large-scale scenes. Our method significantly outperforms competing baselines on various real-world scenes,
yielding an average LPIPS that is ∼ 40% lower than prior
state-of-the-art on the challenging GigaNVS benchmark.
Please see our project page at: xscalenvs.github.io.

† Lu Fang (fanglu@tsinghua.edu.cn, luvision.net) and Ruqi Huang
(ruqihuang@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn, rqhuang88.github.io) are the corresponding authors.

1. Introduction
Neural rendering has attracted significant amount of research interests and influenced down-stream applications
including virtual reality, visual effects, robotic simulation,
to name a few. Among the recent advances, a notable trend
focuses on free-view rendering of real-world large-scale
scenes [13, 23, 29, 35, 37, 39]. While these approaches
excel at recovering macro-scale structures from images captured at a distance, they often struggle to simultaneously deliver micro-scale details, leading to a discrepancy that hinders comprehensive visual perception of the real world (See
Fig. 1). This limitation necessitates a novel scene representation tailored for high-fidelity cross-scale novel view synthesis (NVS) of real-world large-scale scenes. In particular,
we identify and address two critical challenges towards this
goal as follows.
First of all, reconstructing real-world large-scale scenes
in high quality requires to collect images from both distant and close-up views. However, current real-world NVS
benchmarks [4, 6, 17, 33, 51] are limited to a single macroscale setup that neglects close-up imagery for local details
and focus primarily on small-scale scenes. To this end,
we introduce GigaNVS dataset to benchmark cross-scale,
high-resolution NVS of real-world large-scale scenes. The
dataset contains seven scenes covering an average area of
1.4 × 106 m2 , each of which is captured using a combi-

21029

