This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Video Inverse Tone Mapping Based on Temporal Clues
Yuyao Ye1 ,Ning Zhang2 , Yang Zhao3 , Hongbin Cao1,4 , Ronggang Wang1
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University 2 Baidu Netdisk
3
School of Computer and Information, Hefei University of Technology 4 Bytedance Inc.
yeyuyao@pku.edu.cn zhangning34@baidu.com
yzhao@hfut.edu.cn caohongbin.181@bytedance.com rgwang@pkusz.edu.cn

Abstract
Inverse tone mapping (ITM) aims to reconstruct high
dynamic range (HDR) radiance from low dynamic range
(LDR) content. Although many deep image ITM methods
can generate impressive results, the field of video ITM is
still to be explored. Processing video sequences by image
ITM methods may cause temporal inconsistency. Besides,
they aren’t able to exploit the potentially useful information
in the temporal domain. In this paper, we analyze the process of video filming, and then propose a Global Sample
and Local Propagate strategy to better find and utilize temporal clues. To better realize the proposed strategy, we design a two-stage pipeline which includes modules named Incremental Clue Aggregation Module and Feature and Clue
Propagation Module. They can align and fuse frames effectively under the condition of brightness changes and propagate features and temporal clues to all frames efficiently.
Our temporal clues based video ITM method can recover
realistic and temporal consistent results with high fidelity in
over-exposed regions. Qualitative and quantitative experiments on public datasets show that the proposed method
has significant advantages over existing methods. The code
is available at https://github.com/ye3why/VITM-TC/.

1. Introduction
Recently, high dynamic range (HDR) technology has
elicited considerable interest due to its capability to provide more vivid visual experiences. But because of the lack
of HDR content, it’s highly demanded to convert existing
low dynamic range (LDR) content to HDR. High dynamic
range imaging (HDRI) methods use fusion algorithms to
combine multi-exposure sequences and remove the ghost
artifacts caused by misalignment. However, in most situations the multiple-exposure sequences are unavailable(e.g.,
single LDR images or videos on the Internet). Therefore,
inverse tone mapping (ITM) methods are designed to estimate HDR radiance directly from single LDR content.

Figure 1. (a) A real-world LDR video on the Internet, the dynamic
range of frame 0 is too wide so that details outside the window are
lost. Fortunately, we can find clues along time axis. The textures
from distant frames 81, 130, and 205 can be utilized to recover
over-exposed regions. (b) An LDR video with the corresponding
HDR ground truth from [9]. Compared to the SOTA image ITM
method [22], the proposed method can use temporal clues to reconstruct more realistic textures for frame t.

With the development of deep learning, a growing number of image ITM methods have been proposed, where
[7] [22] [26] [32] [38] learn an end-to-end model to recover HDR from LDR straightforwardly and [8] [14] [18]
[19] [20] simulate the generation process of HDR images
and estimate the multi-exposure stack. Compared to the
highly sought-after image ITM, the field of video ITM has
received little attention. Although The deep image ITM
methods can generate impressive results in restoring lost
textures, directly using it to process LDR videos may en-

25995

