This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transductive Zero-Shot and Few-Shot CLIP
Ségolène Martin⇤ , Yunshi Huang† , Fereshteh Shakeri† , Jean-Christophe Pesquet⇤ , Ismail Ben Ayed†
?

Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CentraleSupélec, CVN
†
ÉTS Montréal

Abstract
Transductive inference has been widely investigated in
few-shot image classification, but completely overlooked
in the recent, fast growing literature on adapting visionlangage models like CLIP. This paper addresses the transductive zero-shot and few-shot CLIP classification challenge, in which inference is performed jointly across a minibatch of unlabeled query samples, rather than treating each
instance independently. We initially construct informative
vision-text probability features, leading to a classification
problem on the unit simplex set. Inspired by ExpectationMaximization (EM), our optimization-based classification
objective models the data probability distribution for each
class using a Dirichlet law. The minimization problem is
then tackled with a novel block Majorization-Minimization
algorithm, which simultaneously estimates the distribution parameters and class assignments. Extensive numerical experiments on 11 datasets underscore the benefits and efficacy of our batch inference approach. On
zero-shot tasks with test batches of 75 samples, our approach yields near 20% improvement in ImageNet accuracy over CLIP’s zero-shot performance. Additionally, we
outperform state-of-the-art methods in the few-shot setting.
The code is available at: https://github.com/
SegoleneMartin/transductive-CLIP.

1. Introduction
The emergence of large-scale vision-language models like
CLIP [40] has marked a significant turning point in representation learning [24, 29, 54]. By integrating both visual
and textual modalities, these models have shown remarkable potential in crafting generic and richly informative concepts. Unlike traditional vision models, often constrained
by task specificity, the representations gleaned from visionlanguage models are versatile, setting the stage for a breadth
of downstream vision tasks and expanding the horizons of
what is achievable in the domain.
Among the vision tasks that can be addressed with

vision-language models, zero-shot and few-shot classification have particularly attracted attention. Notably, CLIP has
demonstrated strong performance in zero-shot classification
[40]. Several subsequent works have leveraged few-shot
data, a few labeled samples in the target downstream task,
to further improve CLIP’s classification accuracy. Following on from the research on prompt learning in the NLP
community, CoOp and CoCoOp [57, 58] fine-tuned the pretrained CLIP model using learnable textual tokens. Another type of approaches, like CLIP-Adapter [17] and TIPAdapter [56] provided CLIP with a parametric feature transformation, which generates adapted features and combines
them with the original CLIP-encoded features. Despite
their efficacy on few-shot classification benchmarks, these
methods predominantly operate within the so-called inductive setting, where inference is conducted independently for
each query (i.e., test) sample.
In contrast, in the transductive paradigm, one makes
joint predictions for a batch of query samples, taking advantage of the query set statistics. The transductive setting for few-shot classification with vision-only models was
pioneered in [31], and have since become prominent research subject, triggering an abundant, very recent literature on the subject, e.g., [30, 34, 47, 48, 50, 52, 59, 60],
to list a few. These transductive few-shot classifiers were
shown to significantly outperform their inductive counterparts, with benchmarks indicating up to a 10% increase
in classification accuracy [6]. In fact, this is in line with
well-established theoretical facts in the classical literature
on transductive learning [25, 51], which points to transductive prediction as a way to alleviate the scarcity of labeled
data. Importantly, and beyond theoretical justification, the
transductive setting is highly relevant in a breadth of practical computer vision scenarios, in which test data may come
in mini-batches. This is the case, for instance, of online
video streams and various types of time-series imaging, of
portable-device photos, or of pixel-level tasks such as segmentation.
In this study, we take a close look at the transductive
zero-shot and few-shot inference problems for the popular

28816

