This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Robustness of Large Multimodal Models Against Image Adversarial
Attacks
Xuanming Cui†

Alejandro Aparcedo†

Young Kyun Jang

Ser-Nam Lim†

xu979022@ucf.edu

aaparcedo@ucf.edu

kyun0914@gmail.com

sernam@ucf.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in instruction tuning have led to the
development of State-of-the-Art Large Multimodal Models
(LMMs). Given the novelty of these models, the impact
of visual adversarial attacks on LMMs has not been thoroughly examined. We conduct a comprehensive study of the
robustness of various LMMs against different adversarial
attacks, evaluated across tasks including image classification, image captioning, and Visual Question Answer (VQA).
We find that in general LMMs are not robust to visual adversarial inputs. However, our findings suggest that context
provided to the model via prompts—such as questions in a
QA pair—helps to mitigate the effects of visual adversarial
inputs. Notably, the LMMs evaluated demonstrated remarkable resilience to such attacks on the ScienceQA task with
only an 8.10% drop in performance compared to their visual counterparts which dropped 99.73%. We also propose
a new approach to real-world image classification which
we term query decomposition. By incorporating existence
queries into our input prompt we observe diminished attack effectiveness and improvements in image classification
accuracy. This research highlights a previously under explored facet of LMM robustness and sets the stage for future
work aimed at strengthening the resilience of multimodal
systems in adversarial environments.

1. Introduction
Large Multi-modal Models (LMMs) have demonstrated remarkable abilities in a range of applications, from image
classification and Visual Question Answering (VQA) to image captioning and semantic segmentation [1, 13, 22, 23,
28]. These models excel in generalizing to new domains
with data-efficient solution, a feat attributed to advancements in Instruction Tuning [42]. Such techniques, traditionally applied to text-only models, have now been extended to multi-modal models, opening new avenues for efficient fine-tuning with significantly less data [13, 28].
† University of Central Florida

Query: What is this image about?
LLaVA: Two sheep are standing on a ledge, looking
over a wall.. ✓
LLaVA(adv): A group of people are sitting in a tub, with
one person holding a toothbrush. ✗
LLaVA: Sheep. ✓

Query: What animal is in the image?

LLaVA(adv): None. ✗
Query: Is the photo taken indoor or outdoor?
LLaVA(adv): Outdoor. ✓
Query: Is there a tree in the image?
LLaVA(adv): Yes. ✓
Query: What is in the background of the image?
LLaVA(adv): Trees. ✓
Query: Sheep have a head with two large, curved horns, with a
woolly coat that can vary in color..
Question: What animal is in the image?
LLaVA(adv): Sheep. ✓

Figure 1. QA pairs for LLaVA [28] given an adversarial image.
“LLaVA” and “LLaVA(adv)” refer to LLaVA’s response to the
user query with clean and adversarial image, respectively. For the
readers, there are two sheep in the scene, and the adversarial attack
was based on maximizing the distance between the image and the
text “a photo of a sheep”. In the first two QA pairs, we can see
that LLaVA(adv)’s answer is completely wrong. However, it can
still answer the following questions correctly, because they are not
pertinent to the object being attacked (sheep). Also note the contrast between the second and last QA pairs. LLaVA(adv) answers
the question correctly after additional context has been provided.
These observations help drove some of the findings in this paper.
Source: COCO 2014 [26]

Despite the recent advancements in LMMs, the impact
of adversarial examples still remains under explored. Typically adversarial examples are generated end-to-end, targeting the final loss of the whole model, and focusing on a single modality. However, in the era of combining different
pre-trained models with additional projectors or adaptors
[8, 28, 44], it is imperative to reevaluate the effectiveness
of these adversarial approaches. For example, let’s consider
LLaVA [28] which uses CLIP as its visual component and
LLAMA as text component (with some additional projector
to bridge the gap), will an attack on one of the two components compromise its overall performance?
From a practical perspective, given the substantial size
of LMMs, attacking the entire model is often prohibitively
expensive [7], making the above question an increasingly
important one to answer since traditional adversarial attacks

24625

