This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompting Vision Foundation Models for Pathology Image Analysis
Chong Yin1 , Siqi Liu2 , Kaiyang Zhou1 , Vincent Wai-Sun Wong3 , Pong C. Yuen1
1
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{chongyin, kyzhou, pcyuen}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, siqiliu@sribd.cn, wongv@cuhk.edu.hk

Classifier

Encoder

Encoder

Spatail attribtues
Morphological attributes

Task-agnostic
visual prompts

Task-specific visual prompts

(i) Existing visual prompting methods

(ii) Our proposed method

(a)

Methods
Fablan et al.
SAR
VPT-DEEP
VQT
QAP (Ours)

LD
n
NAF ificatio
k 1)
ss
(Tas ties cla
ali
orm

Classifier

(Task 3) Histologcial
scoring

Frozen

abn

Tuned

(T
fin ask
din 2)
gs Hi
re sto
co lo
gn gic
itio al
n

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The illustration of task-agnostic visual prompts and the proposed task-specific visual prompts. (b) Performance overview of
liver pathology image analysis tasks with various methods (i.e., Fabian et al. [16], SAR [40], VPT-DEEP [18], VQT [37]). Our method
(QAP) excels in overall performance. Detailed results are provided in Table 1 2 3.

Abstract
The rapid increase in cases of non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD) in recent years has raised significant public concern. Accurately identifying tissue alteration regions is crucial for the diagnosis of NAFLD, but this task
presents challenges in pathology image analysis, particularly with small-scale datasets. Recently, the paradigm shift
from full fine-tuning to prompting in adapting vision foundation models has offered a new perspective for small-scale
data analysis. However, existing prompting methods based
on task-agnostic prompts are mainly developed for generic
image recognition, which fall short in providing instructive cues for complex pathology images. In this paper, we
propose Quantitative Attribute-based Prompting (QAP), a
novel prompting method specifically for liver pathology image analysis. QAP is based on two quantitative attributes,
namely K-function-based spatial attributes and histogrambased morphological attributes, which are aimed for quantitative assessment of tissue states. Moreover, a condi-

tional prompt generator is designed to turn these instancespecific attributes into visual prompts. Extensive experiments on three diverse tasks demonstrate that our taskspecific prompting method achieves better diagnostic performance as well as better interpretability. Code is available at https://github.com/7LFB/QAP.

1. Introduction
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) poses a pervasive global health challenge, impacting approximately
30% of adults [36, 39]. Traditional diagnostic process for
NAFLD is labor-intensive as it relies on manual examination of specific histological findings, including steatosis,
lobular inflammation, and ballooning degeneration, as well
as histological scoring [20, 35]. With the increasing global
prevalence of NAFLD, there is a concern that medical systems may face an excessive burden in terms of resources
required for diagnosis. Furthermore, manual pathological
scoring may suffer from inadequate reproducibility, even

11292

