This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

En3D: An Enhanced Generative Model for Sculpting 3D Humans from
2D Synthetic Data
Yifang Men1 , Biwen Lei1 , Yuan Yao1 , Miaomiao Cui1 , Zhouhui Lian2 , Xuansong Xie1
1
2

Institute for Intelligent Computing, Alibaba Group

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China
https://menyifang.github.io/projects/En3D/index.html

Figure 1. Given random noises or guided texts, our generative scheme can synthesize high-fidelity 3D human avatars that are visually
realistic and geometrically accurate. These avatars can be seamlessly animated and easily edited. Our model is trained on 2D synthetic
data without directly relying on any pre-existing 3D or 2D collections.

Abstract
We present En3D, an enhanced generative scheme for
sculpting high-quality 3D human avatars. Unlike previous
works that rely on scarce 3D datasets or limited 2D collections with imbalanced viewing angles and imprecise pose
priors, our approach aims to develop a zero-shot 3D generative scheme capable of producing visually realistic, geometrically accurate and content-wise diverse 3D humans
without directly relying on pre-existing 3D or 2D assets. To
address this challenge, we introduce a meticulously crafted
workflow that implements accurate physical modeling to
learn the enhanced 3D generative model from synthetic 2D
data. During inference, we integrate optimization modules
to bridge the gap between realistic appearances and coarse
3D shapes. Specifically, En3D comprises three modules: a
3D generator that accurately models generalizable 3D humans with realistic appearance from synthesized balanced,
diverse, and structured human images; a geometry sculptor

that enhances shape quality using multi-view normal constraints for intricate human structure; and a texturing module that disentangles explicit texture maps with fidelity and
editability, leveraging semantical UV partitioning and a differentiable rasterizer. Experimental results show that our
approach significantly outperforms prior works in terms of
image quality, geometry accuracy and content diversity. We
also showcase the applicability of our generated avatars for
animation and editing, as well as the scalability of our approach for content-style free adaptation.

1. Introduction
3D human avatars play an important role in various applications of AR/VR such as video games, telepresence and
virtual try-on. Realistic human modeling is an essential
task, and many valuable efforts have been made by leveraging neural implicit fields to learn high-quality articulated
avatars [8, 10, 41, 48]. However, these methods are directly

9981

