This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging Predicate and Triplet Learning for Scene Graph Generation
Jiankai Li1,2,3 Yunhong Wang1 Xiefan Guo1 Ruijie Yang1 Weixin Li1,2,3 *
1
IRIP Lab, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China
{lijiankai, yhwang, xfguo, rjyang, weixinli}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) aims to identify entities and predict the relationship triplets <subject, predicate, object> in visual scenes. Given the prevalence of
large visual variations of subject-object pairs even in the
same predicate, it can be quite challenging to model and
refine predicate representations directly across such pairs,
which is however a common strategy adopted by most existing SGG methods. We observe that visual variations within
the identical triplet are relatively small and certain relation cues are shared in the same type of triplet, which can
potentially facilitate the relation learning in SGG. Moreover, for the long-tail problem widely studied in SGG task,
it is also crucial to deal with the limited types and quantity of triplets in tail predicates. Accordingly, in this paper,
we propose a Dual-granularity Relation Modeling (DRM)
network to leverage fine-grained triplet cues besides the
coarse-grained predicate ones. DRM utilizes contexts and
semantics of predicate and triplet with Dual-granularity
Constraints, generating compact and balanced representations from two perspectives to facilitate relation recognition. Furthermore, a Dual-granularity Knowledge Transfer (DKT) strategy is introduced to transfer variation from
head predicates/triplets to tail ones, aiming to enrich the
pattern diversity of tail classes to alleviate the long-tail
problem. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, which establishes new state-of-the-art
performance on Visual Genome, Open Image, and GQA
datasets. Our code is available at https://github.
com/jkli1998/DRM

1. Introduction
Entities and their associated relationships form the cornerstones of visual contents in images [14]. Scene Graph Generation (SGG), a fundamental task in visual scene understanding, is designed to detect these entities and predict
* Corresponding author

<bird, eating, fruit>

<man, eating, pizza>

<elephant, eating, leaf>

<elephant, eating, leaf>

Figure 1. The illustration of large visual variations within the predicate “eating”. Identical predicate can appear differently under distinct subject-object pairs, encompassing a different set of visual
cues within each manifestation. Identifying discriminative relation cues that are shared across diverse subject-object pairs within
the same predicate can be challenging. Yet, they can be easily captured when the scope is narrowed to the identical triplet.

their pairwise relationships, encapsulating them into <subject, predicate, object> triplets [4, 26, 51]. The generated
compact graph-structured image representation can be utilized in a range of applications, e.g. embodied navigation
[7, 33], image retrieval [5, 8], visual question answering
[1, 32], etc., so the SGG task has received widespread attention in recent years [12, 16, 22, 45].
Existing SGG methods are mostly dedicated to generating discriminative predicate representations for the detected
entities, based on their appearances, relative positions, contextual cues, etc. [15, 19, 37, 44, 54]. However, as shown
in Figure 1, large visual variations due to different subjectobject combinations are inherent even in the same predicate,
presenting an obstacle for SGG methods to capture robust
predicate cues across distinct triplet types. To alleviate this
problem, PE-Net [54] utilizes textual semantics of predicate categories as the prototype and model predicate cues
by reducing the intra-class variance and inter-class similarity. Despite the improved prediction accuracy, PE-Net still
follows the previous strategy of straightforwardly amalga-

28369

