This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CustomListener: Text-guided Responsive Interaction for
User-friendly Listening Head Generation
Xi Liu*, Ying Guo* , Cheng Zhen, Tong Li, Yingying Ao, Pengfei Yan†
Vision AI Department, Meituan
https://customlistener.github.io/

Abstract
Listening head generation aims to synthesize a non-verbal
responsive listener head by modeling the correlation between the speaker and the listener in dynamic conversion.
The applications of listener agent generation in virtual interaction have promoted many works achieving diverse and
fine-grained motion generation. However, they can only manipulate motions through simple emotional labels, but cannot
freely control the listener’s motions. Since listener agents
should have human-like attributes (e.g. identity, personality)
which can be freely customized by users, this limits their
realism. In this paper, we propose a user-friendly framework
called CustomListener to realize the free-form text prior
guided listener generation. To achieve speaker-listener coordination, we design a Static to Dynamic Portrait module
(SDP), which interacts with speaker information to transform static text into dynamic portrait token with completion
rhythm and amplitude information. To achieve coherence
between segments, we design a Past Guided Generation
module (PGG) to maintain the consistency of customized
listener attributes through the motion prior, and utilize a
diffusion-based structure conditioned on the portrait token
and the motion prior to realize the controllable generation.
To train and evaluate our model, we have constructed two
text-annotated listening head datasets based on ViCo and
RealTalk, which provide text-video paired labels. Extensive
experiments have verified the effectiveness of our model.

1. Introduction
Listening Head Generation (LHG) is to generate listener
motions (face expressions, head movements, etc.) that respond synchronously to the speaker during face-to-face
communication. Good communication is a two-way process, and the roles of speakers and listeners are equally
important [4]. Whether the listener responds promptly
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

Figure 1. The process of text-guided listener generation in our
CustomListener. The text prior provides the basic portrait style of
the listener, which is input into CustomListener and combined with
the speaker’s information to obtain the listener’s motions.

will affect whether the speaker can actively express the
follow-up content [17, 19]. Unlike speaker head generation
(SHG) [7, 16, 31, 38], listeners can only convey information
through non-verbal feedback (nodding, frowning, etc.), and
their responses are affected by both sides of the interaction
(speaker’s motion, tone, and listener’s own personality and
emotion state). Currently, many applications, such as digital
avatar generation [8, 20] and human-computer interaction
[43], use the listener agent to simulate more realistic conversations, which has promoted many studies in LHG.
Some early works manually integrate motions based on
rules [1, 5, 35], or rely on 2D facial keypoints [11, 26]
to manipulate the head, but they are limited in the variety of motions and the detailed control ability. Recent
works [15, 21, 25, 34, 44] have introduced 3D face coefficients [9], combined with the post-rendering module to
achieve more precise control. Specifically, RLHG [44] uses
a sequence-sequence structure as the baseline method for decoding 3DMM coefficients. PCH [15] further improves the
render module to inpaint image artifacts. L2L [25] quantizes
listener motions into the discrete one-dimensional codebook
by VQ-VAE [36], and ELP [34] expands the codebook to a
composition of several discrete codewords to achieve more

2415

