This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CVT-xRF: Contrastive In-Voxel Transformer for 3D Consistent
Radiance Fields from Sparse Inputs
Yingji Zhong1
1

Lanqing Hong2

Zhenguo Li2

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

2

Dan Xu1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

{yzhongbn,danxu}@cse.ust.hk, {honglanqing,li.zhenguo}@huawei.com

NeRF [22]

BARF [16]

CVT-xRF (w/ BARF)

SPARF [41]

CVT-xRF (w/ SPARF)

Novel Views (PSNR)

Radiance Fields

CVT-xRF (w/ NeRF)

3.23

13.57 (+10.34)

12.08

14.55 (+2.47)

14.70

19.17 (+4.47)

Figure 1. Qualitative illustration of learned 3D radiance fields and rendered images of the proposed CVT (Contrastive In-Voxel
Transformer)-xRF upon three baselines trained from sparse inputs of three views. Our CVT-xRF can significantly improve all the baselines.
The radiance fields show different levels of 3D inconsistencies (marked in red boxes for BARF and SPARF), which result in failures or
artifacts in rendered images. With CVT, we can obtain radiance fields of better 3D consistency and render images of much higher quality.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) have shown impressive
capabilities for photorealistic novel view synthesis when
trained on dense inputs. However, when trained on sparse
inputs, NeRF typically encounters issues of incorrect density or color predictions, mainly due to insufficient coverage
of the scene causing partial and sparse supervision, thus
leading to significant performance degradation. While existing works mainly consider ray-level consistency to construct 2D learning regularization based on rendered color,
depth, or semantics on image planes, in this paper we propose a novel approach that models 3D spatial field consistency to improve NeRF’s performance with sparse inputs.
Specifically, we first adopt a voxel-based ray sampling strategy to ensure that the sampled rays intersect with a certain
voxel in 3D space. We then randomly sample additional
points within the voxel and apply a Transformer to infer
the properties of other points on each ray, which are then
incorporated into the volume rendering. By backpropagating through the rendering loss, we enhance the consistency

among neighboring points. Additionally, we propose to use
a contrastive loss on the encoder output of the Transformer
to further improve consistency within each voxel. Experiments demonstrate that our method yields significant improvement over different radiance fields in the sparse inputs setting, and achieves comparable performance with
current works. The project page for this paper is available
at https://zhongyingji.github.io/CVT-xRF.

1. Introduction
Representing and modeling 3D properties of scenes is crucial for a wide range of real-world applications, such as autonomous driving, robotic navigation, and 3D content generation. In recent years, implicit neural scene representations [21, 22, 25, 27, 37] have shown impressive abilities to model 3D geometry and appearance in a continuous
manner. Among these approaches, Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [22] have emerged as a powerful representation for
complex scenes. When the NeRF model is optimized with
multi-view inputs, high-fidelity images can be synthesized

21466

