This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FutureHuman3D: Forecasting Complex Long-Term
3D Human Behavior from Video Observations
Christian Diller
Technical University of Munich

Thomas Funkhouser
Google

Angela Dai
Technical University of Munich

christian.diller@tum.de

tfunkhouser@google.com

angela.dai@tum.de

<take=
<cut=

<change temperature=

<screw=

<pour=

<add=

Projected 2D

<screw=

<add=

<take=

Time

<cut=

Long-Term Future Prediction as Sequence of 3D Poses with Action Labels
Predicted 3D

&

Input Image Sequence
with Action Labels

Figure 1. We propose a novel generative approach to model long-term future human behavior by jointly forecasting a sequence of coarse
action labels and their concrete realizations as 3D body poses. For broad applicability, our autoregressive method only requires weak
supervision and past observations in the form of 2D RGB video data, together with a database of uncorrelated 3D human poses.

Abstract
We present a generative approach to forecast long-term
future human behavior in 3D, requiring only weak supervision from readily available 2D human action data. This
is a fundamental task enabling many downstream applications. The required ground-truth data is hard to capture in
3D (mocap suits, expensive setups) but easy to acquire in
2D (simple RGB cameras). Thus, we design our method
to only require 2D RGB data at inference time while being
able to generate 3D human motion sequences. We use a
differentiable 2D projection scheme in an autoregressive
manner for weak supervision, and an adversarial loss for
3D regularization. Our method predicts long and complex
human behavior sequences (e.g., cooking, assembly) consisting of multiple sub-actions. We tackle this in a semantically
hierarchical manner, jointly predicting high-level coarse
action labels together with their low-level fine-grained realizations as characteristic 3D human poses. We observe that
these two action representations are coupled in nature, and
joint prediction benefits both action and pose forecasting.
Our experiments demonstrate the complementary nature of
joint action and 3D pose prediction: our joint approach
outperforms each task treated individually, enables robust
longer-term sequence prediction, and improves over alternative approaches to forecast actions and characteristic 3D
poses.

1. Introduction
Predicting future human behavior is fundamental to machine intelligence, with many applications in content creation, robotics, mixed reality, and more. For instance, a
monitoring system might issue early warnings of potentially
dangerous behaviour, and a robotic assistant can use forecasting to place tools at the right place and time they will
be needed in the future. Consider the specific scenario of
an assembly line monitoring system deployed to issue early
warnings of behavior that could be harmful in the near future:
The system needs to have a long-term understanding of the
future, enabling it to forecast multiple action steps ahead so
that it can act in time before a harmful action occurs. However, simply understanding the next action steps on a high
level is not sufficient: it must also reason about where the
action will occur. Actions such as “grab a tool” are likely
harmless when performed in a toolbox; they become dangerous when done next to an active table saw or moving robot
arm. The monitoring system thus also needs to be able to
reason about spatial relations in 3D – for both the location
and body pose of involved humans.
To support these types of applications, we must address
two tasks: 1) forecasting long-term action sequences, and 2)
predicting future 3D human poses. Prior work has focused on
each of these tasks separately: activity forecasting predicts
future action labels without considering the 3D poses [32,

19902

