This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

XFibrosis: Explicit Vessel-Fiber Modeling for Fibrosis Staging from Liver
Pathology Images
Chong Yin1 , Siqi Liu2 , Fei Lyu1 , Jiahao Lu3 , Sune Darkner3 , Vincent Wai-Sun Wong4 , Pong C. Yuen1
1
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University, Hong Kong
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Copenhagen, Denmark
4
Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{chongyin, feilyu, pcyuen}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk, siqiliu@sribd.cn
{lu, darkner}@di.ku, wongv@cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
The increasing prevalence of non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease (NAFLD) has caused public concern in recent
years. The high prevalence and risk of severe complications make monitoring NAFLD progression a public
health priority. Fibrosis staging from liver biopsy images
plays a key role in demonstrating the histological progression of NAFLD. Fibrosis mainly involves the deposition
of fibers around vessels. Current deep learning-based fibrosis staging methods learn spatial relationships between
tissue patches but do not explicitly consider the relationships between vessels and fibers, leading to limited performance and poor interpretability. In this paper, we propose an eXplicit vessel-fiber modeling method for Fibrosis staging from liver biopsy images, namely XFibrosis.
Specifically, we transform vessels and fibers into graphstructured representations, where their micro-structures are
depicted by vessel-induced primal graphs and fiber-induced
dual graphs, respectively. Moreover, the fiber-induced dual
graphs also represent the connectivity information between
vessels caused by fiber deposition. A primal-dual graph
convolution module is designed to facilitate the learning
of spatial relationships between vessels and fibers, allowing for the joint exploration and interaction of their microstructures. Experiments conducted on two datasets have
shown that explicitly modeling the relationship between
vessels and fibers leads to improved fibrosis staging and enhanced interpretability.

1. Introduction
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is the most
prevalent liver disease globally. It affects around 30% of
the population and has raised public concern in recent years

Figure 1. Illustration of fibrosis staging from liver biopsy images
and the proposed graph-structured representation. (a) Liver biopsy
image samples with different fibrosis stages. (b) Concept illustration of different fibrosis stages. (c) The illustration of a graphstructured representation. It graphically depicts the interaction between vessels and fibers. Vessels are regarded as nodes and the
interactions caused by fiber deposition as edges of the graph.

[26]. NAFLD consists of a spectrum of liver damage ranging in severity from simple harmless fatty liver to various
degrees of fibrosis. Patients with advanced fibrosis are at an
increased risk of developing liver cancer and other complications. Consequently, an accurate diagnosis of liver fibrosis facilitates closer monitoring and enhances clinical care
effectiveness. In clinical practice, pathologists will assign
a semi-quantitative fibrosis stage (FIB) [31] to determine
the extent of fibrosis. Liver biopsy images offer cellularlevel visual insights into microstructures, aiding in fibrosis
staging. Diagnosing fibrosis is a laborious process with low

11282

