This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On Scaling up a Multilingual Vision and Language Model
Xi Chen, Josip Djolonga◦ , Piotr Padlewski◦ , Basil Mustafa◦ , Soravit Changpinyo, Jialin Wu,
Carlos Riquelme Ruiz, Sebastian Goodman, Xiao Wang, Yi Tay, Siamak Shakeri,
Mostafa Dehghani, Daniel Salz, Mario Lucic, Michael Tschannen, Arsha Nagrani,
Hexiang Hu, Mandar Joshi, Bo Pang, Ceslee Montgomery, Paulina Pietrzyk, Marvin Ritter,
AJ Piergiovanni, Matthias Minderer, Filip Pavetic, Austin Waters, Gang Li,
Ibrahim Alabdulmohsin, Lucas Beyer, Julien Amelot, Kenton Lee, Andreas Peter Steiner,
Yang Li, Daniel Keysers, Anurag Arnab, Yuanzhong Xu, Keran Rong, Alexander Kolesnikov,
Mojtaba Seyedhosseini, Anelia Angelova† , Xiaohua Zhai† , Neil Houlsby† , Radu Soricut†
Google
pali-communications@google.com

◦

:Significant technical contribution † : Project lead

Abstract
We explore the boundaries of scaling up a multilingual
vision and language model, both in terms of size of the components and the breadth of its training task mixture. Our
model achieves new levels of performance on a wide-range
of varied and complex tasks, including multiple image-based
captioning and question-answering tasks, image-based document understanding and few-shot (in-context) learning, as
well as object detection, video question answering, and video
captioning. Our model advances the state-of-the-art on most
vision-and-language benchmarks considered (20+ of them).
Finally, we observe emerging capabilities, such as complex
counting and multilingual object detection, tasks that are
not explicitly in the training mix.

1. Introduction
The success of scaling language models [1–4] makes it appealing to similarly scale Vision-Language (V&L) models,
and investigate the improvements, capabilities, and emergent
properties of such models. Inspired by the work in [5], we
present PaLI-X, a multilingual vision and language model
with reusable scaled-up components, consisting of a pretrained large-capacity visual encoder (using [6] as the starting point) and a pretrained language-only encoder-decoder
(using [7] as the starting point), further trained at-scale on
a vision-and-language data mixture using a combination of
self-supervision and full-supervision signals.
One clear pattern that emerges from the combination
of results from PaLI [5] and the work we present in this
paper is that scaling both V&L components together brings
increases in performance across a wide range of tasks. We

show this by comparing against the same benchmarks used
for PaLI (Fig. 1, Left), and also against new benchmarks
for which the new capabilities of PaLI-X are evaluated (e.g.,
ChartQA, AI2D, DocVQA, InfographicVQA, as well as
video understanding tasks). We observe that scaling leads
to large improvements over the results of the PaLI model,
and also over specialized large-scale models that are trained
specifically to solve certain tasks, often with the help of
(often much larger) text-only LLMs [8]. In particular, we
find that increasing both the effective capacity of the vision
component (which [9] does more unilaterally) and of the
language component (which [10] also does unilaterally) is
beneficial; the new PaLI-X model provides more balanced
parameter allocation than any other prior work (roughly
40%-60% split of the total capacity).
Aside from demonstrating the consistent impact of scale,
the original contribution of PaLI-X consists in leveraging
the mixture-of-objectives proposed in [7] for vision-andlanguage modeling, and showing that it results in a model
that improves both state-of-the-art results and the Pareto
frontier for fine-tuning and few-shot (Fig. 1, Right).
We also observe emergent properties based on PaLI-X’s
results compared to previous models with similar architecture but smaller sizes. For instance, we report drastically improved performance on the counting ability (See Table 1 and
Appendix B), both for the plain variety (count all instances
of a class) and the complex variety (count instances based
on a natural language description), that are not attributable
to training design1 . Additionally, we present qualitative insights into the model’s performance (Appendix A), with an
1 Plain counting is usually achievable via good object detection, while
complex counting requires a fine-grained understanding of the alignment
between language-based specifications and visually-based occurrences.

14432

