This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Accelerating Diffusion Sampling with Optimized Time Steps
Shuchen Xue1 , Zhaoqiang Liu2 ,* Fei Chen3 , Shifeng Zhang3 , Tianyang Hu3 , Enze Xie3 , Zhenguo Li3
1
Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract
Diffusion probabilistic models (DPMs) have shown remarkable performance in high-resolution image synthesis,
but their sampling efficiency is still to be desired due to the
typically large number of sampling steps. Recent advancements in high-order numerical ODE solvers for DPMs have
enabled the generation of high-quality images with much
fewer sampling steps. While this is a significant development, most sampling methods still employ uniform time
steps, which is not optimal when using a small number
of steps. To address this issue, we propose a general
framework for designing an optimization problem that seeks
more appropriate time steps for a specific numerical ODE
solver for DPMs. This optimization problem aims to minimize the distance between the ground-truth solution to the
ODE and an approximate solution corresponding to the
numerical solver. It can be efficiently solved using the
constrained trust region method, taking less than 15 seconds. Our extensive experiments on both unconditional and
conditional sampling using pixel- and latent-space DPMs
demonstrate that, when combined with the state-of-the-art
sampling method UniPC, our optimized time steps significantly improve image generation performance in terms of
FID scores for datasets such as CIFAR-10 and ImageNet,
compared to using uniform time steps.1

1. Introduction
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPMs), as referenced in
various studies [15, 43, 46], have garnered significant attention for their success in a wide range of generative tasks.
These tasks include, but are not limited to, image synthesis
[11, 16, 40], video generation [3, 17], text-to-image conversion [36, 39, 41], and speech synthesis [24, 45]. Central to the operation of DPMs is a dual-process mecha* Corresponding author. The work was done when the author worked at
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
1 Code is available at https : / / github . com / scxue / DM NonUniform

nism: a forward diffusion process incrementally introduces
noise into the data, while a reverse diffusion process is employed to reconstruct data from this noise. Despite their superior performance in generation tasks when compared to
alternative methodologies like Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [13] or Variational Autoencoders (VAEs)
[21], DPMs require a considerable number of network function evaluations (NFEs) [15], which is a notable computational limitation for their broader application.
The scholarly pursuit to enhance the sampling efficiency
of DPMs bifurcates into two distinct categories: methods
that require additional training of the DPMs [33–35, 42, 47,
49, 50, 52] and those that do not [2, 18, 19, 31, 44, 53, 55].
This paper focuses on the latter training-free methods, aiming to improve the sampling efficiency of DPMs. Contemporary training-free samplers utilize efficient numerical
schemes to solve the diffusion Stochastic Differential Equations (SDEs) or Ordinary Differential Equations (ODEs).
While introducing stochasticity in diffusion sampling has
been shown to achieve better quality and diversity [53],
ODE-based sampling methods are superior when the sampling steps are fewer. For example, Song et al. [44] provide an empirically efficient solver DDIM. Zhang and Chen
[54] and Lu et al. [31] point out the semi-linear structure
of diffusion ODEs, and develop higher-order ODE samplers based on it. Zhao et al. [55] further improve these
samplers in terms of NFEs by integrating the mechanism
of the predictor-corrector method. Due to its better efficiency, sampling from diffusion ODE has been predominantly adopted. Quality samples can be generated within
as few as 10 steps. However, state-of-the-art ODE-based
samplers are still far from optimal. How to further improve
efficiency is an active field of research.
In this paper, we focus on another important but less
explored aspect of diffusion sampling, the discretization
scheme for time steps (sampling schedule). Our main contributions are summarized as follows:
• Motivated by classic assumptions on score approximation
adopted in relevant theoretical works on DPMs, we propose a general framework for constructing an optimiza-

8292

