This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GPT4Point: A Unified Framework for Point-Language
Understanding and Generation
Zhangyang Qi1* Ye Fang3,5* Zeyi Sun4,5*
Xiaoyang Wu
Tong Wu2 Jiaqi Wang5† Dahua Lin2,5 Hengshuang Zhao1†
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Fudan University 4 Shanghai Jiao Tong University 5 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Lab
1

https://gpt4point.github.io

3D Recognition

* equal contribution

3D Captioning

† corresponding author

3D Question Answering

Point-Text Retrieval:
Q1·T1
Q2·T2
QN·TN

Q1

Q2

T1

a toy blue airplane

T2

a 3D model of Jupiter

TN

a brown guitar

A man wearing a red
shirt and blue pants.

Describe the object.
What is on top of the cake?

A portable, wall-mountable
radio with a cord, handle,
and wooden box design.

QN

There is a candle on top of the cake.

Match
What is the purpose of the cake?

Hand-made Objects

Anomalous Object
3D Understanding

...

pPlan
et
airplane

...

guitar

guitar

planet
airplane

The cake is meant to be a birthday
cake, as indicated by the candle.

The 3D object model in the image is a
horse-drawn carriage, which is a type of
vehicle commonly used in the past for
transportation and transportation of
goods the carriage is made of wood and
has a classic design, with a roof and
wooden wheels.

What is the significance of
the number 4 on the cake?

Point-Text
Feature

The number 4 on the cake likely
represents the age of the person
celebrating their birthday.

Text

Is it one human face?

Yes, it is a human face,

Text-to-3D

选择的是
A man wearing a red Point-E
multimodal
model
shirt and blue
pants.
这个方向提交的

Elaborate on the details
of this point cloud, please.

specifically the face of Buddha.

Is it one human face?

No, it is not one human face,
it is a collection of human faces.

Generated Objects

GPT4Point

Zero-shot Classification:

CLASS

3D Generation
Original Low-Quality Points

Is it one bear body?
Yes, the image depicts a
single bear body.

Controlable Text-to-3D

Is it one bear body?

No, it is a collection of
different bear bodies, each
with its own unique features.

Figure 1. Task examples of GPT4Point. It performs accurate 3D recognition, detailed captioning, precise Q&A, and high-quality
controllable 3D generation. Additionally, GPT4Point excels in 3D anomalous object description, accurately assessing abnormal shapes
like the multi-face object and the 3D generation failure case. It is a crucial ability in the assessment of generated 3D objects.

Abstract
Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) have excelled in 2D image-text comprehension and image generation. Still, their understanding of the 3D world needs to
be improved, limiting progress in 3D language understanding and generation. To solve this problem, we introduce
GPT4Point, an innovative, groundbreaking point-language
multimodal model explicitly designed for unified 3D object understanding and generation within the MLLM framework. GPT4Point, as a powerful 3D MLLM, can seamlessly
execute point-text reference tasks such as point-cloud captioning and Q&A. Additionally, GPT4Point is equipped with

advanced capabilities for controllable 3D generation, and
it can get high-quality results through a low-quality pointtext feature that maintains geometric shapes and colors. We
develop Pyramid-XL, a point-language dataset annotation
engine, to support the expansive needs of 3D object-text
pairs. It constructs a large-scale database of over 1M objects of varied text granularity levels from the Objaverse-XL
dataset, essential for training GPT4Point. A comprehensive benchmark has been proposed to evaluate 3D pointlanguage understanding capabilities. In extensive evaluations, GPT4Point has demonstrated superior performance
in understanding and generation.

26417

