This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-driven GAN Inversion for Multi-Modal Face Image Generation
Jihyun Kim1,2 , Changjae Oh3 , Hoseok Do2 , Soohyun Kim2 , Kwanghoon Sohn1,4 *
1
Yonsei University 2 AI Lab, CTO Division, LG Electronics
3
Queen Mary University of London 4 Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)
{hyunys21, khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr c.oh@qmul.ac.uk {hoseok.do, soohyun1.kim}@lge.com

Abstract

Text condition “She has blond hair, straight hair, and wears heavy makeup.”

We present a new multi-modal face image generation
method that converts a text prompt and a visual input, such
as a semantic mask or scribble map, into a photo-realistic
face image. To do this, we combine the strengths of Generative Adversarial networks (GANs) and diffusion models
(DMs) by employing the multi-modal features in the DM
into the latent space of the pre-trained GANs. We present a
simple mapping and a style modulation network to link two
models and convert meaningful representations in feature
maps and attention maps into latent codes. With GAN inversion, the estimated latent codes can be used to generate 2D
or 3D-aware facial images. We further present a multi-step
training strategy that reﬂects textual and structural representations into the generated image. Our proposed network
produces realistic 2D, multi-view, and stylized face images,
which align well with inputs. We validate our method
by using pre-trained 2D and 3D GANs, and our results
outperform existing methods. Our project page is available at https://github.com/1211sh/Diffusiondriven_GAN-Inversion/.

1. Introduction
In recent years, multi-modal image generation has achieved
remarkable success, driven by the advancements in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [15] and diffusion models (DMs) [11, 18, 48]. Facial image processing has become
a popular application for a variety of tasks, including face
image generation [21, 39], face editing [6, 12, 30, 36, 37,
46], and style transfer [7, 64]. Many tasks typically utilize
the pre-trained StyleGAN [21, 22], which can generate realistic facial images and edit facial attributes by manipulating
the latent space using GAN inversion [39, 42, 58]. In these
tasks, using multiple modalities as conditions is becoming a
popular approach, which improves the user’s controllability
in generating realistic face images. However, existing GAN
* Corresponding author

This research was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP)
(NRF2021R1A2C2006703).

Diffusion

Ours

GAN

Visual condition

Overview of our method
“The woman has bangs, brown hair. She is smiling.”

2D face image generation
“The chubby man has receding hairline, eyeglasses, gray hair, and double chin.”

3D-aware face image generation
“Greek statue” “silver hair Elf” “Cartoon style”

“Watercolor painting”

Face style transfer

Figure 1. We present a method to map the diffusion features to the
latent space of a pre-trained GAN, which enables diverse tasks in
multi-modal face image generation and style transfer. Our method
can be applied to 2D and 3D-aware face image generation.

inversion methods [51, 58] have poor alignment with inputs
as they neglect the correlation between multi-modal inputs.
They struggle to map the different modalities into the latent
space of the pre-trained GAN, such as by mixing the latent
codes or optimizing the latent code converted from a given
image according to the input text.
Recently, DMs have increased attention in multi-modal
image generation thanks to the stability of training and
the ﬂexibility of using multiple modalities as conditions.
DMs [23, 53, 54] can control the multiple modalities and
render diverse images by manipulating the latent or attention features across the time steps. However, existing textto-image DMs rely on an autoencoder and text encoder,
such as CLIP [41], trained on unstructured datasets collected from the web [40, 45] that may lead to unrealistic

10403

