This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WWW: A Unified Framework for Explaining What, Where and Why of Neural
Networks by Interpretation of Neuron Concepts
Yong Hyun Ahn, 1 , Hyeon Bae Kim, 1 , Seong Tae Kim2 *
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Kyung Hee University, Republic of Korea
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Kyung Hee University, Republic of Korea
1

{yhahn, hyeonbae.kim, st.kim}@khu.ac.kr

Abstract
Recent advancements in neural networks have showcased their remarkable capabilities across various domains. Despite these successes, the “black box” problem
still remains. To address this, we propose a novel framework, WWW, that offers the ‘what’, ‘where’, and ‘why’
of the neural network decisions in human-understandable
terms. Specifically, WWW utilizes adaptive selection
for concept discovery, employing adaptive cosine similarity and thresholding techniques to effectively explain
‘what’. To address the ‘where’ and ‘why’, we proposed
a novel combination of neuron activation maps (NAMs)
with Shapley values, generating localized concept maps and
heatmaps for individual inputs. Furthermore, WWW introduces a method for predicting uncertainty, leveraging
heatmap similarities to estimate the prediction’s reliability.
Experimental evaluations of WWW demonstrate superior
performance in both quantitative and qualitative metrics,
outperforming existing methods in interpretability. WWW
provides a unified solution for explaining ‘what’, ‘where’,
and ‘why’, introducing a method for localized explanations
from global interpretations and offering a plug-and-play solution adaptable to various architectures. Code is available
at: https://github.com/ailab-kyunghee/WWW

1. Introduction
Neural networks have demonstrated impressive performance in various fields in recent years. Despite these successes, their widespread adoption in more diverse areas is
slowed by several challenges. A fundamental issue is the
“black box” problem, referring to the often hidden and unclear decision-making processes of neural network models. This lack of clarity raises concerns about the stability
and reliability of these models, leading to a growing consensus that artificial intelligence should be reliable, robust,
* Corresponding author.

Table 1. Illustration of What, Where, and Why of recent
concept-based neural network interpretation methods. Green,
yellow, and red marks illustrate that the method is able to interpret
well, is partially interpretable, and has limitations for interpretation, respectively. Recent methods are able to interpret one or two
‘w’s but have limitations regarding interpreting three ‘w’s at once.

Method
CLIP-Dissect [20] (ICLR’23)
FALCON [14] (ICML’23)
CRAFT [7] (CVPR’23)
WWW (Ours)

What

Where

Why

✔
✔
✗
✔

✗
✗
✔
✔

✗

✔

and safe [4, 13]. As a response to this need for trustworthy AI, there has been an emergence of laws and regulations [15, 18] that require neural networks to base their decisions on principles that are understandable to humans.
According to Doshi-Velez et al. [4], interpretability is
defined as the capability to provide explanations in terms
that are understandable to humans. Zhang et al. [29] expand
on this definition, emphasizing that interpretability involves
providing explanations in understandable terms to humans.
This requirement for explanations in human-understandable
terms is a consistent theme in the literature on interpretable
methods. Furthermore, this concept aligns with a fundamental principle in journalism and problem-solving: the importance of clear and understandable communication. This
principle is often encapsulated in the five Ws (Who, What,
When, Where, Why) [25]. Building on this, we propose
that practical explanations or interpretations should include
three critical elements: ‘what’ (the nature of the decision
or outcome), ‘where’ (the context or specific region of the
input that affects the decision-making process), and ‘why’
(the reasoning or factors behind a decision). This approach
aims to make the interpretations more accessible and relevant to human understanding.
From this point of view, former works can be re-grouped
into several groups which those works aim to solve. For ex-

10968

