This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unveiling Parts Beyond Objects:
Towards Finer-Granularity Referring Expression Segmentation
Wenxuan Wang1,2,3 * Tongtian Yue1,2∗ Yisi Zhang4 Longteng Guo1 Xingjian He1
Xinlong Wang3 Jing Liu1,2†
1
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
Beijing Academy of Artiﬁcial Intelligence (BAAI)
4
University of Science and Technology Beijing (USTB)
{wangwenxuan2023@ia.ac.cn, wangxinlong@baai.ac.cn, jliu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn}

Figure 1. Classic Referring Expression Segmentation (RES) only supports expressions that indicate a single target object, e.g., (a). Compared with classic RES, the proposed Multi-Granularity Referring Expression Segmentation (MRES) task supports expressions indicating the speciﬁc part-level regions of target objects, e.g., part-level expressions like (b)-(e) from our newly built RefCOCOm benchmark.

Abstract
Referring expression segmentation (RES) aims at segmenting the foreground masks of the entities that match the
descriptive natural language expression. Previous datasets
and methods for classic RES task heavily rely on the prior
assumption that one expression must refer to object-level
targets. In this paper, we take a step further to ﬁner-grained
part-level RES task. To promote the object-level RES task
towards ﬁner-grained vision-language understanding, we
put forward a new multi-granularity referring expression
segmentation (MRES) task and construct an evaluation
benchmark called RefCOCOm by manual annotations. By
employing our automatic model-assisted data engine, we
build the largest visual grounding dataset namely MRES32M, which comprises over 32.2M high-quality masks and
captions on the provided 1M images. Besides, a simple yet
strong model named UniRES is designed to accomplish the
uniﬁed object-level and part-level grounding task. Extensive experiments on our RefCOCOm for MRES and three
datasets (i.e., RefCOCO(+/g)) for classic RES task demon* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

strate the superiority of our method over previous state-ofthe-art methods. To foster future research into ﬁne-grained
visual grounding, our benchmark RefCOCOm, the MRES32M dataset and model UniRES will be publicly available
at https://github.com/Rubics-Xuan/MRES.

1. Introduction
As one of the most challenging tasks in vision-language understanding, referring expression segmentation (RES) aims
to locate speciﬁc regions at the pixel level based on a descriptive language expression. Compared to traditional visual segmentation tasks that focus on images or videos
alone, RES poses greater difﬁculties and challenges due
to the necessity of strong comprehension across modalities, but it can simultaneously alleviate the problem of predeﬁned categories in conventional object detection or segmentation. With the real-world scene often requiring diversity in target identiﬁcation, RES task holds vast potential for
applications, e.g., language-based human-object interaction
and interactive image editing.
Since the concept of RES task was initially proposed in

12998

