This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Align Your Gaussians:
Text-to-4D with Dynamic 3D Gaussians and Composed Diffusion Models
Huan Ling1,2,3 *

Seung Wook Kim1,2,3 *
1

NVIDIA

2

Antonio Torralba4

Vector Institute

3

Sanja Fidler1,2,3

University of Toronto

4

Karsten Kreis1

MIT

Project page: https://research.nvidia.com/labs/toronto-ai/AlignYourGaussians/

Figure 1. Text-to-4D synthesis with Align Your Gaussians (AYG). Top: Different dynamic 4D sequences. Dotted lines represent
dynamics of deformation field. Bottom: Multiple dynamic 4D objects are composed within a large dynamic scene; two time frames shown.

Abstract
Text-guided diffusion models have revolutionized image
and video generation and have also been successfully used
for optimization-based 3D object synthesis. Here, we instead focus on the underexplored text-to-4D setting and synthesize dynamic, animated 3D objects using score distillation methods with an additional temporal dimension. Compared to previous work, we pursue a novel compositional
generation-based approach, and combine text-to-image,
text-to-video, and 3D-aware multiview diffusion models to
provide feedback during 4D object optimization, thereby simultaneously enforcing temporal consistency, high-quality
visual appearance and realistic geometry. Our method,
called Align Your Gaussians (AYG), leverages dynamic 3D
Gaussian Splatting with deformation fields as 4D representation. Crucial to AYG is a novel method to regularize the

distribution of the moving 3D Gaussians and thereby stabilize the optimization and induce motion. We also propose a motion amplification mechanism as well as a new
autoregressive synthesis scheme to generate and combine
multiple 4D sequences for longer generation. These techniques allow us to synthesize vivid dynamic scenes, outperform previous work qualitatively and quantitatively and
achieve state-of-the-art text-to-4D performance. Due to the
Gaussian 4D representation, different 4D animations can
be seamlessly combined, as we demonstrate. AYG opens
up promising avenues for animation, simulation and digital
content creation as well as synthetic data generation.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling of dynamic 3D scenes has the potential to revolutionize how we create games, movies, simu* Equal contribution.

8576

