This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlowTrack: Revisiting Optical Flow for Long-Range Dense Tracking
Seokju Cho1

Jiahui Huang2
1

Korea University

Seungryong Kim1
2

Joon-Young Lee2

Adobe Research

Abstract
Motion Prior

In the domain of video tracking, existing methods often
grapple with a trade-off between spatial density and temporal range. Current approaches in dense optical flow estimators excel in providing spatially dense tracking but are limited to short temporal spans. Conversely, recent advancements in long-range trackers offer extended temporal coverage but at the cost of spatial sparsity. This paper introduces FlowTrack, a novel framework designed to bridge this
gap. FlowTrack combines the strengths of both paradigms
by 1) chaining confident flow predictions to maximize efficiency and 2) automatically switching to an error compensation module in instances of flow prediction inaccuracies.
This dual strategy not only offers efficient dense tracking
over extended temporal spans but also ensures robustness
against error accumulations and occlusions, common pitfalls of naive flow chaining. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that chained flow itself can serve as an effective guide for
an error compensation module, even for occluded points.
Our framework achieves state-of-the-art accuracy for longrange tracking on the DAVIS dataset, and renders 50%
speed-up when performing dense tracking.

Error Compensation Module

Co
c
rre
n
tio
Drifting / Occlusion

: Optical Flow

: Corrected Flow

⋯

1. Introduction
Understanding the intricate dynamics of objects as they
move, deform, and occlude within video sequences has
been a longstanding challenge in the field of computer vision [45]. This challenge is significantly amplified when it
comes to long-range understanding [3, 13, 23, 25], where
the temporal and spatial extents of these interactions extend
over periods and distances.
In addressing the intricate challenge of dense and longrange tracking, a recent development, OmniMotion [41]
approaches this by finding dense trajectories through the
optimization of dynamic neural fields [24]. While OmniMotion successfully generates reliable dense trajectories, it
demands extensive optimization for each video and often
encounters training instability, especially in complex video
sequences. Recent developments in point tracking meth-

Time

Figure 1. We revisit optical flow to tackle dense long-range
tracking problem. We address the drifting and occlusion issues
in optical flow using our error compensation module. This module rectifies the error in the flow by leveraging confident motion
extracted through flow chaining.

ods [5, 6, 11, 20] offer an alternative for long-range dense
tracking, by processing densely sampled query points. Yet,
this requires exhaustive processing of each point across the
entire video sequence. Also, these point tracking methods
often disregard the spatial context [6, 11], leading to spatial
incoherence.
In pursuit of a practical approach for dense and longrange tracking, we revisit optical flow [7, 15, 17, 37, 43].

19268

