This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Carve3D: Improving Multi-view Reconstruction Consistency
for Diffusion Models with RL Finetuning
Desai Xie† 1, 2
Jiahao Li† 1, 3
1
Yi Zhou
Sai Bi1
1

Adobe Research

2

Hao Tan1
Sören Pirk4

Stony Brook University

Abstract
Multi-view diffusion models, obtained by applying Supervised Finetuning (SFT) to text-to-image diffusion models, have driven recent breakthroughs in text-to-3D research. However, due to the limited size and quality of existing 3D datasets, they still suffer from multi-view inconsistencies and Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) reconstruction artifacts. We argue that multi-view diffusion models
can benefit from further Reinforcement Learning Finetuning (RLFT), which allows models to learn from the data
generated by themselves and improve beyond their dataset
limitations during SFT. To this end, we introduce Carve3D,
an improved RLFT algorithm coupled with a novel Multiview Reconstruction Consistency (MRC) metric, to enhance
the consistency of multi-view diffusion models. To measure the MRC metric on a set of multi-view images, we
compare them with their corresponding NeRF renderings
at the same camera viewpoints. The resulting model, which
we denote as Carve3DM, demonstrates superior multi-view
consistency and NeRF reconstruction quality than existing models. Our results suggest that pairing SFT with
Carve3D’s RLFT is essential for developing multi-viewconsistent diffusion models, mirroring the standard Large
Language Model (LLM) alignment pipeline. Our code,
training and testing data, and video results are available
at: https://desaixie.github.io/carve-3d.

1. Introduction
Recently, significant progress has been made in generating 3D models from text prompts. Images generated by 2D
diffusion models [9, 40, 42, 49, 52, 56] can be lifted to 3D
representations. Numerous methods [24, 28, 46, 59] have
demonstrated that a set of multi-view images is adequate
for generating diverse and detailed 3D models, effectively
†This work is done while the author is an intern at Adobe Research.

Xin Sun1
Zhixin Shu1
Arie E. Kaufman2
3

TTIC

4

Kiel University

mitigating the multi-face (Janus) problem. Ensuring the 3D
consistency across these multi-view images is crucial for 3D
generation, as inconsistencies can inevitably introduce artifacts, such as broken geometries, blurring, or floaters, in the
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) reconstruction. However,
the lack of an established multi-view consistency metric has
led researchers to rely on qualitative inspections, which are
both inefficient and unreliable.
Existing multi-view diffusion models [24, 27, 28, 46, 59]
primarily utilize Supervised Finetuning (SFT) with multiview datasets derived from 3D datasets [12, 13]. While
SFT can achieve some degree of multi-view consistency, it
presents a dilemma: prolonged SFT enhances this consistency but also induces a distribution shift towards the 3D
dataset that has limited size and quality; thus, the distribution shift diminishes diversity, texture details, and realism of
the generated results [24]. Such dilemma has been observed
in Large Language Model (LLM) research. While SFT can
shift the output distribution of pre-trained LLMs to follow
instructions, the bias from the instruction dataset also introduces hallucination [44], preventing longer SFT. InstructGPT [36], the paper behind ChatGPT 3.5 [35], introduces
Reinforcement Learning finetuning (RLFT) to further align
the SFT model without causing additional distribution shift.
Drawing an analogy between instruction-finetuned LLMs
and multi-view diffusion models, RLFT emerges as an essential step following the SFT stage. By adopting RLFT,
we aim to enhance the consistency of multi-view diffusion
models without introducing the bias from a SFT dataset.
We introduce Carve3D, an enhanced RLFT algorithm
paired with a novel Multi-view Reconstruction Consistency
(MRC) metric, to improve the consistency of multi-view
diffusion models. Figs. 1 and 2 shows the capability and
overview of Carve3D.
Our MRC metric compares the output multi-view images
from a diffusion model with images rendered from the reconstructed NeRF at identical camera viewpoints. We use
the sparse-view Large Reconstruction Model (LRM) [17,
24] to achieve fast, feed-forward NeRF reconstruction from

6369

