This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VideoBooth: Diffusion-based Video Generation with Image Prompts
Yuming Jiang1 Tianxing Wu1 Shuai Yang3∗ Chenyang Si1
Dahua Lin2 Yu Qiao2 Chen Change Loy1 Ziwei Liu1B
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
https://vchitect.github.io/VideoBooth-project/
Image Prompt A horse eating grass.

Horse grazes in snowy meadow

Image Prompt Portrait of a dog, looks out the car window.

Dog walking in the green farm 4k

Image Prompt Cat is looking at a laptop.

Close up of cat on top of a vintage chair

Elephant drinking water in masai mara
Image Prompt reserve, kenya

Elephant walk in the yellow grass of
savannah

Figure 1. Videos synthesized by image prompts. Our VideoBooth generates videos with the subjects specified in the image prompts.

Abstract
Text-driven video generation witnesses rapid progress.
However, merely using text prompts is not enough to depict
the desired subject appearance that accurately aligns with
users’ intents, especially for customized content creation.
In this paper, we study the task of video generation with image prompts, which provide more accurate and direct content control beyond the text prompts. Specifically, we propose a feed-forward framework VideoBooth, with two dedicated designs: 1) We propose to embed image prompts in a
coarse-to-fine manner. Coarse visual embeddings from image encoder provide high-level encodings of image prompts,
while fine visual embeddings from the proposed attention
injection module provide multi-scale and detailed encoding of image prompts. These two complementary embeddings can faithfully capture the desired appearance.
2)
In the attention injection module at fine level, multi-scale
∗ This work was done when Shuai Yang was in S-Lab, NTU.

image prompts are fed into different cross-frame attention
layers as additional keys and values. This extra spatial information refines the details in the first frame and then it is
propagated to the remaining frames, which maintains temporal consistency. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
VideoBooth achieves state-of-the-art performance in generating customized high-quality videos with subjects specified
in image prompts. Notably, VideoBooth is a generalizable
framework where a single model works for a wide range of
image prompts with only feed-forward passes.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image models [16, 17, 20, 26, 31, 37, 39, 43–
45, 62, 67–69, 73, 75] have attracted substantial attention.
With Stable Diffusion [69], we can now easily generate images using texts. Recently, the focus has been shifted to
text-to-video models [6, 18, 30, 38, 46, 48, 60, 76, 80, 84,

6689

