This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Semantic-Aware Multi-Label Adversarial Attacks
Hassan Mahmood
Northeastern University

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University

mahmood.h@northeastern.edu

e.elhamifar@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Despite its importance, generating attacks for multilabel learning (MLL) models has received much less attention compared to multi-class recognition. Attacking an MLL
model by optimizing a loss on the target set of labels has often the undesired consequence of changing the predictions
for other labels. On the other hand, adding a loss on the remaining labels to keep them fixed leads to highly negatively
correlated gradient directions, reducing the attack effectiveness. In this paper, we develop a framework for crafting
effective and semantic-aware adversarial attacks for MLL.
First, to obtain an attack that leads to semantically consistent predictions across all labels, we find a minimal superset of the target labels, referred to as consistent target set.
To do so, we develop an efficient search algorithm over a
knowledge graph, which encodes label dependencies. Next,
we propose an optimization that searches for an attack that
modifies the predictions of labels in the consistent target set
while ensuring other labels will not get affected. This leads
to an efficient algorithm that projects the gradient of the
consistent target set loss onto the orthogonal direction of
the gradient of the loss on other labels. Our framework can
generate attacks on different target set sizes and for MLL
with thousands of labels (as in OpenImages). Finally, by
extensive experiments on three datasets and several MLL
models, we show that our method generates both successful
and semantically consistent attacks.1

1. Introduction
Despite the tremendous success of Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs) for image recognition, DNNs are vulnerable to
adversarial attacks, i.e., imperceptible image perturbations
that result in incorrect prediction with high confidence
[9, 25, 27, 30, 35, 39, 53, 60, 69, 70, 98]. Understanding and improving the robustness of DNNs has motivated
a large body of research on generating adversarial perturbations and subsequently using them to design defense mech1 The code of this work is available at https://github.com/hassanmahmood/SemanticMLLAttacks.git

Vehicle
Wheeled
Vehicle

t
Bicycle

Organism
Craft

Motor
Vehicle

Plant

Person

Person
Organism

* Bicycle
Vehicle
Wheeled
Vehicle

Figure 1. Generating effective attacks for an MLL model is challenging.
Top: Two groups of semantically related labels. Green nodes show labels
predicted as present before the attack. Bottom: While an attack on the
target label ‘bicycle’ succeeds, it fails to turn off ‘vehicle’ and ‘wheeled
vehicle’ for ϵ < 0.2. On the other hand, for ϵ > 0.125, the attack changes
the prediction for the non-target label ‘person’, which is undesired.

anisms, e.g., by detecting attacks or retraining the model
using perturbed images. The majority of existing works,
however, have focused on multi-class recognition (MCR),
in which only one class must be predicted in an image
[14, 21, 26, 31, 37, 82, 85].
On the other hand, many real-world applications require
finding multiple labels in an image. This includes humanobject interaction learning (e.g., recognizing hands and interacting objects), autonomous driving (e.g., recognizing
cars, bikes, pedestrians, roads, signs, etc), assistive robotics
and surveillance. Therefore, multi-label learning (MLL)
aims at recognizing all labels in an image [14, 26, 38, 50,
61, 85, 94]. However, despite its importance and fundamental differences with respect to attacks for MCR (see Figure
1), adversarial attacks for MLL has received much less attention in the literature [1, 2, 36, 71, 86, 87].
The main difference between attacks for MCR and MLL
stems from the different ways decision boundaries between
labels is learned and structured for the two problems. In

24251

