This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffusionTrack: Point Set Diffusion Model for Visual Object Tracking
Fei Xie† Zhongdao Wang‡ Chao Ma† *
†
MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
‡
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
jaffe031@sjtu.edu.cn, wangzhongdao@huawei.com, chaoma@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

6HJPHQWDWLRQ
RQQRLVHPDS

‫ݖ‬

Existing Siamese or transformer trackers commonly pose
visual object tracking as a one-shot detection problem, i.e.,
locating the target object in a single forward evaluation
scheme. Despite the demonstrated success, these trackers
may easily drift towards distractors with similar appearance due to the single forward evaluation scheme lacking
self-correction. To address this issue, we cast visual tracking as a point set based denoising diffusion process and
propose a novel generative learning based tracker, dubbed
DiffusionTrack. Our DiffusionTrack possesses two appealing properties: 1) It follows a novel noise-to-target tracking paradigm that leverages multiple denoising diffusion
steps to localize the target in a dynamic searching manner per frame. 2) It models the diffusion process using a
point set representation, which can better handle appearance variations for more precise localization. One side
beneﬁt is that DiffusionTrack greatly simpliﬁes the postprocessing, e.g. removing window penalty scheme. Without
bells and whistles, our DiffusionTrack achieves leading performance over the state-of-the-art trackers and runs in realtime. The code is in https://github.com/VISIONSJTU/DiffusionTrack.

1. Introduction
Visual Object Tracking (VOT) is one of the most fundamental computer vision problems with numerous applications.
Recent prevalent Siamese [5, 31, 51, 105, 117] and transformer [14, 17, 25, 106, 113] based tracking approaches
typically formulate visual tracking as a one-shot detection
problem with a single forward evaluation scheme, i.e., these
trackers ﬁrst perform template-matching, and then predict
the location and size changes of the target in a single forward pass. Despite the demonstrated success, regarding
tracking as one-shot detection raises two critical issues: 1)
Detectors emphasize the category-level difference to detect
* Corresponding author.

‫ݔ‬

݂

‫ݕ‬

7UDFNLQJPRGHO

2XWSXW

2EMHFWGHWHFWLRQ
RQ ER[

,QSXWLPDJHV

D 6LQJOHIRUZDUGGHWHFWLRQEDVHG
WUDFNHUV 6LDP5317UDQV72VWUDFN«

E 'LIIXVLRQPRGHOLQUHODWHG
SHUFHSWLRQWDVNV

‫ݖ‬

݂
‫ݔ‬

‫ݕ‬଴

«

‫ݕ‬௧ିଵ

‫ݕ‬௧

«

‫ݕ‬୘

‫݌‬ఏ ሺ‫ݕ‬௧ ȁ‫ݕ‬௧ିଵሻ

7UDFNLQJPRGHO
,QSXWLPDJHV

'HQRLVLQJGLIIXVLRQSURFHVV

F 2XU1RLVHWR7DUJHW 17 IUDPHZRUN ZLWKSRLQWVHWGLIIXVLRQSURFHVV

Figure 1. Compared to detection-based trackers with a single
forward evaluation scheme (a), e.g. SiamRPN [51], TransT [14],
OStrack [113], our proposed DiffusionTrack (c) localizes the target in a progressive diffusion manner. Furthermore, we tailor a
point set representation to model the target object for the tracking task, instead of adopting existing representations such as noise
maps for segmentation [13, 42] and random boxes for object detection [11].Better viewed with zoomed in.

all potential objects from the background, while trackers focus on the instance-level difference to distinguish the target
from distractors with a similar appearance. 2) It is difﬁcult for trackers to localize targets undergoing large appearance variations and in complex scenarios in a single forward
pass. Even humans can be easily confused by similar distractor objects at ﬁrst glance.
To address these issues, we reformulate the tracking
problem as a Noise-to-Target (N2T) process shown in
Fig. 1, which explicitly mimics the coarse-to-ﬁne searching mechanism of human vision. Our intuition is that we
should empower a tracker with the ability of self-correction,
by which it can progressively differentiate the target and
fully exploit the rich contexts from the background and distractors. Such a progressive searching manner is intuitively
superior to predicting the target size and location changes
in merely one forward pass. To this end, we construct a
denoising diffusion process, originally proposed for generative image tasks [20, 73, 79], to infer the target from
random hypotheses on the entire frame step by step (see

19113

