This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SpiderMatch: 3D Shape Matching with
Global Optimality and Geometric Consistency
Paul Roetzer1
Florian Bernard1
University of Bonn1

Runtime Comparison (FAUST)

500

(Cao et al.)
Roetzer et al.
Ours

Runtime [s]

400
300
200
100
100

Idea: Match Cyclic Path C on X to Y

Dense Geometrically Consistent Shape Matching

500
1000
# of Faces (|FX | = |FY |)

1550

Scalability Analysis

Figure 1. (Left) Schematic illustration of our method: we extract a cyclic path C on the surface of 3D shape X , and match C to the 3D
target shape Y. (Middle) If C covers the whole source shape X (not shown for clarity, see Sec. 4.1 for details), our method can be used
to compute globally optimal results for dense non-rigid and geometrically consistent 3D shape matching. (Right) We show runtimes
w.r.t. shape resolution and compare to Roetzer et al. [55] (which is the only existing method that achieves geometric consistency while
having a global flavour and being initialization-free) and Cao et al. [14] (which does not provide any geometric consistency guarantees).
Ours solves all instances to global optimality (with geometric consistency), while in addition being much faster than Roetzer et al.

Abstract
Finding shortest paths on product spaces is a popular approach to tackle numerous variants of matching
problems, including the dynamic time warping method for
matching signals, the matching of curves, or the matching
of a curve to a 3D shape. While these approaches admit
the computation of globally optimal solutions in polynomial
time, their natural generalisation to 3D shape matching is
widely known to be intractable. In this work we address
this issue by proposing a novel path-based formalism for
3D shape matching. More specifically, we consider an alternative shape discretisation in which one of the 3D shapes
(the source shape) is represented as a SpiderCurve, i.e. a
long self-intersecting curve that traces the 3D shape surface. We then tackle the 3D shape matching problem as
finding a shortest path in the product graph of the SpiderCurve and the target 3D shape. Our approach introduces
a set of novel constraints that ensure a globally geometrically consistent matching. Overall, our formalism leads to
an integer linear programming problem for which we experimentally show that it can efficiently be solved to global

optimality. We demonstrate that our approach is competitive with recent state-of-the-art shape matching methods,
while in addition guaranteeing geometric consistency.1

1. Introduction
The 3D shape matching problem refers to finding correspondences between given 3D shapes and has a high relevance across the broad field of visual computing. Examples
of applications include texture transfer in graphics, statistical shape analysis in medical imaging, or 3D reconstruction
or shape completion in computer vision. While the state
of the art in 3D shape matching relies on data-driven deep
learning methods [14], respective methods have the strong
shortcoming that they lack guarantees about structural properties of obtained matchings. One crucial example, which
is the main focus of our work, is geometric consistency:
a matching between a given pair of 3D shapes is geometrically consistent if the neighbourhood between shape elements (e.g. triangles) is preserved under the matching.
1 https://github.com/paul0noah/spider-match

14543

