This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Privacy-Preserving Face Recognition Using Trainable Feature Subtraction
Yuxi Mi1 * Zhizhou Zhong1 * Yuge Huang2† Jiazhen Ji2 Jianqing Xu2
Jun Wang3 Shaoming Wang3 Shouhong Ding2 Shuigeng Zhou1†
1
Fudan University 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent 3 WeChat Pay Lab33, Tencent
yxmi20@fudan.edu.cn, zzzhong22@m.fudan.edu.cn, sgzhou@fudan.edu.cn
{yugehuang, royji, joejqxu, ericshding}@tencent.com
{earljwang, mangosmwang}@tencent.com

1. Introduction
Face recognition (FR) is a biometric way to identify persons
through their face images. It has seen prevalent methodological and application advancements in recent years. Currently, considerable parts of FR are implemented as online services to overcome local resource limitations: Local
clients, such as cell phones, outsource captured face images
to an online service provider. Using its model, the provider
extracts identity-representative templates from the face images and matches them with its database.
It has been common sense that face images are sensitive
biometric data and should be protected. Increasing regulatory demands [51] call for privacy-preserving face recognition (PPFR), to avoid leakage of face images during the
* Authors contributed equally to this paper.
† Corresponding authors.

Protective face

Recovery

PPFR prior arts

The widespread adoption of face recognition has led
to increasing privacy concerns, as unauthorized access
to face images can expose sensitive personal information.
This paper explores face image protection against viewing and recovery attacks. Inspired by image compression,
we propose creating a visually uninformative face image
through feature subtraction between an original face and its
model-produced regeneration. Recognizable identity features within the image are encouraged by co-training a
recognition model on its high-dimensional feature representation. To enhance privacy, the high-dimensional representation is crafted through random channel shuffling, resulting in randomized recognizable images devoid of attackerleverageable texture details. We distill our methodologies
into a novel privacy-preserving face recognition method,
MinusFace. Experiments demonstrate its high recognition
accuracy and effective privacy protection. Its code is available at https://github.com/Tencent/TFace.

Original face
(a)

(b)
MinusFace

Abstract

Residue

Improved
Residue

Figure 1. Comparison between SOTAs and MinusFace. (a) SOTAs
gradually remove the most visually informative features. Inadequacy of removal can result in successful recovery, which undermines privacy. (b) MinusFace first obtains a fully visually uninformative residue representation, then improves its recognizability. It
exhibits better privacy protection than all SOTAs.

outsourcing. They attempt to ensure that the faces’ appearances are both visually concealed from inadvertent view by
third parties and difficult to recover by deliberate attackers.
State-of-the-art (SOTA) PPFR primarily employs two
approaches: Cryptographic methods protect face images
with encryption or security protocols. Recently, transformbased methods have gained popularity due to their low latency and budget-saving computational costs. They convert
images into protective representations by minimizing visual
details, rendering them safe to share.
Transform-based methods yet face a persistent challenge
in balancing accuracy and privacy. In face images, the recognizable identity features and appearance-revealing visual
features are closely intertwined. To achieve privacy while
preserving optimal recognizability, prior arts invest significant efforts to locate and minimize the most visually informative feature components while retaining the rest. They
commonly employ either a heuristic or adversarial training
approach: For instance, some [24, 35, 36, 56] turn face images into frequency domain and heuristically prune the most
human-perceivable frequency channels. Others exploit deep
steganography [64] or cyclically add adversarial noise [57].

297

