This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Collaborative Learning of Anomalies with Privacy (CLAP) for Unsupervised
Video Anomaly Detection: A New Baseline
Anas Al-lahham Muhammad Zaigham Zaheer Nurbek Tastan Karthik Nandakumar
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI)
Abu Dhabi, UAE
{anas.al-lahham, zaigham.zaheer, nurbek.tastan, karthik.nandakumar}@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
Unsupervised (US) video anomaly detection (VAD) in
surveillance applications is gaining more popularity recently due to its practical real-world applications. As
surveillance videos are privacy sensitive and the availability of large-scale video data may enable better US-VAD systems, collaborative learning can be highly rewarding in this
setting. However, due to the extremely challenging nature
of the US-VAD task, where learning is carried out without
any annotations, privacy-preserving collaborative learning
of US-VAD systems has not been studied yet. In this paper, we propose a new baseline for anomaly detection capable of localizing anomalous events in complex surveillance videos in a fully unsupervised fashion without any labels on a privacy-preserving participant-based distributed
training configuration. Additionally, we propose three new
evaluation protocols to benchmark anomaly detection approaches on various scenarios of collaborations and data
availability. Based on these protocols, we modify existing
VAD datasets to extensively evaluate our approach as well
as existing US SOTA methods on two large-scale datasets
including UCF-Crime and XD-Violence. All proposed evaluation protocols, dataset splits, and codes are available
here: https://github.com/AnasEmad11/CLAP.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen a surge in federated learning based
methods, where the goal is to enable collaborative training
of machine learning models without transferring any training data to a central server. This direction of research in machine learning is of notable importance as it enables learning with multiple participants that can contribute data without compromising privacy. Several researchers have studied
federated learning for different applications such as medical
diagnosis [1, 3, 6, 22], network security [10, 19, 21, 30], and
large-scale classification models [4, 14, 42].
Anomaly detection in surveillance videos, being one

Conventional Centralized Training

Ours: Collaborative Training

Server

Server

Central
Parameter Sharing

...

...

...

...

Figure 1. a) Conventional central training requires all training data
to be on the server to carry out the training. This setting cannot ensure privacy, thus hindering collaborations between different entities holding large-scale surveillance data. b) Our proposed unsupervised video anomaly detection technique does not require the
transfer of training data between the server and participants, thus
ensuring complete privacy.

of the large-scale applications of computer vision, may
greatly benefit from autonomous collaborative training algorithms. VAD in surveillance videos is privacy sensitive and may involve data belonging to several organizations/establishments. This may result in hectic bureaucratic
processes to obtain data from each establishment for centralized training. For example, the police department of a
city may not be willing to share street surveillance videos
due to privacy concerns of the general public, or a daycare
facility may have to obtain the consent of all parents to be
allowed to share its CCTV footage. Such restrictions may
hinder the possibility of obtaining large-scale data to train
efficient anomaly detectors making a central training requiring all training data the least preferred option in the realworld scenarios. Unfortunately, to the best of our knowl-

12416

