This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ExtDM: Distribution Extrapolation Diffusion Model for Video Prediction
https://zzcheng.top/ExtDM
Zhicheng Zhang
Junyao Hu1,2,† Wentao Cheng1,‡ Danda Paudel3,4 Jufeng Yang1,2
1
VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2
Nankai International Advanced Research Institute (SHENZHEN· FUTIAN)
3
4
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich
INSAIT, Sofia University
1,2,†

gloryzzc6@sina.com,hujunyao@mail.nankai.edu.cn,{wentaocheng,yangjufeng}@nankai.edu.cn,danda.paudel@insait.ai

Video prediction is a challenging task due to its nature of uncertainty, especially for forecasting a long period. To model the temporal dynamics, advanced methods benefit from the recent success of diffusion models, and
repeatedly refine the predicted future frames with 3D spatiotemporal U-Net. However, there exists a gap between the
present and future and the repeated usage of U-Net brings
a heavy computation burden. To address this, we propose a
diffusion-based video prediction method that predicts future
frames by extrapolating the present distribution of features,
namely ExtDM. Specifically, our method consists of three
components: (i) a motion autoencoder conducts a bijection transformation between video frames and motion cues;
(ii) a layered distribution adaptor module extrapolates the
present features in the guidance of Gaussian distribution;
(iii) a 3D U-Net architecture specialized for jointly fusing
guidance and features among the temporal dimension by
spatiotemporal-window attention. Extensive experiments
on five popular benchmarks covering short- and long-term
video prediction verify the effectiveness of ExtDM.

1. Introduction
Video prediction is a long-standing and challenging task
in computer vision. It aims to forecast future frames of a
video like humans and serves as a key component of intelligent decision-making systems [48]. Predicting the possible future with pixel-level details can benefit trustable decisions, which is especially crucial for scenarios involving human security. Take an instance, considering an automatic vehicle driving at a crowded intersection, an important problem is to predict how people will move. Therefore, various downstream applications have been developed,
ranging from autonomous driving [1, 7, 83], robotic navigation [16,33,84], artistic design [19,42,56,57,71], and video
understanding [80, 81, 85, 86].
† Equal Contribution. ‡ Corresponding Author.

10
12
14
16
18
20
22
24
26
28
30

FVD

Abstract

SMMNIST

RVD

K2
K1
ExtDM
(Ours)

LFDM
MCVD-s
MCVD-c

100 FPS 101

(a) Short-term Video Prediction

KTH

200

ExtDM
(Ours) K4
K3
MCVD-c
K2
LFDM
K1

240
280

320 MCVD-s
360

VIDM

400 1
10

100 FPS 101

102

(b) Long-term Video Prediction

Figure 1. A comparison of quality and speed of SOTA diffusion
models for short-term and long-term video prediction on SMMNIST and KTH, respectively. We report FVD as well as FPS. Note
that the FPS axis is in the log scale.

Advanced works in video prediction [20, 22, 64, 66] propose to capture the dynamic change in the video [2, 18, 36,
60]. Direct methods [5, 27] (Fig. 2 (a)) only take RGB
frames as input and find that the video prediction problem
is difficult to be solved due to its inherent high complexity (i.e., estimating the posterior probability of p(xp |xc )).
Thus, in-context learning methods [55, 61] (Fig. 2 (b)) incorporates semantic cues as key information, where motion
cues requiring no extra model can be easily introduced as
implicit guidance p(xp |xc , mc ). A common characteristic
of these methods is that they have excellent predictive capacity in a short time span but lack accuracy over a longer
period, leading to counterfactual results like videos that fade
to grey. The reason behind this is that these methods take
no deterministic cues for the future, which has a huge gap.
Capturing future cues is challenging due to the uncertainty of the future. It is required to understand high-level
spatiotemporal correlation and model potential proposals
for future [21]. Several recent attempts [14, 24, 62] embrace
the popular video diffusion models [26, 50] and try to reformulate estimating the future distribution as a serial denoising process. Attributed to its ODE formula, the future
frames can be obtained through a series of chained Markovian steps. However, this incurs a significant computational
burden due to the repeated usage of spatiotemporal U-Net.

19310

