This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tune-An-Ellipse: CLIP Has Potential to Find What You Want
Jinheng Xie1 Songhe Deng2 Bing Li3 Haozhe Liu3 Yawen Huang4† Yefeng Zheng4
Jürgen Schmidhuber3 Bernard Ghanem3 Linlin Shen2 Mike Zheng Shou1†
1
Show Lab, National University of Singapore 2 Shenzhen University
3
AI Initiative, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology
4
Jarvis Research Center, Tencent YouTu Lab
{sierkinhane,mike.zheng.shou}@gmail.com
https://github.com/showlab/Tune-An-Ellipse

1. Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) [2, 17, 19] and VisionLanguage Models (VLMs) [18, 20] emerged in recent
years are featured with some fascinating properties such as
prompting [1, 13, 31, 40]. Notably, in the absence of predefined supervision signals during training, LLMs exhibit
a robust zero-shot capability across diverse tasks such as
translation and question answering, simply through prompting. For instance, when prompted by “Translate them into
English”, LLMs can accordingly translate the user’s input.
VLMs such as CLIP [20] have demonstrated similar ability,
in which the prompt of “a photo of {}” can enable zero-shot
image classification and boost performance. In light of this,
many works [5, 9, 39] have been dedicated to finding better
† Corresponding Author

score

“the snail on the top”

score

...

...

Visual prompting of large vision language models such
as CLIP exhibits intriguing zero-shot capabilities. A manually drawn red circle, commonly used for highlighting, can
guide CLIP’s attention to the surrounding region, to identify specific objects within an image. Without precise object
proposals, however, it is insufficient for localization. Our
novel, simple yet effective approach, i.e., Differentiable Visual Prompting, enables CLIP to zero-shot localize: given
an image and a text prompt describing an object, we first
pick a rendered ellipse from uniformly distributed anchor
ellipses on the image grid via visual prompting, then use
three loss functions to tune the ellipse coefficients to encapsulate the target region gradually. This yields promising experimental results for referring expression comprehension
without precisely specified object proposals. In addition,
we systematically present the limitations of visual prompting inherent in CLIP and discuss potential solutions.

“the frog in the middle”

“cat reflection”
...

Abstract

...

“cat looking at us”
...

Differentiable Visual Prompt Tuning

Figure 1. Top: An illustration of visual prompt for CLIP [20]. As
observed in [24], the red circle can guide CLIP’s attention towards
the surrounding region. For example, given a text prompt “the
snail on the top”, the CLIP score reaches its maximum when the
circle is drawn around the snail. Bottom: Our Tune-An-Ellipse.
Given a text prompt, we begin by generating an initial ellipse by
visual prompting and propose three loss functions to iteratively
tune the ellipse coefficients to encapsulate the target region.

text prompts for VLMs, with strategies like CoOp [39] to
equip the prompt with learnable tokens.
Unlike previous efforts purely focusing on the textual
prompts, Aleksandar et al. [24] observed that a visually prompted image—a red circle simply drawn around
a region—allows CLIP to pinpoint any specific instances
from an image that may contain multiple objects. For an
intuitive explanation, people commonly use a red circle to
highlight and emphasize important elements, and this visual prompt is then implicitly learned by CLIP through contrastive learning on web-scale data. As the example shown
in Fig. 1, given a text prompt “the frog in the middle” and
various visually prompted images, CLIP can correspondingly infer a distinct matching score for the proper prompted

13723

