This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Space Alignments Towards Universal LiDAR Segmentation
Youquan Liu∗,1

Lingdong Kong∗,2,3 Xiaoyang Wu4 Runnan Chen4 Xin Li5
Liang Pan2 Ziwei Liu6 Yuexin Ma1
1
ShanghaiTech University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 National University of Singapore
4
University of Hong Kong, 5 East China Normal University, 6 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
https://github.com/youquanl/M3Net

Abstract
A unified and versatile LiDAR segmentation model with
strong robustness and generalizability is desirable for safe
autonomous driving perception. This work presents M3Net,
a one-of-a-kind framework for fulfilling multi-task, multidataset, multi-modality LiDAR segmentation in a universal manner using just a single set of parameters. To better
exploit data volume and diversity, we first combine largescale driving datasets acquired by different types of sensors
from diverse scenes and then conduct alignments in three
spaces, namely data, feature, and label spaces, during the
training. As a result, M3Net is capable of taming heterogeneous data for training state-of-the-art LiDAR segmentation models. Extensive experiments on twelve LiDAR segmentation datasets verify our effectiveness. Notably, using
a shared set of parameters, M3Net achieves 75.1%, 83.1%,
and 72.4% mIoU scores, respectively, on the official benchmarks of SemanticKITTI, nuScenes, and Waymo Open.

1. Introduction
Dense and structural 3D surrounding scene understanding provides crucial information for autonomous vehicles to
make proper decisions [70]. With the recent advancements
in sensing technologies, especially the Light Detection and
Ranging (LiDAR) sensor, a holistic scene perception can be
achieved by segmenting the acquired sensor data [28, 83].
Most existing LiDAR segmentation models [1, 36, 111,
121, 128] are trained and tested in a single-task, singledataset, single-modality manner. Despite achieving commendable results in the single domain, there is a significant performance drop when transitioning to new domains
[40, 48]. The limited generalization capability hinders their
facilitation of real-world applications [47, 50, 87]. In reality, LiDAR datasets are marred by significant variances,
encompassing variations in data patterns due to different
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Performance comparisons among M3Net [•], SingleDataset Training [•], and Naı̈ve Joint Training [•] across twelve
LiDAR segmentation datasets. For better comparisons, the radius
is normalized based on M3Net’s scores. The larger the area coverage, the higher the overall performance. Best viewed in colors.

sensor types and weather conditions, diverse class distributions arising from varying capture scenarios, and distinct
label spaces shaped by specific annotation protocols. These
factors collectively pose a formidable challenge in harmonizing disparate LiDAR point clouds and jointly optimizing model parameters to effectively address multiple tasks
across a range of sensor modalities [89, 118]. Empirical
evidence in Fig. 3 further reveals that naı̈vely combining
heterogeneous data to train a LiDAR segmentation model –
without strategic alignments – often leads to sub-opt results.
Recent works [6, 39, 48, 79, 87, 94, 106] resort to unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for utilizing training
data from both source and target domains to optimize one
parameter set. Nevertheless, they either focus on only the
sharing mapping between two domains (by ignoring dis-

14648

