This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Single Mesh Diffusion Models with Field Latents for Texture Generation
Thomas W. Mitchel1,2† Carlos Esteves1
1

Input

2

Google Research

Ameesh Makadia1

PlayStation

Generated textures

Generative transfer to new geometry

Figure 1. Our latent diffusion models operate directly on the surfaces of 3D shapes, synthesizing new high-quality textures (center) after
training on a single example (left). Both our novel latent representation and diffusion models are isometry-equivariant, facilitating a notion
of generative texture transfer by sampling pre-trained models on new geometries (right). Above our models are conditioned on coarse
semantic labels reflecting a subjective distribution of content, which delineate the sole and interior of the shoes, the eyes and mouths of the
skulls, and the decals on the bottles.

Abstract
We introduce a framework for intrinsic latent diffusion
models operating directly on the surfaces of 3D shapes,
with the goal of synthesizing high-quality textures. Our approach is underpinned by two contributions: Field Latents,
a latent representation encoding textures as discrete vector fields on the mesh vertices, and Field Latent Diffusion
Models, which learn to denoise a diffusion process in the
learned latent space on the surface. We consider a singletextured-mesh paradigm, where our models are trained to
generate variations of a given texture on a mesh. We show
the synthesized textures are of superior fidelity compared
those from existing single-textured-mesh generative models.
Our models can also be adapted for user-controlled editing
tasks such as inpainting and label-guided generation. The
efficacy of our approach is due in part to the equivariance
† Work done while at Google Research.

of our proposed framework under isometries, allowing our
models to seamlessly reproduce details across locally similar regions and opening the door to a notion of generative texture transfer. Code and visualizations are available
at https://single-mesh-diffusion.github.
io/.

1. Introduction
The emergence of latent diffusion models (LDMs) [44] as
powerful tools for 2D content creation has motivated efforts
to replicate their success across different modalities. A particularly attractive direction is the synthesis of textured 3D
assets, due to the high cost of building photorealistic objects which can require intricately configured scanning solutions [13] or expertise in 3D modeling.
The majority of 3D synthesis methods employing LDMs
operate in an image-based setting where the 3D repre-

7953

