This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Make-It-Vivid: Dressing Your Animatable Biped Cartoon Characters from Text
Junshu Tang1† Yanhong Zeng2 Ke Fan1 Xuheng Wang3
Bo Dai2 Kai Chen2‡ Lizhuang Ma1‡
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Shanghai AI Lab 3 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Creating and animating 3D biped cartoon characters is
crucial and valuable in various applications. Compared
with geometry, the diverse texture design plays an important role in making 3D biped cartoon characters vivid and
charming. Therefore, we focus on automatic texture design
for cartoon characters based on input instructions. This
is challenging for domain-specific requirements and a lack
of high-quality data. To address this challenge, we propose Make-It-Vivid, the first attempt to enable high-quality
texture generation from text in UV space. We prepare a
detailed text-texture paired data for 3D characters by using vision-question-answering agents. Then we customize a
pretrained text-to-image model to generate texture map with
template structure while preserving the natural 2D image
knowledge. Furthermore, to enhance fine-grained details,
we propose a novel adversarial learning scheme to shorten
the domain gap between original dataset and realistic texture domain. Extensive experiments show that our approach
outperforms current texture generation methods, resulting
in efficient character texturing and faithful generation with
prompts. Besides, we showcase various applications such
as out of domain generation and texture stylization. We
also provide an efficient generation system for automatic
text-guided textured character generation and animation.

1. Introduction
3D biped cartoon characters [28] breathe life into fictional
characters, conveying actions, and storytelling elements engagingly. These characters find applications in various domains, including video games (e.g., Animal Crossing [1]),
movies (e.g., Zootopia [58]), and the upcoming metaverse.
Yet, the creation and animation of these characters heavily
rely on skilled artists utilizing specialized software, making
it a labor-intensive and time-consuming process.
Compared to the shape of 3D biped cartoon characters,
their textures exhibit a significantly higher level of diversity,
† Work done when interning at Shanghai AI Lab.
‡ Corresponding authors.

Text-guided Texture Generation

“A rabbit wearing
suits and tie”

“A bear wearing
suits with a bow”

“A fox wearing suits
and tie in shuimo style”

Text-guided Animatable Cartoon Character Generation
“A cartoon pig wearing blue overall raises hands.”

“A cartoon pig”

“wearing blue overall” “raises hands” “plays guitar”

Figure 1. We present Make-it-Vivid, the first attempt that can create
plausible and consistent texture in UV space for 3D biped cartoon
characters from text input within few seconds. Make-it-vivid enables texture generation with fine-grained details in multiple styles
(see above), and also supports efficient text-guided animatable textured character production (see bottom).

playing a crucial role in creating vivid and charming characters. This work focuses on the automatic design of highquality textured characters by generating textures based on
text descriptions, which presents two main challenges. (1)
Demanding domain-specific requirements. Simply dressing 3D biped cartoon characters with appropriate textures is
insufficient to make them attractive. These characters require textures that possess unique traits, including semantic harmony, consistent global configuration, and rich local
high-frequency details. Consequently, conventional shape
texturing methods are inadequate for cartoon characters, often resulting in textures with smooth and blurry details, as
well as noticeable seam artifacts [6–8, 21, 29, 30, 41]. (2)
Limited availability of high-quality data. The scarcity
of high-quality data that meets the demanding requirements
further complicates the task. The creation of high-quality
cartoon characters involves a costly and skill-intensive pro-

6243

