This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OST: Refining Text Knowledge with Optimal Spatio-Temporal
Descriptor for General Video Recognition
Tongjia Chen1 , Hongshan Yu1 , Zhengeng Yang2 , Zechuan Li1 , Wei Sun1 , Chen Chen3
1
Hunan University, 2 Hunan Normal University
3
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida
Corresponding author

Project Page: https://tomchen-ctj.github.io/OST.

Web-scaled Descriptive Narratives

Abstract

Static Images

Spatial Inductive

High semantic distinction

(Settings, common objects, certain steps, etc.)

Due to the resource-intensive nature of training visionlanguage models on expansive video data, a majority
of studies have centered on adapting pre-trained imagelanguage models to the video domain. Dominant pipelines
propose to tackle the visual discrepancies with additional
temporal learners while overlooking the substantial discrepancy for web-scaled descriptive narratives and concise action category names, leading to less distinct semantic
space and potential performance limitations. In this work,
we prioritize the refinement of text knowledge to facilitate
generalizable video recognition. To address the limitations
of the less distinct semantic space of category names, we
prompt a large language model (LLM) to augment action
class names into Spatio-Temporal Descriptors thus bridging the textual discrepancy and serving as a knowledge base
for general recognition. Moreover, to assign the best descriptors with different video instances, we propose Optimal
Descriptor Solver, forming the video recognition problem as
solving the optimal matching flow across frame-level representations and descriptors. Comprehensive evaluations in
zero-shot, few-shot, and fully supervised video recognition
highlight the effectiveness of our approach. Our best model
achieves a state-of-the-art zero-shot accuracy of 75.1% on
Kinetics-600.

1. Introduction
Large-scale contrastive language-image pre-training [25,
46, 65] have shown remarkable performance in various
computer vision tasks. The visual-semantic joint space
not only serves powerful visual representation but also enables few/zero-shot transferring to downstream tasks with
the reference of natural language. However, training a similar model for video recognition can be costly since largescale video-language datasets are exponentially more massive [57] due to the extra temporal dimension. Hence,
a feasible solution is to adapt the pre-trained image-text
models for the task of video recognition. As depicted in

Ski jumping competitions. Jumper in
mid air with extreme speed. The
background of the forest and slope.
Textual
Discrepancy

CLIP Pre-training Data

Concise Category Names
Low semantic distinction

Visual
Discrepancy

Video Sequences

(Short phrases with constant hard-prompt)

Spatio-Temporal

A video of a person
Ski jumping.
Video Recognition Data
Text Encoder

Matching
Dominant Pipeline

Visual Encoder
Temporal Learner

: Dominant pipelines tackle the visual discrepancy via additional temporal learners
: The textual discrepancy is overlooked, which may introduce ambiguity in matching

Figure 1. Motivation of our method. Dominant pipelines propose
to tackle the visual discrepancies with additional temporal learners while overlooking the textual discrepancy between descriptive
narratives and concise category names. This oversight results in a
less separable latent space, which may hinder video recognition.

Fig. 1, current methods devise a range of temporal learners to address the visual discrepancy while preserving textdomain knowledge in the semantic space of action category names, often by merging the category name with
CLIP-style hard-prompts (e.g., “a video of a person {ski
jumping}”) [41, 45, 53, 56, 60]. Despite providing essential inter-class correlations that can benefit general recognition, we speculate this paradigm overlooks the textual
discrepancy between web-scaled descriptive narratives in
CLIP pre-training and concise category names in downstream video recognition. Given that category names of
video datasets generally consist of verbs and nouns, the
nouns exhibit variability while the verbs tend to remain consistent. For instance, playing cello, playing organ & playing violin are distinct actions related to playing instruments.
The sole differentiation between these category names lies
in the noun itself, resulting in low discriminative text embeddings. This may lead to a less separable semantic space,
potentially introducing ambiguity in recognition tasks [5].

18888

