This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffCast: A Unified Framework via Residual Diffusion for Precipitation
Nowcasting
Demin Yu1 , Xutao Li*1 , Yunming Ye1 , Baoquan Zhang1 , Chuyao Luo1 , Kuai Dai1 , Rui Wang2 , Xunlai Chen2
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen; 2 Shenzhen Meteorological Bureau
deminy@stu.hit.edu.cn, {lixutao, yeyunming, baoquanzhang}@hit.edu.cn,
luochuyao.dalian@gmail.com, {daikuai hit, wangr09, cxlxun}@163.com

Abstract

Ground Truth

Deterministic Model

Probabilistic Model

Ours
255
219

Precipitation nowcasting is an important spatiotemporal prediction task to predict the radar echoes sequences based on current observations, which can serve
both meteorological science and smart city applications.
Due to the chaotic evolution nature of the precipitation systems, it is a very challenging problem. Previous studies address the problem either from the perspectives of deterministic modeling or probabilistic modeling. However, their
predictions suffer from the blurry, high-value echoes fading away and position inaccurate issues. The root reason
of these issues is that the chaotic evolutionary precipitation
systems are not appropriately modeled. Inspired by the nature of the systems, we propose to decompose and model
them from the perspective of global deterministic motion
and local stochastic variations with residual mechanism. A
unified and flexible framework that can equip any type of
spatio-temporal models is proposed based on residual diffusion, which effectively tackles the shortcomings of previous methods. Extensive experimental results on four publicly available radar datasets demonstrate the effectiveness
and superiority of the proposed framework, compared to
state-of-the-art techniques. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/DeminYu98/DiffCast.

1. Introduction
Precipitation nowcasting, aiming at providing a high spatiotemporal resolution rainfall prediction of very short-range
(e.g., 0∼6 hours), is a crucial task in meteorological science
and smart city applications [26, 32]. The core of the task is
to predict the future radar echoes sequence based on current
observations. In essence, it is a spatio-temporal prediction
problem, but with some quite distinguishing traits.
Unlike conventional video or spatio-temporal prediction
tasks [9, 18], which aim to forecast a deterministic trajec* Corresponding author

181

5 min

160
133
100
74
59
31

55 min

16
0

100 min

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. We evaluate different models’ performances in precipitation nowcasting. The deterministic model (b) can nicely capture
the moving trends but tends to get blurry appearance and underestimate the high-value echoes. The probabilistic model (c) can
capture the appearance details well, but the predicted rainfall positions are inaccurate. Our method (d) is able to generate accurate
prediction with nice appearance details.

tory of moving objects, precipitation particles constitute a
chaotic evolutionary system, governed not only by the deterministic moving trends of global system, but also by the
stochastic variations (growth or decay) of local particles.
More importantly, the global moving trends and local variations are inherently coupled. For example, when cold and
warm air masses cross in a region, continuous rainfall is
caused by an evolutionary convection with lasting growth
and decay of precipitation particles, rather than a simple
movement of seen rainfall belt.
However, most of previous spatio-temporal methods [3,
8–11, 26, 33] are developed for conventional tasks, which
fail to analyze and model this nature. As a result, their performance is unsatisfactory for precipitation nowcasting. In
terms of methodology, we categorize these methods into
deterministic and probabilistic models. Each type has its
own disadvatanges. Deterministic models [8, 9, 27] leverage convolution recurrent neural network, transformer or
their variants to forecast the future echoes sequence by directly optimizing the distance or similarity to ground-truth.
This line of methods can nicely capture the moving trends,

27758

