This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Equivariant plug-and-play image reconstruction
Matthieu Terris, Thomas Moreau,
Université Paris-Saclay, Inria, CEA
Palaiseau, 91120, France
Abstract
Plug-and-play algorithms constitute a popular framework for solving inverse imaging problems that rely on the
implicit definition of an image prior via a denoiser. These
algorithms can leverage powerful pre-trained denoisers to
solve a wide range of imaging tasks, circumventing the
necessity to train models on a per-task basis. Unfortunately, plug-and-play methods often show unstable behaviors, hampering their promise of versatility and leading to
suboptimal quality of reconstructed images. In this work,
we show that enforcing equivariance to certain groups of
transformations (rotations, reflections, and/or translations)
on the denoiser strongly improves the stability of the algorithm as well as its reconstruction quality. We provide a
theoretical analysis that illustrates the role of equivariance
on better performance and stability. We present a simple algorithm that enforces equivariance on any existing denoiser
by simply applying a random transformation to the input of
the denoiser and the inverse transformation to the output
at each iteration of the algorithm. Experiments on multiple imaging modalities and denoising networks show that
the equivariant plug-and-play algorithm improves both the
reconstruction performance and the stability compared to
their non-equivariant counterparts.

1. Introduction
Linear inverse imaging problems are ubiquitous in imaging
sciences, famous instances of which include image restoration, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), computed tomography, and astronomical imaging to name a few. In this setting, the aim is to recover an image x 2 Rn from measurements y 2 Rm acquired through
y = Ax + ✏,

(1)

where A : Rn ! Rm is a linear operator and ✏ the realisation of some random noise. A myriad of methods for solving problems of the likes of (1) have been proposed in the
literature, ranging from variational methods [6, 12] (solution of a cost function minimisation problem) to end-to-end

Nelly Pustelnik, Julian Tachella
ENSL, CNRS UMR 5672
Lyon, 69342, France
reconstruction with deep neural networks [19, 22, 52] and,
more recently, diffusion algorithms [9, 14, 21, 54].
In this work, we focus on approaches relying on implicit
denoising priors. For instance, plug-and-play (PnP) algorithms [20, 35, 45, 50] propose to replace the proximity
operator involved in variational methods (solved by proximal algorithms) by a denoiser modeling an implicit image prior. Similarly, regularization-by-denoising (RED) approaches propose to replace gradient steps on the prior term
by a denoiser [33]. While the denoiser is typically trained
as a Gaussian denoiser using grayscale or color natural images, it can be plugged into algorithms designed to tackle a
wide range of image-related problems, without being constrained by the nature of the input images (e.g. MRI images,
CT scans, etc) [1, 26, 39, 43].
Yet, despite successful performance in various applications, these algorithms tend to suffer from instability issues,
making it difficult to transfer across imaging tasks or to derive statistical estimates from the reconstruction. In particular, RED and PnP algorithms often require careful finetuning [27, 32], or departing from the original optimization
algorithm for efficient application [10, 50]. Thus, several
works have been proposed to restore the convergence of
PnP and RED algorithms while establishing a clear connection with an associated cost function [10, 17, 30, 35, 42].
However, these efforts introduce notable constraints on the
denoiser, leading to a trade-off between stability and reconstruction performance. Typically, convergent PnP and RED
algorithms tend to transfer easily to new problems, but perform less well than their fine-tuned and early-stopped nonconvergent counterparts.
In this work, we propose to investigate theoretically and
empirically the effect of equivariance on algorithms relying
on implicit denoising priors. More precisely, we prove that
enforcing equivariance on the denoiser improves the stability of the resulting PnP algorithm and plays a symmetrizing role on the Jacobian of the implicit prior. Our experiments show that the proposed equivariant approach can significantly improve the quality of images reconstructed with
PnP algorithms as well as with popular algorithmic frameworks such as RED or Langevin algorithms. We give an

25255

