This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CyberDemo: Augmenting Simulated Human Demonstration
for Real-World Dexterous Manipulation
Jun Wang1*

Yuzhe Qin1*

Kaiming Kuang1 Yigit Korkmaz2 Akhilan Gurumoorthy1
Hao Su1 Xiaolong Wang1
1
UC San Diego 2 University of Southern California

Sim Data
Collection

Real Deployment

Sim Data Augmentation

Disturbance

Data Aug.

Imitation Learning

Light
Object
Pose

Few Real Demo
Fine Tuning

Pour

Rotate

Pick and Place

Normal

Figure 1. We propose CyberDemo, a novel pipeline for learning real-world dexterous manipulation by using simulation data. First, we
collect human demos in a simulated environment (blue region), followed by extensive data augmentation within the simulator (yellow
region). Then, the imitation learning model, trained on augmented data and fine-tuned on a few real data, can be deployed on a real robot.

Abstract
We introduce CyberDemo, a novel approach to robotic
imitation learning that leverages simulated human demonstrations for real-world tasks. By incorporating extensive
data augmentation in a simulated environment, CyberDemo
outperforms traditional in-domain real-world demonstrations when transferred to the real world, handling diverse
physical and visual conditions. Regardless of its affordability and convenience in data collection, CyberDemo outperforms baseline methods in terms of success rates across various tasks and exhibits generalizability with previously unseen objects. For example, it can rotate novel tetra-valve
and penta-valve, despite human demonstrations only involving tri-valves. Our research demonstrates the significant potential of simulated human demonstrations for realworld dexterous manipulation tasks. More details can be
found at https://cyber-demo.github.io/

* Equal contributions.

1 . Introduction
Imitation learning has been a promising approach in robot
manipulation, facilitating the acquisition of complex skills
from human demonstration. However, the effectiveness of
this approach is critically dependent on the availability of
high-quality demonstration data, which often necessitates
substantial human effort for data collection [6, 9, 48]. This
challenge is further amplified in the context of manipulation
with a multi-finger dexterous hand, where the complexity
and intricacy of the tasks require highly detailed and precise
demonstrations.
In imitation learning, in-domain demonstrations, which
refer to the data collected directly from the deployment
environment, are commonly used for robot manipulation
tasks [43]. It is generally believed that the most effective
way to solve a specific task is to collect demonstrations directly from the real robot on that task. This belief has been
upheld as the gold standard, but we wish to challenge it. We
argue that collecting human demonstrations in simulation

17952

