This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hyper-MD: Mesh Denoising with Customized Parameters Aware of Noise
Intensity and Geometric Characteristics
Xingtao Wang, Hongliang Wei, Xiaopeng Fan*, Debin Zhao
Harbin Institute of Technology
Harbin, China

Abstract
Mesh denoising (MD) is a critical task in geometry processing, as meshes from scanning or AIGC techniques are
susceptible to noise contamination. The challenge of MD
lies in the diverse nature of mesh facets in terms of geometric characteristics and noise distributions. Despite recent
advancements in deep learning-based MD methods, existing MD networks typically neglect the consideration of geometric characteristics and noise distributions. In this paper,
we propose Hyper-MD, a hyper-network-based approach
that addresses this limitation by dynamically customizing
denoising parameters for each facet based on its noise intensity and geometric characteristics. Specifically, HyperMD is composed of a hyper-network and an MD network.
For each noisy facet, the hyper-network takes two angles as
input to customize parameters for the MD network. These
two angles are specially defined to reveal the noise intensity
and geometric characteristics of the current facet, respectively. The MD network receives a facet patch as input, and
outputs the denoised normal using the customized parameters. Experimental results on synthetic and real-scanned
meshes demonstrate that Hyper-MD outperforms state-ofthe-art mesh denoising methods.

1. Introduction
The development of 3D scanning equipment and AIGC algorithms [24, 28, 30] has made the acquisition of meshes
from real-world pretty simple and convenient, but the acquired meshes are inevitably contaminated by noise even
with advanced techniques. Therefore, mesh denoising
(MD) has always been one of the most fundamental research topics in geometry processing [7, 21, 26, 27, 38].
The objective of MD is to remove noise from noisy meshes
while preserving their underlying geometric characteristics.
Early works [6, 14, 34, 39, 42] in this field typically rely on
some assumptions about the geometric characteristics and
noise patterns. However, these assumptions often fail to

(a) Workflow of existing MD networks.

(b) Workflow of Hyper-MD.
Figure 1. Workflows of existing MD networks and Hyper-MD. αn
and αg are two angles.

generalize across various meshes and noise [29], limiting
the performance of conventional methods.
Recently, some deep-learning-based works [8, 15, 16,
23, 31, 35, 41] have been developed to predict noise-free
facet normals for mesh denoising. As shown in Figure 1
(a), these works typically feed a facet patch into a neural
network to predict the denoised normal, which is then used
to update vertex positions. For example, Zhao et al. [41]
represent the patch using voxels and employ 3D convolutions to regress noise-free normals. Li et al. [15] estimate
the denoised normal from a facet patch through a network
similar to PointNet++ [20]. Shen et al. [23] propose to infer denoised normals by graph convolutions which accept a
graph representation of mesh faces as input. Deep-learningbased methods do not rely on any specific assumptions and

4651

