This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continual Forgetting for Pre-trained Vision Models
Hongbo Zhao1,3∗ Bolin Ni1,3∗ Junsong Fan2 Yuxi Wang2
Yuntao Chen2 Gaofeng Meng1,2,3B Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,4B
1
2

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

4

Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory

{zhaohongbo2022, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
For privacy and security concerns, the need to erase unwanted information from pre-trained vision models is
becoming evident nowadays.
In real-world scenarios, erasure requests originate at any time from both
users and model owners. These requests usually form
a sequence. Therefore, under such a setting, selective
information is expected to be continuously removed from
a pre-trained model while maintaining the rest. We define
this problem as continual forgetting and identify two
key challenges. (i) For unwanted knowledge, efficient
and effective deleting is crucial. (ii) For remaining
knowledge, the impact brought by the forgetting procedure should be minimal. To address them, we propose
Group Sparse LoRA (GS-LoRA). Specifically, towards
(i), we use LoRA modules to fine-tune the FFN layers in
Transformer blocks for each forgetting task independently,
and towards (ii), a simple group sparse regularization is
adopted, enabling automatic selection of specific LoRA
groups and zeroing out the others. GS-LoRA is effective,
parameter-efficient, data-efficient, and easy to implement.
We conduct extensive experiments on face recognition,
object detection and image classification and demonstrate
that GS-LoRA manages to forget specific classes with
minimal impact on other classes. Codes will be released on
https://github.com/bjzhb666/GS-LoRA.

1. Introduction
As pre-trained models become larger nowadays, more training data are required. These data are usually collected
through various ways such as the Internet, books, publicly
available datasets, and manual labeling. Within the vast
amount of data, there is often erroneous or privacy-sensitive
∗ Equal contribution. B Corresponding author.

gfmeng@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Private Data

Toxic Data

Available Data

Privacy

Wrong Knowledge

Correct Knowledge

FR

Before Forgetting

FR

FR

After Forgetting

Figure 1. Illustration of continual forgetting, which aims to remove specific knowledge in pre-trained models sequentially. “FR”
stands for Forgetting Request. The red data (privacy data, toxic
data, etc.) contains unwanted knowledge which needs to be removed, while the rest should be maintained. The model inherits
parameters from the last forgetting task at the beginning of a new
forgetting task.

information and pre-trained models may learn from it. For
instance, the ImageNet Roulette project [14, 51] shows
models tend to be biased toward racist, misogynistic, and
cruel etc. Furthermore, with increased public awareness
of privacy protection and updated privacy regulations [21,
57], individuals are now demanding the removal of any
privacy-related information immediately. Therefore, practical model erasing techniques are required upon receiving
a deletion request. In real-world scenarios, these requests
usually originate at any time from both users and model
owners and naturally form a sequence. Under such a setting, selective information is expected to be continuously
removed from a pre-trained model while maintaining the
rest. We identify this novel problem as continual forgetting and illustrate it in Fig. 1, where privacy and wrong
knowledge need to be removed from the pre-trained model

28631

