This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Human Motion Prediction with Symplectic Integral
Haipeng Chen1 , Kedi Lyu1B , Zhenguang Liu2B , Yifang Yin3B , Xun Yang 4 , Yingda Lyu 5
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Jilin University, Changchun, China
2
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
3
Institute for Infocomm Research (I2 R), A*STAR, Singapore
4
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
5
Public Computer Education and Research Center, Jilin University, Changchun, China
lvkd19@mails.jlu.edu.cn, {chenhp, ydlv}@jlu.edu.cn, liuzhenguang2008@gmail.com,
yin yifang@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, xyang21@ustc.edu.cn

0

Abstract
Long-term and accurate forecasting is the long-standing
pursuit of the human motion prediction task. Existing methods typically suffer from dramatic degradation in prediction
accuracy with increasing prediction horizon. It comes down
to two reasons: 1) Insufficient numerical stability caused by
unforeseen high noise and complex feature relationships in
the data, and 2) Inadequate modeling stability caused by
unreasonable step sizes and undesirable parameter updates
in the prediction. In this paper, we design a novel and symplectic integral-inspired framework named symplectic integral neural network (SINN), which engages symplectic trajectories to optimize the pose representation and employs
a stable symplectic operator to alternately model the dynamic context. Specifically, we design a Symplectic Representation Encoder that performs on enhanced human pose
representation to obtain trajectories on the symplectic manifold, ensuring numerical stability based on Hamiltonian
mechanics and symplectic spatial splitting algorithm. We
further present the Symplectic Temporal Aggregation module, which splits the long-term prediction into multiple accurate short-term predictions generated by a symplectic
operator to secure modeling stability. Moreover, our approach is model-agnostic and can be efficiently integrated
with different physical dynamics models. The experimental
results demonstrate that our method achieves the new stateof-the-art, outperforming existing methods by 20.1% on Human3.6M, 16.7% on CUM Mocap, and 10.2% on 3DPW.

1. Introduction
Anticipating future human motions based on historical observations presents a crucial and formidable issue in the
B Corresponding author.

25

50

100

Frames
Ideal Results

Smoking on H3.6M dataset. As an example, we show different
trajectories for hand joint.
0.4

200

Displacement

Ours

Current
SOTA
methods

solid lines

dashed lines
500

Errors

Frames

-0.4

(a)

A degradation issue: with the prediction term
increasing, accuracy degrades rapidly. This is
common in existing methods.

0

50

100

(b)

The solid lines are the trajectories on the symplectic
manifold. The dashed lines are the trajectories in
Euclidean space.

Figure 1. Illustration of human motion prediction challenges. (a)
Existing methods suffer from significant long-term performance
degradation. (b) Conventional motion representation is not numerically stable.

realm of computer vision, particularly in scenarios such as
collision avoidance or handshake interactions. Owing to
its paramount significance, machine learning-driven human
motion prediction has witnessed a surge in research efforts,
yielding a diverse range of practical applications encompassing human-computer interaction, motion synthesis, and
autonomous driving [4, 24, 37, 44, 46, 51]
Drawing on the advancements in neural networks, early
methods (e.g., [3, 7, 8, 16, 34, 43]) have employed recurrent neural networks (RNNs) [36] such as Long Short-Term
Memory (LSTM) [14] and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU)
[5] to realise human motion prediction as a vanilla temporal prediction issue. Despite the impressive performance,
the extension of such methods to complex pose sequences
still remains challenging due to the intricate kinematic and
anatomical nature of human motions. With all this in mind,
researchers have endeavored to incorporate prior knowledge (kinematics and anatomy) to strengthen existing solutions, such as utilizing graph Graph convolutional networks (GCN) [22, 23, 41, 47, 50] to capture spatial depen-

2134

