This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TexVocab: Texture Vocabulary-conditioned Human Avatars
Yuxiao Liu1 Zhe Li2 Yebin Liu2 Haoqian Wang1
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 2 Tsinghua University

Figure 1. Overview of TexVocab. Given multi-view RGB videos of one character, we construct a texture vocabulary, and create realistic
animatable human avatars.

Abstract
To adequately utilize the available image evidence
in multi-view video-based avatar modeling, we propose
TexVocab, a novel avatar representation that constructs a
texture vocabulary and associates body poses with texture
maps for animation. Given multi-view RGB videos, our
method initially back-projects all the available images in
the training videos to the posed SMPL surface, producing texture maps in the SMPL UV domain. Then we construct pairs of human poses and texture maps to establish a texture vocabulary for encoding dynamic human appearances under various poses. Unlike the commonly used
joint-wise manner, we further design a body-part-wise encoding strategy to learn the structural effects of the kinematic chain. Given a driving pose, we query the pose feature hierarchically by decomposing the pose vector into
several body parts and interpolating the texture features
for synthesizing fine-grained human dynamics. Overall,
our method is able to create animatable avatars with detailed and dynamic appearances from RGB videos, and
the experiments show that our method outperforms stateof-the-art approaches. The project page can be found at
https://texvocab.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Animatable human avatar modeling attracts a lot of attention due to its enormous potential in AR/VR applications

including games, movies and holoportation. Animatable
human avatars usually take the skeletal body pose as the input signal and output the pose-conditioned dynamic human
appearances. However, how to effectively learn the mapping between the driving signals and dynamic appearances
is still full of challenges.
Previous works [24, 71] usually directly map the pose input, e.g., the pose vectors, to the human appearances using
a conditional neural radiance field (NeRF) [37] represented
by an MLP. However, the pose input does not involve any
information about dynamic human appearances, so it remains difficult for NeRF MLPs to regress high-fidelity dynamic details solely from the pose input. Although some
works [26, 44, 64] propose to auto-decode [40] latent embeddings to encode the dynamic appearances at the input
end of NeRF, they still suffer from the limited representation ability of global codes [44] or feature lines [26], resulting in blurry synthesized avatars.
On the other hand, image-based reconstruction methods
like pixelNeRF [69] and SparseFusion [73] have already
proved that taking pixel-aligned features as the input of
NeRF can significantly improve the quality and details for
static scene rendering. Inspired by these image-conditioned
representations, we propose TexVocab, a texture vocabulary
that adequately utilizes explicit image evidence to guide
the implicit conditional NeRF to learn the dynamics from
expressive texture conditions. To associate the multi-view
images with the dynamic human body, we back-project all
the available images of corresponding training poses to the

1715

