This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Feature 3DGS: Supercharging 3D Gaussian Splatting to Enable Distilled Feature
Fields
Shijie Zhou1 Haoran Chang1 * Sicheng Jiang1 * Zhiwen Fan2 Zehao Zhu2 Dejia Xu2
Pradyumna Chari1 Suya You3 Zhangyang Wang2 Achuta Kadambi1
1

University of California, Los Angeles

2

University of Texas at Austin

Semantic Segmentation

3

DEVCOM Army Research Laboratory

Language-guided Editing
"Delete the car"

Radiance Field

Promptable Segment Anything
3D Gaussian Splatting

Promptless Segment Everything

2D Foundation Models

Feature Field

Figure 1. Feature 3DGS. We present a general method that significantly enhances 3D Gaussian Splatting through the integration of large
2D foundation models via feature field distillation. This advancement extends the capabilities of 3D Gaussian Splatting beyond mere novel
view synthesis. It now encompasses a range of functionalities, including semantic segmentation, language-guided editing, and promptable
segmentations such as “segment anything” or automatic segmentation of everything from any novel view. Scene from [13].

Abstract
3D scene representations have gained immense popularity in recent years. Methods that use Neural Radiance fields
are versatile for traditional tasks such as novel view synthesis. In recent times, some work has emerged that aims
to extend the functionality of NeRF beyond view synthesis,
for semantically aware tasks such as editing and segmentation using 3D feature field distillation from 2D foundation
* Equal contribution.

models. However, these methods have two major limitations: (a) they are limited by the rendering speed of NeRF
pipelines, and (b) implicitly represented feature fields suffer from continuity artifacts reducing feature quality. Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting has shown state-of-the-art
performance on real-time radiance field rendering. In this
work, we go one step further: in addition to radiance field
rendering, we enable 3D Gaussian splatting on arbitrarydimension semantic features via 2D foundation model distillation. This translation is not straightforward: naively in-

21676

