This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

U-VAP: User-specified Visual Appearance Personalization via
Decoupled Self Augmentation
You Wu, Kean Liu, Xiaoyue Mi, Fan Tang1∗ , Juan Cao, Jintao Li
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS
China

DreamBooth

DreamBooth

GPT-4V

GPT-4V

wuyou22s@ict.ac.cn, liukean22@mails.ucas.ac.cn, (tangfan,mixiaoyue19s,caojuan,jtli)@ict.ac.cn

Input

Ours

Ours

{Flower}

{Shoes}

{Plate}

{Car}

{Lamp}

{Apple}

Figure 1. Given a reference image, U-VAP can personalize the user-specified visual appearances and combine them with some novel
concepts. U-VAP generates images with the material (left) or color (right) extracted from the input image of a rabbit statue (middle) and
achieves better accuracy and controllability in several new concepts.

Abstract
Concept personalization methods enable large textto-image models to learn specific subjects (e.g., objects/poses/3D models) and synthesize renditions in new
contexts. Given that the image references are highly biased
towards visual attributes, state-of-the-art personalization
models tend to overfit the whole subject and cannot disentangle visual characteristics in pixel space. In this study, we
proposed a more challenging setting, namely fine-grained
visual appearance personalization. Different from existing
methods, we allow users to provide a sentence describing
the desired attributes. A novel decoupled self-augmentation
strategy is proposed to generate target-related and nontarget samples to learn user-specified visual attributes.
These augmented data allow for refining the model’s under* Corresponding author: Fan Tang.

standing of the target attribute while mitigating the impact
of unrelated attributes. At the inference stage, adjustments
are conducted on semantic space through the learned target and non-target embeddings to further enhance the disentanglement of target attributes. Extensive experiments on
various kinds of visual attributes with SOTA personalization
methods show the ability of the proposed method to mimic
target visual appearance in novel contexts, thus improving
the controllability and flexibility of personalization. Project
page: https://github.com/ICTMCG/U-VAP.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in text-to-image models [31, 34, 35,
37] allow the generation of both fantastical and realistic
high-resolution visual media from mere textual prompts. To
meet users’ customized generation needs, personalization

9482

