This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fourier-basis functions to bridge augmentation gap:
Rethinking frequency augmentation in image classification
Puru Vaish∗

Shunxin Wang∗ Nicola Strisciuglio
University of Twente

{p.vaish, s.wang-2, n.strisciuglio}@utwente.nl

Abstract
Computer vision models normally witness degraded performance when deployed in real-world scenarios, due to
unexpected changes in inputs that were not accounted for
during training. Data augmentation is commonly used to
address this issue, as it aims to increase data variety and
reduce the distribution gap between training and test data.
However, common visual augmentations might not guarantee extensive robustness of computer vision models. In this
paper, we propose Auxiliary Fourier-basis Augmentation
(AFA), a complementary technique targeting augmentation
in the frequency domain and filling the robustness gap left
by visual augmentations. We demonstrate the utility of augmentation via Fourier-basis additive noise in a straightforward and efficient adversarial setting. Our results show
that AFA benefits the robustness of models against common
corruptions, OOD generalization, and consistency of performance of models against increasing perturbations, with
negligible deficit to the standard performance of models. It
can be seamlessly integrated with other augmentation techniques to further boost performance. Codes and models are
available at https://github.com/nis-research/afa-augment.

1. Introduction
Computer vision models usually encounter performance
degradation when deployed in real-world scenarios due to
unexpected image variations [10, 14, 17]. Improving the
robustness of computer vision models to out-of-distribution
(OOD) data is thus essential for their reliable practical use.
Among the methods addressing the robustness and generalization of computer vision models [1, 8, 9, 11, 38, 39, 47,
50, 53], data augmentation is mostly used for its easy-toapply characteristics and effectiveness at reducing the distribution gap between training and test data [45]. Popular augmentation techniques, such as AugMix [15], AugMax [42], AutoAugment [2], TrivialAugment [34], and
* Equal contribution

X AFA
X Vis. Aug.
X

Figure 1. Frequency augmentation with Fourier-basis functions
is complementary to common visual augmentations. They appear
unnatural and can be used as adversarial examples.

PRIME [33] have shown great improvements in corruption and perturbation robustness benchmarks and OOD
datasets for generalisation, e.g. ImageNet-C, ImageNet-C̄,
ImageNet-3DCC, ImageNet-P, ImageNet-R and ImageNetv2 [13, 14, 18, 32, 35]. These approaches mainly focus
on adding visual variations to images through random or
policy-based combinations [2, 15, 16, 26, 27, 30, 31, 34]
of visual transformations aiming at increasing the diversity
of training images (expanding on their domain, see visual
augmentations in Fig. 1), and adversarial-based augmentations, which address the hardness of training samples but
are computationally heavy (see Tab. 1, AugMax). However, even if trained with visual augmentations, models are
still sensitive to image variations not included in the training [25] and frequency perturbations [49]. This occurs due
to the pre-defined frequency characteristics of visual transformations, which cannot ensure the complete robustness of
models against noise with different frequency characteristics from those encountered during training. Attackers may
exploit this weakness and degrade model performance in
operational settings [23]. This raises a question: Is there a
complementary augmentation technique that can bridge the
gap left by visual augmentations?

17763

