This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GenZI: Zero-Shot 3D Human-Scene Interaction Generation
Lei Li
Angela Dai
Technical University of Munich

“riding a motorcycle, sitting”

“hands knocking on the closed
door, facing the door, standing”

“stretching legs and sitting on
the saddle on a standing cow”

“picking up dumbbells on a
shelf, standing, bending over”

Figure 1. Given an arbitrary 3D scene, GenZI can synthesize virtual humans interacting with the 3D environment at specified locations
from a brief text description. Our approach does not require any 3D human-scene interaction training data or 3D learning. By distilling
interaction priors from powerful 2D vision-language models, we optimize for 3D human-scene interaction synthesis in a flexible fashion,
with simple language-based control and high generality to various types of scene environments.

Abstract
Can we synthesize 3D humans interacting with scenes
without learning from any 3D human-scene interaction
data? We propose GenZI1 , the first zero-shot approach to
generating 3D human-scene interactions. Key to GenZI
is our distillation of interaction priors from large visionlanguage models (VLMs), which have learned a rich semantic space of 2D human-scene compositions. Given a natural language description and a coarse point location of the
desired interaction in a 3D scene, we first leverage VLMs
to imagine plausible 2D human interactions inpainted into
multiple rendered views of the scene. We then formulate
a robust iterative optimization to synthesize the pose and
shape of a 3D human model in the scene, guided by consistency with the 2D interaction hypotheses. In contrast to
existing learning-based approaches, GenZI circumvents the
conventional need for captured 3D interaction data, and allows for flexible control of the 3D interaction synthesis with
easy-to-use text prompts. Extensive experiments show that
our zero-shot approach has high flexibility and generality,
making it applicable to diverse scene types, including both
indoor and outdoor environments.
1 Project page: craigleili.github.io/projects/genzi

1. Introduction
Scenes are typically constructed to enable human interactions with the environment, like sitting on a couch, playing
a piano, or opening a mailbox. Understanding these interactions between humans and scenes, also known as affordances [9, 17], has gained increasing attention in the fields
of computer vision and graphics. In particular, achieving
controllable and generalizable synthesis of human-scene interactions (or HSIs) holds immense potential for various
applications, such as robotics, architectural design, video
games, and virtual reality experiences, among many others.
Generating realistic humans interacting with a 3D scene
is a challenging task, requiring holistic semantic understanding of both the environment and possible human actions therein. Existing approaches to HSI synthesis [11, 46,
50, 51] rely heavily on supervised training using meticulously captured data of real people interacting in 3D environments. Unfortunately, collecting large-scale datasets of
3D scenes and human interactions is exorbitantly difficult.
It not only demands accurate tracking and reconstruction
of both people and their environments, but also needs to ensure sufficient diversity in subjects and scenes. Existing HSI
datasets currently contain very limited quantities of scenes
and actions, for example, PROX [10, 51] only consisting

20465

