This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gaussian-Flow: 4D Reconstruction with Dynamic 3D Gaussian Particle
Youtian Lin1,2
Zuozhuo Dai3
Siyu Zhu4
Yao Yao1,2B
1
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, China
3
Alibaba Group
4
Fudan University

Figure 1. Dynamic reconstruction results of the proposed Gaussian-Flow on the monocular D-NeRF [30] and HyperNeRF Dataset [28]
(left) and the multi-view Plenoptic Dataset [18] (right). Our method achieves a 5⇥ faster training and rendering speed compared with the
per-frame 3DGS modeling and significantly outperforms previous methods in novel view rendering quality.

Abstract
We introduce Gaussian-Flow, a novel point-based approach for fast dynamic scene reconstruction and real-time
rendering from both multi-view and monocular videos. In
contrast to the prevalent NeRF-based approaches hampered
by slow training and rendering speeds, our approach harnesses recent advancements in point-based 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS). Specifically, a novel Dual-Domain Deformation Model (DDDM) is proposed to explicitly model
attribute deformations of each Gaussian point, where the
time-dependent residual of each attribute is captured by a
polynomial fitting in the time domain, and a Fourier series
fitting in the frequency domain. The proposed DDDM is capable of modeling complex scene deformations across long
video footage, eliminating the need for training separate
3DGS for each frame or introducing an additional implicit
neural field to model 3D dynamics. Moreover, the explicit
deformation modeling for discretized Gaussian points en-

sures ultra-fast training and rendering of a 4D scene, which
is comparable to the original 3DGS designed for static
3D reconstruction. Our proposed approach showcases a
substantial efficiency improvement, achieving a 5⇥ faster
training speed compared to the per-frame 3DGS modeling.
In addition, quantitative results demonstrate that the proposed Gaussian-Flow significantly outperforms previous
leading methods in novel view rendering quality. Project
page: https://nju-3dv.github.io/projects/
Gaussian-Flow.

1. Introduction
In the realm of digital scene synthesis, achieving a balance
between high-quality reconstructions and real-time rendering is paramount, especially for applications like virtual reality (VR) playback, where immediate feedback and immersive experiences are essential. Neural Radiance Fields

21136

