This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FairDeDup: Detecting and Mitigating Vision-Language
Fairness Disparities in Semantic Dataset Deduplication

1. Introduction
Recent Vision-Language Pretrained (VLP) models [55] that
learn to align image and language encodings have demonstrated strong zero-shot performance on many standard perception tasks [12, 16, 71, 73]. Beyond these, VLP models have enabled complex downstream applications ranging
from visually-aware chatbots [42, 44] and language-based
image segmentation [37, 79] to instruction-guided robotics
[62, 69] and semantic mapping of 3D scenes [35, 61].
The rapid adoption and widespread impact of these models is due in part to the incredibly broad range of content
they can represent effectively – a scope far exceeding prior
models trained on manually-curated, closed-world datasets
[16, 43]. To acquire this capability, VLP models are trained
on massive open-world datasets of image-caption pairs collected from the internet [58]. VLP models improve reliably
* Work conducted during Slyman’s 2023 summer internship at Adobe.

Zero-Shot ImageNet
(Accuracy@5 ↑)
89.9%

89.7%

Zero-Shot FACET
(Gender Disparity in Recall ↓)

89.7%

.346
.303

.113

.109
Average

Average

.104

.298

Average

Task Performance

Recent dataset deduplication techniques have demonstrated that content-aware dataset pruning can dramatically reduce the cost of training Vision-Language Pretrained (VLP) models without significant performance
losses compared to training on the original dataset. These
results have been based on pruning commonly used imagecaption datasets collected from the web – datasets that
are known to harbor harmful social biases that may then
be codified in trained models. In this work, we evaluate
how deduplication affects the prevalence of these biases
in the resulting trained models and introduce an easy-toimplement modification to the recent SemDeDup algorithm
that can reduce the negative effects that we observe. When
examining CLIP-style models trained on deduplicated variants of LAION-400M, we find our proposed FairDeDup
algorithm consistently leads to improved fairness metrics
over SemDeDup on the FairFace and FACET datasets while
maintaining zero-shot performance on CLIP benchmarks.

Adobe Research

LAION-400M

SemDeDup

FairDeDup

LAION-400M

SemDeDup

FairDeDup

(100% Data)

(50% Data)

(50% Data)

(100% Data)

(50% Data)

(50% Data)

Equality of Oppourtunity

Abstract

2

Worst-Class

Department of EECS, Oregon State University

Kushal Kafle2

Worst-Class

1

Scott Cohen2

Worst-Class
Worst-Group

Eric Slyman1,2 * Stefan Lee1

Figure 1. Training models on deduplicated data can yield similar results to the full-data setting on standard tasks like zero-shot
ImageNet [16] classification (left, higher is better ↑). However,
impacts on subgroup performance have not been studied. We discover cases such as gender disparity (right, lower is better ↓)
where deduplication reinforces existing biases on FACET [26].
FairDeDup preserves performance while reducing bias from deduplication and, in some cases, w.r.t. the full-data setting.

with additional training data [13], driving the number of examples in these datasets into the billions [59]. This scale
of uncurated data introduces at least two challenges – 1)
training can be extremely costly, and 2) manual data curation to reduce undesirable social biases is economically
prohibitive. In this work, we explore how dataset deduplication techniques developed to reduce training costs may
exacerbate or ameliorate these biases in trained models.
While larger pretraining datasets generally yield better model performance [13], the massive web-scraped
datasets commonly used for training VLP models contain
many identical samples (duplicates) or samples that capture
nearly the same content under similar imaging conditions
(semantic duplicates [1]). Several recently developed techniques for data pruning/deduplication have demonstrated
that aggressive removal of these duplicates has limited im-

13905

