This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open3DSG: Open-Vocabulary 3D Scene Graphs from Point Clouds
with Queryable Objects and Open-Set Relationships
Sebastian Koch1,2,3
Narunas Vaskevicius1,2
Mirco Colosi2
4
3
Pedro Hermosilla
Timo Ropinski
1

Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence

2

Robert Bosch Corporate Research

3

University of Ulm

4

TU Vienna

kochsebastian.com/open3dsg

Abstract

3D scene graphs are an emergent graph-based representation facilitating various 3D scene understanding tasks. In
contrast to other more object-centric 3D scene representations, the key advantage of 3D scene graphs is the ability to
also represent relationships between scene entities, such as
for instance objects in a room. These relationships can be
useful for a variety of different downstream tasks in computer vision or robotics, such as place recognition, change
detection, task planning and more [1, 26, 34, 44, 53]. However, the exploitation of 3D scene graphs is limited by their
availability.
Given their complexity and high-level abstraction, 3D

d
nte

u

How are
TV and Wall related?

mo

TV

on Wall

Open-Vocab.

1. Introduction

TV

Supervised

Current approaches for 3D scene graph prediction rely
on labeled datasets to train models for a fixed set of known
object classes and relationship categories. We present
Open3DSG, an alternative approach to learn 3D scene
graph prediction in an open world without requiring labeled
scene graph data. We co-embed the features from a 3D scene
graph prediction backbone with the feature space of powerful open world 2D vision language foundation models.
This enables us to predict 3D scene graphs from 3D point
clouds in a zero-shot manner by querying object classes
from an open vocabulary and predicting the inter-object
relationships from a grounded LLM with scene graph features and queried object classes as context. Open3DSG is
the first 3D point cloud method to predict not only explicit
open-vocabulary object classes, but also open-set relationships that are not limited to a predefined label set, making
it possible to express rare as well as specific objects and
relationships in the predicted 3D scene graph. Our experiments show that Open3DSG is effective at predicting arbitrary object classes as well as their complex inter-object
relationships describing spatial, supportive, semantic and
comparative relationships.

Wall

on

Figure 1. Open3DSG. We present Open3DSG the first approach
for learning to predict open-vocabulary 3D scene graphs from 3D
point clouds. The advantage of our method is that it can be queried
and prompted for any instance in the scene, such as the TV and
Wall, to predict fine-grained semantic descriptions of objects and
relationships. By considering all instance pairs in the scene, we can
reconstruct a complete explicit open-vocabulary 3D scene graph.

scene graphs are hard to predict by learned models. The
state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods for 3D scene graph prediction are limited to a fixed set of object and relationship
labels provided by small-scale datasets. This reduces their
effectiveness in downstream applications, which often require semantic reasoning on concepts extending beyond a
rather narrow scope of training data. Furthermore, one of
the most useful properties of scene graphs is their ability
to represent relationships between scene entities. There are
multiple ways of describing a relationship between two objects, e.g. spatial, comparative, semantic, etc. The relevance
of the type of relationship is dictated by the downstream
task. However, in a closed-set supervised training setting
this choice is made and fixed in advance.
Open-vocabulary 3D scene understanding methods propose a solution towards these challenges by training a model
not on a fixed label set but rather aligning the 3D model
with 2D foundation models [14, 15, 18, 20, 31, 41]. By doing so, e.g. with foundation models such as CLIP [33], the
3D model can express nearly the same broad vocabulary

14183

