This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HDRFlow: Real-Time HDR Video Reconstruction with Large Motions
Gangwei Xu1,2 ,* Yujin Wang2 ,* Jinwei Gu3 , Tianfan Xue3 , Xin Yang1†
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
Shanghai AI Laboratory 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
1

2

{gwxu, xinyang2014}@hust.edu.cn, wangyujin@pjlab.org.cn
{jwgu@cse, tfxue@ie}.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Reconstructing High Dynamic Range (HDR) video from
image sequences captured with alternating exposures is
challenging, especially in the presence of large camera
or object motion. Existing methods typically align low
dynamic range sequences using optical flow or attention
mechanism for deghosting. However, they often struggle
to handle large complex motions and are computationally expensive. To address these challenges, we propose
a robust and efficient flow estimator tailored for real-time
HDR video reconstruction, named HDRFlow. HDRFlow
has three novel designs: an HDR-domain alignment loss
(HALoss), an efficient flow network with a multi-size large
kernel (MLK), and a new HDR flow training scheme. The
HALoss supervises our flow network to learn an HDRoriented flow for accurate alignment in saturated and dark
regions. The MLK can effectively model large motions at a
negligible cost. In addition, we incorporate synthetic data,
Sintel, into our training dataset, utilizing both its provided
forward flow and backward flow generated by us to supervise our flow network, enhancing our performance in large
motion regions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that
our HDRFlow outperforms previous methods on standard
benchmarks. To the best of our knowledge, HDRFlow is the
first real-time HDR video reconstruction method for video
sequences captured with alternating exposures, capable of
processing 720p resolution inputs at 25ms. Project website:
https://openimaginglab.github.io/HDRFlow/.

1. Introduction
Capturing a high dynamic range (HDR) natural scene using a standard digital camera with a limited dynamic range
(LDR) often yields undesirable results: either details in
* Equal contribution. This work was done when Gangwei Xu interned
at Shanghai AI Laboratory.
† Corresponding author.

!"#

!"$

!!
!#
!$
Input LDR images

RAFT+fusion
(920ms)

Kalantari et al.
(220ms)

Our Result

Chen et al.
(540ms)

Ours
(50ms)

Figure 1. Row 2: the optical flow from frame 0 to frame -1. Row
3: the resulting HDR images. The methods of Kalantari et al. [14]
and Chen et al. [2] struggle to predict accurate optical flow due
to large motions, resulting in ghosting artifacts in the HDR output. In contrast, our HDRFlow predicts HDR-oriented optical flow
and exhibits robustness to large motions. We compare our HDRoriented flow with RAFT’s [34] flow. RAFT’s flow is sub-optimal
for HDR fusion, and alignment may fail in occluded regions, leading to significant ghosting artifacts in the HDR output.

highlights are missing or shadows are too dark. The most
prevalent solution to this issue is video HDR fusion, which
merges multiple LDR images with varying exposures. With
recent advances in deep learning, video HDR fusion has become a popular solution for HDR capturing and has been
extensively used on recent mobile cameras.
However, in the presence of large motion, video HDR
fusion algorithms still face two main challenges: achieving
robust artifact-free merging and ensuring efficient processing for real-time applications. Large motions are common
in amateur captures, caused by either camera motion during hand-held capture, or by object motion, such as peo-

24851

