This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Simple Semantic-Aided Few-Shot Learning
Hai Zhang1 * Junzhe Xu1,2 *‡ Shanlin Jiang3 Zhenan He1†
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University
2
Banma Network Technology, Alibaba Group
3
Naveen Jindal School of Management, University of Texas at Dallas
zhanghi@stu.scu.edu.cn, xujunzhe.xjz@alibaba-inc.com
shanlin.jiang@utdallas.edu, zhenan@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
Learning from a limited amount of data, namely FewShot Learning, stands out as a challenging computer vision
task. Several works exploit semantics and design complicated semantic fusion mechanisms to compensate for rare
representative features within restricted data. However, relying on naive semantics such as class names introduces biases due to their brevity, while acquiring extensive semantics from external knowledge takes a huge time and effort.
This limitation severely constrains the potential of semantics in Few-Shot Learning. In this paper, we design an automatic way called Semantic Evolution to generate highquality semantics. The incorporation of high-quality semantics alleviates the need for complex network structures
and learning algorithms used in previous works. Hence,
we employ a simple two-layer network termed Semantic
Alignment Network to transform semantics and visual features into robust class prototypes with rich discriminative
features for few-shot classification. The experimental results show our framework outperforms all previous methods on six benchmarks, demonstrating a simple network
with high-quality semantics can beat intricate multi-modal
modules on few-shot classification tasks. Code is available at https://github.com/zhangdoudou123/
SemFew.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have witnessed substantial advancements by leveraging extensive annotated data [8]. Nevertheless, in numerous real-world scenarios, the shortage of
labeled data restricts the applicability of conventional deep
learning approaches. In contrast, humans possess a remarkable cognitive ability to learn new concepts and recognize
* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Author.
‡ Work done during master’s degree at Sichuan University.

categories from just a few examples [3]. Motivated by this,
Few-Shot Learning (FSL) [46] is proposed to mimic the
ability of humans to learn from a few labeled samples.
In a typical setting of FSL [46], the support set, which
consists of N novel classes and each class contains K samples, is provided for the model. The model learned on the
support set is required to accurately classify test samples,
which are labeled as the query set, into one of the N categories. A conventional classification approach involves projecting both support and query sets onto a pre-established
metric space. Then, query images are classified by finding
the nearest support image. However, few support samples
may not contain sufficient discriminative features for recognition. These samples are typically located on the periphery
of the sample cluster in the metric space, resulting in unstable distance evaluations and inaccurate classification.
To address this issue, researchers start from visual-based
methods [7, 11, 13, 16, 19, 29, 32, 37, 46, 49, 53, 60],
aiming at extracting class-related features from periphery
image, reducing the intra-class variation among samples,
and thus constructing robust features for classification. Although visual-based methods have undergone extensive investigation and achieved great success, this type of approach still struggles to handle situations when there is only
one hard periphery sample with minimal semantic features
per class, i.e., the one-shot learning task [25, 53]. Hence,
some researchers turned to applying semantics as auxiliary
information to help the model better understand periphery
images, leveraging the synergies between language and vision modalities.
From this perspective, semantic-based methods [5, 28,
38, 44, 50, 56–59, 61] dedicated to exploring different types
of semantics to enhance periphery samples. One kind of
method [57–59] applies the class name as the semantic
source. However, class name is not the best way to understand a novel class. For instance, If a person never saw
a zebra, it would be easier to identify a zebra by the definition, i.e., a horse with stripes, than by the name zebra.

28588

