This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Selectively Informative Description can Reduce Undesired Embedding
Entanglements in Text-to-Image Personalization
Jimyeong Kim1
Jungwon Park1
Wonjong Rhee1,2,3
1
2
Department of Intelligence and Information & IPAI & RICS3 , Seoul National University
{wlaud1001, quoded97, wrhee}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In text-to-image personalization, a timely and crucial
challenge is the tendency of generated images overfitting
to the biases present in the reference images. We initiate
our study with a comprehensive categorization of the biases
into background, nearby-object, tied-object, substance (in
style re-contextualization), and pose biases. These biases
manifest in the generated images due to their entanglement
into the subject embedding. This undesired embedding entanglement not only results in the reflection of biases from
the reference images into the generated images but also notably diminishes the alignment of the generated images with
the given generation prompt. To address this challenge, we
propose SID (Selectively Informative Description), a text
description strategy that deviates from the prevalent approach of only characterizing the subject’s class identification. SID is generated utilizing multimodal GPT-4 and
can be seamlessly integrated into optimization-based models. We present comprehensive experimental results along
with analyses of cross-attention maps, subject-alignment,
non-subject-disentanglement, and text-alignment.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image diffusion models [5, 7, 11, 25, 30, 35, 40,
42, 43, 46] have demonstrated remarkable generation capabilities that align with textual descriptions across various
applications. One such application is text-to-image personalization [12, 24, 45], where models are tailored to generate novel renditions of subjects described in a few reference
images. Recent works, such as DreamBooth [45] or Custom
Diffusion [24], stand out for their exceptional personalized
generation results. They achieve this by fine-tuning a pretrained text-to-image diffusion model with a small number
of reference images using a text description in the format of
“a [v] [class name]” or “photo of a [v] [class name].” In this
context, [v] represents the subject’s unique identifier, which
uses a rare token with minimal semantic significance, while

the class descriptor [class name] represents a coarse category for the subject.
Recent developments in text-to-image personalization
can be categorized into optimization-based approaches [12,
15, 24, 45, 57] and encoder-based approaches [21, 26, 50,
62]. For both types of approaches, a problem typically addressed as ‘overfitting’ has emerged [2, 15, 21, 26, 45, 57].
It is a phenomenon where objects, other than the subject of
interest, in the reference images affect the generated image
in an undesired way. For the sake of clarity, we refer to such
an entity as ‘non-subject’ or ‘undesired object’. The cause
of this phenomenon is closely related to the embedding of
the identifier token [v] for optimization-based approaches
and the embedding of the subject for encoder-based models,
where the information related to any non-subject seeps into
the embeddings. Rather than referring to it as overfitting, we
formally address this phenomenon as undesired embedding
entanglement.
The phenomenon of undesired embedding entanglement
has been noticed, but it has been only superficially understood so far. A potential explanation for the limited understanding is the rarity of this phenomenon in straightforward scenarios. Instances where reference images encompass diverse subject views and minimal undesired objects
are much less prone to this phenomenon. However, such an
ideal scenario is highly unlikely in real-world applications.
Therefore, it is crucial to comprehensively understand the
biases and develop counter methods to address them effectively. In an effort to gain a more thorough understanding
of the prevalent biases contributing to these entanglements,
we conducted exhaustive paper reviews followed by extensive experiments utilizing state-of-the-art models. The resulting identification of the five most commonly encountered biases is presented in Fig. 1. While we have chosen
DreamBooth [45] for generating the examples in Fig. 1, additional examples for Custom Diffusion [24], SVDiff [15],
ELITE [62] and BLIP-Diffusion [26] will be provided later.
In prior studies, several models [2, 21, 26, 50, 62] have
employed segmentation masks. However, depending exclusively on segmentation masks comes with limitations, as we

8312

