This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Visual Continual Learning with Language-Guided Supervision
⋆

⋆

Bolin Ni1,2 , Hongbo Zhao1,2 , Chenghao Zhang1,2 , Ke Hu2
Gaofeng Meng1,2,3† , Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3 , Shiming Xiang1,2
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
2
3

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences.

Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HK Institute of Science & Innovation, Chinese Academy of Sciences.

CVPR camera ready & arxiv 版本
nibolin2019@ia.ac.cn

Previous Task t-1

Current Task t

Typical CL methods: randomly initialized classifier
: Trainable

Future Task t+1

Buffer
Buffer

image
1…t-1

(Optional)

(Optional)

Vision
Model t

Image t

Cls t

{eagle}
{plane}

Image t

Feature space

(a) Method w/ One-hot Supervision

Potential Tasks

Language supervised method: classifier with rich semantics
: Frozen

Cls: classifier

gfmeng@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Category t

Cls: classifier
image
1…t-1
Vision
Model t

PLM

Cls t

semantic
targets

rich semantics

Feature space

(b) Method w/ Language Supervision (ours)

(c) Performance Diagram

Figure 1. We introduce LingoCL, a simple yet effective continual learning paradigm leveraging language-guided supervision, which can be
integrated into most existing approaches seamlessly. (a) Overview of the typical methods which are supervised only by one-hot labels. (b)
Overview of the proposed LingoCL which is supervised by semantic targets generated from the pretrained language model. (c) LingoCL is
versatile, which significantly enhances the performance of mainstream methods in class-, task- and domain-incremental scenarios.

Abstract
Continual learning (CL) aims to empower models to learn
new tasks without forgetting previously acquired knowledge.
Most prior works concentrate on the techniques of architectures, replay data, regularization, etc. However, the category
name of each class is largely neglected. Existing methods
commonly utilize the one-hot labels and randomly initialize
the classifier head. We argue that the scarce semantic information conveyed by the one-hot labels hampers the effective
knowledge transfer across tasks. In this paper, we revisit the
role of the classifier head within the CL paradigm and replace the classifier with semantic knowledge from pretrained
language models (PLMs). Specifically, we use PLMs to generate semantic targets for each class, which are frozen and
serve as supervision signals during training. Such targets
fully consider the semantic correlation between all classes
across tasks. Empirical studies show that our approach
mitigates forgetting by alleviating representation drifting
and facilitating knowledge transfer across tasks. The pro⋆ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

posed method is simple to implement and can seamlessly be
plugged into existing methods with negligible adjustments.
Extensive experiments based on eleven mainstream baselines demonstrate the effectiveness and generalizability of
our approach to various protocols. For example, under the
class-incremental learning setting on ImageNet-100, our
method significantly improves the Top-1 accuracy by 3.2%
to 6.1% while reducing the forgetting rate by 2.6% to 13.1%.

1. Introduction
The main challenge in continual learning (CL) is catastrophic forgetting, where models experience significant performance degradation on earlier tasks when new tasks are
introduced. To address this, researchers have developed various strategies, including architecture-based [26, 27, 39, 49],
replay-based [3, 35, 40], distillation-based [12, 16, 38], and
regularization-based methods [7, 22, 52], alongside other
notable contributions [21, 47].
However, most existing approaches overlook the significance of the semantic knowledge contained in category
names. The prevailing trend in prior work leans towards

24068

