This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Time-, Memory- and Parameter-Efficient Visual Adaptation
Otniel-Bogdan Mercea1, 2 *

Alexey Gritsenko1
Cordelia Schmid1
1
2
Google
University of Tübingen

Anurag Arnab1†
2.00

84

1. Introduction
Foundation models [3, 6, 9, 35, 42] are becoming the de
facto tools of modern vision systems: Large models, trained
on massive datasets, have diverse abilities across a range of
applications. Such foundation models are typically generalists that perform well in zero- or few-shot settings across
a range of tasks [1, 3]. However, they typically achieve
their best results on individual tasks when finetuned specifically for it, particularly when there is a large domain gap
* Work done during an internship at Google.
† Correspondence to aarnab@google.com.

1.75

82

Normalised Requirements
(lower is better)

As foundation models become more popular, there is a
growing need to efficiently finetune them for downstream
tasks. Although numerous adaptation methods have been
proposed, they are designed to be efficient only in terms
of how many parameters are trained. They, however, typically still require backpropagating gradients throughout the
model, meaning that their training-time and -memory cost
does not reduce as significantly.
We propose an adaptation method which does not backpropagate gradients through the backbone. We achieve this
by designing a lightweight network in parallel that operates on features from the frozen, pretrained backbone. As a
result, our method is efficient not only in terms of parameters, but also in training-time and memory usage. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art accuracy-parameter tradeoffs on the popular VTAB benchmark, and we further show
how we outperform prior works with respect to trainingtime and -memory usage too. We further demonstrate the
training efficiency and scalability of our method by adapting a vision transformer backbone of 4 billion parameters
for the computationally demanding task of video classification, without any intricate model parallelism. Here, we
outperform a prior adaptor-based method which could only
scale to a 1 billion parameter backbone, or fully-finetuning
a smaller backbone, with the same GPU and less training time. To facilitate further research, we release code at
https://github.com/google-research/scenic.

Accuracy, iNaturalist 2021

Abstract

1.50

80
78

1.25

76

1.00

74

0.75

72

0.50
0.25

70
68

Linear
probing

Train sec / img

BitFit

Prompt
Tuning

Inference GFLOPs

Full
finetuning

LoRA

Ours (LoSA)

Param, log10

0.00

Train Memory

Figure 1. Parameter-efficient adaptation methods proposed in
the literature are not necessarily efficient in terms of other efficiency metrics. Prompt-tuning [25], for example, learns only a
few learnable prompt tokens, but is in fact slower than fully finetuning the network due to the added tokens. LoRA [21] and BitFit [52], do not substantially reduce training time as they still need
to backpropagate through the whole network. Our method, LowRank Side Adaptation (LoSA), in contrast, achieves improvements
across multiple efficiency metrics and tasks. Experiments conducted by adapting ViT-g with 1 billion parameters.

to the web-sourced pretraining data [1, 5, 35]. As these
models continue growing, it is crucial to be able to efficiently adapt, or partially finetune, large pretrained models
for downstream tasks. And particulary so for safety-critical
tasks where the highest possible accuracy is critical.
Numerous efficient adaptation methods for large, pretrained models have been proposed in the literature, including LoRA [21], adapters [20, 48] and prompt-tuning [25,
34, 36] among others. These methods are typically designed
to be parameter-efficient, or in other words, learn the smallest number of parameters to achieve high task accuracy.
However, there are numerous other relevant efficiency metrics such as training time and memory usage that are crucial,
as they determine whether the adaptation method is feasible
or not for larger models or low computational resources. As
shown in Fig. 1, although many prior methods dramatically
reduce the number of learned parameters, they typically do
not improve other efficiency metrics like training-time and
memory as significantly. This fact is because even though
they only train a small number of parameters, they still require backpropagating gradients throughout the entire backbone of the pre-trained model. Prompt-tuning [25, 34, 36]
in particular, also adds additional tokens to the network, and
therefore increases the training- and inference-time signifi-

5536

