This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Producing and Leveraging Online Map Uncertainty in Trajectory Prediction
Xunjiang Gu1
Guanyu Song1
Igor Gilitschenski1,2
Marco Pavone3,4
Boris Ivanovic3
1
2
3
4
University of Toronto
Vector Institute
NVIDIA Research
Stanford University
{alfred.gu, guanyu.song}@mail.utoronto.ca, gilitschenski@cs.toronto.edu,
{mpavone, bivanovic}@nvidia.com, pavone@stanford.edu

Abstract
High-definition (HD) maps have played an integral role
in the development of modern autonomous vehicle (AV)
stacks, albeit with high associated labeling and maintenance costs. As a result, many recent works have proposed
methods for estimating HD maps online from sensor data,
enabling AVs to operate outside of previously-mapped regions. However, current online map estimation approaches
are developed in isolation of their downstream tasks, complicating their integration in AV stacks. In particular, they
do not produce uncertainty or confidence estimates. In this
work, we extend multiple state-of-the-art online map estimation methods to additionally estimate uncertainty and
show how this enables more tightly integrating online mapping with trajectory forecasting1 . In doing so, we find that
incorporating uncertainty yields up to 50% faster training
convergence and up to 15% better prediction performance
on the real-world nuScenes driving dataset.

1. Introduction
A critical component of autonomous driving is understanding the static environment, e.g., road layout and connectivity, surrounding the autonomous vehicle (AV). Accordingly, high-definition (HD) maps have been developed to
capture and provide such information, containing semantics
like road boundaries, lane dividers, and road markings at
the centimeter level. In recent years, HD maps have proven
to be indispensable for AV development and deployment,
seeing widespread use today [35]. However, HD maps are
costly to label and maintain over time, and they can only be
used in geofenced areas, limiting AV scalability.
To address these issues, many recent works turn to estimating HD maps online from sensor data. Broadly, they
aim to predict the locations and classes of map elements,
typically as polygons or polylines, all from camera images
and LiDAR scans. However, current online map estimation methods do not produce any associated uncertainty or
confidence information. This is problematic as it causes
1 Code: https://github.com/alfredgu001324/MapUncertaintyPrediction

Figure 1. Producing uncertainty from online HD map estimation
methods and incorporating it in downstream modules yields a variety of benefits. Left: Ground truth HD map and agent positions. Middle: HiVT [41] predictions using the map output by
MapTR [22]. Right: HiVT [41] predictions using the map output by MapTR [22] augmented with point uncertainties (which are
large as the left road boundary is occluded by parked vehicles).

downstream consumers to implicitly assume that inferred
map components are certain, and any mapping errors (e.g.,
shifting or incorrectly-placed map elements) may yield errant downstream behaviors. Towards this end, we propose
to expose map uncertainty from online map estimation approaches and incorporate it in downstream modules. Concretely, we incorporate map uncertainty into trajectory prediction and find significant performance improvements in
combined mapper-predictor systems with map uncertainty
(Fig. 1) compared to those without.
Contributions. Our core contributions are threefold:
First, we propose a general vectorized map uncertainty formulation and extend multiple state-of-the-art online map
estimation methods to additionally output uncertainty estimates, without any degradation in pure mapping performance. Second, we empirically analyze potential sources
of map uncertainty, confirming where current map estimation methods lack confidence and informing future research directions. Third, we combine many recent online
map estimation models with multiple state-of-the-art trajectory prediction approaches and show how incorporating online mapping uncertainty significantly improves the performance and training characteristics of downstream prediction models, speeding up training convergence by up to 50%
and improving online prediction accuracy by up to 15%.

14521

