This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modality-Agnostic Structural Image Representation Learning for
Deformable Multi-Modality Medical Image Registration
Tony C. W. Mok1,2 * Zi Li1,2 * Yunhao Bai1 Jianpeng Zhang1,2,4 Wei Liu1,2
Yan-Jie Zhou1,2,4 Ke Yan1,2 Dakai Jin1 Yu Shi3 Xiaoli Yin3 Le Lu1 Ling Zhang1
1

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
Hupan Lab, 310023, Hangzhou, China
3
Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University, China
4
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
2

cwmokab@connect.ust.hk

Augmented Image

Abstract

Image

Augmented Image
Nonlinear Intensity
Transformation
Contrast invariance

1. Introduction
Determining anatomical correspondence between multimodal data is crucial for medical image analysis and clinical applications, including diagnostic settings [33], surgical planning [1, 57] and post-operative evaluation [39].
As a vital component for modern medical image analysis
* Contributed equally.

Discriminability

High

CNN




MIND

Feature Similarity

Low

DNS

Establishing dense anatomical correspondence across
distinct imaging modalities is a foundational yet challenging procedure for numerous medical image analysis studies and image-guided radiotherapy. Existing multi-modality
image registration algorithms rely on statistical-based similarity measures or local structural image representations.
However, the former is sensitive to locally varying noise,
while the latter is not discriminative enough to cope with
complex anatomical structures in multimodal scans, causing ambiguity in determining the anatomical correspondence across scans with different modalities. In this paper, we propose a modality-agnostic structural representation learning method, which leverages Deep Neighbourhood Self-similarity (DNS) and anatomy-aware contrastive
learning to learn discriminative and contrast-invariance
deep structural image representations (DSIR) without the
need for anatomical delineations or pre-aligned training
images. We evaluate our method on multiphase CT, abdomen MR-CT, and brain MR T1w-T2w registration. Comprehensive results demonstrate that our method is superior to the conventional local structural representation and
statistical-based similarity measures in terms of discriminability and accuracy.






Figure 1. Visualization of feature similarity between the marked
feature vector (red dot) of the image and all feature vectors of
augmented images using the convolutional neural network without pertaining (CNN), Modality Independent Neighbourhood Descriptor (MIND), and our proposed Deep Neighbourhood Selfsimilarity (DNS). Our method captures the contrast invariant and
high discriminability structural representation of the image, reducing the ambiguity in matching the anatomical correspondence between multimodal images.

studies and image-guided interventions, deformable multimodal registration aims to establish the dense anatomical
correspondence between multimodal scans and fuse information from multimodal scans, e.g., propagating anatomical or tumour delineation for image-guided radiotherapy
[30]. Since different imaging modalities provide valuable
complementary visual cues and diagnosis information of
the patient, precise anatomical alignment between multimodal scans benefits the radiological observation and the

11215

