This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging Vision-Language Models for Improving
Domain Generalization in Image Classification
Sravanti Addepalli * Ashish Ramayee Asokan * Lakshay Sharma R. Venkatesh Babu
Vision and AI Lab, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore

Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) such as CLIP are
trained on large amounts of image-text pairs, resulting
in remarkable generalization across several data distributions. However, in several cases, their expensive training and data collection/curation costs do not justify the
end application. This motivates a vendor-client paradigm,
where a vendor trains a large-scale VLM and grants only
input-output access to clients on a pay-per-query basis in
a black-box setting. The client aims to minimize inference
cost by distilling the VLM to a student model using the
limited available task-specific data, and further deploying
this student model in the downstream application. While
naive distillation largely improves the In-Domain (ID) accuracy of the student, it fails to transfer the superior outof-distribution (OOD) generalization of the VLM teacher
using the limited available labeled images. To mitigate
this, we propose Vision-Language to Vision - Align, Distill, Predict (VL2V-ADiP), which first aligns the vision and
language modalities of the teacher model with the vision
modality of a pre-trained student model, and further distills
the aligned VLM representations to the student. This maximally retains the pre-trained features of the student, while
also incorporating the rich representations of the VLM image encoder and the superior generalization of the text embeddings. The proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art
results on the standard Domain Generalization benchmarks
in a black-box teacher setting as well as a white-box setting
where the weights of the VLM are accessible. Project page:
http://val.cds.iisc.ac.in/VL2V-ADiP/

1. Introduction
While the initial success of Deep Learning was predominantly driven by training specialized models for each task
or dataset [26, 29], recent research on foundation models
[24, 34, 47, 65] eliminates the need for this by training
generic models jointly over several modalities using large* Equal Contribution.
Correspondence to Sravanti Addepalli <sravantia@iisc.ac.in>, Ashish
Ramayee Asokan <ashish.ramayee@gmail.com>

Figure 1. Schematic diagram showing class and domain distributions in the shared text/ image embedding space of a VLM:
VLMs learn highly specialized image representations that are not
domain invariant. Thus, a linear classifier (red decision boundary) that is trained over the vision encoder using limited training
data cannot generalize well to the target domain (shown in purple). On the other hand, generic text embeddings such as “A photo
of a class” represent the core concept of a class by virtue of their
training method and vast training data. Thus, they generalize effectively across domains, and a zero-shot classifier (green decision
boundary) aligns better with the true distribution of classes.

scale data. The use of both image and language modalities in large-scale Vision-Language Models (VLMs) enables their use in several applications including zero-shot
classification, where the embedding of an image is compared with text embeddings for “a photo of a {class}” corresponding to every class during inference and the class
with highest similarity is predicted. For example, the LiT
(private) model [65] has been trained on 4 billion image-text
pairs scraped from the web, and it achieves 85.2% zero-shot
accuracy on ImageNet. VLMs also demonstrate extraordinary performance across several distributions, owing to the
vast diversity of distributions seen during their training [47].
The remarkable OOD generalization of VLMs makes
them suitable for use in several applications, either directly

23922

