This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging the Gap: A Unified Video Comprehension Framework
for Moment Retrieval and Highlight Detection
Yicheng Xiao1†, Zhuoyan Luo1†
Yong Liu , Yue Ma1 , Hengwei Bian2 , Yatai Ji1 , Yujiu Yang1B , Xiu Li1B
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Carnegie Mellon University
1

Abstract
Video Moment Retrieval (MR) and Highlight Detection
(HD) have attracted significant attention due to the growing demand for video analysis. Recent approaches treat MR
and HD as similar video grounding problems and address
them together with transformer-based architecture. However, we observe that the emphasis of MR and HD differs,
with one necessitating the perception of local relationships
and the other prioritizing the understanding of global contexts. Consequently, the lack of task-specific design will inevitably lead to limitations in associating the intrinsic specialty of two tasks. To tackle the issue, we propose a Unified
Video COMprehension framework (UVCOM) to bridge the
gap and jointly solve MR and HD effectively. By performing
progressive integration on intra and inter-modality across
multi-granularity, UVCOM achieves the comprehensive understanding in processing a video. Moreover, we present
multi-aspect contrastive learning to consolidate the local
relation modeling and global knowledge accumulation via
well aligned multi-modal space. Extensive experiments on
QVHighlights, Charades-STA, TACoS, YouTube Highlights
and TVSum datasets demonstrate the effectiveness and rationality of UVCOM which outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods by a remarkable margin. Code is available at
https://github.com/EasonXiao-888/UVCOM.

1. Introduction
Video has emerged as a highly favored multi-medium format on the internet with its diverse content. This significant surge in online video encourages users to adjust their
strategies for accessing desired video contents. Instead
of spending time-consuming efforts inspecting the whole
video, they are more inclined to directly obtain particular clips of interest through language descriptions. This
† Equal contribution.

B Corresponding author ({yang.yujiu, li.xiu}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn).

Query: A video collection of wonderful places to visit
Transformer
Encoder
Transformer
Encoder

Moment Retrieval
Video
Text

Encoder

Highlight Detection
Video
Text

Encoder

0s

Head

Head

150s

Moment Span

1

0

Saliency Score

Figure 1. Illustration of the intrinsic characteristics of Moment
Retrieval and Highlight Detection. We visualize the attention
map of the same video under two tasks. The attention map for MR
takes on strip-like patterns, indicating the emphasis of local relations. In contrast, it is in band-like format for HD, which signifies
the focus on global information.

shift in user preference gives rise to two significant research
topics: Video Moment Retrieval [8, 26, 40, 60, 61], focuses on locating the specific moment, and Highlight Detection [1, 12, 52, 56, 58], is dedicated to identifying segments
of high saliency.
Actually, it is apparent that two tasks share many common characteristics, e.g., identifying relevant video segments in response to textual expressions. In light of the
above, Lei et.al. [21] first proposes a novel dataset named
QVHighlights and a basic framework called MomentDETR to jointly solve both tasks. UMT [27] incorporates
extra audio modality and QD-DETR [31] produces textquery dependent video representation to achieve better performance. The above-mentioned methods simply model
MR and HD as a multi-task problem and mainly concentrate on utilizing non-specific strategy to solve them. In
particular, they all adopt a straightforward way to train
and optimize both tasks together with general design, e.g.,
transformer-based models. However, we revisit the characteristics of MR/HD and discover that there exists a gap between them as illustrated in Fig. 1. which leads to the chal-

18709

Multi
Modal
Fusion

