This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SOK-Bench: A Situated Video Reasoning
Benchmark with Aligned Open-World Knowledge
Andong Wang*1 , Bo Wu*2 , Sunli Chen3 , Zhenfang Chen2 , Haotian Guan1
Wei-Ning Lee1 , Li Erran Li4 , Chuang Gan 5,2
1
The University of Hong Kong, 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab,
3
Tsinghua University, 4 AWS AI, 5 UMass Amherst

Abstract
Learning commonsense reasoning from visual contexts
and scenes in real-world is a crucial step toward advanced
artificial intelligence. However, existing video reasoning
benchmarks are still inadequate since they were mainly designed for factual or situated reasoning and rarely involve
broader knowledge in the real world. Our work aims to
delve deeper into reasoning evaluations, specifically within
dynamic, open-world, and structured context knowledge.
We propose a new benchmark (SOK-Bench), consisting of
44K questions and 10K situations with instance-level annotations depicted in the videos. The reasoning process is
required to understand and apply situated knowledge and
general knowledge for problem-solving. To create such
a dataset, we propose an automatic and scalable generation method to generate question-answer pairs, knowledge graphs, and rationales by instructing the combinations of LLMs and MLLMs. Concretely, we first extract
observable situated entities, relations, and processes from
videos for situated knowledge and then extend to openworld knowledge beyond the visible content. The task generation is facilitated through multiple dialogues as iterations and subsequently corrected and refined by our designed self-promptings and demonstrations. With a corpus
of both explicit situated facts and implicit commonsense, we
generate associated question-answer pairs and reasoning
processes, finally followed by manual reviews for quality
assurance. We evaluated recent mainstream large visionlanguage models on the benchmark and found several insightful conclusions. For more information, please refer to
our benchmark at www.bobbywu.com/SOKBench.

1. Introduction
The evolutions of Large Language Models (LLMs) [32,
33, 39, 44] and Multimodal Large Language Models
* The authors contributed equally to the work.

(MLLMs) [21–23, 26, 42, 58, 62] mark a significant milestone in artificial intelligence. These models are making remarkable strides across various domains, exhibiting better
capabilities in perceptual, generative, and comprehensive
tasks [3, 60]. As models like ChatGPT [32, 33] and successors continue to improve in scale, the possibility to capture
commonsense knowledge has also seen obvious advancements. Hence, building models with real-world knowledge is becoming more promising now which was a longstanding but difficult challenge before [5, 43].
Besides novel models, previous efforts have been directed towards evaluating multimodal commonsense reasoning, transitioning from purely language-based models
to those incorporating visual comprehension, such as Visual Question Answering (VQA) [1, 15, 19, 28] or Visual
Commonsense Reasoning (VCR) [10, 14, 17, 18, 47, 52].
These tasks have an underlying assumption that the given
visual and language inputs (e.g., images, videos, questions,
etc.) contain most of the required information. However,
relying on the given task context does not fully reflect realworld complexities, narrowing the scope of their reasoning evaluation. More recently, the focus has shifted towards developing tasks that require external knowledge for
commonsense reasoning [27, 41, 56] and consider the integration of factual [46], evidential [20], or external knowledge sources [11, 27, 41, 48, 56] into evaluations. They
primarily provide visual information and external information on static images for reasoning. Thus, this way
overlooks several crucial natures such as spatio-temporal,
causal, or dynamic processes of real-world activities and
events, an aspect crucial for truly understanding and interacting with our environment. Also, the knowledge is written and concluded by free-form descriptions from crowdsource ways [11, 27, 41, 48, 56], presenting its own set of
limitations. Consistency in descriptions provided by annotators is difficult to maintain [27, 56], and there are multiple
risks of the method being influenced by distinct descriptive
or empirical biases [10, 14, 17, 47].
Our research aims to delve deeper into the realm of com-

13384

