This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Small Scale Data-Free Knowledge Distillation
He Liu1,2∗ , Yikai Wang2∗ , Huaping Liu2 , Fuchun Sun2 , Anbang Yao3†
1

China Telecom Cloud Technology Co., Ltd.
BNRist Center, State Key Lab on Intelligent Technology and Systems,
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University 3 Intel Labs China
2

{liuhe17@mails.,yikaiw@,hpliu@,fuchuns@}tsinghua.edu.cn, anbang.yao@intel.com

1. Introduction
Abstract
Data-free knowledge distillation is able to utilize the
knowledge learned by a large teacher network to augment
the training of a smaller student network without accessing the original training data, avoiding privacy, security,
and proprietary risks in real applications. In this line of research, existing methods typically follow an inversion-anddistillation paradigm in which a generative adversarial network on-the-fly trained with the guidance of the pre-trained
teacher network is used to synthesize a large-scale sample
set for knowledge distillation. In this paper, we reexamine this common data-free knowledge distillation paradigm,
showing that there is considerable room to improve the
overall training efficiency through a lens of “small-scale
inverted data for knowledge distillation”. In light of three
empirical observations indicating the importance of how to
balance class distributions in terms of synthetic sample diversity and difficulty during both data inversion and distillation processes, we propose Small Scale Data-free Knowledge Distillation (SSD-KD). In formulation, SSD-KD introduces a modulating function to balance synthetic samples
and a priority sampling function to select proper samples,
facilitated by a dynamic replay buffer and a reinforcement
learning strategy. As a result, SSD-KD can perform distillation training conditioned on an extremely small scale
of synthetic samples (e.g., 10× less than the original training data scale), making the overall training efficiency one
or two orders of magnitude faster than many mainstream
methods while retaining superior or competitive model performance, as demonstrated on popular image classification
and semantic segmentation benchmarks. The code is available at https://github.com/OSVAI/SSD-KD.

∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
This work was done when He Liu was an intern at Intel Labs China, supervised by Anbang Yao who conceived the project.

For computer vision applications on resource-constrained
devices, how to learn portable neural networks yet with satisfied prediction accuracy is the key problem. Knowledge
distillation (KD) [2, 12, 17, 22, 25, 33], which leverages
the information of a pre-trained large teacher network to
promote the training of a smaller target student network on
the same training data, has become a mainstream solution.
Conventional KD methods assume that the original training data is always available. However, accessing the source
dataset on which the teacher network was trained is usually not feasible in practice, due to its potential privacy or
security or proprietary or huge-size concerns. To relax the
constraint on training data, knowledge distillation under a
data-free regime has recently attracted increasing attention.
The basic idea of Data-free Knowledge Distillation (DKD) [3, 18, 21] is to construct synthetic samples for knowledge distillation conditioned on the pre-trained teacher network, which would match the underlying distribution of
the original training data. Existing top-performing D-KD
methods [4, 7, 8, 10, 24, 30, 31] generally adopt an adversarial inversion-and-distillation paradigm. Under this
paradigm, (1) during the inversion process, a generator is
trained by taking the pre-trained teacher network as the discriminator; (2) during the subsequent knowledge distillation process, the on-the-fly learned generator will synthesize pseudo samples for training the student network. However, adversarial D-KD methods usually require generating
a large number of synthetic samples (compared to the original training dataset size) in order to guarantee trustworthy
knowledge distillation. This poses a heavy burden on training resource consumption, suppressing their use in real applications. In the recent work of [11], the authors present an
effective meta-learning strategy that seeks common features
and reuses them as initial priors to reduce the number of iteration steps required to reach the convergence of the generator. Although faster data synthesis can be attained, [11]
still needs to generate a sufficiently large number of syn-

6008

