This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling Laws for Data Filtering—
Data Curation cannot be Compute Agnostic
Sachin Goyal⇤†
Pratyush Maini⇤†
†
Zachary C. Lipton
Aditi Raghunathan†
J. Zico Kolter†,‡
Carnegie Mellon University†
Bosch Center for AI‡
{sachingoyal,pratyushmaini,zlipton,raditi,zkolter}@cmu.edu
Lower Utility of Repeated Data

B
C
D
E

Lower Utility Data Pools

A

Epoch 1

Epoch 2

Epoch 3

E

E

E

D

D

D

C

C

C

F
Web Data is NonHomogenous
(Green = High Utility)

Pareto Allocation of Compute
Among Data Pools

Figure 1. (a) The Dynamic Problem of Data Filtering: Web data is non-homogenous, and past work has proposed metrics that ranking
various data subsets according to their diminishing quality (y-axis). However, training on ‘high-quality’ data for multiple epochs leads to
diminishing utility (x-axis), an angle ignored in past work. Assume we have compute equivalent to 6 data pools, one could train on the
best pool (E) for 6 epochs, or train on the best two pools (E and D) for 2 epochs each, and so on. Our work aims to answer–what is the best
allocation of computational resources in such scenarios? (b) Data Filtering Scaling Laws: Our work proposes scaling laws for predicting
the model performance on mixtures of data pools of various quality. Note that we do not train on data mixtures to fit the above scaling
curves (scatter points are test points), rather the scaling curves are estimated from the scaling parameters of individual pools.

Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs) are trained for thousands of GPU hours on carefully selected subsets of massive web scrapes. For instance, the LAION public dataset
retained only about 10% of the total crawled data. In recent times, data curation has gained prominence with several works developing strategies to retain ‘high-quality’
subsets of ‘raw’ scraped data. However, these strategies
are typically developed agnostic to the available compute
for training. In this paper, we demonstrate that making filtering decisions independent of training compute is often
suboptimal—well-curated data rapidly loses its utility when
repeated, eventually decreasing below the utility of ‘unseen’
⇤

but ‘lower-quality’ data. While past research in neural scaling laws has considered web data to be homogenous, real
data is not. Our work bridges this important gap in the literature by developing scaling laws that characterize the differing ‘utility’ of various data subsets, and accounting for
how this diminishes for a data point at its ‘nth’ repetition.
Our key message is that data curation can not be agnostic of the total compute a model will be trained for. Even
without ever jointly training on multiple data buckets, our
scaling laws enable us to estimate model performance under this dynamic trade-off between quality and repetition.
This allows us to curate the best possible pool for achieving
top performance on Datacomp at various compute budgets,
carving out a pareto-frontier for data curation.

Equal Contribution.

22702

