This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Readout Guidance: Learning Control from Diffusion Features
Grace Luo1,2

Trevor Darrell2
1

Readout

▽dMSE

Dan B Goldman1

Google Research

Readout

Readout

2

Aleksander Holynski1,2

UC Berkeley

Readout

▽dCosine Sim

▽dHinge

Pose

Oliver Wang1

Appearance

Text Guidance Only

Correspondence

(a) Readout Guidance

Control Input

With Readout Guidance

(b) Applications

Figure 1. Given a frozen pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model [50], we learn parameter-efficient readout heads to interpret relevant
signals, or readouts, from the intermediate network features. These readouts can be single-image concepts such as pose and depth, or relative
concepts between two images, such as appearance similarity and correspondence. We use the readouts for sampling-time guidance to enable
controlled image generation.

Abstract
We present Readout Guidance, a method for controlling
text-to-image diffusion models with learned signals. Readout
Guidance uses readout heads, lightweight networks trained
to extract signals from the features of a pre-trained, frozen
diffusion model at every timestep. These readouts can encode single-image properties, such as pose, depth, and edges;
or higher-order properties that relate multiple images, such
as correspondence and appearance similarity. Furthermore,
by comparing the readout estimates to a user-defined target, and back-propagating the gradient through the readout
head, these estimates can be used to guide the sampling process. Compared to prior methods for conditional generation,
Readout Guidance requires significantly fewer added parameters and training samples, and offers a convenient and
simple recipe for reproducing different forms of conditional
control under a single framework, with a single architecture
and sampling procedure. We showcase these benefits in the
applications of drag-based manipulation, identity-consistent
generation, and spatially aligned control. Project page:
https://readout-guidance.github.io.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have shown enormous potential in accurately modeling the space of natural images. However, one
remaining open challenge that is critical to many applications
is enabling arbitrary user control over their outputs. Existing
solutions for enabling custom user control typically involve
substantial model training on large annotated datasets, a process that is cumbersome and often infeasible for the average
user. In this work, we provide an alternative solution for
enabling user control that combines two ideas; first, that diffusion models contain rich internal representations that are
useful for extracting relevant image properties, and second,
that these extracted image properties can be used to guide
the generation process towards desired user constraints. We
call the combined approach Readout Guidance, because it
makes use of small auxiliary readout heads that can be easily
trained on top of a frozen diffusion model.
Taking as input the set of intermediate diffusion features,
these readout heads can be trained to extract arbitrary properties about the image being generated (Figure 1, left). These
can include image-space properties, such as human pose,

8217

