This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language-driven Object Fusion into Neural Radiance Fields
with Pose-Conditioned Dataset Updates
Ka Chun Shum1
1

Jaeyeon Kim1

Binh-Son Hua2,4

Duc Thanh Nguyen3

Sai-Kit Yeung1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 VinAI 3 Deakin University 4 Trinity College Dublin

Abstract

Input: multi-view object images & object text prompt

Neural radiance field (NeRF) is an emerging technique
for 3D scene reconstruction and modeling. However, current
NeRF-based methods are limited in the capabilities of adding
or removing objects. This paper fills the aforementioned
gap by proposing a new language-driven method for object
manipulation in NeRFs through dataset updates. Specifically,
to insert an object represented by a set of multi-view images
into a background NeRF, we use a text-to-image diffusion
model to blend the object into the given background across
views. The generated images are then used to update the
NeRF so that we can render view-consistent images of the
object within the background. To ensure view consistency,
we propose a dataset update strategy that prioritizes the
radiance field training based on camera poses in a poseordered manner. We validate our method in two case studies:
object insertion and object removal. Experimental results
show that our method can generate photo-realistic results
and achieves state-of-the-art performance in NeRF editing.

•••

•••

“ a ∗ [object noun] ”
Input: multi-view background images & background text prompt

•••

“ a ∗ [background noun] ”
Input: target text prompt

“ a ∗ [object noun] on a ∗ [background noun] ”

Output: multi-view object-blended images & novel view synthesis

•••

•••

1. Introduction
Editing of 3D scenes by insertion or removal of objects has
been a fundamental task in computer graphics and computer
vision. The task has often been performed using traditional
3D scene authoring tools [5, 9]. For example, to insert an
object into a 3D scene, traditional approach requires user to
manually select the object and position it into the scene. This
manual pipeline has been adopted in a wide range of applications, such as furniture arrangement in interior design [15]
and asset creation in game development [10, 13].
Recent advances in deep learning have opened new directions to scene modeling. Neural radiance field (NeRF) [40]
is a pioneer to render view-consistent photo-realistic images using neural networks. Generative models such as
generative adversarial networks (GANs) [12] and diffusion
models [17] learn to output photo-realistic images from un-

Figure 1. Object insertion. We propose a language-driven method
for view-consistent 3D object insertion into a background NeRF
scene. Given an object defined by a set of multi-view images, our
method generates plausible text-guided insertion results that require
geometry manipulation of the original background NeRF.

constrained image collections. Recent text-guided diffusion
models [50, 51, 53] have shown great promise in generating
high-quality and diverse images from a single text prompt.
Such successes inspire us to revisit 3D scene editing via
language-driven image synthesis techniques. Particularly,
for object insertion (see Fig. 1), our method performs viewconsistent edits by taking as input a set of multi-view object
images, multi-view background images, and a target text
prompt. We utilize a text-to-image diffusion model to con-

5176

