This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Steganographic Passport: An Owner and User Verifiable Credential for Deep
Model IP Protection Without Retraining
Qi Cui*
Ruohan Meng*
Chaohui Xu
Chip-Hong Chang†
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
qi.cui@ntu.edu.sg, ruohan.meng@ntu.edu.sg, chaohui001@e.ntu.edu.sg, echchang@ntu.edu.sg
For ownership verification
Model signature

Abstract

-1 +1 … +1 -1

1. Introduction
To foster Artificial Intelligence (AI) diffusion and application, AI as a Service (AIaaS) has emerged as a lucrative
This research is supported by the National Research Foundation, Singapore, and Cyber Security Agency of Singapore under its National Cybersecurity Research & Development Programme (Development of Secured
Components & Systems in Emerging Technologies through Hardware &
Software Evaluation <NRF-NCR25-DeSNTU-0001>). Any opinions,
findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material
are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the view of National Research
Foundation, Singapore and Cyber Security Agency of Singapore.
† Corresponding author;
*Both authors contributed equally.

− +

Reveal
Steganography

+ −
…

Owner-side
Passport affine factors passport
Feed

Model owner

Revealed
User ID image

SGN(HASH ' )

Sign
constraint

Ensuring the legal usage of deep models is crucial to
promoting trustable, accountable, and responsible artificial intelligence innovation. Current passport-based methods that obfuscate model functionality for license-to-use
and ownership verifications suffer from capacity and quality
constraints, as they require retraining the owner model for
new users. They are also vulnerable to advanced Expanded
Residual Block ambiguity attacks. We propose Steganographic Passport, which uses an invertible steganographic
network to decouple license-to-use from ownership verification by hiding the user’s identity images into the owner-side
passport and recovering them from their respective userside passports. An irreversible and collision-resistant hash
function is used to avoid exposing the owner-side passport from the derived user-side passports and increase the
uniqueness of the model signature. To safeguard both the
passport and model’s weights against advanced ambiguity
attacks, an activation-level obfuscation is proposed for the
verification branch of the owner’s model. By jointly training
the verification and deployment branches, their weights become tightly coupled. The proposed method supports agile
licensing of deep models by providing a strong ownership
proof and license accountability without requiring a separate model retraining for the admission of every new user.
Experiment results show that our Steganographic Passport
outperforms other passport-based deep model protection
methods in robustness against various known attacks.

For license verification

Verification
branch
Steganographic
Key

Hide

User
ID
image
Original affine
factors

Steganography
User-side
passport
Deployment
branch
Licensed user

Figure 1. The conceptual overview. The owner holds the ownerside passport and the steganographic key, which are used to verify
the licenses and reveal the user IDs, respectively. The verification
branch of the deep model is trained with the constraint of the signature. Upon licensing, the user receives the user-side passport
and the deployment branch of the deep model.

business model that offers across-the-broad access to highperformance machine learning models with subscriptionor transaction-based payment schemes. The customers can
submit inputs to the remote server and receive the inference or classification results of machine learning processes
through application program interfaces (APIs). As complex models of high capabilities in AIaaS are offered as
“turnkey” solutions to potentially anyone, they have huge
potential to be misused and abused. Ownership and user license verifications are the first step towards accountability
of responsible use of AI services.
Ownership verification has long been a primary tool to
protect deployed deep models against intellectual property
(IP) infringement and unauthorized model replication [13].
Numerous approaches have been proposed, such as watermarking [8, 27], fingerprinting[10, 23, 24], and backdoor
embedding [11, 14, 26]. These approaches typically aim
to enable the trained deep model to exhibit distinguishable
characteristics under specific conditions without sacrificing its utility. To resist ambiguity attacks, passport-based
ownership verification scheme [5, 6, 20, 30] embeds digital passports during model training to obfuscate the primary
functionality until the obfuscated parameters are restored by
a genuine passport. The passport scheme provides access
control [5, 6] at the expense of some accuracy degradation.
Each passport is tied to a user model, retraining is required
to derive a new user model from the owner model for every new passport issued. The recent passport-aware normal-

12302

