This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

KPConvX: Modernizing Kernel Point Convolution with Kernel Attention
Hugues Thomas† , Yao-Hung Hubert Tsai† , Timothy D. Barfoot‡ , Jian Zhang†
†
Apple, ‡ University of Toronto
https://github.com/apple/ml-kpconvx

Abstract

mIoU

KPConvD-L (76.2)

In the field of deep point cloud understanding, KPConv is a unique architecture that uses kernel points to
locate convolutional weights in space, instead of relying
on Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) encodings. While it initially achieved success, it has since been surpassed by recent MLP networks that employ updated designs and training strategies. Building upon the kernel point principle,
we present two novel designs: KPConvD (depthwise KPConv), a lighter design that enables the use of deeper architectures, and KPConvX, an innovative design that scales
the depthwise convolutional weights of KPConvD with kernel attention values. Using KPConvX with a modern architecture and training strategy, we are able to outperform
current state-of-the-art approaches on the ScanObjectNN,
Scannetv2, and S3DIS datasets. We validate our design
choices through ablation studies and release our code and
models.

1. Introduction
The field of 3D point cloud understanding has experienced
significant growth in the past decade. This growth can be
attributed to the availability of advanced 3D sensors and the
increasing use of deep learning in various research domains.
The evolution of this field has known different phases. Until 2017, most of the proposed approaches relied on projection in images or 3D grids [3, 17, 27, 34, 35, 44]. However, after 2017, point-based methods gained dominance
[2, 13, 19, 20, 31, 32, 41, 47, 50], leading to a rapid expansion of the field. More recently, 3D point cloud understanding followed the trend of attention and transformer
networks, which are widely adopted in other deep learning fields [15, 25, 29, 49, 52, 54]. This diverse range of
approaches is a response to the challenge posed by the unstructured and continuous nature of point clouds. In this dynamic field, we explore the potential of Kernel Point Convolution (KPConv) [41], one of the most successful pointbased methods, when enhanced with modern techniques
and attention mechanisms.

KPConvX-L (76.3)

OctFormer
KPConvX-S
KPConvD-S

PTv2
OctFormer-Small

StratTrans

M params

Figure 1. KPConvD and KPConvX using small (S) and large
(L) architectures outperform other state-of-the-art architectures on
ScanNetv2 dataset using a relatively small number of parameters.

KPConv proposed a convolution design that utilizes kernel points to store network weights in specific positions
within the space. In this study, we revisit this design and introduce a new, lighter operator called KPConvD. Additionally, we enhance the operator by incorporating "geometric
attention", a novel self-attention mechanism applied to the
kernel points, resulting in KPConvX. Apart from the convolution operator itself, we also reconsider the network architectures built using this operator. Due to its lightweight
nature, we are able to construct deeper architectures. Overall, we observe that our networks are faster than the original
KPConv and achieve state-of-the-art performance.
In Sec. 2, we will provide a comprehensive overview of
the different approaches to deep point cloud understanding.
Our focus will be on point-based methods, and we will compare KPConvX to other similar designs. Sec. 3 is dedicated
to the definition of our convolution design. As depicted in
Fig. 2, we utilize kernel points similar to KPConv, but we
introduce two major changes: depthwise weights, which
combine neighbors’ features using the Hadamard product,
and a new concept called kernel attention that scales the
kernel weights based on the current input features. This approach, which defines attention geometrically rather than
topologically, is analogous to image involution [18] and
is tailored for kernel points, which have a fixed order and

5525

