This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Theoretically Achieving Continuous Representation of Oriented Bounding Boxes
Zi-Kai Xiao1 , Guo-Ye Yang1 , Xue Yang2 , Tai-Jiang Mu1 *, Junchi Yan2 , Shi-Min Hu1
1
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Department of CSE & MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{xzk23, yanggy19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

{taijiang, shimin}@tsinghua.edu.cn

{yangxue-2019-sjtu, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn
Code:

https://github.com/514flowey/JDet-COBB

Abstract
Considerable efforts have been devoted to Oriented Object Detection (OOD). However, one lasting issue regarding the discontinuity in Oriented Bounding Box (OBB) representation remains unresolved, which is an inherent bottleneck for extant OOD methods. This paper endeavors
to completely solve this issue in a theoretically guaranteed
manner and puts an end to the ad-hoc efforts in this direction. Prior studies typically can only address one of
the two cases of discontinuity: rotation and aspect ratio,
and often inadvertently introduce decoding discontinuity,
e.g. Decoding Incompleteness (DI) and Decoding Ambiguity (DA) as discussed in literature. Specifically, we propose a novel representation method called Continuous OBB
(COBB), which can be readily integrated into existing detectors e.g. Faster-RCNN as a plugin. It can theoretically ensure continuity in bounding box regression which
to our best knowledge, has not been achieved in literature
for rectangle-based object representation. For fairness and
transparency of experiments, we have developed a modularized benchmark based on the open-source deep learning
framework Jittor’s detection toolbox JDet for OOD evaluation. On the popular DOTA dataset, by integrating FasterRCNN as the same baseline model, our new method outperforms the peer method Gliding Vertex by 1.13% mAP50
(relative improvement 1.54%), and 2.46% mAP75 (relative
improvement 5.91%), without any tricks.

1. Introduction
Object detection constitutes a fundamental task within the
realm of computer vision. In conventional object detection scenarios [52], the commonplace approach involves the
localization of objects using Horizontal Bounding Boxes
(HBB). However, in many real-world settings such as re* Corresponding author.

(a) Rotation Discontinuity

(b) Aspect Ratio Discontinuity

(c) Decoding Incompleteness

(d) Decoding Ambiguity

Figure 1. Examples of Discontinuity in OBB Representations.
(a) Acute-angle Representation limits the rotation angle of OBBs
inside a range of π2 ([− π4 , π4 ) in this example). The red OBB1
and the blue OBB2 are similar, but their representations are significantly different. (b) Long-edge Representation determines the rotation angle θ by the long side and the x-axis. A slight disturbance
in the aspect ratio of square-like OBBs will cause a huge change
in their representation, which causes Aspect Ratio Discontinuity.
(c) CSL [37] divides the rotation angle into several classifications
(6 classifications in this figure). OBB between two classifications
cannot be accurately represented, which brings DI. (d) GWD [40]
denotes OBBs by Gaussian distribution. As the squares with different rotation angles can correspond to the same Gaussian, the
orientation of decoded squares will be ambiguous.

mote sensing [3, 32] and scene text [13, 19], where objects
exhibit arbitrary orientations, HBBs are inadequate in precisely delineating object boundaries. To overcome this issue, Oriented Bounding Boxes (OBB) [32], conceptualized
as rotated rectangles, have been introduced as a more suit-

16912

