This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ODCR: Orthogonal Decoupling Contrastive Regularization
for Unpaired Image Dehazing
Zhongze Wang Haitao Zhao* Jingchao Peng Lujian Yao Kaijie Zhao
East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, China
{zzwang, lujianyao, kjzhao}@mail.ecust.edu.cn, haitaozhao@ecust.edu.cn, starry-sky@outlook.com

Abstract
Unpaired image dehazing (UID) holds significant research importance due to the challenges in acquiring
haze/clear image pairs with identical backgrounds. This
paper proposes a novel method for UID named Orthogonal Decoupling Contrastive Regularization (ODCR). Our
method is grounded in the assumption that an image consists of both haze-related features, which influence the degree of haze, and haze-unrelated features, such as texture
and semantic information. ODCR aims to ensure that the
haze-related features of the dehazing result closely resemble those of the clear image, while the haze-unrelated features align with the input hazy image. To accomplish the
motivation, Orthogonal MLPs optimized geometrically on
the Stiefel manifold are proposed, which can project image features into an orthogonal space, thereby reducing
the relevance between different features. Furthermore, a
task-driven Depth-wise Feature Classifier (DWFC) is proposed, which assigns weights to the orthogonal features
based on the contribution of each channel’s feature in predicting whether the feature source is hazy or clear in a selfsupervised fashion. Finally, a Weighted PatchNCE (WPNCE) loss is introduced to achieve the pulling of hazerelated features in the output image toward those of clear
images, while bringing haze-unrelated features close to
those of the hazy input. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superior performance of our ODCR method on UID.

1. Introduction
Haze is a common atmospheric phenomenon caused by
the accumulation of aerosol particles. It can cause severe
quality degradation of images, which can affect subsequent
computer vision tasks [27, 50]. The degradation of haze effect can be described as the atmospheric scattering model
(ASM) [14, 33]:
I(x) = J(x)t(x) + A(1 − t(x))
* Corresponding author.

(1)

where I(x), J(x), t(x) and A stand for the hazy image, the
clear image, the transmission map (T-map) and the global
atmospheric light separately.
To enhance image clarity and detail, numerous image dehazing methods have been introduced. Early image dehazing methods [2, 3, 16, 18, 58] are mainly based on handcrafted priors. These methods conduct statistical analyses on hazy and clear images to acquire prior knowledge
for image enhancement, but have limited robustness due
to specific assumptions. With the development of deep
neural networks, many deep learning dehazing methods
[6, 13, 24, 40, 46, 48] have emerged, which train networks
in a supervised manner on large-scale synthetic datasets, resulting in significantly improved dehazing performance.
Despite their impressive performance on synthetic data,
the real-world applicability of these methods is limited
by the challenge of acquiring paired images with identical backgrounds. Consequently, research into training dehazing models on unpaired datasets is gaining traction.
Most current unpaired image dehazing (UID) strategies
[9, 15, 47] adopt the Cycle-GAN framework [57], which
constructs hazy-clear-hazy and clear-hazy-clear conversion
cycles. These approaches depend on cycle-consistency loss
to ensure content consistency across the dehazing process.
However, the cycle-consistency loss assumes a bijective relationship between the two domains [35], which is too strict
for image dehazing. In real world, a clear image can correspond to a hazy image with varying degrees of haze within
the same scene.
To bypass this bijection limitation, CUT-like methods
[32, 35, 44] have been introduced, eschewing the CycleGAN architecture for a singular GAN framework. These
methods preserve consistency by maximizing mutual information between the features of a query patch in the dehazed
output and the corresponding patch in the original hazy input, as depicted in Fig. 1 (a). Nonetheless, this approach
incurs a contradiction between maximizing mutual information and attaining effective dehazing, and do not fully
utilize the guiding role of clear images for dehazing.
To achieving background consistency and bridging the

25479

