This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoNPHM: Dynamic Head Reconstruction from Monocular Videos
Simon Giebenhain1

2

Technical University of Munich

Synthesia

3

Martin Rünz2

University College London

Parametric Model

Photometric Tracking

Input: RGB Video

1

Tobias Kirschstein1 Markos Georgopoulos2∗
Lourdes Agapito3 Matthias Nießner1

Figure 1. We present MonoNPHM, a neural-field-based parametric head model (left), for dynamic 3D head reconstruction in monocular
videos (right). On the left we demonstrate the effect on a reconstructed human head, by individually varying shape (top box), expression
(middle box) and appearance (bottom box). The right-hand side illustrates three input RGB frames (top row), and our reconstructed geometry (bottom row). We also show the reconstructed appearance under estimated lighting conditions, which is the basis of our reconstruction.

Abstract
We present Monocular Neural Parametric Head Models
(MonoNPHM) for dynamic 3D head reconstructions from
monocular RGB videos. To this end, we propose a latent appearance space that parameterizes a texture field on top of a
neural parametric model. We constrain predicted color values to be correlated with the underlying geometry such that
gradients from RGB effectively influence latent geometry
codes during inverse rendering. To increase the representational capacity of our expression space, we augment our
backward deformation field with hyper-dimensions, thus improving color and geometry representation in topologically
challenging expressions. Using MonoNPHM as a learned
prior, we approach the task of 3D head reconstruction using
signed distance field based volumetric rendering. By numerically inverting our backward deformation field, we incorporated a landmark loss using facial anchor points that
are closely tied to our canonical geometry representation.
To evaluate the task of dynamic face reconstruction from
monocular RGB videos we record 20 challenging Kinect
sequences under casual conditions. MonoNPHM outper-

forms all baselines with a significant margin, and makes an
important step towards easily accessible neural parametric
face models through RGB tracking.

1. Introduction
Tracking, animation, and reconstruction of human faces
and heads under complex facial movements are fundamental problems in many applications such as computer
games, movie production, telecommunication, and AR/VR
settings. In particular, obtaining high-fidelity 3D head reconstructions from monocular input videos is a common
scenario in many practical settings, e.g., when only a commodity webcam is available.
Recovering the 3D head geometry throughout a monocular RGB video, however, is inherently under-constrained.
The task is further complicated in the presence of depth ambiguity, complex facial movements, and strong lighting and
shadow effects. Therefore, to disambiguate the 3D scene
Website: https://simongiebenhain.github.io/MonoNPHM
* Work done while MG was at Synthesia.

10747

