This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniBind: LLM-Augmented Unified and Balanced Representation Space to Bind
Them All
Yuanhuiyi Lyu1 ∗ Xu Zheng1 * Jizhou Zhou1 Lin Wang1,2 †
1
AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ) 2 Dept. of CSE, HKUST
{yuanhuiyilv, jiazhouzhou}@hkust-gz.edu.cn, zhengxu128@gmail.com, linwang@ust.hk
Project Page: https://vlislab22.github.io/UniBind/

Abstract
We present UniBind, a flexible and efficient approach
that learns a unified representation space for seven diverse
modalities – image, text, audio, point cloud, thermal, video,
and event data. Existing works, e.g., ImageBind [13], treat
the image as the central modality and build an imagecentered representation space; however, the space may be
sub-optimal as it leads to an unbalanced representation
space among all modalities. Moreover, the category names
are directly used to extract text embeddings for the downstream tasks, making it hardly possible to represent the semantics of multi-modal data. The ‘out-of-the-box’ insight
of our UniBind is to make the alignment centers modalityagnostic and further learn a unified and balanced representation space, empowered by the large language models (LLMs). UniBind is superior in its flexible application
to all CLIP-style models and delivers remarkable performance boosts. To make this possible, we 1) construct a
knowledge base of text with the help of LLMs and multimodal LLMs; 2) adaptively build LLM-augmented classwise embedding centers on top of the knowledge base and
encoded visual embeddings; 3) align all the embeddings
to the LLM-augmented embedding centers via contrastive
learning to achieve a unified and balanced representation
space. UniBind shows strong zero-shot recognition performance gains over prior arts by an average of 6.36%. Finally, we achieve new state-of-the-art performance, e.g., a
6.75% gain on ImageNet, on the multi-modal fine-tuning
setting while reducing 90% of the learnable parameters.

1. Introduction
Humans use multiple senses– each of which is from a
different source, a.k.a., modality– to perceive and interpret the world [36, 46]. Humans are naturally equipped
* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Event Point Cloud Image

Event Point Cloud Image
Category:
“airplane”

Ours

ImageBind

(a) Multi-modal Representation Space
“A photo of a
helicopter”
“A photo of a
𝐿!
airplane”

𝐿"
ImageBind W/o ECL:
𝐿" > 𝐿!

“helicopter”
center
“airplane”
center

Embedding
Center
Localization

𝐿!
𝐿"
ImageBind W ECL:
𝐿! > 𝐿"

(b) Embedding Center Localization (ECL)

Figure 1. (a) By making the alignment center modality-agnostic,
our UniBind can learn a unified and balanced representation space.
(b) The embedding centers for each semantic category: these centers exhibit more complementary semantics compared to embeddings solely encoded by category names.

with the capacity to process and fuse multiple modalities
simultaneously. For machines to emulate human intelligence, it is imperative for them to interpret, reason, and
fuse multi-modal inputs, such as vision, text, audio, etc. [8].
This has inspired many methods that employ paired data
to align image with text [4, 12, 24, 47] or align image
with audio [16, 32]. Building on these works, early research has largely focused on integrating additional modalities, e.g., CLIP2Video [10] and PointCLIP [59] for enhancing the comprehensiveness and accuracy of multi-modal
data representation, and ultimately, improving performance

26752

