This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Objects as volumes: A stochastic geometry view of opaque solids
Bailey Miller, Hanyu Chen, Alice Lai, Ioannis Gkioulekas
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
We develop a theory for the representation of opaque solids
as volumes. Starting from a stochastic representation of
opaque solids as random indicator functions, we prove the
conditions under which such solids can be modeled using exponential volumetric transport. We also derive expressions
for the volumetric attenuation coefficient as a functional
of the probability distributions of the underlying indicator
functions. We generalize our theory to account for isotropic
and anisotropic scattering at different parts of the solid, and
for representations of opaque solids as stochastic implicit
surfaces. We derive our volumetric representation from first
principles, which ensures that it satisfies physical constraints
such as reciprocity and reversibility. We use our theory to
explain, compare, and correct previous volumetric representations, as well as propose meaningful extensions that lead
to improved performance in 3D reconstruction tasks.

1. Introduction
Volumetric representations have a long history in applied
physics [38] and computer graphics [44], where they enable efficient light transport simulation in translucent objects (e.g., tissue, clouds, materials such as wax and soap)
and participating media (e.g., smoke, fog, murky water).
Since the introduction of NeRF by Mildenhall et al. [36],
there has been a proliferation of neural rendering techniques [5, 17, 45, 50, 61, 63, 66, 68] that use volumetric
representations for scenes much unlike the above examples,
comprising opaque objects (rather than translucent ones) in
free space (rather than volumetric media). The tremendous
success of volumetric representations for scenes without subsurface or volumetric scattering motivates questions such
as: Why can we use volumetric light transport to simulate
scenes with only light-surface interactions? What is the
mathematical underpinning for modeling an opaque object
as a volume? What are the properties of such a volume?
Our goal is to answer these questions. We start from first
principles, revisiting the derivation of volumetric representations for translucent objects and participating media. As
recent work in computer graphics highlights [9, 15, 26], volumetric representations are a formalism for querying stochastic geometry [12, 48]: From this lens, volumetric quantities
such as transmittance and free-flight distribution are the an-

swers to queries such as “are two points mutually visible” (a
visibility query) and “what is the distance to first intersection along a ray” (a ray-casting query), when the geometry
occluding visibility and terminating rays is stochastic.
Volumetric representations for translucent and participating media are stochastic abstractions of their microscopic
structure: Such media comprise numerous microscopic particles that reflect and occlude light rays. Modeling explicit
microparticle configurations, and rendering light transport
through them, is prohibitively expensive. As a compromise
for efficiency, volumetric representations allow to simulate
light transport in such media on average [6]. These representations replace explicit with statistical descriptions of
microparticle configurations (e.g., average particle location,
size, shape, and orientation), analogously to statistical BRDF
models for surface microgeometry [13, 14, 24, 46, 60]. Computer graphics has developed volumetric representations for
microparticle media that account for details such as varying particle size and material [16, 32], shape and orientation [23, 25], and placement correlations [9, 15, 26].
We develop (Section 3) analogous volumetric representations for scenes comprising opaque macroscopic 3D objects,
or opaque solids, using stochastic geometry theory. We
prove (Section 3.1) formal conditions for exponential volumetric representations to apply to stochastic opaque solids;
and functional relationships between volumetric parameters
(i.e., attenuation coefficient) and stochastic geometry models.
We adapt (Section 3.2) anisotropic volumetric representations of microparticle geometry to opaque solids, to account
for effects such as directionally-dependent foreshortening
near surfaces, and directionally-independent attenuation far
from them. We extend (Section 3.3) our volumetric representations to utilize geometry models common in current
practice (e.g., implicit surfaces). Our theory delivers volumetric representations equipped with properties necessary
for physical plausibility (e.g., reciprocity and reversibility).
Our work is not the first to derive volumetric representations for opaque solids [45, 52, 63, 66]. Previous derivations
generally consider how to transform a deterministic geometry representation (e.g., signed distance function) into a volumetric one that behaves approximately like the deterministic
geometry. Despite its empirical success, this methodological

87

