This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Objectification in Films: Towards a New AI Task for Video Interpretation
Julie Tores1,2
Lucile Sassatelli1,3 Hui-Yin Wu4
Clement Bergman4
Léa Andolfi6
Victor Ecrement6
Frédéric Precioso2
Thierry Devars6
5
6
Magali Guaresi
Virginie Julliard
Sarah Lecossais7
1
2
Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, I3S, France
Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, Inria, I3S, France
3
4
Institut Universitaire de France
Université Côte d’Azur, Inria, France
5
6
Université Côte d’Azur, CNRS, BCL, France
Sorbonne Université, GRIPIC
7
Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, LabSIC
julie.tores@univ-cotedazur.fr

Abstract
In film gender studies, the concept of “male gaze” refers
to the way the characters are portrayed on-screen as objects of desire rather than subjects. In this article, we introduce a novel video-interpretation task, to detect character
objectification in films. The purpose is to reveal and quantify the usage of complex temporal patterns operated in cinema to produce the cognitive perception of objectification.
We introduce the ObyGaze12 dataset, made of 1914 movie
clips densely annotated by experts for objectification concepts identified in film studies and psychology. We evaluate
recent vision models, show the feasibility of the task and
where the challenges remain with concept bottleneck models. Our new dataset and code are made available to the
community.

1. Introduction
In film gender studies, the concept of “male gaze” [41]
refers to the way the characters – especially women – are
portrayed on-screen as objects of desire rather than subjects.
Consider in Figure 1 how objectification is manifested in
various ways such as camera placement and movement, the
gaze interactions between characters, the choice of clothing, and arrangement of scene elements. Such disparities in
how people are presented, depicted or addressed to in digital
contents based on their gender has large-scale social implications such as the perpetuation of harmful stereotypes and
hostile social situations.
These disparities have been the subject of an increasing
number of studies at the intersection of social and computational sciences. In online social networks, computational
approaches to sexism detection have been increasingly investigated for textual data as a part of hate speech detection.

Figure 1. In modern film media, the unequal characterization of
gender on screen frequently evokes concepts of objectification,
such as (A) unequal gaze (Pulp Fiction, 1994), (B) Nudity and
submissive postures (Pulp Fiction, 1994), (C) animalisation or infantilisation (Marley and Me, 2008), and (D) transparent clothing, camera framing, domestic gender roles, and voyeurism (Gone
Girl, 2014).

As explained by Samory et al. [47], sexism is a complex
sociological construct, whose high-level interpretive nature
and subtle dimensions beyond offensive speech make for
an unsolved challenge. In visual media such as films and
TV series, the characters they depict shape our collective
imagination and perception of sociological constructs, such
as gender, race, and class. Currently, most large-scale approaches to understanding gender representation in these
media have focused on quantifying the presence of women
in the image and audio content (e.g., [35, 39, 51]). However,
works in social sciences show that quantifying the presence
of gender on screen is insufficient for grasping the issue of

10864

