This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Intrinsic Features for Debiasing via Investigating
Class-Discerning Common Attributes in Bias-Contrastive Pair
Jeonghoon Park* , Chaeyeon Chung* , Jaegul Choo
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, South Korea
{jeonghoon park, cy chung, jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
In the image classification task, deep neural networks
frequently rely on bias attributes that are spuriously correlated with a target class in the presence of dataset bias,
resulting in degraded performance when applied to data
without bias attributes. The task of debiasing aims to
compel classifiers to learn intrinsic attributes that inherently define a target class rather than focusing on bias attributes. While recent approaches mainly focus on emphasizing the learning of data samples without bias attributes
(i.e., bias-conflicting samples) compared to samples with
bias attributes (i.e., bias-aligned samples), they fall short
of directly guiding models where to focus for learning intrinsic features. To address this limitation, this paper proposes a method that provides the model with explicit spatial guidance that indicates the region of intrinsic features.
We first identify the intrinsic features by investigating the
class-discerning common features between a bias-aligned
(BA) sample and a bias-conflicting (BC) sample (i.e., biascontrastive pair). Next, we enhance the intrinsic features in
the BA sample that are relatively under-exploited for prediction compared to the BC sample. To construct the biascontrastive pair without using bias information, we introduce a bias-negative score that distinguishes BC samples
from BA samples employing a biased model. The experiments demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-theart performance on synthetic and real-world datasets with
various levels of bias severity.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks in image classification [5, 19, 20, 24]
are known to be vulnerable to the dataset bias [22], which
refers to a spurious correlation between the target classes
and the peripheral attributes. Basically, image classification aims to learn intrinsic attributes — the visual features
that inherently define a target class — that generally appear across the samples in the class. However, when the

dataset bias exists in the training data, the models tend to
use the frequently appearing peripheral attribute (i.e., bias
attribute) to predict the class unintentionally. For instance,
if airplanes in the training images are mostly in the sky, a
model can heavily rely on the sky to predict an image as
an airplane class due to its high correlation with the airplane class. This indicates that the model is biased towards
the bias attribute (e.g., sky) rather than focusing on intrinsic
features (e.g., the shape of wings or the body) when making decisions. As a result, even though the biased model
achieves high accuracy on the samples including bias attributes (e.g., airplanes in the sky), termed as bias-aligned
(BA) samples, it may fail to accurately predict samples devoid of such bias attributes (e.g., airplanes on the runway),
referred to as bias-conflicting (BC) samples.
In this regard, debiasing aims to encourage the model to
focus on intrinsic attributes rather than bias attributes when
dataset bias exists. One straightforward approach is utilizing prior knowledge regarding bias (e.g., labels for bias attribute) to inform the model which attributes to focus on
or not to focus on [2, 8, 21, 23]. However, acquiring such
bias information is often infeasible in real-world scenarios.
Therefore, recent studies [7, 11–14] have proposed debiasing methods that do not require bias information. They
identify and emphasize BC samples during the training using an additional biased classifier that mainly learns the bias
attributes. However, such a training strategy fails to directly
indicate where the model should focus to learn the intrinsic
features.
To address this issue, we present a debiasing approach
that explicitly informs the model of the region of the intrinsic features during the training while not using bias labels. While the intrinsic features in the unbiased dataset
can simply be identified in generally appearing features in
the training samples, generally appearing features in the biased dataset inevitably include bias features. Therefore, we
identify the intrinsic features in the biased dataset by investigating the common features between a BA and a BC sample (i.e., a bias-contrastive pair). Here, the common features
also need to be class-discerning since the common features

We note that Juyoung Lee (michael.ljy@kakaobrain.com) at Kakao
Brain, who significantly contributed to this work, should have been the
third author, but unfortunately, he was omitted due to the failure of adding
him during the paper registration phase. * indicates equal contribution.

12332

