This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniHuman: A Unified Model For Editing Human Images in the Wild
Nannan Li1 * Qing Liu2 Krishna Kumar Singh2 Yilin Wang2
Jianming Zhang2 Bryan A. Plummer1 Zhe Lin2
1
Boston University 2 Adobe
nnli@bu.edu

{qingl,krishsin,yilwang,jianmzha}@adobe.com
bplum@bu.edu

zlin@adobe.com

Figure 1. The results of UniHuman on diverse real-world images. UniHuman learns informative representations by leveraging multiple
data sources and connections between related tasks, achieving high-quality results across various human image editing objectives.

Abstract
Human image editing includes tasks like changing a person’s pose, their clothing, or editing the image according
to a text prompt. However, prior work often tackles these
tasks separately, overlooking the benefit of mutual reinforcement from learning them jointly. In this paper, we
propose UniHuman, a unified model that addresses multiple facets of human image editing in real-world settings.
To enhance the model’s generation quality and generalization capacity, we leverage guidance from human visual encoders and introduce a lightweight pose-warping module
that can exploit different pose representations, accommodating unseen textures and patterns. Furthermore, to bridge
the disparity between existing human editing benchmarks
with real-world data, we curated 400K high-quality human
image-text pairs for training and collected 2K human images for out-of-domain testing, both encompassing diverse
clothing styles, backgrounds, and age groups. Experiments
on both in-domain and out-of-domain test sets demonstrate
that UniHuman outperforms task-specific models by a significant margin. In user studies, UniHuman is preferred by
the users in an average of 77% of cases. Our project is
available at this link.

* Work during Nannan Li’s 2023 summer internship at Adobe Research.

1. Introduction
In the realm of computer graphics and computer vision, the
synthesis and manipulation of human images have evolved
into a captivating and transformative field. This field holds
invaluable applications covering a range of domains: reposing strives to generate a new pose of a person given a target
pose [2, 43, 45, 47], virtual try-on aims to seamlessly fit a
new garment onto a person [23, 26, 48], and text-to-image
editing manipulate a person’s clothing styles based on text
prompts [5, 11, 12, 40]. However, most approaches address
these tasks in isolation, neglecting the benefits of learning
them jointly to mutually reinforce one another via the utilization of auxiliary information provided by related tasks
[9, 16, 42]. In addition, few studies have explored effective
ways to adapt to unseen human-in-the-wild cases.
In response to these challenges, our goal is to unify multiple human image editing tasks in a single model, boosting
performance in all settings. Thus, we propose UniHuman,
a unified model that exploits the synergies among reposing,
virtual try-on, and text manipulation for in-the-wild human
image editing. Fig. 1 shows UniHuman’s high-quality generations can both preserve the clothing identity and recover
texture details. While prior work [7] made initial attempts
to bridge the visual and text domains, connections within
visual tasks remain largely under-explored. In contrast, our

2039

