This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modality-Collaborative Test-Time Adaptation for Action Recognition
Baochen Xiong1,2,3 , Xiaoshan Yang1,2,3 , Yaguang Song2 , Yaowei Wang2 , Changsheng Xu1,2,3*
1

State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems (MAIS), Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
3

Peng Cheng Laboratory, China

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)

bcxiong@yeah.net, xiaoshan.yang@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, songyg01@pcl.ac.cn, wangyw@pcl.ac.cn, csxu@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Action recognition is a very challenging task, which requires complex motion analysis of video sequence information. It has broad application prospects and important
research value in security monitoring, health management,
smart home and other fields. With the development of multimodal technology, multimodal data fusion is a promising
* Corresponding author.

Source

SSFR
Proposed Method

Target

Video-based Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (VUDA)
method improves the generalization of the video model, enabling it to be applied to action recognition tasks in different environments. However, these methods require continuous access to source data during the adaptation process,
which are impractical in real scenarios where the source
videos are not available with concerns in transmission efficiency or privacy issues. To address this problem, in this paper, we focus on the Multimodal Video Test-Time Adaptation
(MVTTA) task. Existing image-based TTA methods cannot
be directly applied to this task because videos have domain
shifts in multimodal and temporal, which brings difficulties
to adaptation. To address the above challenges, we propose a Modality-Collaborative Test-Time Adaptation (MCTTA) Network. MC-TTA contains maintain teacher and
student memory banks respectively for generating pseudoprototypes and target-prototypes. In the teacher model,
we propose Self-assembled Source-friendly Feature Reconstruction (SSFR) to encourage the teacher memory bank to
store features that are more likely to be consistent with the
source distribution. Through multimodal prototype alignment and cross-modal relative consistency, our method can
effectively alleviate domain shift in videos. We evaluate the
proposed model on four public video datasets. The results
show that our model outperforms existing state-of-the-art
methods.

Without Considering
Modality Correspondence

RGB Feature
Space

Pseudo:

Target:

Flow Feature
Space

Adaptation

Modality Correspondence

Figure 1. Main idea of the proposed Modality-collaborative TestTime Tdaptation (MC-TTA). Only pre-trained source model and
unlabeled target videos can be used for target model learning.
We propose Self-assembled Source-friendly Feature Reconstruction (SSFR) module to construct pseudo-source domain features
from target domain. In addition, modality correspondence is explored to maintain good discriminability for modalities susceptible
to domain shifts.

way to solve this task. In particular, RGB provides rich
scene context information, while optical flow captures key
motion attributes that complement the visual features for
more accurate action understanding.
Deep neural network has made significant progress in
the supervised learning of large-scale labeled data, and it
has achieved excellent performance in the task of action
recognition [15, 37, 42, 46, 47]. However, when there is
a distribution shift between the data of the test environment
(i.e. the target domain) and the data of the training environment (i.e. the source domain), the multimodal action
recognition model is more vulnerable to the impact of distribution changes [3]. Therefore, it is very important for the
model to quickly adapt to the new multimodal data during
the test to obtain better performance, i.e., test-time adaptation (TTA). This is different from the usual domain adaptive
action recognition task settings [8, 11], which can access
source data during training. In TTA, we only have access
to model parameters pre-trained on the source data and then

26732

