This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CroSel: Cross Selection of Confident Pseudo Labels
for Partial-Label Learning
Shiyu Tian1

Hongxin Wei2 Yiqun Wang1 Lei Feng3 *
1
Chongqing University
2
Southern University of Science and Technology
3
Singapore University of Technology and Design

tiansy7@foxmail.com, weihx@sustech.edu.cn, yiqun.wang@cqu.edu.cn, lfengqaq@gmail.com

Abstract
Partial-label learning (PLL) is an important weakly supervised learning problem, which allows each training example to have a candidate label set instead of a single
ground-truth label. Identification-based methods have been
widely explored to tackle label ambiguity issues in PLL,
which regard the true label as a latent variable to be identified. However, identifying the true labels accurately and
completely remains challenging, causing noise in pseudo
labels during model training. In this paper, we propose a
new method called CroSel, which leverages historical predictions from the model to identify true labels for most training examples. First, we introduce a cross selection strategy, which enables two deep models to select true labels
of partially labeled data for each other. Besides, we propose a novel consistency regularization term called co-mix
to avoid sample waste and tiny noise caused by false selection. In this way, CroSel can pick out the true labels of
most examples with high precision. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the superiority of CroSel, which consistently
outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods on benchmark datasets. Additionally, our method achieves over 90%
accuracy and quantity for selecting true labels on CIFARtype datasets under various settings.

1. Introduction
The past few years have seen an increased interest in deep
learning due to its outstanding performance in various application domains, including image processing [3], automatic driving [38], and medical diagnosis [23]. The success of deep learning heavily relies on a massive amount
of fully labeled data. However, it is challenging to obtain a large-scale dataset with completely accurate annotations in the real world. To address this challenge, many
* Corresponding author.

researchers have explored a promising weakly supervised
learning problem called partial-label learning (PLL) [5, 7,
12, 26, 27, 29, 35, 36, 39, 41], where each training example
to have a set of candidate labels that includes the true label.
This problem arises in many real-world tasks such as automatic image annotation [2] and facial age estimation [22].
As PLL focuses on multi-class classification, there is
only one ground-truth label for each training example, and
other labels in the candidate label set are actually wrong
(false positive) labels, which would have a negative impact
on model training. Therefore, there exists the challenge of
label ambiguity in PLL. To address this challenge, the current mainstream solution is to disambiguate the candidate
labels so as to figure out the true label for each training instance [7, 14, 17, 19, 43]. However, most of the existing
disambiguation methods normally leverage simple heuristics to iteratively update the labeling confidences or pseudo
labels [6, 7, 19, 29, 36], which could not achieve convincing
performance in identifying the true label during the training
phase. Generally, if more true labels of training instances
can be identified, we can train a better model. This serves
as our primary motivation for identifying as many true labels as possible for training instances, ultimately resulting
in the creation of a desired model.
In this paper, we propose a method called CroSel (Cross
Selection of Confident Pseudo Labels), which leverages historical prediction from deep neural networks to accurately
identify true labels for most training examples. Our selecting criteria are based on the assumption that if a model
consistently predicts the same label for an input image with
high confidence and low volatility, then that label has a high
probability of being the true label for that example. Using
the cross selection strategy, the true labels of the vast majority of training examples can be accurately identified, with
only negligible noise. Moreover, in order to avoid sample waste and tiny noise resulting from the selection, we
also propose a co-mix consistency regularization to gener-

19479

