This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image Processing GNN: Breaking Rigidity in Super-Resolution
Yuchuan Tian1 , Hanting Chen2 , Chao Xu1 , Yunhe Wang2∗
1

National Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University. 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab.
tianyc@stu.pku.edu.cn, yunhe.wang@huawei.com

Abstract
Super-Resolution (SR) reconstructs high-resolution images from low-resolution ones. CNNs and window-attention
methods are two major categories of canonical SR models. However, these measures are rigid: in both operations, each pixel gathers the same number of neighboring pixels, hindering their effectiveness in SR tasks. Alternatively, we leverage the flexibility of graphs and propose the Image Processing GNN (IPG) model to break the
rigidity that dominates previous SR methods. Firstly, SR
is unbalanced in that most reconstruction efforts are concentrated to a small proportion of detail-rich image parts.
Hence, we leverage degree flexibility by assigning higher
node degrees to detail-rich image nodes. Then in order to
construct graphs for SR-effective aggregation, we treat images as pixel node sets rather than patch nodes. Lastly, we
hold that both local and global information are crucial for
SR performance. In the hope of gathering pixel information from both local and global scales efficiently via flexible graphs, we search node connections within nearby regions to construct local graphs; and find connections within
a strided sampling space of the whole image for global
graphs. The flexibility of graphs boosts the SR performance
of the IPG model. Experiment results on various datasets
demonstrates that the proposed IPG outperforms State-ofthe-Art baselines. Codes are available at this link.

1. Introduction
The ill-posed task of Super-Resolution (SR) constructs
high-resolution images from low-resolution ones. SR works
typically apply Deep Neural Network (DNN) knowledge
learned from High-Resolution training images to construct
missing details in low-resolution inputs. Existing DNN
variants for classical SR tasks include CNNs [16, 24, 50]
and Transformers [5, 6, 23]. These measures have proved
effective in creating High-Resolution images, and are used
in real-world applications like medical imaging [10], re∗ Corresponding author

Convolution

Self-Attention

KNN Graph

Ours

Figure 1. Convolution (left), Self-Attention (middle-left), KNN
Graph Aggregation (middle-right), and Graph Aggregation in IPG
(right). Compared with other methods, IPG graph aggregation
considers the unbalanced nature of SR: detail-rich, high-frequency
image nodes (red) have higher node degrees; while flat, lowfrequency image nodes (blue) require fewer aggregations.

mote sensing [15], et cetera.
Despite various measures, it is taken for granted that
mainstream SR models treat all pixels in a fairly rigid
manner. For instance, as shown in Figure 1, in convolution layers of the CNN-based SR model VDSR [16], the
same convolution kernel scans through all pixels of feature
maps, i.e. each pixel is rigidly designated to communicate
with its nearest neighbors; in the Transformer-based model
SwinIR [23], all pixels are assigned to equal-sized attention
grids for self-attention operations. In both examples, each
pixel aggregates information from a fixed number of pixels
within a neighborhood of fixed size.
Efforts have been made to overcome the rigidity of convolution and window-attention operations. For example,
some recent SR research tries to enhance SR models by
enlarging self-attention grids [5, 46] and designing striped
global attention windows [6, 22]. But these improvements
also introduce a large computation burden. Some other
works [12, 26, 52] leverage the flexibility of graphs and
propose graph-based methods. With content-based graphs
constructed from patch nodes, each image patch could aggregate top-k relevant but distant parts beyond hard local
boundaries in convolution and window-attention.
However, these graph measures have limited flexibility
because the lopsided nature of SR is overlooked. In SR
tasks, only a small proportion of high-frequency pixels require hard reconstruction efforts; the majority of pixels are
located in flat, low-frequency regions and thus almost left
intact [9]. In response to the imbalance, SR methods should

24108

