This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Detection of Long Consistent Cycles
and its Application to Distributed Synchronization *
Shaohan Li
University of Minnesota

Yunpeng Shi
University of California, Davis

Gilad Lerman
University of Minnesota

li000743@umn.edu

ypshi@ucdavis.edu

lerman@umn.edu

Abstract
Group synchronization plays a crucial role in global
pipelines for Structure from Motion (SfM). Its formulation is
nonconvex and it is faced with highly corrupted measurements.
Cycle consistency has been effective in addressing these challenges. However, computationally efficient solutions are needed
for cycles longer than three, especially in practical scenarios
where 3-cycles are unavailable. To overcome this computational
bottleneck, we propose an algorithm for group synchronization
that leverages information from cycles of lengths ranging from
three to six with a time complexity of order O(n3) (or O(n2.373)
when using a faster matrix multiplication algorithm). We establish non-trivial theory for this and related methods that achieves
competitive sample complexity, assuming the uniform corruption model. To advocate the practical need for our method, we
consider distributed group synchronization, which requires at
least 4-cycles, and we illustrate state-of-the-art performance by
our method in this context.

1. Introduction
Structure from Motion (SfM) asks to recover the 3D structure
of a stationary scene from multiple images taken by cameras
from different orientations and locations. In the past decade, the
global SfM pipeline has become increasingly popular due to its
several advantages over the incremental pipelines [17, 31]. First
of all, global SfM requires only one implementation of bundle
adjustment, making it more efficient in computation. Second,
it estimates camera poses in a global optimization framework
which mitigates the drifting issue of the incremental pipelines.
Despite the popularity of global SfM pipelines, the estimation
of global camera poses (e.g., orientations) remains a highly challenging problem. For instance, estimating camera orientations
from their relative measurements, often called rotation synchronization, is a highly nonconvex graph optimization problem.
In typical scenarios of highly noisy or corrupted measurements
* This work was supported by NSF award DMS-2152766.
Supplementary code: https://github.com/sli743/LongSync

of relative orientations, many common solutions of rotation
synchronization have poor accuracy and slow convergence.
Given these challenges, theoretical developments have
demonstrated the critical role of cycle-consistency information
in inferring corrupted measurements [25]. In practice, the
consistency constraint on 3-cycles was utilized to estimate
the error of each measured relative orientation. It also helped
nonconvex iterative rotation synchronization solvers avoid
spurious local minima and achieve significantly higher accuracy
[39]. However, the usage of 3-cycles largely limits the
application of these improved algorithms to other important
scenarios. One scenario involves a sparse viewing graph lacking
sufficient 3-cycles. This often occurs when the size of the graph
is too large to densely measure the relative orientations on its
edges, which could happen in certain case for the molecular
orientation estimation in cryo-electron microscopy imaging.
Another scenario is orientation estimation for each piece of
jigsaw puzzles, where the graph is a 2D lattice and 3-cycle
does not exist. Lastly, in distributed SfM, edges between any
two clusters of nodes form a bipartite graph, and cycles of odd
length do not exist. Our numerical results primarily emphasize
the practical scenario of distributed SfM, which holds particular
relevance for the broader computer vision community.
Despite the multiple critical applications of long-cycle
consistency, inferring measurement noise from long cycles is
challenging in both computation and theory. First of all, the
number of cycles grows exponentially with the cycle length, and
measuring cycle inconsistencies for each long cycle is computationally intractable. Moreover, developing theoretical guarantees
for long-cycle inference methods is fundamentally more difficult
than the 3-cycle case. Indeed, in a random graph setting, a set of
longer cycles are more likely to share common edges, making
their consistency score highly correlated. Therefore, new tools
are required to handle the correlated empirical process.
In this work, we propose the first practical method,
LongSync, for inferring edge corruption levels from long
cycle consistency information. For this purpose, we carefully
modify and vectorize the Cycle Edge Message Passing (CEMP)
method [25]. This nontrivial modification drastically reduces its
computational complexity when using longer cycles. Moreover,

5260

