This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Upscale-A-Video: Temporal-Consistent Diffusion Model
for Real-World Video Super-Resolution
Shangchen Zhou∗

Peiqing Yang∗ Jianyi Wang Yihang Luo
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

Chen Change Loy

https://shangchenzhou.com/projects/upscale-a-video
“A majestic lion steps down from a withered tree and enters the forest”

Real-world Video

Input

Upscaled Video

ResShift

SD ×4 Upscaler

StableSR

“Campfire in a snowy forest with starry sky”

AIGC Video

RealBasicVSR

Upscaled Video

Upscale-A-Video (Ours)

Figure 1. Video super-resolution comparisons on both real-world and AI-generated videos. Our proposed Upscale-A-Video showcases
excellent upscaling capabilities. By using appropriate text prompts, it achieves impressive results characterized by finer details and heightened visual realism. (Zoom-in for best view)

Abstract
Text-based diffusion models have exhibited remarkable
success in generation and editing, showing great promise
for enhancing visual content with their generative prior.
However, applying these models to video super-resolution
remains challenging due to the high demands for output fidelity and temporal consistency, which is complicated by
the inherent randomness in diffusion models. Our study
introduces Upscale-A-Video, a text-guided latent diffusion
* Equal contribution.

framework for video upscaling. This framework ensures
temporal coherence through two key mechanisms: locally,
it integrates temporal layers into U-Net and VAE-Decoder,
maintaining consistency within short sequences; globally,
without training, a flow-guided recurrent latent propagation
module is introduced to enhance overall video stability by
propagating and fusing latent across the entire sequences.
Thanks to the diffusion paradigm, our model also offers
greater flexibility by allowing text prompts to guide texture
creation and adjustable noise levels to balance restoration
and generation, enabling a trade-off between fidelity and

2535

