This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PairAug: What Can Augmented Image-Text Pairs Do for Radiology?
∗

∗

Yutong Xie1 Qi Chen1 Sinuo Wang1 Minh-Son To4 Iris Lee4 Ee Win Khoo4
†
Kerolos Hendy4 Daniel Koh4 Yong Xia2,3 Qi Wu1
1

2

Australian Institute for Machine Learning (AIML), The University of Adelaide, Australia
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
3
Ningbo Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
4
South Australia Medical Imaging, Australia
yutong.xie678@gmail.com, {qi.chen04, qi.wu01}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Current vision-language pre-training (VLP) methodologies predominantly depend on paired image-text datasets,
a resource that is challenging to acquire in radiology due
to privacy considerations and labelling complexities. Data
augmentation provides a practical solution to overcome the
issue of data scarcity, however, most augmentation methods exhibit a limited focus, prioritising either image or text
augmentation exclusively. Acknowledging this limitation,
our objective is to devise a framework capable of concurrently augmenting medical image and text data. We design
a Pairwise Augmentation (PairAug) approach that contains
an Inter-patient Augmentation (InterAug) branch and an
Intra-patient Augmentation (IntraAug) branch. Specifically,
the InterAug branch of our approach generates radiology
images using synthesised yet plausible reports derived from
a Large Language Model (LLM). The generated pairs can be
considered a collection of new patient cases since they are
artificially created and may not exist in the original dataset.
In contrast, the IntraAug branch uses newly generated reports to manipulate images. This process allows us to create
new paired data for each individual with diverse medical
conditions. Our extensive experiments on various downstream tasks covering medical image classification zero-shot
and fine-tuning analysis demonstrate that our PairAug, concurrently expanding both image and text data, substantially
outperforms image-/text-only expansion baselines and advanced medical VLP baselines. Our code is released at
https://github.com/YtongXie/PairAug.

1. Introduction
Vision-language pre-training (VLP) has garnered considerable attention in recent years [25], yielding substantial
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author.

benefits across a wide spectrum of downstream tasks. However, the application of VLP within the medical domain faces
a complex challenge, largely attributable to the inherent requirement for extensive data. For instance, the Contrastive
Language–Image Pretraining (CLIP) model [25] necessitates
training on a dataset comprising 400 million image-text pairs
curated from the internet. In stark contrast, the total volume
of publicly accessible medical images and reports is significantly lower by several orders of magnitude. This scarcity
is primarily due to privacy considerations, data acquisition
challenges, and the rarity of certain diseases [8].
Data augmentation algorithms serve to address the sample size limit without altering the base model architecture,
making them widely applicable across various tasks and algorithms. By expanding medical datasets using such methods,
we can not only enhance the size and diversity of training
datasets but also impute missing values and maintain patient privacy, thereby reducing dependence on real-world
data acquisition. Many studies [7, 11, 14, 22, 24, 30] have
explored image augmentation techniques designed specifically for medical image expansion, which mainly include
traditional spatial transformations and morphological operations, as well as recent image synthesis techniques. These
studies demonstrate significant potential in enhancing the
accuracy of data-driven diagnostics and prognostics applications. Influenced by the recent advancements in Natural
Language Processing (NLP), particularly the development of
Large Language Models (LLMs) [1, 5, 23, 34], many studies
have concentrated on the augmentation of medical textual
data [6, 32, 44] such as traditional synonym replacement,
random deletion and random insertion, as well as more recent methods using LLMs to generate reliable text samples.
Despite considerable advances in the field, a significant
proportion of medical data augmentation algorithms remain
narrowly focused, concentrating exclusively on either image
or text augmentation. In the context of VLP, image and text

11652

