This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Photo-SLAM: Real-time Simultaneous Localization and Photorealistic Mapping
for Monocular, Stereo, and RGB-D Cameras
Huajian Huang1 Longwei Li2 Hui Cheng2 Sai-Kit Yeung1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Sun Yat-sen University
hhuangbg@connect.ust.hk, lilw23@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, chengh9@mail.sysu.edu.cn, saikit@ust.hk
1

Abstract
The integration of neural rendering and the SLAM system recently showed promising results in joint localization
and photorealistic view reconstruction. However, existing
methods, fully relying on implicit representations, are so
resource-hungry that they cannot run on portable devices,
which deviates from the original intention of SLAM. In this
paper, we present Photo-SLAM, a novel SLAM framework
with a hyper primitives map. Specifically, we simultaneously exploit explicit geometric features for localization and
learn implicit photometric features to represent the texture information of the observed environment. In addition
to actively densifying hyper primitives based on geometric
features, we further introduce a Gaussian-Pyramid-based
training method to progressively learn multi-level features,
enhancing photorealistic mapping performance. The extensive experiments with monocular, stereo, and RGB-D
datasets prove that our proposed system Photo-SLAM significantly outperforms current state-of-the-art SLAM systems for online photorealistic mapping, e.g., PSNR is 30%
higher and rendering speed is hundreds of times faster in
the Replica dataset. Moreover, the Photo-SLAM can run at
real-time speed using an embedded platform such as Jetson AGX Orin, showing the potential of robotics applications. Project Page and code: https://huajianup.
github.io/research/Photo-SLAM/.

1. Introduction
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) using
cameras is a fundamental problem in both computer vision and robotics, seeking to enable autonomous systems
to navigate and comprehend their surroundings. Traditional SLAM systems [7–9, 24] primarily focus on geometric mapping, providing accurate but visually simplistic representations of the environment. However, recent developments in neural rendering [35, 40] have demonstrated the
potential of integrating photorealistic view reconstruction

Figure 1. Rendering and trajectory results. Photo-SLAM can reconstruct high-fidelity views of scenes using monocular, stereo,
and RGB-D cameras while render speed is up to 1000 FPS.

into the SLAM pipeline, enhancing the perception capabilities of robotic systems.
Despite the promising results achieved through the integration of neural rendering and SLAM, existing methods simply and heavily rely on implicit representations,
making them computationally intensive and unsuitable for
deployment on resource-constrained devices. For example, Nice-SLAM [46] leverages a hierarchical grid [42] to
store learnable features representing the environment while
ESLAM [16] utilizes multi-scale compact tensor components [3]. They then jointly estimate the camera poses and
optimize features by minimizing the reconstruction loss of
a batch of ray sampling [21]. Such an optimization process is time-consuming. Consequently, it is indispensable
for them to incorporate corresponding depth information
obtained from various sources such as RGB-D cameras,
dense optical flow estimators [33], or monocular depth es-

21584

