This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Defense Against Adversarial Attacks on No-Reference Image Quality Models
with Gradient Norm Regularization
Yujia Liu1,2 *, Chenxi Yang3,1 *, Dingquan Li4 , Jianhao Ding1,2 , Tingting Jiang1,2B
1
NERCVT, School of Computer Science, Peking University, China
2
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University, China
3
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, China 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, China
{yujia liu,dingquanli,ttjiang}@pku.edu.cn; {yangchenxi,djh01998}@stu.pku.edu.cn

predicted score: 37.3

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have demonstrated remarkable performance across various domains [11, 16, 22], and
Image Quality Assessment (IQA) is one of them. IQA aims
to predict the quality of images consistent with human perception. And it could be categorized as Full-Reference (FR)
and No-Reference (NR) according to the access to the reference images. While FR-IQA models specialize in assess* Equal contribution

predicted score: 33.2
MOS: 30.9

Difference of predicted scores

The task of No-Reference Image Quality Assessment
(NR-IQA) is to estimate the quality score of an input image without additional information. NR-IQA models play
a crucial role in the media industry, aiding in performance
evaluation and optimization guidance. However, these models are found to be vulnerable to adversarial attacks, which
introduce imperceptible perturbations to input images, resulting in significant changes in predicted scores. In this
paper, we propose a defense method to improve the stability
in predicted scores when attacked by small perturbations,
thus enhancing the adversarial robustness of NR-IQA models. To be specific, we present theoretical evidence showing that the magnitude of score changes is related to the ℓ1
norm of the model’s gradient with respect to the input image. Building upon this theoretical foundation, we propose
a norm regularization training strategy aimed at reducing
the ℓ1 norm of the gradient, thereby boosting the robustness of NR-IQA models. Experiments conducted on four
NR-IQA baseline models demonstrate the effectiveness of
our strategy in reducing score changes in the presence of
adversarial attacks. To the best of our knowledge, this work
marks the first attempt to defend against adversarial attacks
on NR-IQA models. Our study offers valuable insights into
the adversarial robustness of NR-IQA models and provides
a foundation for future research in this area.

predicted score: 98.6

MOS: 30.9

predicted score: 33.0

Mean Opinion Scores (MOS)

Figure 1. Comparison of DBCNN [46] trained with and without
the proposed Norm regularization Training (NT) strategy under
the Perceptual Attack [47] using the same setting. The absolute
differences between predicted scores before and after the attack
(|safter − sbefore |) for all test images are presented, with the fitted
distribution displayed on the right side of the picture. An example
is shown with predicted scores before and after the attack (zoom in
for a better view). It is evident that DBCNN+NT exhibits smaller
score changes compared to the baseline model.

ing the perceptual disparities between two images, NR-IQA
models focus on estimating a quality score for a single input image. The importance of IQA extends to many applications such as image transport systems [8], image inpainting [14] and so on [6, 27, 45]. Leveraging the capabilities of DNNs, recent IQA models have achieved remarkable
consistency with human opinion scores [32].
However, the reliability of DNNs is challenged since
they are found to be susceptible to adversarial perturbations. Attackers would mislead DNNs to make decisions
inconsistent with human perception by adding carefully designed perturbations to inputs. This manipulation technique

25554

