This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SuperPrimitive: Scene Reconstruction at a Primitive Level
Kirill Mazur, Gwangbin Bae, Andrew J. Davison
Dyson Robotics Lab, Imperial College London
{k.mazur21, g.bae, a.davison}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Joint camera pose and dense geometry estimation from
a set of images or a monocular video remains a challenging
problem due to its computational complexity and inherent
visual ambiguities. Most dense incremental reconstruction
systems operate directly on image pixels and solve for their
3D positions using multi-view geometry cues. Such pixellevel approaches suffer from ambiguities or violations of
multi-view consistency (e.g. caused by textureless or specular surfaces).
We address this issue with a new image representation
which we call a SuperPrimitive. SuperPrimitives are obtained by splitting images into semantically correlated local
regions and enhancing them with estimated surface normal
directions, both of which are predicted by state-of-the-art
single image neural networks. This provides a local geometry estimate per SuperPrimitive, while their relative positions are adjusted based on multi-view observations.
We demonstrate the versatility of our new representation by addressing three 3D reconstruction tasks:
depth completion, few-view structure from motion, and
monocular dense visual odometry.
Project page:
https://makezur.github.io/SuperPrimitive/

1. Introduction
Enriching monocular incremental reconstruction with prior
world knowledge is essential for resolving visual ambiguities. This issue is particularly prevalent in scenarios
with scarce data observations available: a notable example
would be monocular visual SLAM, where images are being
streamed from a camera into the system in real-time.
When a monocular vision system encounters a new scene
region, it must estimate the region’s geometry based on a
very limited number of observations. Without this, continuous camera motion tracking would not be possible. Once
the scene region is thoroughly observed, the initial geometry estimate should be refined to better explain the multiview information.
This naturally leads to a question: what sort of priors
are effective in both providing reliable initial geometry es-

Extracted SuperPrimitive

I"

I!

[", $]

Figure 1. Multi-View Geometry with SuperPrimitives. SuperPrimitives are extracted from an input frame by dividing it into image segments equipped with estimated surface normal directions
(bottom-left). Each SuperPrimitive induces a dense reconstruction
within the corresponding image segment up to a priori unknown
scale. Different possible reconstructions are shown in light blue.
The scales are then jointly optimised together with a relative camera pose to fit multi-view photometric constraints (visualised in
green and red). The resulting dense reconstruction of the reference frame is shown in the top.

timates and supporting multi-view consistency? Geometric
priors generally fall into one of two categories: local and
global. Local priors, such as smoothness assumption [30] or
surface normal regularisation [52], impose additional constraints within a small neighbourhood. Global priors, on the
other hand, aim to impose constraints on a larger scale, such
as depth prediction [2, 11].
Our key observation is that some of the geometrical correlations are more reliable than the others, and therefore
could be safely “locked in” together within local regions

4979

