This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Object Pose Estimation via the Aggregation of Diffusion Features
Tianfu Wang1,2,3 , Guosheng Hu4 , Hongguang Wang1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
4
Oosto, Belfast, U.K.
wangtianfu100@gmail.com, huguosheng100@gmail.com, hgwang@sia.cn

Abstract
Estimating the pose of objects from images is a crucial task of 3D scene understanding, and recent approaches
have shown promising results on very large benchmarks.
However, these methods experience a significant performance drop when dealing with unseen objects. We believe
that it results from the limited generalizability of image features. To address this problem, we have an in-depth analysis on the features of diffusion models, e.g. Stable Diffusion, which hold substantial potential for modeling unseen
objects. Based on this analysis, we then innovatively introduce these diffusion features for object pose estimation.
To achieve this, we propose three distinct architectures that
can effectively capture and aggregate diffusion features of
different granularity, greatly improving the generalizability
of object pose estimation. Our approach outperforms the
state-of-the-art methods by a considerable margin on three
popular benchmark datasets, LM, O-LM, and T-LESS. In
particular, our method achieves higher accuracy than the
previous best arts on unseen objects: 98.2% vs. 93.5% on
Unseen LM, 85.9% vs. 76.3% on Unseen O-LM, showing
the strong generalizability of our method. Our code is released at https://github.com/Tianfu18/diff-feats-pose.

1. Introduction
Estimating the pose of objects from images is crucial for
various real-world applications, including robot manipulation [4, 38, 47], augmented reality [23], and many others.
Thanks to the advancements in deep learning, the performance of object pose estimation has significantly improved.
The most popular methods for object pose estimation
can be categorized into three approaches: indirect methods
[7, 13, 19, 27, 29, 43], direct methods [3, 5, 15, 22, 39, 41],
and template-based methods [1, 16, 18, 35, 40]. Templatebased methods involve matching the input image of an ob-

ject to a set of template images with various poses rendered
by 3D models to achieve the object’s pose. In this work, we
focus on template-based methods due to their simplicity, increasing popularity, and promising accuracy.
Despite the success of the aforementioned methods,
image-based object pose estimation methods have not yet
become widely adopted in real-world applications. In particular, the ability to handle unseen objects without the need
for retraining is crucial for quick and convenient adaptation
to new scenarios. Recent works [24, 36, 46] have begun to
tackle this challenge. The method [36] introduces a novel
architecture with multiple decoders to adapt to different objects. The results indeed demonstrate the interesting generalization to unseen objects, however, these objects must
share great similarity with the training objects. Methods
[24, 46] propose the use of local object representations for
template matching. Their methods have achieved interesting results, but a noticeable performance gap remains between seen and unseen objects. For example, the accuracy
of one state-of-the-art method [24] is 99.1% on Seen LM
dataset and 94.4% on Unseen LM dataset, resulting in a performance gap of approximately 4.7%.
The performance gap in the existing methods [24, 36, 46]
is empirically found to mainly result from the inadequacy
of their discriminative features. This finding, which will be
detailed in Sec. 3.2, inspires us to learn image representations which can generalize well to unseen objects. On the
other hand, we realize that text-to-image diffusion models
have already proven their ability to generate high-quality
images with robust features which can generalize well to
different scenarios [20, 21, 37, 42, 44]. This promising generalizability can be attributed to four main factors: 1) Text
supervision with rich semantic content can lead to highly
discriminative features. 2) Diffusion models encode the
information at various timesteps, capturing a spectrum of
granularity and diverse attributes. 3) Diffusion models [44]
are found capable of encoding 3D characteristics, including scene geometry, depth, etc. 4) Diffusion models, like

10238

