This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hide in Thicket: Generating Imperceptible and Rational Adversarial
Perturbations on 3D Point Clouds
Tianrui Lou1 Xiaojun Jia2,∗ Jindong Gu3 Li Liu4 Siyuan Liang5 Bangyan He6 Xiaochun Cao1,∗
1

Sun Yat-Sen University 2 Nanyang Technological University 3 University of Oxford
4
National University of Defense Technology 5 National University of Singapore 6 Chinese Academy of Sciences
{loutianrui, jiaxiaojunqaq, pandaliang521}@gmail.com
li.liu@oulu.fi

hebangyan@iie.ac.cn

jindong.gu@siemens.com

caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial attack methods based on point manipulation
for 3D point cloud classification have revealed the fragility
of 3D models, yet the adversarial examples they produce
are easily perceived or defended against. The trade-off between the imperceptibility and adversarial strength leads
most point attack methods to inevitably introduce easily
detectable outlier points upon a successful attack. Another promising strategy, shape-based attack, can effectively eliminate outliers, but existing methods often suffer
significant reductions in imperceptibility due to irrational
deformations. We find that concealing deformation perturbations in areas insensitive to human eyes can achieve
a better trade-off between imperceptibility and adversarial
strength, specifically in parts of the object surface that are
complex and exhibit drastic curvature changes. Therefore,
we propose a novel shape-based adversarial attack method,
HiT-ADV, which initially conducts a two-stage search for attack regions based on saliency and imperceptibility scores,
and then adds deformation perturbations in each attack region using Gaussian kernel functions. Additionally, HiTADV is extendable to physical attack. We propose that
by employing benign resampling and benign rigid transformations, we can further enhance physical adversarial
strength with little sacrifice to imperceptibility. Extensive
experiments have validated the superiority of our method in
terms of adversarial and imperceptible properties in both
digital and physical spaces. Our code is avaliable at:
https://github.com/TRLou/HiT-ADV .

1. Introduction
In recent years, numerous models based on Deep Neural
Networks (DNNs) [7, 11, 31, 37, 48] have shown strong
performance in a broad spectrum of tasks, including 3D
data processing and analysis [13, 28, 30, 33, 53]. How-

Figure 1. Comparison of successful adversarial examples generated by point-based attack method [24] and HiT-ADV. The orange
points represent the central points of local shape deformations generated in HiT-ADV and the yellow points represent the outliers in
point-based attack. HiT-ADV has no outlier points and exhibits a
smooth surface. By concealing perturbations in complex areas, the
deformation perturbations become difficult to perceive.

ever, it has been observed that meticulously crafted, imperceptible perturbations can lead DNNs to produce erroneous
outputs [6, 8, 14, 15, 19, 20, 27, 42], highlighting their inherent vulnerability. This characteristic of DNNs significantly hinders their development in some safety-critical areas, e.g. autonomous driving [1, 4, 16, 36, 39] and robotic
task planning [21, 38]. Numerous point cloud adversarial
attacks have effectively compromised 3D point cloud models [10, 35, 43, 52], exposing their vulnerabilities. However, adversarial examples in point clouds are usually easily
perceived by the human vision compared to those in other
domains such as imaging, because point cloud data lacks
RGB information to conceal perturbations. Thus, achieving

24326

