This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Part-aware Unified Representation of Language and Skeleton for Zero-shot
Action Recognition
Anqi Zhu1 , Qiuhong Ke2, *, Mingming Gong1 , James Bailey1
1
The University of Melbourne; 2 Monash University
Parkville VIC 3052, Australia; Wellington Road, Clayton VIC 3800, Australia
azzh1@student.unimelb.edu.au, qiuhong.ke@monash.edu, {mingming.gong, baileyj}@unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
While remarkable progress has been made on supervised
skeleton-based action recognition, the challenge of zeroshot recognition remains relatively unexplored. In this paper, we argue that relying solely on aligning label-level semantics and global skeleton features is insufficient to effectively transfer locally consistent visual knowledge from
seen to unseen classes. To address this limitation, we introduce Part-aware Unified Representation between Language
and Skeleton (PURLS) to explore visual-semantic alignment
at both local and global scales. PURLS introduces a new
prompting module and a novel partitioning module to generate aligned textual and visual representations across different levels. The former leverages a pre-trained GPT-3
to infer refined descriptions of the global and local (bodypart-based and temporal-interval-based) movements from
the original action labels. The latter employs an adaptive
sampling strategy to group visual features from all body
joint movements that are semantically relevant to a given
description. Our approach is evaluated on various skeleton/language backbones and three large-scale datasets, i.e.,
NTU-RGB+D 60, NTU-RGB+D 120, and a newly curated
dataset Kinetics-skeleton 200. The results showcase the
universality and superior performance of PURLS, surpassing prior skeleton-based solutions and standard baselines
from other domains. The source codes can be accessed at
https://github.com/azzh1/PURLS.

1. Introduction
Human action recognition (HAR) is an important topic in
computer vision. As actions are the primary bridge for establishing communications between people and the outside
world, HAR is used in many application domains, such as
virtual reality [1, 37], automated driving [20, 44], video retrieval [49], and robotics [4, 39]. The visual input modal* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Examples of a seen class (’Hit another person with
something’) and an unseen class (’Shoot at the basket’) from NTURGB+D 120 [21]. While humans can quickly identify their similar hand movements and use this knowledge to distinguish the new
class from other unseen classes, label-based global feature learning does not facilitate the direct transfer of such local knowledge.

ity can vary, covering RGB videos, depth image sequences,
point clouds, and skeleton sequences [34]. During its early
stages and even until today, the advancement of HAR has
mainly been driven by RGB-based solutions due to their
natural data abundance [23, 35]. With the rise of pose
prediction and depth-sensing technologies [6, 21, 30], 3D skeleton sequences are becoming competitive substitutes
that can reach high-accuracy prediction while cutting down
computation, preserving profile privacy, and being robust by
excluding background or color noises from action subjects.
Due to these advantages, skeleton-based action recognition
is attracting increasing attention in recent years [24, 28, 47].
While remarkable progress has been made in this area,
most existing research [5, 11, 19, 22, 31, 32] focuses on recognizing actions in a fully supervised manner, i.e., their designs require annotated data of all action classes for model
training. Nevertheless, gathering labeled data for every potential action class is impractical, especially for rare or perilous actions. Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is a research direction that aims to address this issue. Previous ZSL approaches have focused on training models to align label embeddings with visual encoding outputs that are globally av-

18761

