This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SDSTrack: Self-Distillation Symmetric Adapter Learning for
Multi-Modal Visual Object Tracking
Xiaojun Hou1 , Jiazheng Xing1 , Yijie Qian1 , Yaowei Guo1 , Shuo Xin1 , Junhao Chen1 ,
Kai Tang1 , Mengmeng Wang1 , Zhengkai Jiang2 , Liang Liu3 ,* Yong Liu1 *
1
Zhejiang University 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent 3 Huzhou Institute, Zhejiang University
1

{xiaojunhou, jiazhengxing, yijieqian, yaoweiguo, shuoxin, chenjunhao
1∗

kaitang, mengmengwang}@zju.edu.cn
2

zhengkjiang@tencent.com

3∗

yongliu@iipc.zju.edu.cn

leonliuz@zju.edu.cn

Tuned parameters

Abstract
Multimodal Visual Object Tracking (VOT) has recently
gained significant attention due to its robustness. Early
research focused on fully fine-tuning RGB-based trackers,
which was inefficient and lacked generalized representation due to the scarcity of multimodal data. Therefore,
recent studies have utilized prompt tuning to transfer pretrained RGB-based trackers to multimodal data. However,
the modality gap limits pre-trained knowledge recall, and
the dominance of the RGB modality persists, preventing the
full utilization of information from other modalities. To
address these issues, we propose a novel symmetric multimodal tracking framework called SDSTrack. We introduce
lightweight adaptation for efficient fine-tuning, which directly transfers the feature extraction ability from RGB to
other domains with a small number of trainable parameters and integrates multimodal features in a balanced, symmetric manner. Furthermore, we design a complementary
masked patch distillation strategy to enhance the robustness of trackers in complex environments, such as extreme
weather, poor imaging, and sensor failure. Extensive experiments demonstrate that SDSTrack outperforms state-ofthe-art methods in various multimodal tracking scenarios,
including RGB+Depth, RGB+Thermal, and RGB+Event
tracking, and exhibits impressive results in extreme conditions. Our source code is available at: https://
github.com/hoqolo/SDSTrack.

1. Introduction
RGB-based visual object tracking has garnered considerable research attention in recent years, and several works
have achieved impressive tracking performance [4–7, 9, 13,
36, 53, 57, 61]. However, the performance of RGB-based
* Corresponding authors.

RGB
X-Modal

RGB
feature extraction

Fusion
X-Modal
feature extraction
(a) Previous symmetric framework

RGB

X-Modal

Frozen parameters

Fusion

RGB
feature extraction

(b) Previous asymmetric framework
RGB
X-Modal

RGB
feature extraction
Modal
X
X-Modal
feature
featureextraction
extraction
(c) SDSTrack (ours)

Fusion

Figure 1. Previous frameworks vs. SDSTrack. (a) Previous symmetric framework [58] has lots of training parameters and risk of
overfitting. (b) Previous asymmetric framework [71] regards RGB
as the primary modality and X-Modal as the auxiliary modality
with prompt tuning. (c) Our proposed SDSTrack utilizes adapterbased tuning to fine-tune the pre-trained RGB-based tracker in
a symmetric manner. “X-Modal” denotes modalities other than
RGB, which can be Depth, Thermal, Event, etc.

trackers often degrades in complex conditions, particularly
due to the degradation in imaging quality. This limitation
is critical in real-world applications, especially in safetysensitive scenarios like autonomous driving. Consequently,
there is a growing interest in incorporating multimodal images to obtain more comprehensive information, which has
also gained considerable attention in other areas such as object detection [23, 24, 46] and semantic segmentation [1–
3, 25, 37, 44, 68, 75], among others.

26551

