This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SUGAR

: Pre-training 3D Visual Representations for Robotics

Shizhe Chen†
†

Ricardo Garcia†

Ivan Laptev⋆

Cordelia Schmid†

Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University
⋆

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence

https://cshizhe.github.io/projects/robot_sugar.html

Pre-training

Abstract
Learning generalizable visual representations from Internet data has yielded promising results for robotics. Yet, prevailing approaches focus on pre-training 2D representations,
being sub-optimal to deal with occlusions and accurately
localize objects in complex 3D scenes. Meanwhile, 3D representation learning has been limited to single-object understanding. To address these limitations, we introduce a novel
3D pre-training framework for robotics named SUGAR that
captures semantic, geometric and affordance properties of
objects through 3D point clouds. We underscore the importance of cluttered scenes in 3D representation learning, and
automatically construct a multi-object dataset benefiting
from cost-free supervision in simulation. SUGAR employs
a versatile transformer-based model to jointly address five
pre-training tasks, namely cross-modal knowledge distillation for semantic learning, masked point modeling to understand geometry structures, grasping pose synthesis for
object affordance, 3D instance segmentation and referring
expression grounding to analyze cluttered scenes. We evaluate our learned representation on three robotic-related tasks,
namely, zero-shot 3D object recognition, referring expression grounding, and language-driven robotic manipulation.
Experimental results show that SUGAR’s 3D representation
outperforms state-of-the-art 2D and 3D representations.

1. Introduction
Visual perception plays an essential role in robotics and enables autonomous agents to understand and interact with
their physical environment. Nevertheless, learning generalizable visual representations for robotics is challenging due
to the scarcity of real robot data and the large variety of
real-world scenes. Despite substantial efforts in robot data
accumulation [2, 76, 77] and augmentation [39, 85], it remains prohibitively expensive to collect large-scale datasets
comprising a broad range of robotic tasks.
To alleviate the burden of data collection, recent endeavors [36, 37, 48, 49, 51, 62] have sought to leverage largescale internet data to pre-train 2D visual representations for

mUlti-object scenes

RGB

Depth

Geometry

Label

Semantic

Affordance

a blue plastic
water bottle
with a black lid

Robotics tasks

pick up the knife and leave it
on the chopping board

grasp the red cup and lift it

Figure 1. We introduce SUGAR , a pre-training framework for
robotic-related tasks, which learns semantic, geometry and affordance on both single- and multi-object scenes.

robotics. For example, MVP [62], VIP [48] and VC-1 [49]
use self-supervised learning on image or video datasets,
while EmbCLIP [37], R3M [51] and Voltron [36] further perform cross-modal pre-training based on videos with aligned
language descriptions. While these 2D representations have
demonstrated promising performance, they still fall short in
addressing occlusions in complex cluttered scenes [79] and
accurately predicting robotic actions [7] in the 3D world.
Recently, growing research attention has been paid to 3D
visual representations for robotics. A majority of approaches
train 3D-based models from scratch [7, 43, 69], potentially
losing the generalization ability. Several recent works lift pretrained 2D features to the 3D space [20, 34, 56, 89], which
compromise efficiency due to processing multi-view images
and do not fully take advantage of 3D data. To improve
3D representation learning, prior endeavours propose selfsupervised pre-training of 3D models [44, 53, 59, 86]. Pretraining in existing work, however, is typically limited to
single objects and complete point clouds, hence, ignoring

18049

