This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffForensics: Leveraging Diffusion Prior to Image Forgery Detection and
Localization
Zeqin Yu*∗,1
Jiangqun Ni†,2,3
Yuzhen Lin∗,4
Haoyi Deng4
Bin Li†,4
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
2
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University
3
Department of New Networks, Peng Cheng Laboratory
4
Guangdong Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing, Shenzhen University

Abstract

#𝟏 𝑪𝒍𝒂𝒔𝒔𝒊𝒇𝒊𝒄𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏

#𝟏 𝑻𝒂𝒎𝒑𝒆𝒓 𝒄𝒍𝒂𝒔𝒔𝒊𝒇𝒊𝒄𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏

#𝟐 𝑺𝒆𝒈𝒎𝒆𝒏𝒕𝒂𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏

As manipulating images may lead to misinterpretation
of the visual content, addressing the image forgery detection and localization (IFDL) problem has drawn serious
public concerns. In this work, we propose a simple assumption that the effective forensic method should focus on
the mesoscopic properties of images. Base on the assumption, a novel two-stage self-supervised framework leveraging the diffusion model for IFDL task, i.e., DiffForensics, is
proposed in this paper. The DiffForensics begins with selfsupervised denoising diffusion paradigm equipped with the
module of encoder-decoder structure, by freezing the pretrained encoder (e.g., in ADE-20K) to inherit macroscopic
features for general image characteristics, while encouraging the decoder to learn microscopic feature representation of images, enforcing the whole model to focus the
mesoscopic representations. The pre-trained model as a
prior, is then further fine-tuned for IFDL task with the customized Edge Cue Enhancement Module (ECEM), which
progressively highlights the boundary features within the
manipulated regions, thereby refining tampered area localization with better precision. Extensive experiments on several public challenging datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method compared with other state-ofthe-art methods. The proposed DiffForensics could significantly improve the model’s capabilities for both accurate
tamper detection and precise tamper localization while concurrently elevating its generalization and robustness.

1. Introduction
Manipulating images has become increasingly effortless as
rapid advances in image editing tools, such as GAN [24, 25]
and diffusion models [2, 36]. Users can easily forge on-thefly images that do not exist or realize. The risks posed by
* Equal contribution.

†Corresponding author.

Encoder

#𝟐 𝑫𝒐𝒖𝒃𝒍𝒆 𝑱𝑷𝑬𝑮 𝒅𝒆𝒕𝒆𝒄𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏

Encoder

#𝟑 𝑾𝒂𝒗𝒆𝒍𝒆𝒕 𝒕𝒓𝒂𝒏𝒔𝒇𝒐𝒓𝒎 𝑪𝑳

#𝟑 𝑶𝒃𝒋𝒆𝒄𝒕 𝑫𝒆𝒕𝒆𝒄𝒕𝒊𝒐𝒏

……

……

𝐌𝐚𝐜𝐫𝐨 𝐅𝐞𝐚𝐭𝐮𝐫𝐞 𝐄𝐱𝐭𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐭𝐢𝐨𝐧

𝐌𝐢𝐜𝐫𝐨 𝐅𝐞𝐚𝐭𝐮𝐫𝐞 𝐄𝐱𝐭𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐭𝐢𝐨𝐧
𝐷𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛

𝑅𝑒𝑎𝑙 𝑣. 𝑠. 𝐹𝑜𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑟𝑦

𝑅𝑒𝑎𝑙

ADE20K

DDPM

𝐹𝑜𝑟𝑔𝑒𝑟𝑦
𝐸𝑑𝑖𝑡𝑖𝑛𝑔

𝐷𝐺𝑀

𝐿𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙𝑖𝑧a𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛

M𝐞𝐬𝐨𝐬𝐜𝐨𝐩𝐢𝐜 𝐅𝐞𝐚𝐭𝐮𝐫𝐞 𝐄𝐱𝐭𝐫𝐚𝐜𝐭𝐢𝐨𝐧

Figure 1. Comparison of the proposed pipeline (lower) with the
conventional one (upper). Our approach could effectively integrate the macroscopic features with the microscopic features so
that the model concentrates on the mesoscopic properties of tampered images and achieves better IFDL performance in both Artificial Editing and Deep Generative Model (DGM) images.

such forged images in the wrong hands are obvious in terms
of politics, economics, and personal privacy. Accordingly,
the countermeasures being desired to identify image forgery
have become an urgent topic in social security.
To push the frontier of image forensics, in this work, we
study the image forgery detection and localization (IFDL)
task, particularly partial modifications that change the image semantics. In general, the IFDL task involves binary
classification (authentic versus forgery) at both the image
level (detection) and the pixel level (localization). Until
now, the state-of-the-arts [8, 16, 17, 22, 30, 31, 42, 45, 46]
are commonly built upon the deep learning-based semantic segmentation meta-framework, consisting of two components, i.e., the encoder and decoder. The encoder extracts
the image features, subsequently processed by the decoder
to predict classification results and forgery masks. Despite
considerable advances in the area, current SOTA detectors
are not yet performant enough for in-the-wild deployment,
mainly due to their shortfall in generalization, robustness,
and detection performance.

12765

