This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiFi4G: High-Fidelity Human Performance Rendering via Compact Gaussian
Splatting
Yuheng Jiang1,2 Zhehao Shen1 Penghao Wang1 Zhuo Su3 Yu Hong1
Yingliang Zhang4 Jingyi Yu1 Lan Xu1
1

ShanghaiTech University

2

NeuDim

3

ByteDance

4

DGene

Figure 1. High-fidelity rendering with our compact Gaussian Splatting. From multi-view human performance video, HiFi4G marries
the traditional non-rigid fusion with differentiable rasterization advance to efficiently produce compact 4D assets.

Abstract
We have recently seen tremendous progress in photoreal human modeling and rendering. Yet, efficiently rendering realistic human performance and integrating it into
the rasterization pipeline remains challenging. In this paper, we present HiFi4G, an explicit and compact Gaussianbased approach for high-fidelity human performance rendering from dense footage. Our core intuition is to marry
the 3D Gaussian representation with non-rigid tracking,
achieving a compact and compression-friendly representation. We first propose a dual-graph mechanism to obtain
motion priors, with a coarse deformation graph for effective initialization and a fine-grained Gaussian graph to enforce subsequent constraints. Then, we utilize a 4D Gaussian optimization scheme with adaptive spatial-temporal
regularizers to effectively balance the non-rigid prior and
Gaussian updating. We also present a companion compression scheme with residual compensation for immersive experiences on various platforms. It achieves a substantial
compression rate of approximately 25 times, with less than
2MB of storage per frame. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, which significantly

outperforms existing approaches in terms of optimization
speed, rendering quality, and storage overhead. Project
page: https://nowheretrix.github.io/HiFi4G/.

1. Introduction
Volumetric recording and realistic rendering of 4D (spacetime) human performance diminish the boundaries between
viewers and performers. It brings numerous immersive experiences like telepresence or tele-education in VR/AR.
Early solutions [8–10, 25] reconstruct textured meshes
from captured videos by explicitly leveraging non-rigid registration [44, 62]. Yet, they remain vulnerable to occlusions and lack of textures which cause holes and noise in
the reconstruction results. Recent neural advances, represented by NeRF [41], bypass explicit reconstruction and
instead optimize a coordinate-based multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) to conduct volume rendering at photo-realism. Some
dynamic variants [13, 46–48, 66, 68] of NeRF attempt to
maintain a canonical feature space to reproduce features in
each live frame with an extra implicit deformation field.
However, such a canonical design is fragile to large mo-

19734

