This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Tailored Visions: Enhancing Text-to-Image Generation with Personalized
Prompt Rewriting
Zijie Chen⇤,1,2

Lichao Zhang⇤,2

Fangsheng Weng3

Lili Pan†,4

Zhenzhong Lan†,2

Zhejiang University 2 Westlake University 3 Scietrain
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
1

{chenzijie, zhanglichao, lanzhenzhong}@westlake.edu.cn , lilipan@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite significant progress in the field, it is still challenging to create personalized visual representations that
align closely with the desires and preferences of individual users. This process requires users to articulate their
ideas in words that are both comprehensible to the models and accurately capture their vision, posing difficulties for many users. In this paper, we tackle this challenge by leveraging historical user interactions with the
system to enhance user prompts. We propose a novel approach that involves rewriting user prompts based on a
newly collected large-scale text-to-image dataset with over
300k prompts from 3115 users. Our rewriting model enhances the expressiveness and alignment of user prompts
with their intended visual outputs. Experimental results
demonstrate the superiority of our methods over baseline
approaches, as evidenced in our new offline evaluation
method and online tests. Our code and dataset are available at https://github.com/zzjchen/Tailored-Visions

1. Introduction
Increasingly large and powerful foundation models [1, 4,
20] are trained through self-supervised learning. These
large pretrained models (LPMs) serve as efficient compressors [3], condensing vast amounts of internet data.
This compression enables the convenient extraction of the
knowledge encoded within these models via natural language descriptions. Despite being in its infancy, this approach exhibits potentials to surpass traditional search engines as a superior source for knowledge and information
acquisition.
Akin to refining queries for search engines, prompts
given to LPMs must also be carefully crafted. However,
⇤
†

Equal contribution.
Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison between our personalized prompt rewriting
method and the standard prompt rewriting method. Our technique
excels at incorporating user preferences, such as “oil paintings
by artists,” while methods that lack a historical context frequently
generate content that may not align with the user’s desires.

the complexity of prompts, the unpredictability of model
responses compared to traditional search engines present
unique challenges. Significant research efforts [10, 29]
have been made to comprehend how LPMs react to various prompts, with some studies examining the feasibility of
rewriting prompts for specificity. However, without access
to users’ personal data and behavior, tailoring the prompt to
meet the user’s needs accurately remains challenging.
Our research addresses this issue by integrating user
preference information into prompt rewriting. The primary
obstacle in personalized query rewriting is the absence of
a dataset containing text-to-image prompts with personalized information. To overcome this, we have assembled a
large dataset encompassing over 300k text-to-image histories from 3,115 users. We rewrite user prompts using their
query history, although we had limited access to personal

7727

