This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCoFT: Self-Contrastive Fine-Tuning for Equitable Image Generation
Zhixuan Liu1

Peter Schaldenbrand1
Beverley-Claire Okogwu1
Wenxuan Peng2
Youngsik Yun3 Andrew Hundt1 Jihie Kim3 Jean Oh1 *
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Nanyang Technological University 3 Dongguk University
⇤

Nigerian Culture

Korean Culture

Mexican Culture

Chinese Culture

Indian Culture

SCoFT (Ours)

Stereotype

Original
Stable Diffusion

American Culture

Corresponding author

SCoFT (Ours)

Misrepresentation

Original
Stable Diffusion

(a)“Photo of a traditional building, in [Culture]”

(b)“Two people wearing traditional clothing, in [Culture]”

Figure 1. Comparison between Stable Diffusion with and without our proposed fine-tuning approach, SCoFT, on our proposed CCUB
dataset. Stable Diffusion perpetuates harmful stereotypes that assume dirty buildings are representative of some nations, and often generates
regionally irrelevant designs. By contrast, our approach decreases stereotypes and improves cultural relevance of generated images.

Abstract
Accurate representation in media is known to improve
the well-being of the people who consume it. Generative image models trained on large web-crawled datasets
such as LAION are known to produce images with harmful stereotypes and misrepresentations of cultures. We improve inclusive representation in generated images by (1)
engaging with communities to collect a culturally representative dataset that we call the Cross-Cultural Understanding Benchmark (CCUB) and (2) proposing a novel
Self-Contrastive Fine-Tuning (SCoFT, pronounced /sôft/)
method that leverages the model’s known biases to selfimprove. SCoFT is designed to prevent overfitting on small
datasets, encode only high-level information from the data,

and shift the generated distribution away from misrepresentations encoded in a pretrained model. Our user study conducted on 51 participants from 5 different countries based
on their self-selected national cultural affiliation shows that
fine-tuning on CCUB consistently generates images with
higher cultural relevance and fewer stereotypes when compared to the Stable Diffusion baseline, which is further improved with our SCoFT technique. Resources and code are
at https://ariannaliu.github.io/SCoFT.

1. Introduction

Representation matters. In media, studies repeatedly show
that representation affects the well-being of its viewers [8,
12, 53]. Representation can positively affect viewers by
providing them with role models that they identify with,

10822

