This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep-TROJ: An Inference Stage Trojan Insertion Algorithm
through Efficient Weight Replacement Attack
Sabbir Ahmed1∗ , Ranyang Zhou2∗ , Shaahin Angizi2 , Adnan Siraj Rakin1
1
Binghamton University (SUNY), 2 New Jersey Institute of Technology

Abstract
To insert Trojan into a Deep Neural Network (DNN),
the existing attack assumes the attacker can access the victim’s training facilities. However, a realistic threat model
was recently developed by leveraging memory fault to inject Trojans at the inference stage. In this work, we develop a novel Trojan attack by adopting a unique memory fault injection technique that can inject bit-flip into
the page table of the main memory. In the main memory, each weight block consists of a group of weights located at a specific address of a DRAM row. A bit-flip in
the page frame number replaces a target weight block of
a DNN model with another replacement weight block. To
develop a successful Trojan attack leveraging this unique
fault model, the attacker must solve three key challenges:
i) how to identify a minimum set of target weight blocks
to be modified? ii) how to identify the corresponding optimal replacement weight block? iii) how to optimize the
trigger to maximize the attacker’s objective given a target and replacement weight block set? We address them
by proposing a novel Deep-TROJ attack algorithm that can
identify a minimum set of vulnerable target and corresponding replacement weight blocks while optimizing the trigger at the same time. We evaluate the performance of our
proposed Deep-TROJ on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100, and ImageNet dataset for fifteen different DNN architectures, including vision transformers. Proposed Deep-TROJ is the
most successful one to date that does not require access to
training facilities while successfully bypassing the existing
defenses. Our code is available at https://github.com/MLSecurity-Research-LAB/Deep-TROJ.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in deep learning technologies have
revolutionized a wide range of applications and accelerated the integration of these technologies into our lives.
In particular, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have found
widespread applications, including but not limited to image
∗ Both authors contributed equally

Deep-TROJ Attack
at Inference
DNN Weight blocks

Dog
Input
a1 a2 a3 a4

aN

DNN Weight blocks

Dog
Input

Cat
aN a2 a1 a2

Triggered Input

aN

Attacker

Figure 1. Before interfering with the addresses, the deep neural network (DNN) model functions accurately (Top). However,
the inference process yields adversarial response once an attacker
manipulates the memory block that stores DNN weights (Bottom).

classification [17], object detection [2], and speech recognition [42]. A majority of these applications require strict
safety standards for public well-being. However, recent
attack methodologies [1, 4–6, 12, 14, 26, 28, 30, 31] developed using software and system-level attack vectors can
compromise and manipulate the performance of DNNs.
Trojan/Backdoor [14, 30] attack is a stealthy DNN
behavior manipulation among the prevalent adversarial
threats. The first step to inject Trojan in a DNN model starts
during the training phase. An attacker accessing the training facilities poisons the training samples using triggered
input and a corresponding target response. However, after training, the model performs benignly but only malfunctions when the attacker-designed trigger is present in the
input sample. The community standard of injecting Trojans
into the model via accessing the victim training facilities
makes this threat model less practical and challenging.
Consequently, an inference stage Trojan insertion strategy was first proposed by TBT attack [30] to eliminate
the need for accessing training facilities. To make this
threat practical, TBT adopted memory fault injection techniques [43] using rowhammer attack [20]. Rowhammer

24810

