This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Panda-70M: Captioning 70M Videos with Multiple Cross-Modality Teachers
Tsai-Shien Chen1,2,⇤
Hsiang-wei Chao1
1

Aliaksandr Siarohin1 Willi Menapace1,3,⇤ Ekaterina Deyneka1
Byung Eun Jeon1 Yuwei Fang1 Hsin-Ying Lee1 Jian Ren1
Ming-Hsuan Yang2 Sergey Tulyakov1

Snap Inc.

2

University of California, Merced

3

University of Trento

https://snap-research.github.io/Panda-70M

HDVILA-100M

Panda-70M (Ours)

“Yeah, now everybody thought that we couldn't replace cat; yeah,
because you're such animal lovers.”

“It is a close-up shot of a brown and white english bulldog with
wrinkles on its face, sitting on a person's lap.”

“It's good that we have aquariums they bring this wonderful
experience into our homes for special moments”

“It is a red and purple betta fish swimming in a tank with gravel
and plants.”

“We're gonna cook this all together stirring it constantly for just a
minute until it smells nice and fragrant.”

“A person is adding chicken broth to a pot of quinoa on a stove.”

“He thought he was gonna get shows terrible communication on the
teams part.”

“A basketball player is dribbling the ball and shooting it into the
hoop.”

Figure 1. Comparison of Panda-70M to the existing large-scale video-language datasets. We introduce Panda-70M, a large-scale
video dataset with captions that are annotated by multiple cross-modality vision-language models. Compared to text annotations in existing
dataset [80], captions in Panda-70M more precisely describe the main object and action in videos (highlighted in green). Besides, videos
in Panda-70M are semantically coherent, high-resolution, and free from watermarks. More samples can be found in Appendix E.

Abstract

The quality of the data and annotation upper-bounds the
quality of a downstream model. While there exist large text
corpora and image-text pairs, high-quality video-text data
is much harder to collect. First of all, manual labeling is
more time-consuming, as it requires an annotator to watch
an entire video. Second, videos have a temporal dimension,
consisting of several scenes stacked together, and showing
multiple actions. Accordingly, to establish a video dataset
with high-quality captions, we propose an automatic approach leveraging multimodal inputs, such as textual video
description, subtitles, and individual video frames. Specifically, we curate 3.8M high-resolution videos from the pub-

licly available HD-VILA-100M dataset. We then split them
into semantically consistent video clips, and apply multiple
cross-modality teacher models to obtain captions for each
video. Next, we finetune a retrieval model on a small subset
where the best caption of each video is manually selected
and then employ the model in the whole dataset to select
the best caption as the annotation. In this way, we get 70M
videos paired with high-quality text captions. We dub the
dataset as Panda-70M. We show the value of the proposed
dataset on three downstream tasks: video captioning, video
and text retrieval, and text-driven video generation. The
models trained on the proposed data score substantially better on the majority of metrics across all the tasks.

⇤ This work was done while interning at Snap.

13320

