This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SingularTrajectory: Universal Trajectory Predictor Using Diffusion Model
Inhwan Bae, Young-Jae Park and Hae-Gon Jeon*
AI Graduate School, GIST, South Korea
{inhwanbae, youngjae.park}@gm.gist.ac.kr, haegonj@gist.ac.kr

Abstract
There are five types of trajectory prediction tasks: deterministic, stochastic, domain adaptation, momentary observation, and few-shot. These associated tasks are defined
by various factors, such as the length of input paths, data
split and pre-processing methods. Interestingly, even though
they commonly take sequential coordinates of observations
as input and infer future paths in the same coordinates as
output, designing specialized architectures for each task is
still necessary. For the other task, generality issues can lead
to sub-optimal performances. In this paper, we propose SingularTrajectory, a diffusion-based universal trajectory prediction framework to reduce the performance gap across the
five tasks. The core of SingularTrajectory is to unify a variety
of human dynamics representations on the associated tasks.
To do this, we first build a Singular space to project all types
of motion patterns from each task into one embedding space.
We next propose an adaptive anchor working in the Singular
space. Unlike traditional fixed anchor methods that sometimes yield unacceptable paths, our adaptive anchor enables
correct anchors, which are put into a wrong location, based
on a traversability map. Finally, we adopt a diffusion-based
predictor to further enhance the prototype paths using a cascaded denoising process. Our unified framework ensures the
generality across various benchmark settings such as input
modality, and trajectory lengths. Extensive experiments on
five public benchmarks demonstrate that SingularTrajectory
substantially outperforms existing models, highlighting its
effectiveness in estimating general dynamics of human movements. Code is publicly available at https://github.
com/inhwanbae/SingularTrajectory.

1. Introduction
Extensive studies of trajectory prediction methods have been
conducted in the computer vision field for several decades
[20, 52]. They have demonstrated its importance in various
applications, including crowd simulation, social robot navi* Corresponding author

Figure 1. An overview of our SingularTrajectory framework. All
relevant human trajectory prediction tasks can be represented in our
Singular space, a unified feature embedding space for human dynamics. Using the embedding features, our diffusion-based model
for a universal trajectory prediction makes prediction for all the
tasks in this same space.

gation, obstacle avoidance and security and surveillance systems, etc. Trajectory prediction takes sequential coordinate
values of agents as input and infers their future pathways in
common [1, 19, 83]. Such tasks vary depending on the application. The tasks are determined with respect to the number
of input/output, data processing, and the use of geological
information.
The tasks for trajectory prediction can be categorized
into five groups: (1) Stochastic prediction is to predict 20
multi-modal future trajectories from one observation with
8 frames [19]. Each future trajectory consists of 12 frames.
(2) Deterministic prediction takes one observation with 8
frames, but infers only one future trajectory with 12 frames
[1]. (3) The momentary observation uses only two frames to
predict 20 multi-modal future paths with 12 frames [77]. (4)
Domain adaptation splits training data with respect to places
in datasets, trains a model on one place, and then checks
the transferability to other places [93]. (5) The few-shot
task only uses partial data to build a dataset-efficient model
[53], as illustrated in Fig. 1. Until now, each specialized
architecture for a task type has provided performance gains.
However, two questions arise. First, why do state-ofthe-art models for one task undergo significant performance
drops when applied to other trajectory prediction tasks? Second, is it feasible to design a general predictor that works
across the five tasks?
As answers to these questions, we present a universal tra-

17890

