This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SC-Tune: Unleashing Self-Consistent Referential Comprehension in Large
Vision Language Models
Tongtian Yue1,3* Jie Cheng2,3* Longteng Guo1,3* Xingyuan Dai2,3
†
Zijia Zhao1,3 Xingjian He1,3 Gang Xiong2,3 Yisheng Lv2,3 Jing Liu1,3
1
Laboratory of Cognition and Decision Intelligence for Complex Systems, CASIA
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, CASIA
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Recent trends in Large Vision Language Models
(LVLMs) research have been increasingly focusing on advancing beyond general image understanding towards more
nuanced, object-level referential comprehension. In this
paper, we present and delve into the self-consistency capability of LVLMs, a crucial aspect that reflects the models’ ability to both generate informative captions for specific objects and subsequently utilize these captions to accurately re-identify the objects in a closed-loop process.
This capability significantly mirrors the precision and reliability of fine-grained visual-language understanding. Our
findings reveal that the self-consistency level of existing
LVLMs falls short of expectations, posing limitations on
their practical applicability and potential. To address this
gap, we introduce a novel fine-tuning paradigm named
Self-Consistency Tuning (SC-Tune). It features the synergistic learning of a cyclic describer-locator system. This
paradigm is not only data-efficient but also exhibits generalizability across multiple LVLMs. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that SC-Tune significantly elevates performance across a spectrum of object-level visionlanguage benchmarks and maintains competitive or improved performance on image-level vision-language benchmarks. Both our model and code will be publicly available
at https://github.com/ivattyue/SC-Tune.

Can you describe the object (0,223),(277,682)
to me?
It is a man sitting with arms crossed.
Can you tell me the location of a man sitting
with arms crossed?
(295,72),(541,677)
Can you describe the object (403,475),(522,780)
to me?
It is a woman wearing purple T-shirt
holding a wine glass.
Can you tell me the location of a woman
wearing purple T-shirt holding a wine glass?
(742,391),(987,892)

Figure 1. Upper: two examples demonstrating the shortfall in
self-consistent referential comprehension of LVLMs, which are
attributed to limited grounding (the first example) and limited captioning (the second example) capabilities, respectively. Lower:
We use Pr@0.5 as the self-consistency evaluation metric. We consider it to be correct when the IoU between prediction bbox and
the groung truth is greater than 0.5. The self-consistency levels
of different LVLMs show pronounced performance gap between
in-domain (RefCOCO) and out-of-domain (Object365 and OpenImages) datasets.

1. Introduction
Recently, Large Vision Language Models have witness remarkable progress [13, 25, 59]. By introducing learnable
parameters to map visual features to the semantic space of
Large Language Models (LLMs) [7, 12, 38, 45], LVLMs
demonstrate strong capabilities for visual content percep* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding author.

tion and expression. A line of works [3, 9, 10, 57] go beyond basic image-level comprehension, and have emerged
to cultivate object-level referential comprehension capability with LVLMs, namely understanding or identifying a specific object within an image. Referential comprehension capability bases on two symmetry object-level tasks, i.e., referring expression generation (REG) and referring expression comprehension (REC). REG is to describe an object

13073

