This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-Guided 3D Face Synthesis - From Generation to Editing
Yunjie Wu†1 , Yapeng Meng†1,2 , Zhipeng Hu†1 , Lincheng Li∗1
Haoqian Wu1 , Kun Zhou3 , Weiwei Xu3 , Xin Yu4
1
2
Netease Fuxi AI Lab
Tsinghua University 3 Zhejiang University 4 University of Queensland

“Mark Zuckerberg”

“Elon Musk”

“Make his eyes big”

“Let him wear a
purple Zorro mask”

“Make his lips black”

“Turn him Asian”

“Give him mustache”

“Make him bald”

(a) High-fidelity generation and flexible editing

Animation

Relighting

Animation

Relighting

(b) Semlessly integrated to existing CG pipeline

Figure 1. (a) Our approach enables the high-fidelity generation and flexible editing of 3D faces from textual input. It facilitates sequential
editing for creating customized details in 3D faces. (b) The produced 3D faces can be seamlessly integrated into existing CG pipelines.

Abstract
Text-guided 3D face synthesis has achieved remarkable
results by leveraging text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models.
However, most existing works focus solely on the direct generation, ignoring the editing, restricting them from synthesizing customized 3D faces through iterative adjustments.
In this paper, we propose a unified text-guided framework
from face generation to editing. In the generation stage, we
propose a geometry-texture decoupled generation to mitigate the loss of geometric details caused by coupling. Besides, decoupling enables us to utilize the generated geometry as a condition for texture generation, yielding highly
geometry-texture aligned results. We further employ a finetuned texture diffusion model to enhance texture quality in
both RGB and YUV space. In the editing stage, we first employ a pre-trained diffusion model to update facial geometry
or texture based on the texts. To enable sequential editing,
we introduce a UV domain consistency preservation regularization, preventing unintentional changes to irrelevant
facial attributes. Besides, we propose a self-guided consistency weight strategy to improve editing efficacy while preserving consistency. Through comprehensive experiments,
we showcase our method’s superiority in face synthesis.
Project page: https://faceg2e.github.io/.
† Equal contribution
* Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Modeling 3D faces serves as a fundamental pillar for various emerging applications such as film making, video
games, and AR/VR. Traditionally, the creation of detailed
and intricate 3D human faces requires extensive time from
highly skilled artists. With the development of deep learning, existing works [7, 9, 46, 55] attempted to produce 3D
faces from photos or videos with generative models. However, the diversity of the generation remains constrained primarily due to the limited scale of training data. Fortunately,
recent large-scale vision-language models (e.g., CLIP [32],
Stable Diffusion [34]) pave the way for generating diverse
3D content. Through the integration of these models, numerous text-to-3D works [22, 27, 28, 49, 51] can create 3D
content in a zero-shot manner.
Many studies have been conducted on text-to-3D face
synthesis. They either utilize CLIP or employ score distillation sampling (SDS) on text-to-image (T2I) models to
guide the 3D face synthesis. Some methods [45, 52] employ
neural fields to generate visually appealing but low-quality
geometric 3D faces. Recently, Dreamface [53] has demonstrated the potential for generating high-quality 3D face textures by leveraging SDS on facial textures, but their geometry is not fidelitous enough and they overlooked the subsequent face editing. A few works [1, 11, 26] enable textguided face editing, allowing coarse-grained editing (e.g.
overall style), but not fine-grained adjustments (e.g., lips

1260

