This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

One-Prompt to Segment All Medical Images
Junde Wu
National University of Singapore
MBZUAI
University of Oxford

Abstract
Large foundation models, known for their strong zeroshot generalization, have excelled in visual and language
applications. However, applying them to medical image
segmentation, a domain with diverse imaging types and
target labels, remains an open challenge. Current approaches, such as adapting interactive segmentation models
like Segment Anything Model (SAM), require user prompts
for each sample during inference. Alternatively, transfer learning methods like few/one-shot models demand labeled samples, leading to high costs. This paper introduces a new paradigm toward the universal medical image
segmentation, termed ’One-Prompt Segmentation.’ OnePrompt Segmentation combines the strengths of one-shot
and interactive methods. In the inference stage, with
just one prompted sample, it can adeptly handle the unseen task in a single forward pass. We train One-Prompt
Model on 64 open-source medical datasets, accompanied
by the collection of over 3,000 clinician-labeled prompts.
Tested on 14 previously unseen datasets, the One-Prompt
Model showcases superior zero-shot segmentation capabilities, outperforming a wide range of related methods. The
code and data is released as https://github.com/
KidsWithTokens/one-prompt.

1. Introduction
Large foundation models pre-trained on large-scale
datasets, are transforming the landscape with powerful
zero-shot capabilities [27, 54–56]. These foundational
models showcase an impressive ability in adapting to the
tasks not seen during training. A standout example is
the Segment Anything Model (SAM) [27], which has
gained great success for the zero-shot image segmentation.
The strength of SAM lies in its interactive segmentation
paradigm: the model segments the target following the usergiven prompts, such as a point, a bounding box (BBox), or
free text-like descriptions.
Medical image segmentation, as a unique component of

Min Xu
Carnegie Mellon University
MBZUAI

the image segmentation, plays a vital role in real-world
clinical practices, including disease diagnosis and imageguided surgery. Many efforts have been made on bring this
interactive foundation model to the medical image segmentation through fine-tuning [13, 36, 58]. However, most of
them still need to re-training the model for each new task,
leading to actually a loss of zero-shot generalization. Additionally, in these interactive models, the users have to provide prompts for each image, which is time-consuming and
inapplicable for building the automatic pipeline.
Another way towards the universal medical image segmentation is few/one-shot learning [8, 41, 42, 51]. In
this setting, a pre-trained foundational model needs one
or few labeled samples as the ’supportive examples’, to
grasp a new specific task. However, securing labels for new
tasks is not always feasible. Furthermore, the success of
these methods heavily depends on the number of supportive
examples provided. For example, UniverSeg[8] achieves
competitive performance with 64 supportive samples. But
obtaining such amount of data can be challenging in real
clinical practice.
In this paper, we introduce a new paradigm for the
universal medical image segmentation, called One-Prompt
Medical Image Segmentation. This method combines the
strengths of both one-shot and interactive models to meet
the real clinical requirements. Specifically, given an unseen
task, the user only needs to provide one prompted sample to
the trained model, then it can perform well at this new task
without any retraining or fine-tuning, even for tasks significantly different from those encountered during training. An
illustration is shown in Fig. 1.
The success of the One-Prompt Model is driven by three
key factors. First, we propose novel One-Prompt Former
modules as the model decoder. Such design helps to efficiently integrate the prompted template feature into the process of query image segmentation. Secondly, we gather
a large-scale data collection comprising 78 open-source
datasets covering diverse biomedical domains. Our model
is trained on 64 datasets, with clinicians prompting a part
of the data. Moreover, to further enhance the clinical utility,

11302

