This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Correspondences to Pose:
Non-minimal Certifiably Optimal Relative Pose without Disambiguation
Javier Tirado-Garı́n
Javier Civera
I3A, University of Zaragoza

Estimating the relative camera pose from n ≥ 5 correspondences between two calibrated views is a fundamental task in computer vision. This process typically involves
two stages: 1) estimating the essential matrix between the
views, and 2) disambiguating among the four candidate relative poses that satisfy the epipolar geometry. In this paper, we demonstrate a novel approach that, for the first
time, bypasses the second stage. Specifically, we show
that it is possible to directly estimate the correct relative
camera pose from correspondences without needing a postprocessing step to enforce the cheirality constraint on the
correspondences. Building on recent advances in certifiable non-minimal optimization, we frame the relative pose
estimation as a Quadratically Constrained Quadratic Program (QCQP). By applying the appropriate constraints, we
ensure the estimation of a camera pose that corresponds
to a valid 3D geometry and that is globally optimal when
certified. We validate our method through exhaustive synthetic and real-world experiments, confirming the efficacy,
efficiency and accuracy of the proposed approach. Code is
available at https://github.com/javrtg/C2P.

1. Introduction
Finding the relative pose between two calibrated views is
crucial in many computer vision applications. This task is
particularly relevant, among others, in Structure from Motion (SfM) [44, 53], and Simultaneous Localization And
Mapping (SLAM) [13, 46, 47]. In SfM, it serves to geometrically verify the correspondences as well as to provide
pairwise constraints for pose averaging schemes [27, 40]. In
SLAM, besides correspondence verification, it is also used
for bootstrapping the odometry of the camera and computing an initial estimate of the 3D map.
The relative pose problem has five observable degrees
of freedom: three for the relative rotation between the
cameras, and two for the direction of the relative transla-

I0

I1

×n

approximate
solver

E

×n

glob. optim.
solver

certif.

×n

C2P
(ours)

certif.

E⋆

E⋆ +

disambiguation

is pure rot.?

Abstract

pure rot. check

{j.tiradog,jcivera}@unizar.es

+ is pure rot.?

Figure 1. Relative pose directly from matches, without posterior disambiguation and pure rotation checks. Traditionally,
estimating the relative pose involves two steps: 1) Estimating
the essential matrix E using an approximate or globally-optimal
solver, and 2) disambiguating the unique geometrically valid pose
among four candidate relative poses, with an additional step to
determine if the motion is purely rotational. In this paper, we introduce C2P, a globally-optimal and certifiable approach that, for
the first time, solves the relative pose problem in a single step.

tion. The standard approach for its computation [29] begins by considering a set of n pixel correspondences between the two images. These correspondences can be established through matching the descriptors of keypoints extracted from the images [1, 16, 41, 43], or more recently by
estimating a (semi)dense 2D mapping between the views
[17, 58, 61]. The pose is then computed by minimizing
epipolar errors [29], requiring at least five correspondences.
Solvers that handle n = 5 correspondences are termed minimal [48, 54] and those able to handle all the correspondences are called non-minimal [10, 69].
This paper focuses on non-minimal solvers. In a practical setup in which input correspondences may contain outliers, these solvers are essential within RANSAC [19, 49]
and Graduated Non-Convexity (GNC) [66]. In RANSAC,
non-minimal solvers are used to improve the accuracy of
the so-far-best and final models (initially computed with
minimal solvers) thanks to noise cancellation of the inliers
[49]. In GNC, globally-optimal non-minimal solvers serve
as fundamental building blocks to robustly solve a weighted
instance of the problem in an iterative fashion.
Since the seminal paper by Longuet-Higgins [42] in

403

