This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PhysPT: Physics-aware Pretrained Transformer for Estimating Human
Dynamics from Monocular Videos

1

Yufei Zhang1 , Jeffrey O. Kephart2 , Zijun Cui1,3 , Qiang Ji1
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, 2 IBM Research, 3 University of Southern California
{zhangy76, jiq}@rpi.edu, kephart@us.ibm.com, ceejkl@gmail.com

Abstract
While current methods have shown promising progress
on estimating 3D human motion from monocular videos,
their motion estimates are often physically unrealistic because they mainly consider kinematics. In this paper, we introduce Physics-aware Pretrained Transformer (PhysPT),
which improves kinematics-based motion estimates and infers motion forces. PhysPT exploits a Transformer encoderdecoder backbone to effectively learn human dynamics in a
self-supervised manner. Moreover, it incorporates physics
principles governing human motion. Specifically, we build a
physics-based body representation and contact force model.
We leverage them to impose novel physics-inspired training losses (i.e., force loss, contact loss, and Euler-Lagrange
loss), enabling PhysPT to capture physical properties of
the human body and the forces it experiences. Experiments
demonstrate that, once trained, PhysPT can be directly applied to kinematics-based estimates to significantly enhance
their physical plausibility and generate favourable motion
forces. Furthermore, we show that these physically meaningful quantities translate into improved accuracy of an important downstream task: human action recognition.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D human motion estimation is essential for applications like human-computer interaction [8, 74], motion
analysis [14], and robotics [17]. This task is inherently challenging due to the absence of depth information and the intricate interplay of forces and human body movements.
Recent advances in deep learning, along with progress
in 3D human modeling [47, 85], have substantially improved the reconstruction of 3D humans from a single image [28, 33, 38, 76, 105]. With video inputs, current research aims to enhance model performance by exploiting
temporal information. Some authors devise temporal models that extract meaningful features from videos to improve
performance [6, 10, 11, 13, 23, 36, 55, 64, 69, 73, 80, 98,

100]. Other authors learn motion priors that capture natural 3D body movement patterns. Integrating the learned
priors into model training can promote smooth motion estimates [31, 48, 61, 66]. While these approaches enhance
reconstruction to some extent, they often produce unrealistic estimates characterized by noticeable physical artifacts
such as motion jittering and foot skating.
To address this limitation, a promising strategy is to
leverage physical principles governing body movements. In
this approach, the human body is treated as an articulated
rigid body, and human dynamics are described through the
Euler-Lagrange equations. These equations link body mass,
inertia, and physical forces (including joint actuations and
contact forces) to body motion through ordinary differential equations. Some researchers [19, 20, 40, 60, 67, 84, 88]
formulate optimization frameworks that jointly estimate unknown physical parameters and refine kinematics-based estimates by aligning them with the physics equations. Alternatively, others [24, 39, 49, 68, 93] employ learning-based
frameworks. They sidestep the cumbersome manual parameter tuning inherent in optimization-based methods by training neural networks to predict the parameters.
Yet, a key challenge remains: physics information, including physical properties of human bodies and motion
forces, is absent in current 3D motion capture datasets [51].
To incorporate physics, existing methods generally rely on
physics engines [15, 75]. This entails creating proxy bodies
with geometric primitives to capture body properties, importing these proxies into a physics engine, and then leveraging the physics engine to compute the necessary physical
parameters and simulate body motion. The problem with
this approach arises from the difficulty of efficiently computing gradients from physics engine outputs [19], thereby
limiting their seamless integration with deep learning models. Moreover, existing physics-based models are primarily
trained with 3D annotated videos, which are challenging to
acquire in practice. Consequently, the trained models may
not generalize well to unseen scenarios.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for learning human dynamics that circumvents the need for 3D an-

2305

