This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pre-training Vision Models with Mandelbulb Variations
Benjamin Naoto Chiche, Yuto Horikawa, Ryo Fujita
Rist Inc.
830 Hongakujimae-cho, Kawaramachi Nishi-iru, Gojo-dori, Shimogyo-ku, Kyoto 600-8102 Japan
https://github.com/RistoranteRist/MandelbulbVariationsGenerator

Abstract
The use of models that have been pre-trained on natural
image datasets like ImageNet may face some limitations.
First, this use may be restricted due to copyright and license on the training images, and privacy laws. Second,
these datasets and models may incorporate societal and
ethical biases. Formula-driven supervised learning (FDSL)
enables model pre-training to circumvent these issues. This
consists of generating a synthetic image dataset based on
mathematical formulae and pre-training the model on it.
In this work, we propose novel FDSL datasets based
on Mandelbulb Variations. These datasets contain RGB
images that are projections of colored objects deriving
from the 3D Mandelbulb fractal. Pre-training ResNet-50
on one of our proposed datasets MandelbulbVAR-1k enables an average top-1 accuracy over target classification
datasets that is at least 1% higher than pre-training on existing FDSL datasets. With regard to anomaly detection
on MVTec AD, pre-training the WideResNet-50 backbone
on MandelbulbVAR-1k enables PatchCore to achieve 97.2%
average image-level AUROC. This is only 1.9% lower than
pre-training on ImageNet-1k (99.1%) and 4.5% higher than
pre-training on the second-best performing FDSL dataset
i.e. VisualAtom-1k (92.7%). Regarding Vision Transformer
(ViT) pre-training, another dataset that we propose and coin
MandelbulbVAR-Hybrid-21k enables ViT-Base to achieve
82.2% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet-1k, which is 0.4%
higher than pre-training on ImageNet-21k (81.8%) and only
0.1% lower than pre-training on VisualAtom-1k (82.3%).

1. Introduction
Formula-driven supervised learning (FDSL) to pre-train
computer vision models such as Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [12] or Vision Transformers (ViTs) [11, 17,
23, 24] has recently gained interest within the industry and
the research community. This consists of the following
steps. First, an artificial dataset of labeled images is generated based on mathematical formulae and rendering soft-

ware. Second, a model undergoes the supervised learning
over this labeled dataset. The trained model is then deployed to solve a target (synonym for downstream) task
on a real-image dataset. In this transfer learning phase,
the model is generally fine-tuned on the target dataset, if
possible. FDSL presents remarkable advantages: first, its
annotation is free of errors and cost since labels are automatically generated. Second, the synthesized dataset does
not contain any societal biases that can be harmful from
an ethical point of view. Third, it can replace other pretraining datasets that either are not publicly available (e.g.
Instagram-3.5B [14] and JFT-300M/3B [29]) or present license, copyright or privacy issues. For example, as ImageNet [8] is only available for non-commercial use, ImageNet pre-trained models—that are largely available online
today—are not really licensed for commercial use. Also,
this dataset contains some images that either violate privacy
protection laws or are not cleared in terms of copyright.
Thus, using ImageNet pre-trained models can be legally not
suitable in some countries.

Figure 1. Example MandelbulbVAR-1k images. 10 classes are
randomly chosen and each image is an instance of one of them.

In this context, several FDSL datasets have been proposed. One of them is meant to pre-train CNNs [12], others are reportedly suitable to pre-train ViTs [11, 17, 24].
These datasets are classification datasets and are effective
for downstream supervised classifications, that involve finetuning on target datasets. Yet, there is a small number
of datasets that are effective in pre-training both ViTs and
CNNs. Indeed, only FractalDB has been shown to be ef-

22062

