This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffMOT: A Real-time Diffusion-based Multiple Object Tracker with
Non-linear Prediction
Weiyi Lv1∗ Yuhang Huang2∗ Ning Zhang3 Ruei-Sung Lin3 Mei Han3 Dan Zeng1†
1
Shanghai University 2 National University of Defense Technology 3 PAII Inc.
1

{kroery,dzeng}@shu.edu.cn, 2 huangai@nudt.edu.cn, 3 {ning.zhang,rueisung,meihan}@gmail.com

https://diffmot.github.io/

(a) Tracklets visualization of DiffMOT and advance over KF tracker

(b) Performance comparison

(c) Dataset analysis

Figure 1. (a) illustrates the trajectories of DiffMOT on sampled sequences of DanceTrack. Each object’s center position along the 200
frames is plotted in the 3D coordinates. The objects in DanceTrack exhibit non-linear motion trajectories. Trackers with the KF predictor
will fail in tracking in frame 30 for the inaccurate prediction, while our DiffMOT with D2 MP can track successfully. (b) shows the HOTAIDF1-FPS comparisons of different trackers. Our DiffMOT with the YOLOX-X detector achieves 62.3% HOTA, 63.0% IDF1 on the
DanceTrack test set with 22.7 FPS. (c) shows the motion prediction of the linear Kalman Filter on different datasets. The average IoU
of the predicted and ground truth bounding boxes are used as the metric to demonstrate the linear (high IoU) and non-linear (low IoU)
characteristics of each dataset.

Abstract
In Multiple Object Tracking, objects often exhibit nonlinear motion of acceleration and deceleration, with irregular direction changes. Tacking-by-detection (TBD) trackers with Kalman Filter motion prediction work well in
pedestrian-dominant scenarios but fall short in complex situations when multiple objects perform non-linear and diverse motion simultaneously. To tackle the complex nonlinear motion, we propose a real-time diffusion-based MOT
approach named DiffMOT. Specifically, for the motion predictor component, we propose a novel Decoupled Diffusionbased Motion Predictor (D2 MP). It models the entire distribution of various motion presented by the data as a whole.
It also predicts an individual object’s motion conditioning
on an individual’s historical motion information. Furthermore, it optimizes the diffusion process with much fewer
sampling steps. As a MOT tracker, the DiffMOT is real-time
at 22.7FPS, and also outperforms the state-of-the-art on
DanceTrack[30] and SportsMOT[6] datasets with 62.3%
and 76.2% in HOTA metrics, respectively. To the best of

our knowledge, DiffMOT is the first to introduce a diffusion
probabilistic model into the MOT to tackle non-linear motion prediction.

1. Introduction
Multiple object tracking (MOT) is one of the fundamental computer vision tasks that aims at continuously tracking objects in video sequences. A successful MOT benefits
downstream research such as action detection and recognition, pose tracking, and video understanding. It also
attracts much attention in various applications, including
pedestrian-dominant smart-city, autonomous driving, and
sports analysis.
Tracking-by-detection (TBD) paradigm has been a popular implementation in the MOT [3, 4, 10, 31, 39]. The
TBD requires a robust detector and accurate motion predictor, which predicts an individual object’s motion. These
∗ equal contribution.
†corresponding author.

19321

