This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

REACTO: Reconstructing Articulated Objects from a Single Video
Chaoyue Song1,2 , Jiacheng Wei1, † , Chuan Sheng Foo2,3 , Guosheng Lin1, † , Fayao Liu2, †
1
Nanyang Technological University, 2 Institute for Inforcomm Research, A*STAR
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR
†

Corresponding Authors

1. Introduction
We focus on reconstructing general articulated objects from
a casually captured monocular video, a challenging task that
involves creating 3D models from everyday footage and
dealing with the complexity of objects with movable parts.
Understanding and recognizing the structure of general articulated objects from videos plays a crucial role in various
ﬁelds, such as robotics, animation, 3D generation [4, 5, 60]
virtual reality, and augmented reality.
Recently, NASAM [59] introduced a method to learn categories of articulated objects from multi-view images across
various articulations. However, this approach necessitates
training on several objects within the same category. Another
method, PARIS [27], was proposed to learn articulation in a
self-supervised manner but relies on multi-view images to
provide complete views of the object at different articula-

3D shapes
Texture

In this paper, we address the challenge of reconstructing
general articulated 3D objects from a single video. Existing
works employing dynamic neural radiance ﬁelds have advanced the modeling of articulated objects like humans and
animals from videos, but face challenges with piece-wise
rigid general articulated objects due to limitations in their
deformation models. To tackle this, we propose Quasi-Rigid
Blend Skinning, a novel deformation model that enhances
the rigidity of each part while maintaining ﬂexible deformation of the joints. Our primary insight combines three
distinct approaches: 1) an enhanced bone rigging system for
improved component modeling, 2) the use of quasi-sparse
skinning weights to boost part rigidity and reconstruction
ﬁdelity, and 3) the application of geodesic point assignment
for precise motion and seamless deformation. Our method
outperforms previous works in producing higher-ﬁdelity 3D
reconstructions of general articulated objects, as demonstrated on both real and synthetic datasets. Project page:
https://chaoyuesong.github.io/REACTO.

Other views

Abstract

Input video

{chaoyue002@e., jiacheng.wei@, gslin@}ntu.edu.sg, {foo chuan sheng, liu fayao}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Figure 1. Given a single casual video capturing a piece-wise rigid
general articulated object, REACTO can model the 3D shape, texture, and motion. The second row presents shape reconstruction
results from reference views, the third row showcases the reconstructed texture, and the fourth row displays the shapes from another
view.

tions. Consequently, both of these methods face limitations
when applied to casually captured everyday videos.
Previous research [11, 14, 15, 61] on reconstructing articulated objects from monocular videos has primarily focused
on humans and quadrupeds, utilizing readily available parametric models like SMPL [29] and SMAL [80], while neglecting the diverse range of everyday objects we commonly
encounter and use. Non-parametric methods, like BANMo
[70], MoDA [52], and PPR[73], utilizing dynamic volumetric neural radiance ﬁelds to model deformable objects.
These methods are predominantly optimized for non-rigid,

5384

