This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bridging the Synthetic-to-Authentic Gap: Distortion-Guided Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation for Blind Image Quality Assessment
Aobo Li

Jinjian Wu* Yongxu Liu
Xidian University

Leida Li

abli@stu.xidian.edu.cn, jinjian.wu@mail.xidian.edu.cn, {yongxu.liu, ldli}@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
The annotation of blind image quality assessment
(BIQA) is labor-intensive and time-consuming, especially
for authentic images. Training on synthetic data is expected
to be beneficial, but synthetically trained models often suffer from poor generalization in real domains due to domain gaps. In this work, we make a key observation that
introducing more distortion types in the synthetic dataset
may not improve or even be harmful to generalizing authentic image quality assessment. To solve this challenge,
we propose distortion-guided unsupervised domain adaptation for BIQA (DGQA), a novel framework that leverages
adaptive multi-domain selection via prior knowledge from
distortion to match the data distribution between the source
domains and the target domain, thereby reducing negative
transfer from the outlier source domains. Extensive experiments on two cross-domain settings (synthetic distortion
to authentic distortion and synthetic distortion to algorithmic distortion) have demonstrated the effectiveness of our
proposed DGQA. Besides, DGQA is orthogonal to existing model-based BIQA methods, and can be used in combination with such models to improve performance with less
training data.

1. Introduction
Nowadays, countless images are being generated, transmitted, and processed by image enhancement, compression,
and other algorithms all the time. During these processes,
distortions are inevitably introduced that degrade the image quality and may even affect the visual experience of
receivers or the use of downstream algorithms. In most scenarios, the reference information required by full-reference
(FR) or reduced-reference (RR) image quality assessment
(IQA) methods [29, 32] is not available. Therefore, it is
crucial to have an accurate and efficient blind image quality assessment (BIQA) method [22] to monitor the image
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The performance on the authentically distorted dataset
LIVEC [7] when the baseline is trained on LIVE [26], KADID10k [18], and the sub-set of KADID-10k selected by the proposed
DGQA. Ref. and Dist. denote the number of the reference images
and the number of the distortion in this dataset, respectively.

quality during these processes [14].
With the rapid development of deep learning, many
learning-based BIQA methods [12, 13] have been proposed,
which significantly improve the performance of traditional
BIQA methods. However, since the annotation for the perceptual quality of images (especially authentic distortion
images) is time-consuming and laborious, the amount of labeled data in existing BIQA datasets is relatively limited. It
greatly limits the performance of deep learning-based BIQA
methods that rely on a large number of labeled samples.
The acquisition of data and annotations can be much
cheaper for synthetically distorted images generated by
adding artificial distortions than for authentically distorted
images, due to the availability of the corresponding reference images and the possibility of adjusting the parameters to generate different levels of distortion [31]. If models trained on images with synthetic distortion could be effectively generalized to images with authentic distortion, it
would greatly alleviate the pressure on annotation. However, since authentic distortions are complex and variable, it

28422

