This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FINER: Flexible spectral-bias tuning in Implicit NEural Representation
by Variable-periodic Activation Functions*
Zhen Liu1,† , Hao Zhu1,† , Qi Zhang2 , Jingde Fu3 , Weibing Deng3 , Zhan Ma1 , Yanwen Guo4 , Xun Cao1
1
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, 3 Department of Mathematics,
4
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210023, China
2
AI Lab, Tencent Company, Shenzhen 518054, China
†
Equal contribution. Corresponding author: caoxun@nju.edu.cn

1. Introduction
The way a signal is represented is the foundation of all
the following problems and determines the paradigm for
solving them. Traditional representations, such as the
image matrices, point cloud or volumes [35], focus on
recording the elements individually and have offered signiﬁcant contributions in history. However, this representation is increasingly inadequate for addressing the numerous inverse problems arising in modern times, such as
neural rendering [35], inverse imaging [39] and simulations [14]. On the contrary, the implicit neural representation (INR) [32], which characterizes a signal by preserving
* The work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants No. 62025108, 12171237).

‫ ݔ‬+1 ‫ݔ‬

࣌(࢞)

࣌(࢞)

Implicit Neural Representation (INR), which utilizes a
neural network to map coordinate inputs to corresponding
attributes, is causing a revolution in the ﬁeld of signal processing. However, current INR techniques suffer from a restricted capability to tune their supported frequency set, resulting in imperfect performance when representing complex signals with multiple frequencies. We have identiﬁed
that this frequency-related problem can be greatly alleviated by introducing variable-periodic activation functions,
for which we propose FINER. By initializing the bias of the
neural network within different ranges, sub-functions with
various frequencies in the variable-periodic function are
selected for activation. Consequently, the supported frequency set of FINER can be ﬂexibly tuned, leading to improved performance in signal representation. We demonstrate the capabilities of FINER in the contexts of 2D image
ﬁtting, 3D signed distance ﬁeld representation, and 5D neural radiance ﬁelds optimization, and we show that it outperforms existing INRs.

FINER sin

SIREN sin ‫ݔ‬

Abstract

࢞

࢞

(a) Selected activation functions for INR when ࢈ = ૙ ࢈ = ૛࣊

(b) Performance comparisons on 2D image representation

Figure 1. Flexible spectral-bias tuning in implicit neural representation (FINER). We observe that the supported frequency
set in classical INRs is limited due to the underutilization of activation functions’ deﬁnition domain, i.e., they mainly employ the
central region near the origin point. To overcome this limitation,
we propose a novel variable-periodic activation function for INR.
This innovation allows for tuning the supported frequency set by
adjusting the initialization range of the bias vector in the neural network. (a) visualizes the selected narrow activation functions in classical periodic activation sin(x) alongside our proposed
variable-periodic one sin((|x| + 1)x) with different bias settings.
(b) plots the training curves of SIREN and FINER, demonstrating
the impact of different initializations applied to the bias vector b
(see Sec. 5.1.1 for more details).

the mapping function from the coordinates to corresponding
attributes using neural networks, is gaining increasing attention thanks to the advantages of querying attributes continu-

2713

