This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Correlation-Decoupled Knowledge Distillation for
Multimodal Sentiment Analysis with Incomplete Modalities
Dingkang Yang1,2
Xiao Zhao1,2 Shuaibing Wang1,2 Yan Wang1
Mingcheng Li1,2
Kun Yang1 Mingyang Sun1,2 Dongliang Kou1,2 Ziyun Qian1,2 Lihua Zhang1,2,3,4§
1

Academy for Engineering and Technology, Fudan University 2 Cognition and Intelligent Technology Laboratory (CIT Lab)
3

Jilin Provincial Key Laboratory of Intelligence Science and Engineering, Changchun, China

4

Engineering Research Center of AI and Robotics, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China
mingchengli21@m.fudan.edu.cn, dkyang20@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA) aims to understand human sentiment through multimodal data. Most
MSA efforts are based on the assumption of modality completeness. However, in real-world applications, some practical factors cause uncertain modality missingness, which
drastically degrades the model’s performance. To this end,
we propose a Correlation-decoupled Knowledge Distillation (CorrKD) framework for the MSA task under uncertain missing modalities. Specifically, we present a samplelevel contrastive distillation mechanism that transfers comprehensive knowledge containing cross-sample correlations
to reconstruct missing semantics. Moreover, a categoryguided prototype distillation mechanism is introduced to
capture cross-category correlations using category prototypes to align feature distributions and generate favorable
joint representations. Eventually, we design a responsedisentangled consistency distillation strategy to optimize
the sentiment decision boundaries of the student network
through response disentanglement and mutual information maximization. Comprehensive experiments on three
datasets indicate that our framework can achieve favorable
improvements compared with several baselines.

1. Introduction
“Correlations serve as the beacon through the fog of the
missingness.”
–Lee & Dicken

Multimodal sentiment analysis (MSA) has attracted
wide attention in recent years. Different from the traditional unimodal-based emotion recognition task [7], MSA
§ Corresponding author.

Equal contribution.

Modality

Content

Language

It was a great movie and I loved it.

Audio
Visual

Language

Label

Positive

Positive

Neutral

Positive

…
It was a great movie and I loved it.

Audio
Visual

Prediction

…

Figure 1. Traditional model outputs correct prediction when inputting the sample with complete modalities, but incorrectly predicts the sample with missing modalities. We define two missing
modality cases: (i) intra-modality missingness (i.e., the pink areas)
and (ii) inter-modality missingness (i.e., the yellow area).

understands and recognizes human emotions through multiple modalities, including language, audio, and visual [28].
Previous studies have shown that combining complementary information among different modalities facilitates the
generation of more valuable joint multimodal representations [34, 36]. Under the deep learning paradigm [3, 17,
42, 43, 54, 59, 60], numerous studies assuming the availability of all modalities during both training and inference
stages [10, 19, 22, 49–53, 55–58, 62]. Nevertheless, this
assumption often fails to align with real-world scenarios,
where factors such as background noise, sensor constraints,
and privacy concerns may lead to uncertain modality missingness issues. Modality missingness can significantly impair the effectiveness of well-trained models based on complete modalities. For instance, as shown in Figure 1, the
entire visual modality is missing, and some frame-level fea-

12458

