This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCULPT: Shape-Conditioned Unpaired Learning of Pose-dependent Clothed
and Textured Human Meshes
Soubhik Sanyal1
Partha Ghosh1
Jinlong Yang1∗
1
1,2
Michael J. Black
Justus Thies
Timo Bolkart1∗
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 2Technical University of Darmstadt
{soubhik.sanyal, partha.ghosh, jinlong.yang, black, justus.thies, timo.bolkart}@tue.mpg.de

Figure 1. SCULPT is a generative model of geometry and appearance of clothed human meshes. The generated textured clothing mesh can
be readily inserted into 3D scenes. In the above figure, we generated the clothed humans and placed them on a 3D floor. The scene has a single
camera with global directional light settings.

Abstract
We present SCULPT, a novel 3D generative model for clothed
and textured 3D meshes of humans. Specifically, we devise a
deep neural network that learns to represent the geometry and
appearance distribution of clothed human bodies. Training
such a model is challenging, as datasets of textured 3D meshes
for humans are limited in size and accessibility. Our key
observation is that there exist medium-sized 3D scan datasets
like CAPE, as well as large-scale 2D image datasets of clothed
humans and multiple appearances can be mapped to a single
geometry. To effectively learn from the two data modalities, we
propose an unpaired learning procedure for pose-dependent
clothed and textured human meshes. Specifically, we learn
a pose-dependent geometry space from 3D scan data. We
represent this as per vertex displacements w.r.t. the SMPL
model. Next, we train a geometry conditioned texture generator
in an unsupervised way using the 2D image data. We use
intermediate activations of the learned geometry model to
condition our texture generator. To alleviate entanglement
between pose and clothing type, and pose and clothing
*Now at Google.

appearance, we condition both the texture and geometry
generators with attribute labels such as clothing types for the
geometry, and clothing colors for the texture generator. We
automatically generated these conditioning labels for the 2D
images based on the visual question answering model BLIP
and CLIP. We validate our method on the SCULPT dataset,
and compare to state-of-the-art 3D generative models for
clothed human bodies. Our code and data can be found at
https://sculpt.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Generating 3D virtual humans that can be articulated with
realistically deforming clothing, is a key challenge of content
creation for games and movies. Virtual assistants in augmented
and virtual reality could be enriched by an automatically
generated 3D human appearance. Furthermore, synthetic
humans could also play an important role in data generation
to comply with privacy and data protection laws.
Recently, we have seen immense progress in the synthesis
of virtual 3D humans [4, 16–18, 31, 49]. However, they are
almost exclusively based on implicit representations, such as

2362

