This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mind marginal non-crack regions: Clustering-inspired representation learning
for crack segmentation
Zhuangzhuang Chen, Zhuonan Lai, Jie Chen, Jianqiang Li *
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
{chenzhuangzhuang2016, 2018101068}@email.szu.edu.cn
{chenjie, lijq}@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
Crack segmentation datasets make great efforts to obtain the ground truth crack or non-crack labels as clearly as
possible. However, it can be observed that ambiguities are
still inevitable when considering the marginal non-crack region, due to low contrast and heterogeneous texture. To
solve this problem, we propose a novel clustering-inspired
representation learning framework, which contains a twophase strategy for automatic crack segmentation. In the first
phase, a pre-process is proposed to localize the marginal
non-crack region. Then, we propose an ambiguity-aware
segmentation loss (Aseg Loss) that enables crack segmentation models to capture ambiguities in the above regions via
learning segmentation variance, which allows us to further
localize ambiguous regions. In the second phase, to learn
the discriminative features of the above regions, we propose
a clustering-inspired loss (CI Loss) that alters the supervision learning of these regions into an unsupervised clustering manner. We demonstrate that the proposed method
could surpass the existing crack segmentation models on
various datasets and our constructed CrackSeg5k dataset.

1. Introduction
Concrete structure health monitoring plays an essential role
in industrial scenarios [24, 29, 32, 45], of which crack segmentation is the last and indispensable stage. With aging concrete structures, the need for maintenance increases,
which would lead to poor health conditions or structural deficiencies if not addressed properly [20, 22]. For this reason,
we argue that it is necessary to repair cracks before the onset
of serious deterioration so as to lighten the manual maintenance burden [5]. However, the ambiguity in marginal
non-crack regions is still inevitable due to low contrast, heterogeneous texture, and the uncertainty of the segmented
* Corresponding Author Email: lijq@szu.edu.cn

Crack pixels in crack regions

(a) Crack Image

Non-crack pixels in marginal non-crack regions

(b) T-SNE visualization

Figure 1. The ambiguity problem in marginal non-crack regions.
(a) Blue indicates crack regions and red is marginal non-crack regions. Due to the unclear crack boundary, the labels of marginal
non-crack regions are likely to be ambiguous (a close look at the
marginal region is present in the orange box). (b) T-SNE feature
visualizations of the crack pixels (blue) in crack regions and noncrack pixels (red) in marginal non-crack regions.

region without domain knowledge. Considering this, pixellevel segmentation of cracks remains challenging [3, 7, 63].
Nowadays, substantial progress of deep learning techniques also promotes research on crack segmentation tasks
[8, 32, 41]. For instance, DeepCrack [67] proposes a multistage fusion for crack segmentation, which is derived from
the commonly used encoder-decoder architecture (SegNet
[2]). Inspired by ViT [51], Crackformer [32] proposes a
crack transformer network to capture long-range interactions for fine-grained crack segmentation. By exploiting
boundary information, JTFN [8] exploits crack boundary
as an additional supervision for crack segmentation tasks.
However, theses methods have a crucial limitation: the inability to extract discriminative features due to ambiguity in
marginal non-crack regions. That is, unlike objects in the
natural image, there might be no salient structure boundary due to low contrast between crack and non-crack regions. Thus, it is challenging for crack segmentation mod-

12698

