This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DaReNeRF: Direction-aware Representation for Dynamic Scenes
Ange Lou1,2, * Benjamin Planche1 Zhongpai Gao1 Yamin Li2
Tianyu Luan1,3, * Hao Ding1,4, * Terrence Chen1 Jack Noble2 Ziyan Wu1
1

United Imaging Intelligence

2

Vanderbilt University

3

4

Johns Hopkins University

University of Buffalo

{first.last}@uii-ai.com, {first.last}@vanderbilt.edu, tianyulu@buffalo.edu, hding15@jhu.edu
synthesized views

(a)
input views

(b)

discrete wavelet
representation

32.5

DaReNeRF-S
(Ours)

DaReNeRF
(Ours)

32

Image Quality (PSNR)

(prior art)

direction-aware
representation

K-Planes-hybrid
Mix Voxel-X

31.5

HexPlane-650k

Mix Voxel-L

HexPlane-100k
31

4D-GS
K-Planes-explicit

30.5
100

(ours)

Model Size (MB)

Training Time
10h
5h
1h

1000

Figure 1. DaReNeRF performance on dynamic 3D scenes. Our proposed direction-aware representation excels by capturing features of
dynamic scenes from six different directions—a capability beyond the reach of traditional discrete-wavelet representations, cf . sub-figure
(a). Built upon this advanced representation, our NeRF method outperforms prior work in challenging dynamic scenarios while being
competitive in terms of training time and model size, offering the best trade-off overall, cf . sub-figure (b).

Abstract
Addressing the intricate challenge of modeling and rerendering dynamic scenes, most recent approaches have
sought to simplify these complexities using plane-based explicit representations, overcoming the slow training time
issues associated with methods like Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) and implicit representations. However, the straightforward decomposition of 4D dynamic scenes into multiple 2D plane-based representations proves insufficient for
re-rendering high-fidelity scenes with complex motions. In
response, we present a novel direction-aware representation (DaRe) approach that captures scene dynamics from
six different directions. This learned representation undergoes an inverse dual-tree complex wavelet transformation
(DTCWT) to recover plane-based information. DaReNeRF
computes features for each space-time point by fusing vectors from these recovered planes. Combining DaReNeRF
with a tiny MLP for color regression and leveraging volume
rendering in training yield state-of-the-art performance in
* This work was carried out during the internships of Ange Lou, Tianyu
Luan, and Hao Ding at United Imaging Intelligence, Burlington, MA.

novel view synthesis for complex dynamic scenes. Notably, to
address redundancy introduced by the six real and six imaginary direction-aware wavelet coefficients, we introduce a
trainable masking approach, mitigating storage issues without significant performance decline. Moreover, DaReNeRF
maintains a 2× reduction in training time compared to prior
art while delivering superior performance.

1. Introduction
The reconstruction and re-rendering of 3D scenes from a
set of 2D images pose a fundamental challenge in computer vision, holding substantial implications for a range of
AR/VR applications [36, 55, 59]. Despite recent progress in
reconstructing static scenes, significant challenges remain.
Real-world scenes are inherently dynamic, characterized by
intricate motion, further adding to the task complexity.
Recent dynamic scene reconstruction methods build on
NeRF’s implicit representation. Some utilize a large MLP
to process spatial and temporal point positions, generating
color outputs [22, 23, 54]. Others aim to disentangle scene
motion and appearance [15, 27, 38–40]. However, both ap-

5031

