This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeepCache: Accelerating Diffusion Models for Free
Xinyin Ma Gongfan Fang Xinchao Wang*
National University of Singapore
{maxinyin, gongfan}@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

(a) Stable Diffusion v1.5

2.3 ×

(b) LDM-4-G for ImageNet

7.0 ×

Figure 1. Accelerating Stable Diffusion V1.5 and LDM-4-G by 2.3× and 7.0×, with 50 PLMS steps and 250 DDIM steps respectively.

Abstract
Diffusion models have recently gained unprecedented
attention in the field of image synthesis due to their remarkable generative capabilities. Notwithstanding their
prowess, these models often incur substantial computational costs, primarily attributed to the sequential denoising
process and cumbersome model size. Traditional methods
for compressing diffusion models typically involve extensive
retraining, presenting cost and feasibility challenges. In
this paper, we introduce DeepCache, a novel training-free
paradigm that accelerates diffusion models from the perspective of model architecture. DeepCache capitalizes on
the inherent temporal redundancy observed in the sequential denoising steps of diffusion models, which caches and
retrieves features across adjacent denoising stages, thereby
curtailing redundant computations. Utilizing the property
of the U-Net, we reuse the high-level features while up-

dating the low-level features in a very cheap way. This
innovative strategy, in turn, enables a speedup factor of
2.3× for Stable Diffusion v1.5 with only a 0.05 decline
in CLIP Score, and 4.1× for LDM-4-G with a slight decrease of 0.22 in FID on ImageNet. Our experiments also
demonstrate DeepCache’s superiority over existing pruning and distillation methods that necessitate retraining and
its compatibility with current sampling techniques. Furthermore, we find that under the same throughput, DeepCache effectively achieves comparable or even marginally
improved results with DDIM or PLMS. Code is available at
https://github.com/horseee/DeepCache.

1. Introduction
In recent years, diffusion models [9, 18, 59, 61] have
emerged as a pivotal advancement in the field of genera∗ Corresponding author

15762

