This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoDi-2: In-Context, Interleaved, and Interactive Any-to-Any Generation
Zineng Tang1,4 * Ziyi Yang2† Mahmoud Khademi2
1

UC Berkeley

2

Yang Liu2

Microsoft Azure AI

3

Zoom

Chenguang Zhu3‡ Mohit Bansal4†
4

UNC Chapel Hill

https://codi-2.github.io
Abstract
We present CoDi-2, a Multimodal Large Language
Model (MLLM) for learning in-context interleaved multimodal representations. By aligning modalities with language for both encoding and generation, CoDi-2 empowers
Large Language Models (LLMs) to understand modalityinterleaved instructions and in-context examples and autoregressively generate grounded and coherent multimodal
outputs in an any-to-any input-output modality paradigm.
To train CoDi-2, we build a large-scale generation dataset
encompassing in-context multimodal instructions across
text, vision, and audio. CoDi-2 demonstrates a wide range
of zero-shot and few-shot capabilities for tasks like editing, exemplar learning, composition, reasoning, etc. CoDi2 surpasses previous domain-specific models on tasks such
as subject-driven image generation, vision transformation,
and audio editing and showcases a significant advancement for integrating diverse multimodal tasks with sequential generation.

1. Introduction
Multimodal generation has achieved remarkable advancements in recent years, e.g., generating high-fidelity image, video, audio and music samples from prompt provided
by users. Recent advancements in AI-Generated Content
(AIGC) highlight in-context generation [24, 38], concept
learning [28], editing [2], and fine-grained control [46]. Recently, Tang et al. [32] proposed CoDi, the first model ever
that can generate any combinations of modalities from any
combinations of input ones. Building upon this foundational work, the subsequent study by [40] further advances
CoDi by proposing a model that can facilitates conversational abilities and expansion to additional modalities.
* Work done while at Microsoft internship and UNC.
† Correspondence: ziyiyang@microsoft.com, mbansal@cs.unc.edu
‡ Work done while at Microsoft.

Although remarkable advances have been made in multimodal generation, several critical challenges remain: (1)
Zero-shot fine-grained and complex user-control of multimodal generation is difficult: current multimodal generative models (MGM) cannot follow in-context generation examples without finetuning on subtasks, such as replicating
or transferring an editing effect via an ‘analogy’ setting or
subject driven generation, as demonstrated in the prompt
(as in the row “Exemplar Learning” and “’Subject Driven’
of Table 3). Moreover, the reasoning ability of MGM is
rather limited, e.g., the input prompts are usually descriptive where the generation do not require capabilities such as
logical, compositional, and analytical intelligence. (2) The
inputs in previous MGMs mostly only contain one or two
modalities. The ability to understand modality-interleaved
inputs, such as language instruction mixing with contextual
visual and auditory inputs is critical to building a fundamental multimodality model. Hence, overall, a versatile anyto-any MGM, that can follow interleaved in-context multimodal instructions and interactive multi-round chatting is
strongly needed. (3) The user-and-model interaction is usually constrained to single-round, or it is challenging for current models to follow multi-round instructions while ensuring the consistency and faithfulness of responses across the
rounds, as shown in Figure 1.
To this end, we propose CoDi-2, a versatile Multimodal
Large Language Model (MLLM) that understand in-context
examples, follow modality-interleaved instructions, perform multi-round chatting and editing. Enabling in-context
learning and following interleaved multimodal instructions
in multimodal generation is challenging. In previous multimodal generative models, the backbone is mostly diffusion models (DMs) which are good at generation but intrinsically lack the capability to perform in-context understanding [39]. We therefore propose to harness a Large Language Model (LLM) as the “brain” to understand modalityinterleaved human instructions and in-context examples,
and output multimodal signals. LLMs have strong language
reasoning capabilities for complex instructions in the lan-

27425

