This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Anchor-based Robust Finetuning of Vision-Language Models
Jinwei Han1 , Zhiwen Lin2 , Zhongyisun Sun2 , Yingguo Gao2 , Ke Yan2
Shouhong Ding2 , Yuan Gao3† , Gui-Song Xia1†
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University 2 YouTu Lab, Tencent
3
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University
{hanjinwei, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn, {sunzy12315, ethan.y.gao}@gmail.com
xavier.lin@foxmail.com, {yingguogao, kerwinyan, ericshding}@tencent.com

Abstract
We aim at finetuning a vision-language model without
hurting its out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization. We
address two types of OOD generalization, i.e., i) domain
shift such as natural to sketch images, and ii) zero-shot capability to recognize the category that was not contained in
the finetune data. Arguably, the diminished OOD generalization after finetuning stems from the excessively simplified finetuning target, which only provides the class information, such as “a photo of a [CLASS]”. This is distinct
from the process in that CLIP was pretrained, where there
is abundant text supervision with rich semantic information.
Therefore, we propose to compensate for the finetune process using auxiliary supervision with rich semantic information, which acts as anchors to preserve the OOD generalization. Specifically, two types of anchors are elaborated
in our method, including i) text-compensated anchor which
uses the images from the finetune set but enriches the text
supervision from a pretrained captioner, ii) image-text-pair
anchor which is retrieved from the dataset similar to pretraining data of CLIP according to the downstream task,
associating with the original CLIP text with rich semantics.
Those anchors are utilized as auxiliary semantic information to maintain the original feature space of CLIP, thereby
preserving the OOD generalization capabilities. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves
in-distribution performance akin to conventional finetuning
while attaining new state-of-the-art results on domain shift
and zero-shot learning benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Maintaining out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization is essential for a pretrained model to ensure applicability across
† Corresponding authors.

Pretrain

Finetune

CLIP
Model

Downstream
Model

OOD

Evaluation
Cat

ID

Domain Shift

Fox

Horse
Dog
Cat
Zero-shot Learning

(a) Generalization Degradation

Image
Generated Text
Class Label
Retrieved Image
Retrieved Text
(b) Two Types of Anchors

Figure 1. Motivation illustration. (a) The out-of-distribution generalization (i.e., domain shift and zero-shot learning) capabilities of CLIP degrade significantly after finetuning on downstream
tasks. (b) Images with generated texts and retrieved image-text
pairs serve as two types of anchors to regularize the finetuning
process of CLIP with auxiliary semantic information.

diverse circumstances (e.g., domain shift and zero-shot
learning), even after adaptation to downstream tasks. In
recent years, contrastive vision-language pretrained models, such as CLIP [30] and ALIGN [17], have exhibited exceptional OOD generalization capabilities in the aforementioned situations. Although it is desirable to finetune these
models using task-specific labeled data to improve performance on downstream tasks [8, 31], they often experience a
significant degradation of OOD generalization [22, 39].
As illustrated in Fig. 1(a), OOD generalization encompasses domain shift, such as from natural to sketch images,
and zero-shot capability to recognize categories not present
in the finetuning data. Numerous methods have been proposed to preserve the OOD generalization of CLIP during
the finetuning process. Prompt learning [1, 42, 43] optimizes a set of learnable vectors using a limited number of

26919

