This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Back to 3D: Few-Shot 3D Keypoint Detection with Back-Projected 2D Features
Thomas Wimmer1,2
1
LIX, École Polytechnique

Peter Wonka3
Maks Ovsjanikov1
2
Technical University of Munich 3 KAUST

thomas.m.wimmer@tum.de, pwonka@gmail.com, maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Figure 1. Qualitative results of our proposed method B2-3D for few-shot keypoint detection using back-projected features (red) with
ground truth keypoint annotations (green).

Abstract
With the immense growth of dataset sizes and computing
resources in recent years, so-called foundation models have
become popular in NLP and vision tasks. In this work, we
propose to explore foundation models for the task of keypoint detection on 3D shapes. A unique characteristic of
keypoint detection is that it requires semantic and geometric awareness while demanding high localization accuracy.
To address this problem, we propose, first, to back-project
features from large pre-trained 2D vision models onto 3D
shapes and employ them for this task. We show that we obtain robust 3D features that contain rich semantic information and analyze multiple candidate features stemming from
different 2D foundation models. Second, we employ a keypoint candidate optimization module which aims to match
the average observed distribution of keypoints on the shape
and is guided by the back-projected features. The resulting
approach achieves a new state of the art for few-shot keypoint detection on the KeyPointNet dataset, almost doubling
the performance of the previous best methods.

1. Introduction
Foundation models are finding their way into an increasing number of downstream applications. They show strong

generalization to tasks they were not explicitly trained for
and exhibit surprising zero- or few-shot capabilities. Successful approaches have been presented for processing text
or 2D images [8, 28, 33], but there are no prominent 3D
methods yet available that are aimed at local details. The
main reasons for this are the diversity of 3D representations
(i.e., meshes, point clouds, volumetric or implicit representations) and the comparably low availability of high-quality
3D data.
Recent works using 2D foundation models for shape
analysis, like [19, 25, 49], have focused mainly on global
tasks like shape classification, or segmentation which represents a middle ground between global and local analyses [2]. This paper builds on this continuum, advancing
from classification to segmentation and now to keypoints,
each stage requiring a more localized understanding of geometric details.
In this work, we focus on the task of few-shot keypoint detection on 3D meshes. Repeatable keypoints enable a wide range of downstream applications, including
rigid and non-rigid shape matching, object tracking, shape
reconstruction, and shape manipulation [9, 12, 21, 29, 43]
to name a few. Furthermore, the complex nature of the keypoint detection problem, which requires both semantic and
geometric shape understanding, has been used in the past
as a fruitful testbed for both exploiting and evaluating var-

4154

