This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

APSeg: Auto-Prompt Network for Cross-Domain Few-Shot
Semantic Segmentation
Weizhao He1† , Yang Zhang1†∗ , Wei Zhuo3∗ , Linlin Shen1,2,3 , Jiaqi Yang3,4 , Songhe Deng1 , Liang Sun1
Computer Vision Institute, School of Computer Science & Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
3
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data System Computing Technology, Shenzhen University
4
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, China

1

{heweizhao, dengsonghe, sunliang}2022@email.szu.edu.cn {yangzhang, weizhuo, llshen}@szu.edu.cn jiaqi.yang2@nottingham.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) endeavors to segment unseen classes with only a few labeled samples. Current FSS methods are commonly built on the assumption
that their training and application scenarios share similar domains, and their performances degrade significantly
while applied to a distinct domain. To this end, we propose
to leverage the cutting-edge foundation model, the Segment Anything Model (SAM), for generalization enhancement. The SAM however performs unsatisfactorily on domains that are distinct from its training data, which primarily comprise natural scene images, and it does not support
automatic segmentation of specific semantics due to its interactive prompting mechanism. In our work, we introduce
APSeg, a novel auto-prompt network for cross-domain fewshot semantic segmentation (CD-FSS), which is designed
to be auto-prompted for guiding cross-domain segmentation. Specifically, we propose a Dual Prototype Anchor
Transformation (DPAT) module that fuses pseudo query
prototypes extracted based on cycle-consistency with support prototypes, allowing features to be transformed into a
more stable domain-agnostic space. Additionally, a Meta
Prompt (MPG) module is introduced to automatically generate prompt embeddings, eliminating the need for manual visual prompts. We build an efficient model which can
be applied directly to target domains without fine-tuning.
Extensive experiments on four cross-domain datasets show
that our model outperforms the state-of-the-art CD-FSS
method by 5.24% and 3.10% in average accuracy on 1-shot
and 5-shot settings, respectively.

†
∗

Equal Contribution: Weizhao He and Yang Zhang
Corresponding Author: Yang Zhang and Wei Zhuo

1. Introduction
Source Dataset
Pascal VOC

FSS-1000

Target Datasets

transfer
Chest X-ray

ISIC

Deepglobe

(a)

support image

query image

SAM
Image
Encoder

Sampling
Visual
Prompt

Point
Box
Mask

SAM
Prompt
Encoder

prediction

label

prediction

label

SAM
Mask
Decoder

(b)

support image

query image

SAM
Image
Encoder

Meta
Prompt
Generation

Feature
Transformation

SAM
Mask
Decoder

(c)

Figure 1. (a) In CD-FSS tasks, training (source) and testing (target) datasets come from different domains, and categories in the
testing dataset are unseen during the training phase. (b) The framework of PerSAM [53], an existing one-shot segmentation method
based on SAM. (C) The framework of our proposed APSeg.

Current deep neural networks [7, 8, 25, 45] depend heavily on extensive annotated data to attain satisfactory performance. Data annotation is a time-consuming task that
requires significant human resources, especially for dense
pixel-wise annotation for segmentation tasks [8, 20, 23].
The few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) [33] is therefore
introduced to close this gap, aiming to produce pixel-level
predictions for a novel category with only a few of labeled
samples. Although existing FSS methods [20, 26, 30, 38]

23762

