This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gaussian Shading: Provable Performance-Lossless Image Watermarking for
Diffusion Models

1

Zijin Yang1 , Kai Zeng1 , Kejiang Chen1, *, Han Fang2 , Weiming Zhang1 , Nenghai Yu1 ,
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Digital Security, University of Science and Technology of China
2
National University of Singapore
{bsmhmmlf@mail., zk0128@mail., chenkj@, zhangwm@, ynh@}ustc.edu.cn

fanghan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Ethical concerns surrounding copyright protection and
inappropriate content generation pose challenges for the
practical implementation of diffusion models. One effective solution involves watermarking the generated images.
However, existing methods often compromise the model performance or require additional training, which is undesirable for operators and users. To address this issue, we propose Gaussian Shading, a diffusion model watermarking
technique that is both performance-lossless and trainingfree, while serving the dual purpose of copyright protection
and tracing of offending content. Our watermark embedding is free of model parameter modifications and thus is
plug-and-play. We map the watermark to latent representations following a standard Gaussian distribution, which is
indistinguishable from latent representations obtained from
the non-watermarked diffusion model. Therefore we can
achieve watermark embedding with lossless performance,
for which we also provide theoretical proof. Furthermore,
since the watermark is intricately linked with image semantics, it exhibits resilience to lossy processing and erasure attempts. The watermark can be extracted by Denoising Diffusion Implicit Models (DDIM) inversion and inverse sampling. We evaluate Gaussian Shading on multiple versions
of Stable Diffusion, and the results demonstrate that Gaussian Shading not only is performance-lossless but also outperforms existing methods in terms of robustness.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [16, 31–34] signify a noteworthy leap
forward in image generation. These well-trained diffusion
models, especially commercial diffusion models like Stable
Diffusion (SD) [30], Glide [27], and Muse AI [30], enable
individuals with diverse backgrounds to create high-quality
images effortlessly. However, this raises concerns about
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Existing watermarking frameworks can be divided into
three categories: post-processing-based, fine-tuning-based, and
latent-representation-based Tree-Ring. Our method also relies on
latent representations but achieves performance-lossless without
altering the distribution.

intellectual property and whether diffusion models will be
stolen or resold twice.
On the other hand, the ease of generating realistic images
raises concerns about potentially misleading content generation. For example, on May 23, 2023, a Twitter-verified
user named Bloomberg Feed posted a tweet titled “Large
explosion near the Pentagon complex in Washington DCinitial report,” along with a synthetic image. This tweet
led to multiple authoritative media accounts sharing it, even
causing a brief impact on the stock market1 . On October
30, 2023, White House issued an executive order on AI security, emphasizing the need to protect Americans from AIenabled fraud and deception by establishing standards and
best practices for detecting AI-generated content and authenticating official content2 . The urgency of labeling gen1 Fake image of Pentagon explosion on Twitter
2 FACT SHEET: President Biden Issues Executive Order on Safe, Secure, and Trustworthy Artificial Intelligence

12162

