This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-time Acquisition and Reconstruction of Dynamic Volumes with Neural
Structured Illumination
Yixin Zeng

Zoubin Bi Mingrui Yin Xiang Feng Kun Zhou
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
Light Patterns (2 of 6)

1. Introduction
High-quality volumetric reconstruction of dynamic phenomena is an essential task in scientific research, with a
wide variety of important applications, including aircraft
design [8], vehicle manufacturing [7], weather forecasting [6], and even modern microscopy [29]. Expressed as a
temporally-varying 3D density volume, the captured results
help scientists better understand/validate different physical
properties (e.g., aerodynamics) of the complex underlying
phenomena.
However, it is difficult to acquire and reconstruct dynamic volumes from the physical world with high fidelity.
First, the samples from common 2D imaging sensor(s) are
usually not the direct measurements of a 3D volume. Furthermore, the dynamic nature limits the sampling budget for
each volume. The fundamental challenge here is the infor* Y. Zeng and Z. Bi contributed equally. K. Zhou and H. Wu are the
corresponding authors. E-mail: {kunzhou,hwu}@acm.org

Final Density Volume

Cam1

Input Measurements

Non-Input View
Photo
Cam2

We propose a novel framework for real-time acquisition
and reconstruction of temporally-varying 3D phenomena
with high quality. The core of our framework is a deep
neural network, with an encoder that directly maps to the
structured illumination during acquisition, a decoder that
predicts a 1D density distribution from single-pixel measurements under the optimized lighting, and an aggregation module that combines the predicted densities for each
camera into a single volume. It enables the automatic
and joint optimization of physical acquisition and computational reconstruction, and is flexible to adapt to different
hardware configurations. The effectiveness of our framework is demonstrated on a lightweight setup with an offthe-shelf projector and one or multiple cameras, achieving
a performance of 40 volumes per second at a spatial resolution of 1283 . We compare favorably with state-of-the-art
techniques in real and synthetic experiments, and evaluate
the impact of various factors over our pipeline.

Single-View
Pred. Vol.

Cam0

Abstract

Hongzhi Wu*

Figure 1. Using as few as 6 pre-optimized structured light patterns, we capture and reconstruct high-quality, dynamic 3D volumes from corresponding image measurements at different views,
with a lightweight projector-camera setup. We achieve a performance of 40 volumes per second for both acquisition and reconstruction. Pred. = predicted, and vol. = volume.

mation gap between the samples and the final temporallychanging 3D volumes.
Considerable research efforts have been made over the
past decades. Approaches with uncontrolled illumination
fill in the information gap with prior knowledge, based on
heuristics [18, 20], physical rules [13, 14], or learning from
existing data [16, 33]. The reconstruction quality and computation time are usually not satisfactory, especially with a
sparse sampling, as the information missing from the measurements is effectively hallucinated. On the other hand,
controlled-lighting-based methods pack more physical information into the measurements to reduce the gap [19, 21].
But existing work often suffers from long acquisition time
or low Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR). The sampling efficiency is still insufficient for high-quality acquisition of dynamic volumes.
To tackle the above challenge, we propose a novel framework for high-quality, real-time acquisition and reconstruction of each dynamic 3D volume independently, for a
projector-camera setup. We map both the projected structured light patterns and computational reconstruction to a
neural network, which enables the automatic and joint optimization of hardware and software, towards optimal sam-

20186

