This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Template-assisted Point Cloud Shape Correspondence Network
Jiacheng Deng1 , Jiahao Lu1 , Tianzhu Zhang1,2,†
1

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Deep Space Exploration Lab

{dengjc, lujiahao }@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised point cloud shape correspondence aims to
establish point-wise correspondences between source and
target point clouds. Existing methods obtain correspondences directly by computing point-wise feature similarity between point clouds. However, non-rigid objects possess strong deformability and unusual shapes, making it
a longstanding challenge to directly establish correspondences between point clouds with unconventional shapes.
To address this challenge, we propose an unsupervised
Template-Assisted point cloud shape correspondence Network, termed TANet, including a template generation module and a template assistance module. The proposed TANet
enjoys several merits. Firstly, the template generation module establishes a set of learnable templates with explicit
structures. Secondly, we introduce a template assistance
module that extensively leverages the generated templates
to establish more accurate shape correspondences from
multiple perspectives. Extensive experiments on four human and animal datasets demonstrate that TANet achieves
favorable performance against state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Point cloud shape correspondence is a challenging task that
identifies and densely matches the source and target point
clouds with deformable 3D shapes. The task has significant
implications for various industries, including augmented reality [1], gaming [15], and robotics [21, 32]. However, the
unrestricted mobility of humans and animals and their unusual postures have made direct correspondence between
unconventional shapes a longstanding challenge in point
cloud shape correspondence.
The shape correspondence problem has been thoroughly
investigated for 3D mesh data. However, such spectralbased methods [2, 14, 19, 27, 35] are mainly limited by
the time-consuming pre-processing step and the reliance
on mesh vertice connectivity information, frequently absent
† Corresponding Author

Source

Baseline

GroundTruth

Template

Ours

Figure 1. Visualization of template-assisted shape correspondence results. Correspondences are depicted by transferring colors from the source to the target based on matching results. The
baseline incorrectly aligns the hands with the head and knees between unconventional shapes. In contrast, our method leverages
the template to establish accurate correspondences for the hands.

in point cloud scenarios. Point-based methods [7, 8, 11,
13, 16, 24, 42] are directly applied to the raw point cloud
data, relying solely on point coordinates without connectivity information. To mitigate the resource-intensive labeling in fully supervised methods [8, 11, 24], the unsupervised point cloud shape correspondence task garners significant attention and yields competitive results [7, 13, 16, 42].
DPC [16] designs construction losses to reduce outlier
matches. HSTR [13] incorporates whitening losses to mitigate the impact of shape discrepancies. SE-ORNet [7]
introduces an orientation estimation module to alleviate
symmetry issues. The shapes of humans and animals are
highly diverse and complex. For instance, the SURREAL
dataset [11] comprises 230K human body shapes, while the
SMAL dataset [45] contains 10K animal shapes, including numerous unconventional forms. Establishing accurate
correspondences between two unconventional point cloud
shapes remains a challenging problem in shape correspondence. Current methods [7, 13, 16, 42] rely on computing

5250

