This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gradient-based Parameter Selection for Efficient Fine-Tuning
Zhi Zhang1,2 ,* Qizhe Zhang2 ,* Zijun Gao2 , Renrui Zhang3 , Ekaterina Shutova1 , Shiji Zhou4 , Shanghang Zhang2†
1
ILLC, University of Amsterdam,
2
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University,
3
MMLAB, The Chinese University of Hong Kong,
4
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
{z.zhang, e.shutova}@uva.nl, {theia, shanghang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
With the growing size of pre-trained models, full finetuning and storing all the parameters for various downstream tasks is costly and infeasible. In this paper,
we propose a new parameter-efficient fine-tuning method,
Gradient-based Parameter Selection (GPS), demonstrating
that only tuning a few selected parameters from the pretrained model while keeping the remainder of the model
frozen can generate similar or better performance compared with the full model fine-tuning method. Different
from the existing popular and state-of-the-art parameterefficient fine-tuning approaches, our method does not introduce any additional parameters and computational costs
during both the training and inference stages. Another advantage is the model-agnostic and non-destructive property,
which eliminates the need for any other design specific to
a particular model. Compared with the full fine-tuning,
GPS achieves 3.33% (91.78% vs. 88.45%, FGVC) and
9.61% (73.1% vs. 65.57%, VTAB) improvement of the accuracy with tuning only 0.36% parameters of the pre-trained
model on average over 24 image classification tasks; it
also demonstrates a significant improvement of 17% and
16.8% in mDice and mIoU, respectively, on medical image segmentation task. Moreover, GPS achieves state-ofthe-art performance compared with existing PEFT methods. The code will be available in https://github.
com/FightingFighting/GPS.git.

1. Introduction
The pre-training and fine-tuning pipeline has become a
common paradigm for adapting large models pre-trained on
substantial amounts of data to downstream tasks with fewer
training samples. However, fine-tuning all the parameters in
the model is memory-intensive and data-inefficient, which

Figure 1. Comparison between our GPS and other PEFT methods.
(a) Exiting popular methods introduce extra parameters for tuning
downstream tasks, which might need a special design for diverse
architectures, such as appending prompt into the input token in
Transformer or inserting different modules into different layers (b)
Our approach avoids the introduction of additional parameters and
solely fine-tunes the selected parameters from the model, employing a unified gradient-based parameter selection method across diverse architectural variations, e.g. Transformer and CNN.

is costly and infeasible for multiple downstream tasks given
a large-scale model [36, 43, 58]. To tackle this issue,
parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) methods have been
proposed with the aim of tuning a minimal number of parameters to fit downstream tasks while keeping most of the
parameters frozen. Another benefit of PEFT is that tuning
a smaller set of parameters reduces the complexity of optimization and alleviates overfitting concerns when adapting
large pre-trained models to downstream tasks with limited
data, resulting in comparable or even superior performance

28566

