This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IntrinsicAvatar: Physically Based Inverse Rendering of Dynamic Humans from
Monocular Videos via Explicit Ray Tracing
Shaofei Wang1,2,3 , Božidar Antić2,3 , Andreas Geiger2,3 , Siyu Tang1
1
ETH Zürich 2 University of Tübingen 3 Tübingen AI Center

Rendering

Albedo

Shading

Metallic Roughness Visibility Geometry

Lighting

“city”

4 hours
training

Input: a monocular video (~100 frames)

“cambridge”

applications

Output: animatable avatar with intrinsic properties

Animation Under Novel Lighting Condition

Figure 1. IntrinsicAvatar aims to achieve physically based inverse rendering of clothed humans from monocular videos. Left: Our model
takes a monocular video as input and learns an avatar of the target person. Middle: We show decomposed properties of the learned avatar.
Importantly, our model can produce such decomposition without any data-driven prior on geometry, albedo, or material. Right: With the
learned avatar and intrinsic properties, we can animate and relight the avatar using arbitrary pose and arbitrary lighting condition.

Abstract
We present IntrinsicAvatar, a novel approach to recovering the intrinsic properties of clothed human avatars including geometry, albedo, material, and environment lighting from only monocular videos. Recent advancements in
human-based neural rendering have enabled high-quality
geometry and appearance reconstruction of clothed humans
from just monocular videos. However, these methods bake
intrinsic properties such as albedo, material, and environment lighting into a single entangled neural representation.
On the other hand, only a handful of works tackle the problem of estimating geometry and disentangled appearance
properties of clothed humans from monocular videos. They
usually achieve limited quality and disentanglement due to
approximations of secondary shading effects via learned
MLPs. In this work, we propose to model secondary shading effects explicitly via Monte-Carlo ray tracing. We model
the rendering process of clothed humans as a volumetric
scattering process, and combine ray tracing with body articulation. Our approach can recover high-quality geometry, albedo, material, and lighting properties of clothed
humans from a single monocular video, without requiring
supervised pre-training using ground truth materials. Furthermore, since we explicitly model the volumetric scattering process and ray tracing, our model naturally general-

izes to novel poses, enabling animation of the reconstructed
avatar in novel lighting conditions.

1. Introduction
Photo-realistic reconstruction and animation of clothed human avatars is a long-standing problem in augmented reality, virtual reality, and computer vision. Existing solutions
can achieve high-quality reconstruction for both geometry and appearance of clothed humans given dense multiview cameras [24, 27, 61]. Recently, reconstruction of
clothed humans from monocular videos has also been explored [23, 56, 73, 76]. While these approaches achieve
satisfactory results, they model the appearance of clothed
humans as a single neural representation. This makes it
difficult to edit the physical properties of the reconstructed
clothed human avatars, such as reflectance and material,
or to relight the reconstructed clothed human avatars under novel lighting conditions. In this work, we aim to recover physically based intrinsic properties for clothed human avatars including geometry, albedo, material, and environment lighting from only monocular videos.
Physically based inverse rendering is a challenging problem in computer graphics and computer vision. Traditional approaches tackle this problem as a pure optimization problem with simplifying assumptions such as con-

1877

