This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TRINS: Towards Multimodal Language Models that Can Read
Ruiyi Zhang 1 , Yanzhe Zhang 2 , Jian Chen 3 , Yufan Zhou 1 , Jiuxiang Gu 1 ,
Changyou Chen 3 , Tong Sun 1
1
2
Adobe Research
Georgia Institute of Technology 3 State University of New York at Buffalo
{ruizhang}@adobe.com

Abstract
Large multimodal language models have shown remarkable proficiency in understanding and editing images. However, a majority of these visually-tuned models struggle to
comprehend the textual content embedded in images, primarily due to the limitation of training data. In this work, we
introduce TRINS: a Text-Rich image1 INStruction dataset,
with the objective of enhancing the reading ability of the
multimodal large language model. TRINS is built upon
LAION 2 using hybrid data annotation strategies that include
machine-assisted and human-assisted annotation process.
It contains 39,153 text-rich images, captions, and 102,437
questions. Specifically, we show that the number of words
per annotation in TRINS is significantly longer than that of
related datasets, providing new challenges. Furthermore,
we introduce a simple and effective architecture, called a
Language-Vision Reading Assistant (LaRA), which is good
at understanding textual content within images. LaRA outperforms existing state-of-the-art multimodal large language
models on the TRINS dataset as well as other classical benchmarks. Lastly, we conducted a comprehensive evaluation
with TRINS on various text-rich image understanding and
generation tasks, demonstrating its effectiveness.

1. Introduction
Instruction tuning [9, 38] has shown a great generalization
ability on unseen tasks and has contributed to the growing
popularity of large language models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT [37]. Recently, multimodal language models benefit
from visual instruction finetuning [1, 18, 19, 28, 63], and has
shown great success in real-world applications. These models leverage visual encoders such as CLIP-ViT [12, 39] to empower LLMs with image comprehension ability. However,
challenges arise in comprehension of textual information
within images, which may stem from the prevalence of natu1 In this work, we use the phrase “text-rich images” to describe images
with rich textual information, such as posters and book covers.
2Work done during Q3 2023.

ral images in training datasets, such as Conceptual Captions
[5] and COCO [26]), as highlighted by Liu et al. [30]. Recognizing the importance of visual textual understanding for
effective collaboration between agents and humans, Zhang
et al. [62] proposed enhancing end-to-end visual instructiontuned models by introducing noisy Optical Character Recognition (OCR) annotations to improve vision-language alignment. In this work, we surpass existing achievements and
collect a new Text-Rich image INStruction dataset named
TRINS, which contains 39,153 text-rich images, captions
and 102,437 questions.
TRINS is created in a semi-automatic manner for a more
controllable and faithful collection. Specifically, we exploited large-scale pre-trained models such as CLIP [40]
and GPT-4 in the annotation process. This semi-automatic
process significantly reduces the time and resources required
for manual annotation and surprisingly improves the overall
quality of annotations. TRINS dataset is composed of three
datasets for captioning, visual question answering (VQA)
and image generation, respectively. Specifically, humanannotated captions for text-rich images are first collected
because they can best translate text-rich images into texts.
During this process, extracted OCR words and recognizeanything model tags are provided to the annotators for better
and efficient annotations. With detailed image descriptions,
VAQ data is built and fulfilled by large language models,
such as GPT-4 [37] and LLaMA-2 [51]. In detailed statistics and analysis, we found that both annotated captions
and collected question-answer pairs are more comprehensive and contain significantly more details than the existing dataset. Therefore, we show the superior advantage of
TRINS compared to existing instruction fine-tuning datasets.
As a by-product, high-quality image-caption pairs can serve
as a good benchmark for text-rich image generation, which
is still a very challenging task [6]. At the same time, we propose a new simple and effective multimodal language model
architecture that includes OCR as a component. We call it
Language-vision Reading Assistant (LaRA) and show that
LaRA fine-tuned on TRINS brings the best text-rich image
understanding ability. Our contributions are as follows:

22584

