This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Memory-Scalable and Simplified Functional Map Learning
Robin Magnet
LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris

Maks Ovsjanikov
LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris

rmagnet@lix.polytechnique.fr

maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Abstract
Deep functional maps have emerged in recent years as
a prominent learning-based framework for non-rigid shape
matching problems. While early methods in this domain
only focused on learning in the functional domain, the latest techniques have demonstrated that by promoting consistency between functional and pointwise maps leads to significant improvements in accuracy. Unfortunately, existing
approaches rely heavily on the computation of large dense
matrices arising from soft pointwise maps, which compromises their efficiency and scalability. To address this limitation, we introduce a novel memory-scalable and efficient
functional map learning pipeline. By leveraging the specific structure of functional maps, we offer the possibility to
achieve identical results without ever storing the pointwise
map in memory. Furthermore, based on the same approach,
we present a differentiable map refinement layer adapted
from an existing axiomatic refinement algorithm. Unlike
many functional map learning methods, which use this algorithm at a post-processing step, ours can be easily used
at train time, enabling to enforce consistency between the
refined and initial versions of the map. Our resulting approach is both simpler, more efficient and more numerically
stable, by avoiding differentiation through a linear system,
while achieving close to state-of-the-art results in challenging scenarios.

1. Introduction
Automatically computing dense correspondences between
non-rigid shapes is a classical problem in computer vision, forming the foundation of various downstream applications like shape registration [6], deformation [11, 45],
and analysis [42]. A popular approach to tackle this problem involves the functional map pipeline [34], which represents correspondences as linear operators between functional spaces derived from the intrinsic Laplacian [31] on
each shape. Numerous early methods [32, 33, 38] have
leveraged this framework using handcrafted descriptors to
generate functional maps, which can lack fine detail. Many

Figure 1. Our method takes a set of point features as input, which
can be learned, and uses a differentiable version of the ZoomOut
algorithm to produce correspondences. Due to its light memory
cost, it can be used while training a network, or when running the
network on very dense meshes.

algorithms [19, 27, 30, 39] have therefore successfully been
developed in order to refine such imprecise maps into high
quality dense correspondences.
Building upon pioneering efforts by [12], recent advancements [17, 43, 46] have successfully explored the possibility of learning descriptors directly from data for subsequent functional map computations, adapting the original pipeline introduced by [34, 40]. Notably, the most recent developments in this area have observed that promoting
functional maps to be “proper” (i.e., functional maps arising
from pointwise ones) can lead to significant improvement in
accuracy. The concept of “proper” functional maps was introduced in the optimization setting [39] and then quickly
adopted within the learning context. Specifically, recent
deep functional map methods have constructed dual-branch
networks [2, 9, 23, 46] that enforce the connection between
pointwise and functional maps and that have demonstrated
impressive performance across multiple datasets. Interestingly, these studies highlighted the necessity of retaining
the original functional map branch [46] to achieve optimal
performance, despite its inherent instability when differentiating through the linear system solver [15].
In all these works, however, the “properness’ of functional maps is enforced by first computing a soft point-to-

4041

