This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inlier Confidence Calibration for Point Cloud Registration
Yongzhe Yuan1,2 Yue Wu1,2 * Xiaolong Fan1,3 Maoguo Gong1,3 Qiguang Miao1,2 Wenping Ma4
1
MoE Key Lab of Collaborative Intelligence Systems, Xidian University
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
3
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University
yyz@stu.xidian.edu.cn, {ywu, qgmiao}@xidian.edu.cn,
xiaolongfan@outlook.com, gong@ieee.org, wpma@mail.xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
Inliers estimation constitutes a pivotal step in partially
overlapping point cloud registration. Existing methods
broadly obey coordinate-based scheme, where inlier confidence is scored through simply capturing coordinate differences in the context. However, this scheme results in
massive inlier misinterpretation readily, consequently affecting the registration performance. In this paper, we explore to extend a new definition called inlier confidence calibration (ICC) to alleviate the above issues. Firstly, we provide finely initial correspondences for ICC in order to generate high quality reference point cloud copy corresponding to the source point cloud. In particular, we develop
a soft assignment matrix optimization theorem that offers
faster speed and greater precision compared to Sinkhorn.
Benefiting from the high quality reference copy, we argue
the neighborhood patch formed by inlier and its neighborhood should have consistency between source point cloud
and its reference copy. Based on this insight, we construct transformation-invariant geometric constraints and
capture geometric structure consistency to calibrate inlier
confidence for estimated correspondences between source
point cloud and its reference copy. Finally, transformation
is further calculated by the weighted SVD algorithm with
the calibrated inlier confidence. Our model is trained in
an unsupervised manner, and extensive experiments on synthetic and real-world datasets illustrate the effectiveness of
the proposed method.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of 3D data acquisition technology, point cloud data collected by LiDAR [45], Structured
Light Sensors [30], and Stereo Cameras [9] has become
* Corresponding author.

w1 0.2
w2 0.5
w3 0.3
Shared

wN 0.7
MAE (R): 1.0123

MAE (t): 0.0161

(a)

w1 0.9
w2 0.4
w3 0.9
Shared

wN 0.2
MAE (R): 0.0012

MAE (t): 0.0000

(b)

Figure 1. A toy example of proposed geometric constraints for
inlier confidence calibration. The indicative center points pair is
inlier pair in reality. (a) shows the situation without constraints.
(b) demonstrates the situation with reliable geometric constraints.
The experimental results are derived from ablation study.

ubiquitous in various 3D computer vision and robotics applications [6, 20], such as autopilot [15], surgical navigation
[23], and simultaneous localization and mapping [11]. In
such applications, rigid body point cloud registration plays
an essential role, which aims to find a rigid transformation
to align one point cloud to another.
The recent advances have been dominated by learning-

5312

