This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diff-Plugin: Revitalizing Details for Diffusion-based Low-level Tasks
Yuhao Liu1 , Zhanghan Ke1,† , Fang Liu1,† , Nanxuan Zhao2 , Rynson W.H. Lau1,†
1
City University of Hong Kong, 2 Adobe Research

“Can you remove the rain in this photo?”

“I want to enhance the face appearance of this image.”

“Please help me enhance the lighting of this photo.”

“ I need to remove the snow in this photo.”

“… clear haze …”

“remove snow and haze”

Figure 1. Real-world applications of Diff-Plugin visualized across distinct single-type and one multi-type low-level vision tasks. DiffPlugin allows users to selectively conduct interested low-level vision tasks via natural languages and can generate high-fidelity results.

Abstract
Diffusion models trained on large-scale datasets have
achieved remarkable progress in image synthesis. However, due to the randomness in the diffusion process, they
often struggle with handling diverse low-level tasks that
require details preservation. To overcome this limitation,
we present a new Diff-Plugin framework to enable a single pre-trained diffusion model to generate high-fidelity results across a variety of low-level tasks. Specifically, we
first propose a lightweight Task-Plugin module with a dual
branch design to provide task-specific priors, guiding the
diffusion process in preserving image content. We then propose a Plugin-Selector that can automatically select different Task-Plugins based on the text instruction, allowing
users to edit images by indicating multiple low-level tasks
with natural language. We conduct extensive experiments
on 8 low-level vision tasks. The results demonstrate the
superiority of Diff-Plugin over existing methods, particularly in real-world scenarios. Our ablations further validate that Diff-Plugin is stable, schedulable, and supports
robust training across different dataset sizes. Project page:
https://yuhaoliu7456.github.io/Diff-Plugin

† Joint corresponding authors. This project is in part supported by a
GRF grant (Grant No.: 11205620) from the Research Grants Council of
Hong Kong.

1. Introduction
Over the past two years, diffusion models [9, 21, 22, 61]
have achieved unprecedented success in image generation
and shown potential to become vision foundation models.
Recently, many works [4, 25, 28, 31, 46, 91, 96] have
demonstrated that diffusion models trained on large-scale
text-to-image datasets can already understand various visual attributes and provide versatile visual representations
for downstream tasks, e.g., image classification [31], segmentation [25, 96], translation [46, 91], and editing [4, 28].
However, due to the inherent randomness in the diffusion process, existing diffusion models cannot maintain
consistent contents to the input image and thus fail in handling low-level vision tasks. To this end, some methods [46, 63] propose to utilize input images as a prior via
the DDIM Inversion [61] strategy when editing images, but
they are unstable when the scenes are complex. Other methods [16, 52, 56, 71, 83] attempt to train new diffusion models on task-specific datasets from scratch, limiting them to
solve only a single task.
In this work, we observe that an accurate text prompt
describing the goal of the task can already instruct a pretrained diffusion model to address many low-level tasks, but
typically leads to obvious content distortion, as illustrated
in Fig. 2. Our insight to this problem is that task-specific
priors containing both guidance information of the task and
spatial information of the input image can adequately guide

4197

