This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sculpting Holistic 3D Representation
in Contrastive Language-Image-3D Pre-training
Yipeng Gao1
Zeyu Wang2
Wei-Shi Zheng1
Cihang Xie2
Yuyin Zhou2
1
2
Sun Yat-sen University
University of California, Santa Cruz

Abstract
Contrastive learning has emerged as a promising
paradigm for 3D open-world understanding, i.e., aligning point cloud representation to image and text embedding space individually. In this paper, we introduce MixCon3D, a simple yet effective method aiming to sculpt
holistic 3D representation in contrastive language-image3D pre-training. In contrast to point cloud only, we develop the 3D object-level representation from complementary perspectives, e.g., multi-view rendered images with the
point cloud. Then, MixCon3D performs language-3D contrastive learning, comprehensively depicting real-world 3D
objects and bolstering text alignment. Additionally, we pioneer the first thorough investigation of various training
recipes for the 3D contrastive learning paradigm, building a solid baseline with improved performance. Extensive
experiments conducted on three representative benchmarks
reveal that our method significantly improves over the baseline, surpassing the previous state-of-the-art performance
on the challenging 1,156-category Objaverse-LVIS dataset
by 5.7%. The versatility of MixCon3D is showcased in
applications such as text-to-3D retrieval and point cloud
captioning, further evidencing its efficacy in diverse scenarios. The code is available at https://github.com/UCSCVLAA/MixCon3D.

1. Introduction
The ability to perceive and comprehend 3D environments
is crucial in applications like augmented and virtual reality, autonomous driving, and embodied AI. Despite significant progress achieved in closed-set 3D recognition
[29, 50, 51, 53, 54, 68, 69, 80, 88], there is still a distinct gap
between the advanced development of 2D and 3D vision
methods. This phenomenon primarily stems from the limited diversity and complexity of existing 3D datasets caused
by high data acquisition costs.
Recent research endeavors have turned to well-trained
2D foundation models to unlock the full potential of 3D

Figure 1. Comparison of zero-shot point cloud recognition between the OpenShape (blue) and our MixCon3D (red) under different pre-training datasets (ShapeNet, Ensemble (No LVIS) and
Ensemble). Our model obtains consistent improvements on different training datasets on various downstream benchmarks.

open-world recognition. A line of such works is built upon
CLIP [56], a pioneering foundation model known for its extraordinary zero-shot recognition capability [17, 34, 82, 85,
89] by training on web-scale data [60, 61]. The knowledge
learned from millions or even billions of image-text pairs
proves to be invaluable in assisting the model to learn 3D
shapes. In this context, ULIP [77] and CLIP2 [81] first
propose to keep the image and text encoder frozen while
training the 3D encoder on the (image, text, point cloud)
triplets, which leads to substantially increased zero-shot
3D recognition performance. While existing methods have
demonstrated great promise, they predominantly center on a
vanilla correspondence between point-text and point-image
to form contrastive pairs, typically overlooking the intricate relationships across various modalities and perspectives. For instance, multi-view RGB images and 3D point
clouds are known to capture distinct yet complementary attributes of a 3D object [4, 7, 19, 26, 38, 62, 71] — point

22998

