This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TRIP: Temporal Residual Learning with Image Noise Prior
for Image-to-Video Diffusion Models*
Zhongwei Zhang† , Fuchen Long§ , Yingwei Pan§ , Zhaofan Qiu§ , Ting Yao§ , Yang Cao† and Tao Mei§
†
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
§
HiDream.ai Inc.
zhwzhang@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {longfuchen, pandy, qiuzhaofan, tiyao}@hidream.ai
forrest@ustc.edu.cn, tmei@hidream.ai

Gaussian Noise

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep generative models have demonstrated
impressive capabilities to create high-quality visual con* This work was performed at HiDream.ai.

Gaussian Noise
W

First Frame

H

Latent

First Frame

H
T

T

3D-UNet

Latent

Recent advances in text-to-video generation have
demonstrated the utility of powerful diffusion models. Nevertheless, the problem is not trivial when shaping diffusion
models to animate static image (i.e., image-to-video generation). The difficulty originates from the aspect that the diffusion process of subsequent animated frames should not only
preserve the faithful alignment with the given image but
also pursue temporal coherence among adjacent frames. To
alleviate this, we present TRIP, a new recipe of image-tovideo diffusion paradigm that pivots on image noise prior
derived from static image to jointly trigger inter-frame relational reasoning and ease the coherent temporal modeling via temporal residual learning. Technically, the image
noise prior is first attained through one-step backward diffusion process based on both static image and noised video
latent codes. Next, TRIP executes a residual-like dual-path
scheme for noise prediction: 1) a shortcut path that directly
takes image noise prior as the reference noise of each frame
to amplify the alignment between the first frame and subsequent frames; 2) a residual path that employs 3D-UNet
over noised video and static image latent codes to enable
inter-frame relational reasoning, thereby easing the learning of the residual noise for each frame. Furthermore, both
reference and residual noise of each frame are dynamically
merged via attention mechanism for final video generation.
Extensive experiments on WebVid-10M, DTDB and MSRVTT datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our TRIP for
image-to-video generation. Please see our project page at
https://trip-i2v.github.io/TRIP/.

W

Noise Prior
Estimation

Image
Noise Prior

3D-UNet
Residue Estimation

Noise Estimation

...

...

...

...

(a) Independent noise prediction

(b) Residual-like noise prediction
with image noise prior

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) independent noise prediction
and (b) our residual-like noise prediction with image noise prior
in I2V diffusion models.

tent. In between, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs)
[16, 75] and diffusion models [7, 24] have brought forward milestone improvement for a series of generative
tasks in computer vision field, e.g., text-to-image generation [44, 50], image editing [3, 22], and text-to-video generation [2, 25, 26]. In this work, we are interested in imageto-video generation (I2V), i.e., animating a static image by
endowing it with motion dynamics, which has great potential real-world applications (e.g., entertainment and creative
media). Conventional I2V techniques [9, 12, 40] commonly
target for generating video from a natural scene image with
random or very coarse motion dynamics (such as clouds
moving or fluid flowing). In contrast, our focus is a more
challenging text-driven I2V scenario: given the input static
image and text prompt, the animated frames should not only
faithfully align with the given first frame, but also be temporally coherent and semantically matched with text prompt.
Several recent pioneering practices [17, 60] for I2V is
to remould the typical latent diffusion model of text-tovideo generation by directly leveraging the given static image as additional condition during diffusion process. Figure
1 (a) illustrates such conventional noise prediction strategy
in latent diffusion model. Concretely, by taking the given

8671

