This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Human Gaussian Splatting: Real-time Rendering of Animatable Avatars
Arthur Moreau*

Jifei Song*
Helisa Dhamo
Yiren Zhou
Eduardo Pérez-Pellitero
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Richard Shaw

HuGS
Deformation

HuGS
Deformation

Training

Rendering

Figure 1. Overview of HuGS. Using multi-view video frames of a dynamic human, HuGS learns a photorealistic 3D human avatar
represented by a 3D Gaussian Splatting model. Given an arbitrary human body pose, our model deforms the canonical 3D representation
to the observation space, from which novel views can be rendered in real-time from any camera viewpoint.

Abstract
This work addresses the problem of real-time rendering
of photorealistic human body avatars learned from multiview videos. While the classical approaches to model and
render virtual humans generally use a textured mesh, recent research has developed neural body representations
that achieve impressive visual quality. However, these models are difficult to render in real-time and their quality degrades when the character is animated with body poses different than the training observations. We propose an animatable human model based on 3D Gaussian Splatting,
that has recently emerged as a very efficient alternative to
neural radiance fields. The body is represented by a set
of gaussian primitives in a canonical space which is deformed with a coarse to fine approach that combines forward skinning and local non-rigid refinement. We describe
how to learn our Human Gaussian Splatting (HuGS) model
in an end-to-end fashion from multi-view observations, and
evaluate it against the state-of-the-art approaches for novel
pose synthesis of clothed body. Our method achieves 1.5 dB
PSNR improvement over the state-of-the-art on THuman4
dataset while being able to render in real-time (≈ 80 fps for
512 × 512 resolution).

1. Introduction
Virtual human avatars are essential components of virtual
reality and video games for applications such as content creation and immersive interaction between users and virtual
worlds. The common procedure to create a highly realistic
avatar of a person involves expensive sensors and tedious
manual work. However, recent progress in 3D modeling
and neural rendering enabled data-driven models that learn
controllable human avatars from images.
Recent research in this area focuses on neural representations based on Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [36] or
Signed Distance Fields (SDF) [40]. Thanks to their continuous design, they can represent highly detailed shape and
textures of a clothed human body, and thus exhibit better
quality than the commonly-used textured meshes. However,
their deployment is difficult, first because they present long
training and rendering times, but also because animating the
character in a controllable way is challenging. As a result,
these neural avatars shine on novel view synthesis of body
poses observed during training, but struggle to generalize to
novel body poses with similar quality.
While animating meshes is a well understood problem
* Authors contributed equally to this work.

788

