This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

POPDG: Popular 3D Dance Generation with PopDanceSet
Xuecai Hu†
Yongzhen Huang†
Li Yao
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University

Zhenye Luo*

Min Ren *

luozy2021@mail.bnu.edu.cn, {renmin, huxc1208, huangyongzhen, yaoli}@bnu.edu.cn

Figure 1. POPDG, in combination with PopDanceSet, could generate a variety of aesthetically driven popular dances.

Abstract
Generating dances that are both lifelike and well-aligned
with music continues to be a challenging task in the crossmodal domain. This paper introduces PopDanceSet, the
first dataset tailored to the preferences of young audiences,
enabling the generation of aesthetically oriented dances.
And it surpasses the AIST++ dataset in music genre diversity and the intricacy and depth of dance movements.
Moreover, the proposed POPDG model within the iDDPM framework enhances dance diversity and, through the
Space Augmentation Algorithm, strengthens spatial physical connections between human body joints, ensuring that
increased diversity does not compromise generation quality. A streamlined Alignment Module is also designed to
improve the temporal alignment between dance and music. Extensive experiments show that POPDG achieves
SOTA results on two datasets. Furthermore, the paper also
expands on current evaluation metrics. The dataset and
code are available at https://github.com/LukeLuo1/POPDG.

1. Introduction
Dance is a fundamental artistic expression with a rich history in humanity. Throughout time, humans have utilized
dance to convey messages and express emotions [18].The
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

task of music-driven dance generation not only helps choreographers improve the efficiency of creating innovative
dances but also facilitates performances by virtual characters. It even extends to the field of neuroscience, assisting researchers in exploring the relationship between human
movement and music [3].
This task has long been hampered by the scarcity of
publicly available datasets and the limitations in generative
model capabilities. As of now, the AIST++ dataset[24] is
among the few with a significant volume of data that is publicly accessible. Despite significant advancements in dance
generation models in recent years, issues such as the complexity of training steps, instability in generation, and lack
of diversity still exist. This paper introduces the PopDanceSet and the POPDG, aimed at enhancing both the dataset
and the model aspects of dance generation.
The AIST++ dataset’s limitations include a lack of aesthetically oriented dances, a narrow range of dance and music genres, among others. The dances in this dataset are
confined to 10 subcategories of street dance, which hardly
encompass the vast array of dance styles in reality. The PopDanceSet, created through a popularity function designed in
this paper, filters dance videos that align with popular aesthetics. It represents a significant breakthrough in terms of
aesthetically oriented content, diversity in dance types, music genres, and dance movements.
Previous generative models primarily focused on the
temporal alignment of music and dance, but even when considering the spatial constraints of dance, they did not delve

26984

