This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ActiveDC: Distribution Calibration for Active Finetuning
Wenshuai Xu1, 2 , Zhenghui Hu * 2 , Yu Lu2 , Jinzhou Meng1, 2 , Qingjie Liu2, 3 , Yunhong Wang2, 3
1

School of Software, Beihang University
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University
3
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
2

Abstract
The pretraining-finetuning paradigm has gained popularity in various computer vision tasks. In this paradigm,
the emergence of active finetuning arises due to the abundance of large-scale data and costly annotation requirements. Active finetuning involves selecting a subset of data
from an unlabeled pool for annotation, facilitating subsequent finetuning. However, the use of a limited number of
training samples can lead to a biased distribution, potentially resulting in model overfitting. In this paper, we propose a new method called ActiveDC for the active finetuning tasks. Firstly, we select samples for annotation by optimizing the distribution similarity between the subset to be
selected and the entire unlabeled pool in continuous space.
Secondly, we calibrate the distribution of the selected samples by exploiting implicit category information in the unlabeled pool. The feature visualization provides an intuitive sense of the effectiveness of our method to distribution
calibration. We conducted extensive experiments on three
image classification datasets with different sampling ratios.
The results indicate that ActiveDC consistently outperforms
the baseline performance in all image classification tasks.
The improvement is particularly significant when the sampling ratio is low, with performance gains of up to 10%.
Our code will be publicly available.

1. Introduction
The recent successes in deep learning owe much of their
progress to the availability of extensive training data. However, it is crucial to recognize that annotating large-scale
datasets demands a significant allocation of human resources. In response to this challenge, a prevalent approach
has emerged, referred to as the pretraining-finetuning
paradigm. This paradigm involves the initial pretraining
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparison of the performance for finetuning the CIFAR100 dataset at different sampling ratios.

of models on a substantial volume of data in an unsupervised fashion, followed by a subsequent finetuning phase
on a more limited, labeled subset of data.
The existing body of literature extensively delves into
the domains of unsupervised pretraining [9, 17, 46] and supervised finetuning [25, 42], making noteworthy contributions in these areas. However, when confronted with a vast
repository of unlabeled data, the crucial task at hand is the
judicious selection of the most valuable samples for annotation, a task necessitated by the constraints of limited annotation resources. At the same time, the distribution of the
small number of labeled samples tends to significantly deviate from the overall distribution, raising the issue of how
to calibrate the distribution of the selected samples [13, 43].
Active learning [2, 5, 22, 26, 28, 31, 37] is a method that
iteratively selects the most informative samples for manual labeling during the training process, aiming to improve
predictive model performance. Although active learning
is considered a promising approach, empirical experiments

16996

