This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unlocking Pre-trained Image Backbones for Semantic Image Synthesis
Tariq Berrada1,2
1

Ground truth

FAIR, Meta

Label map

Jakob Verbeek1
2

Camille Couprie1

Karteek Alahari2

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, Inria, CNRS, Grenoble INP, LJK

OASIS – 0.03s

SDM – 260s

PITI – 17s

Ours – 0.04s

Figure 1. Images generated with models trained on COCO-Stuff. We compare our approach to state-of-the-art methods OASIS, SDM, and
PITI, along with inference times to generate a single image. Our approach combines high-quality samples with low-latency sampling.

Abstract
Semantic image synthesis, i.e., generating images from
user-provided semantic label maps, is an important conditional image generation task as it allows to control both the
content as well as the spatial layout of generated images.
Although diffusion models have pushed the state of the art
in generative image modeling, the iterative nature of their
inference process makes them computationally demanding.
Other approaches such as GANs are more efficient as they
only need a single feed-forward pass for generation, but the
image quality tends to suffer when modeling large and diverse datasets. In this work, we propose a new class of GAN
discriminators for semantic image synthesis that generates
highly realistic images by exploiting feature backbones pretrained for tasks such as image classification. We also introduce a new generator architecture with better context modeling and using cross-attention to inject noise into latent
variables, leading to more diverse generated images. Our
model, which we dub DP-SIMS, achieves state-of-the-art results in terms of image quality and consistency with the input label maps on ADE-20K, COCO-Stuff, and Cityscapes,
surpassing recent diffusion models while requiring two orders of magnitude less compute for inference.

1. Introduction
Conditional image synthesis aims to generate images based
on information such as text, categories, sketches, label
maps, etc. While text-based generation has seen impressive
advances in recent years with diffusion models [41, 49], it
lacks precise control over the location and the boundaries of
objects, which are important properties for creative content
generation tasks like photo editing, inpainting, and for data
augmentation in discriminative learning [1, 4, 18, 68]. Consequently, in this work we focus on semantic image synthesis [24, 44, 53, 59–61], where the goal is to produce
an image, given a segmentation map, with every pixel assigned to a category, as input. Due to the one-to-many nature of the mapping, prior works have tackled this problem
in a conditional GAN [17] framework by exploring different
conditioning mechanisms in GANs to do stochastic generations that correspond to the input label map [24, 44, 60].
Others developed conditional discriminator models, which
avoid image-to-image reconstruction losses that compromise diversity in generated images [53]. Diffusion models [59, 61] have also been investigated for this problem.
SDM [61] adds spatially adaptive normalization layers for
conditioning, while PITI [59] replaces the text encoder of

7840

