This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Utility-Fairness Trade-Offs and How to Find Them
Sepehr Dehdashtian Bashir Sadeghi Vishnu Naresh Boddeti
Michigan State University
{sepehr, sadeghib, vishnu}@msu.edu

ata

1. Introduction
As learning-based systems are increasingly being deployed
in high-stakes applications, there is a dire need to ensure
that they do not propagate or amplify any discriminative
tendencies inherent in the training datasets. An ideal solution would impart fairness to prediction models while retaining the performance of the same model when learned
without fairness considerations.
Realizing this goal necessitates optimizing two objectives: maximizing utility in predicting a label Y for a target task (e.g., face identity) while minimizing the unfairness w.r.t. a demographic attribute S (e.g., age or gender).
However, when the statistical dependence between Y and S

Utility (Y)

Im

When building classification systems with demographic
fairness considerations, there are two objectives to satisfy:
1) maximizing utility for the specific task and 2) ensuring
fairness w.r.t. a known demographic attribute. These objectives often compete, so optimizing both can lead to a
trade-off between utility and fairness. While existing works
acknowledge the trade-offs and study their limits, two questions remain unanswered: 1) What are the optimal tradeoffs between utility and fairness? and 2) How can we numerically quantify these trade-offs from data for a desired
prediction task and demographic attribute of interest? This
paper addresses these questions. We introduce two utilityfairness trade-offs: the Data-Space and Label-Space Tradeoff. The trade-offs reveal three regions within the utilityfairness plane, delineating what is fully and partially possible and impossible. We propose U-FaTE, a method to numerically quantify the trade-offs for a given prediction task
and group fairness definition from data samples. Based on
the trade-offs, we introduce a new scheme for evaluating
representations. An extensive evaluation of fair representation learning methods and representations from over 1000
pre-trained models revealed that most current approaches
are far from the estimated and achievable fairness-utility
trade-offs across multiple datasets and prediction tasks.

100

LST

le
sib

s
po

aD

tr

ith
ew

Ex

bl
ssi
Po

e
ibl

s

s
Po

DST

DST
LST
Zero-Shot
Supervised

90

Accuracy (%)

Abstract

80
70
60
50
40
30

Unfairness (S)

(a)

0

10

20

EOD (%)

30

(b)

Figure 1. The utility-fairness trade-offs. (a) Classification systems can be evaluated by their utility (e.g., accuracy) w.r.t. a target
label Y and their unfairness w.r.t. a demographic label S. We
introduce two trade-offs, Data Space Trade-Off (DST) and Label
Space Trade-Off (LST). (b) We empirically estimate DST and LST
on CelebA and evaluate the utility (high cheekbones) and fairness
(gender & age) of over 100 zero-shot and 900 supervised models.

is not negligible, learning with fairness considerations will
necessarily degrade the performance of the target predictor,
i.e., a trade-off will exist between utility and fairness.
The existence of a utility-fairness trade-off has been well
established, theoretically [11, 22, 29, 36, 37] and empirically [29], in multiple prior works. However, the focus
of this body of work has been limited in multiple respects.
First, prior work [29, 36] focused on just one type of tradeoff, ignoring other possible trade-offs between utility and
fairness. Second, prior work [36, 37] focused on establishing bounds or identifying the end-points of the trade-off of
interest rather than attempting its precise characterization.
Third, the majority of the prior work [11, 29, 36, 37] has
investigated the utility-fairness trade-offs for one definition
of group fairness, namely, demographic parity (DP). There
are multiple fairness definitions [2], including those more
practically relevant than DP, such as Equalized Opportunity
(EO), for which the trade-offs have not been studied.
Despite these attempts, several questions related to the
utility-fairness trade-offs remain outstanding.
1. What are the optimal utility-fairness trade-offs?
2. For a given prediction task and a demographic attribute, we wish to be fair w.r.t., how can we empirically estimate the trade-offs from data?

12037

