This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Upload-Efficient Scheme for Transferring Knowledge From a Server-Side
Pre-trained Generator to Clients in Heterogeneous Federated Learning
Jianqing Zhang1 ,* Yang Liu2,3†, Yang Hua4 , Jian Cao1,5†
1

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 Queen’s University Belfast
5
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Trusted Data Circulation and Governance in Web3

tsingz@sjtu.edu.cn, liuy03@air.tsinghua.edu.cn, y.hua@qub.ac.uk, cao-jian@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Heterogeneous Federated Learning (HtFL) enables collaborative learning on multiple clients with different model
architectures while preserving privacy. Despite recent research progress, knowledge sharing in HtFL is still difficult
due to data and model heterogeneity. To tackle this issue, we
leverage the knowledge stored in public pre-trained generators and propose a new upload-efficient knowledge transfer
scheme called Federated Knowledge-Transfer Loop (FedKTL). Our FedKTL can produce client-task-related prototypical image-vector pairs via the generator’s inference on
the server. With these pairs, each client can transfer preexisting knowledge from the generator to its local model
through an additional supervised local task. We conduct
extensive experiments on four datasets under two types of
data heterogeneity with 14 kinds of models including CNNs
and ViTs. Results show that our upload-efficient FedKTL
surpasses seven state-of-the-art methods by up to 7.31%
in accuracy. Moreover, our knowledge transfer scheme is
applicable in scenarios with only one edge client. Code:
https://github.com/TsingZ0/FedKTL

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been a growing trend for companies to
develop custom models tailored to their specific needs [3,
11, 15, 18, 50]. However, the problem of insufficient data
has persistently plagued model training in specific fields,
such as medicine [1, 4, 43]. Federated Learning (FL) is a
popular approach to tackle this problem by training models
collaboratively among multiple clients (e.g., companies or
edge devices) while preserving privacy on clients [19, 28].
Traditional FL (tFL) focuses on training a global model for
all clients and is unable to fulfill clients’ personalized needs
due to data heterogeneity among clients [20, 29]. Consequently, personalized FL (pFL) has emerged as a solution
to train customized models for each client [30, 58, 67, 69].
* Work done during internship at AIR.
† Corresponding authors.

However, most pFL methods still assume homogeneous
client models [30, 67, 69], which may not adequately cater
to the specific needs of companies and individuals [61].
Besides, as the size of the model increases, both tFL and
pFL incur significant communication costs when transmitting model parameters [76]. Furthermore, exposing clients’
model parameters also raises privacy and intellectual property (IP) concerns [27, 55, 63, 70]. Recently, Heterogeneous
Federated Learning (HtFL) frameworks have been proposed
to consider both data and model heterogeneity [52, 61]. It
explores novel knowledge-sharing schemes that go beyond
sharing the entire client models.
Most existing HtFL methods adopt knowledge distillation (KD) techniques [13] and design various knowledgesharing frameworks based on a global dataset [36, 64], a
global auxiliary model [57, 71], or global class-wise prototypes [52, 53, 70]. However, global datasets’ availability and quality as well as their relevance to clients’ tasks
significantly impact the effectiveness of KD [65]. Directly
replacing the global dataset with a pre-trained generator
has a minimal impact since most generators are pre-trained
to generate unlabeled data within the domain of their pretraining data [21, 22]. As for the global auxiliary model,
it introduces a substantial communication overhead due to
the need to transmit it in each communication iteration.
Although sharing class-wise prototypes is communicationefficient, they can only carry limited global knowledge to
clients, which is insufficient for clients’ model training
needs. Furthermore, the prototypes extracted by heterogeneous models are biased, hindering the attainment of uniformly separated global prototypes on the server [70].
Thus, we propose an upload-efficient knowledge transfer
scheme called Federated Knowledge-Transfer Loop (FedKTL), which takes advantage of the compactness of prototypes and the pre-existing knowledge from a server-side
public pre-trained generator. FedKTL can (1) use the generator on the server to produce a handful of global prototypical image-vector pairs tailored to clients’ tasks, and (2)
transfer pre-existing common knowledge from the generator to each client model via an additional supervised local

12109

