This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Adversarial Training via Fisher-Rao Norm-based Regularization
Xiangyu Yin Wenjie Ruan*
University of Liverpool, UK
x.yin22@liverpool.ac.uk, w.ruan@trustai.uk

Abstract
Adversarial training is extensively utilized to improve the
adversarial robustness of deep neural networks. Yet, mitigating the degradation of standard generalization performance in adversarial-trained models remains an open problem. This paper attempts to resolve this issue through the
lens of model complexity. First, We leverage the Fisher-Rao
norm, a geometrically invariant metric for model complexity, to establish the non-trivial bounds of the Cross-Entropy
Loss-based Rademacher complexity for a ReLU-activated
Multi-Layer Perceptron. Then we generalize a complexityrelated variable, which is sensitive to the changes in
model width and the trade-off factors in adversarial training. Moreover, intensive empirical evidence validates
that this variable highly correlates with the generalization
gap of Cross-Entropy loss between adversarial-trained and
standard-trained models, especially during the initial and
final phases of the training process. Building upon this
observation, we propose a novel regularization framework,
called Logit-Oriented Adversarial Training (LOAT), which
can mitigate the trade-off between robustness and accuracy
while imposing only a negligible increase in computational
overhead. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that the
proposed regularization strategy can boost the performance
of the prevalent adversarial training algorithms, including
PGD-AT, TRADES, TRADES (LSE), MART, and DM-AT,
across various network architectures. Our code will be
available at https://github.com/TrustAI/LOAT.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are extensively applied in a
variety of safety-critical systems, such as surveillance systems, drones, autonomous vehicles, and malware detection
[4, 7, 10, 36, 41]. Despite their pervasiveness, considerable evidence shows that the standard-trained deep learning
models can be easily fooled by subtly modified data points,
leading to inaccurate predictions [6, 11, 19, 20, 28, 38]. To
* Corresponding Author

make models more resistant to such imperceptible perturbations, numerous adversarial training algorithms have been
proposed in recent years, such as PGD-AT [17], TRADES
[43], MART [32], TRADES (LSE) [24], DM (Diffusion
Model)-AT [34], etc. These methods aim to ensure the
model’s feature representation consistency across clean and
adversarial inputs [9, 30]. Nonetheless, it is observed that
these adversarial training algorithms commonly lead to a
compromise in the standard generalization performance.
This phenomenon, often referred to as ’trade-off between
robustness and accuracy’, continues to be a subject of vigorous discussion in recent years.
Specifically, several studies have attributed the deterioration of standard accuracy to the bias introduced by adversarial training algorithms [24, 40]. Other researchers have suggested that sufficient training data is required to bridge the
feature gap between adversarial and standard-trained models [25, 29]. Another viewpoint relates this trade-off with
the generalizability of the network using a measure known
as local Lipschitzness [37]. However, most of these studies
tend to focus on a single specific perspective, such as training objective, learning data, or model architecture, which
fails to consider the comprehensive integration of these various factors. This context compels us to explore an important
yet challenging question: Can we interpret the degradation
of standard accuracy in a unified and principled way?
Affirmatively, as elucidated by [8], all the factors above
that contribute to the degradation of standard generalization in adversarial training ultimately influence a central
concept: model complexity, which offers a potential approach to analyze this trade-off fundamentally. Considering the diversity of DNNs, identifying a universal framework for model complexity remains an elusive goal. For
the sake of simplicity, we conceptualize models with varying widths and depths as Multi-Layer Perceptrons (MLP).
Specifically, given a ReLU-activated L-layer MLP, we examine its Rademacher complexity concerning the CrossEntropy loss out of a set of hypotheses. The range of complexity is captured by Fisher-Rao norm [15], a geometric
invariant measure for model complexity. Deriving from
this, we can establish bounds for the Rademacher complex-

24544

