This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AAMDM: Accelerated Auto-regressive Motion Diffusion Model
Tianyu Li
Georgia Tech

Calvin Qiao
UBC

Guanqiao Ren
BUAA

KangKang Yin
SFU

Sehoon Ha
Georgia Tech

Figure 1. We introduce the Accelerated Auto-regressive Motion Diffusion Model (AAMDM), a novel framework designed to synthesize
diverse and high-quality character motions at interactive rates.

Abstract
Interactive motion synthesis is essential in creating immersive experiences in entertainment applications, such as
video games and virtual reality. However, generating animations that are both high-quality and contextually responsive remains a challenge. Traditional techniques in
the game industry can produce high-fidelity animations but
suffer from high computational costs and poor scalability. Trained neural network models alleviate the memory and speed issues, yet fall short on generating diverse
motions. Diffusion models offer diverse motion synthesis with low memory usage, but require expensive reverse
diffusion processes. This paper introduces the Accelerated Auto-regressive Motion Diffusion Model (AAMDM),
a novel motion synthesis framework designed to achieve
quality, diversity, and efficiency all together. AAMDM
integrates Denoising Diffusion GANs as a fast Generation Module, and an Auto-regressive Diffusion Model as
a Polishing Module. Furthermore, AAMDM operates in
a lower-dimensional embedded space rather than the fulldimensional pose space, which reduces the training complexity as well as further improves the performance. We
show that AAMDM outperforms existing methods in motion
quality, diversity, and runtime efficiency, through comprehensive quantitative analyses and visual comparisons. We
also demonstrate the effectiveness of each algorithmic component through ablation studies.

1. Introduction
The landscape of interactive motion synthesis, particularly
in the realm of video games, has seen a notable expansion. Today’s AAA titles boast tens of thousands of unique
characters in real-time, all needing to be contextually animated [18]. Therefore, the efficiency of motion synthesis has emerged as a critical focus of research in the field
of computer animation. Motion Matching [25], a prevalent
technique for industry-grade animation, was first developed
by UbiSoft for the game “For Honor” [1]. The main objective of Motion Matching (MM) is to identify the most
contextually suitable animation in a large dataset based on
manually defined motion features. This approach, while
capable of yielding responsive high-quality animations, is
computationally intensive and scales poorly with respect to
the size of the dataset.
Alternatively, trained neural networks have emerged to
reduce the memory footprints and enhance runtime performance. However, these models possess their own challenges, such as unstable convergence at training time and
compromised motion quality at testing time. Recently,
diffusion-based generative models have revolutionized content creation, thanks to their power to create diverse highquality content with lean memory demands. However, standard diffusion models are often impractical for time-critical
applications, due to their poor run-time performance caused
by expensive reverse diffusion processes.
We introduce the Accelerated Auto-regressive Motion

1813

