This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real Acoustic Fields: An Audio-Visual Room Acoustics Dataset and Benchmark
∗

Israel D. Gebru2
Christian Richardt2
Anurag Kumar3
Ziyang Chen1,2
William Laney2
Andrew Owens1
Alexander Richard2
1

University of Michigan

2

Codec Avatars Lab, Pittsburgh, Meta

3

Reality Labs Research, Meta

https://facebookresearch.github.io/real-acoustic-fields

Abstract
We present a new dataset called Real Acoustic Fields (RAF)
that captures real acoustic room data from multiple modalities. The dataset includes high-quality and densely captured
room impulse response data paired with multi-view images,
and precise 6DoF pose tracking data for sound emitters and
listeners in the rooms. We used this dataset to evaluate existing methods for novel-view acoustic synthesis and impulse response generation which previously relied on synthetic data.
In our evaluation, we thoroughly assessed existing audio and
audio-visual models against multiple criteria and proposed
settings to enhance their performance on real-world data.
We also conducted experiments to investigate the impact of
incorporating visual data (i.e., images and depth) into neural acoustic field models. Additionally, we demonstrated
the effectiveness of a simple sim2real approach, where a
model is pre-trained with simulated data and fine-tuned with
sparse real-world data, resulting in significant improvements
in the few-shot learning approach. RAF is the first dataset to
provide densely captured room acoustic data, making it an
ideal resource for researchers working on audio and audiovisual neural acoustic field modeling techniques. Demos and
datasets are available on our project page.

1. Introduction
Sound waves reflect off objects in a scene before reaching a
listener’s ears. These reflections change the sound waves in
complex ways and convey the objects’ size, shape, and material properties. Accurately modeling these changes is crucial
for spatial audio rendering, and plays a key role in adding
the sense of immersion in a variety of application domains,
such as 3D games, virtual and augmented reality [22, 70].
The goal of a sound propagation model is typically to
estimate a room impulse response (RIR) for a given emitter
and listener pose. RIRs are linear filters that, when convolved with an input sound, simulate the sound that would
* Work done during an internship at Meta.

be perceived by the listener, performing changes like adding
reverb or dampening certain frequencies. Estimating RIRs
for novel emitter and listener poses from sparsely sampled
RIRs acquired from a scene has been a major focus of recent
work in audio [5, 21, 26, 28, 42] and audio-visual learning [2, 9, 13, 37, 54, 55]. Inspired by novel-view synthesis [32, 38, 40], an emerging line of work has proposed
learning-based models based on neural fields [34, 36, 57].
Despite the recent interest in sound propagation in the
audio-visual community, existing methods have been developed and evaluated on highly simplified datasets with
artificially generated impulse responses. This is due to the
fact that collecting real-world RIRs is a challenging process that requires both playing and recording sounds from
densely sampled positions throughout a scene. Many different data collection efforts have each made different compromises between the conflicting factors in terms of realism,
ground truth, and costs. Existing datasets [11, 29, 33] thus
make highly restrictive assumptions, such as by having only
a single sound emitter at a fixed pose, by having limited
(2D-only) spatial coverage of the scenes, or by having only
simple planar geometry. Consequently, these datasets do
not fully capture the complexities of real-world room geometry, material variations, and source directivity. The lack
of a real “gold standard” benchmark makes it challenging
to effectively analyze existing approaches under real-world
assumptions and to drive research on audio-visual informed
sound propagation toward its true potential.
In this paper, we propose an audio-visual sound propagation dataset and benchmark that addresses the shortcomings
of previous approaches. Our Real Acoustic Fields (RAF)
dataset is a multimodal real acoustic room dataset with dense
3D audio captures of a large space filled with and without
furniture. To capture dense and calibrated audio in the rooms,
we used a custom-built microphone tower system and robotic
loudspeaker stand. The microphone tower contains 36 omnidirectional microphones placed at different heights and
positions. The robotic stand can rotate and position the loudspeaker at different heights, enabling us to capture sound

21886

