This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Detector-Free Structure from Motion
Xingyi He1 Jiaming Sun1 Yifan Wang1 Sida Peng1
Qixing Huang2 Hujun Bao 1 Xiaowei Zhou1†
1

Zhejiang University

2

The University of Texas at Austin
Detector-Based SfM

Abstract
We propose a structure-from-motion framework to recover
accurate camera poses and point clouds from unordered
images. Traditional SfM systems typically rely on the
successful detection of repeatable keypoints across multiple
views as the first step, which is difficult for texture-poor
scenes, and poor keypoint detection may break down
the whole SfM system. We propose a detector-free SfM
framework to draw benefits from the recent success of
detector-free matchers to avoid the early determination
of keypoints, while solving the multi-view inconsistency
issue of detector-free matchers. Specifically, our framework
first reconstructs a coarse SfM model from quantized
detector-free matches. Then, it refines the model by a novel
iterative refinement pipeline, which iterates between an
attention-based multi-view matching module to refine feature
tracks and a geometry refinement module to improve the
reconstruction accuracy. Experiments demonstrate that the
proposed framework outperforms existing detector-based
SfM systems on common benchmark datasets. We also
collect a texture-poor SfM dataset to demonstrate the capability of our framework to reconstruct texture-poor scenes.
Based on this framework, we take the first place in Image
Matching Challenge 2023 [9]. Project page: https:
//zju3dv.github.io/DetectorFreeSfM/.

1. Introduction
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) is a fundamental task in computer vision, which aims to recover camera poses, intrinsic
parameters, and point clouds from multi-view images of
a scene. The estimated camera poses and optional point
clouds benefit downstream tasks, such as visual localization,
multi-view stereo, and novel view synthesis.
SfM has been studied for decades, with many wellestablished methods [4, 10, 11, 54], open source systems
such as Bundler [43] and COLMAP [40], and commercial
software [1, 3] that are accurate and scalable for large-scale
The authors from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key
Lab of CAD&CG. † Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

Detection

Matching

Failed Reconstruction

Our Detector-Free SfM

R_error=0.91,
t_error=4.3 mm,
Regis. rate=100%

Unordered
Images

Detector-Free
Matching

Highly Accurate Poses

More Results on Challenging Scenes

Deep Sea

Moon Surface

Figure 1. Comparison between traditional detector-based SfM
and the proposed detector-free SfM. For the texture-poor scene,
detector-based SfM fails due to the poor repeatability of detected
keypoints at the beginning, while our detector-free SfM framework
leverages detector-free matching and achieves complete reconstruction with highly accurate camera poses. Our framework is applicable to real-world challenging scenes such as the deep sea and the
moon surface.

scenes. As a routine, they require to detect and match sparse
feature points across multiple views [12, 28, 37] at the beginning of the pipeline to build multi-view point-to-point
correspondences. This requirement could not be fulfilled in
many cases. For example, in texture-poor regions, it is hard
to robustly detect repeatable keypoints across multiple views
for matching. Poor feature detection and matching become
the bottleneck of the whole SfM pipeline, leading to missing
image registration or even failing reconstruction of the entire
model. Fig. 1 presents an example.

21594

