This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Uncertainty-Guided Never-Ending Learning to Drive
Lei Lai

Eshed Ohn-Bar Sanjay Arora† John Seon Keun Yi
Boston University † Red Hat Inc.

{leilai, eohnbar, jskyi}@bu.edu

saarora@redhat.com

Unlabeled Video Stream

Abstract
We present a highly scalable self-training framework
for incrementally adapting vision-based end-to-end autonomous driving policies in a semi-supervised manner, i.e.,
over a continual stream of incoming video data. To facilitate large-scale model training (e.g., open web or unlabeled
data), we do not assume access to ground-truth labels and
instead estimate pseudo-label policy targets for each video.
Our framework comprises three key components: knowledge distillation, a sample purification module, and an exploration and knowledge retention mechanism. First, given
sequential image frames, we pseudo-label the data and estimate uncertainty using an ensemble of inverse dynamics
models. The uncertainty is used to select the most informative samples to add to an experience replay buffer. We
specifically select high-uncertainty pseudo-labels to facilitate the exploration and learning of new and diverse driving skills. However, in contrast to prior work in continual
learning that assumes ground-truth labeled samples, the uncertain pseudo-labels can introduce significant noise. Thus,
we also pair the exploration with a label refinement module, which makes use of consistency constraints to re-label
the noisy exploratory samples and effectively learn from
diverse data. Trained as a complete never-ending learning system, we demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on
training from domain-changing data as well as millions of
images from the open web.

…
1. Teacher

2. Refine

3. Student

4. Memory
+

Figure 1. Never-Ending Learning to Drive. We present
∞-Driver, an agent that continually learns from unlabeled incoming video data. For each video in the video stream, the agent
employs an ensemble of inverse dynamics models to infer waypoint pseudo-labels and their uncertainty (higher uncertainty is
depicted in red). Noisy pseudo-labels are automatically refined
through consistency-based re-labeling and confidence-based filtering. Next, a driving policy student model is trained over incoming
and episodic memory replay data. The memory buffer is updated
to incorporate high-uncertainty samples. This maintains a diverse
set of samples to retain knowledge and prevent forgetting, despite
only viewing a given image once. Towards learning a generalized driving policy, our efficient framework enables highly scalable training, i.e., over millions of video frames from the web.

1. Introduction

emergency vehicles [2], begin to emerge. Determined to
resolve such scenarios, additional data may be collected in
such uncertain situations, and the model is re-trained from
scratch. Yet, to their dismay, the next iteration exhibits additional failures, e.g., uncertainty when encountering an unfamiliar object on the road (a puddle or a rock), or perhaps
a drastically different environment, and the cycle repeats.

Despite unprecedented advancements in sensors and compute since the nascent days of learning-based autonomous
driving, the manner in which driving decision policies are
trained today is still surprisingly narrow when compared
with human learning. In a similar fashion to the classical
ALVINN [54] over three decades ago, engineers and researchers may first collect a large, clean dataset of demonstrations and then utilize it to train, and subsequently deploy, the policy model [7, 14, 19, 27–29, 31–33, 55]. However, shortly after deployment, reports of various failure
events, such as colliding with a jaywalker [49] or handling

In contrast to such isolated policies and fixed deployment
scenarios, to learn to drive safely humans integrate a continual process of acquiring, fine-tuning, and adapting knowledge based on a never-ending stream of observations that
often span years and primarily comprises self-supervised
experience [16, 44, 47, 52, 63]. Human drivers continuously build on what they’ve previously learned to handle
unseen scenarios and domains, from complex merging into
busy traffic and up to driving in intricate highways, tunnels,
and handling bad weathers. Indeed, the likelihood of fatal
crash rates for drivers is reduced by nearly a factor of three

15088

