This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Style Blind Domain Generalized Semantic Segmentation
via Covariance Alignment and Semantic Consistence Contrastive Learning
Woo-Jin Ahn1 Geun-Yeong Yang1 Hyun-Duck Choi2 * Myo-Taeg Lim1 *
1
Korea University 2 Chonnam National University
1

{wjahn,hggofficial,mlim}@korea.ac.kr

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, a technique that classifies each
pixel in an image into predefined categories, has garnered
significant attention due to its potential applications in vari* Corresponding Authors

ducky.choi@jnu.ac.kr

Image

Baseline

Ours

Target

Source

Abstract
Deep learning models for semantic segmentation often
experience performance degradation when deployed to unseen target domains unidentified during the training phase.
This is mainly due to variations in image texture (i.e. style)
from different data sources. To tackle this challenge, existing domain generalized semantic segmentation (DGSS)
methods attempt to remove style variations from the feature. However, these approaches struggle with the entanglement of style and content, which may lead to the unintentional removal of crucial content information, causing
performance degradation. This study addresses this limitation by proposing BlindNet, a novel DGSS approach that
blinds the style without external modules or datasets. The
main idea behind our proposed approach is to alleviate the
effect of style in the encoder whilst facilitating robust segmentation in the decoder. To achieve this, BlindNet comprises two key components: covariance alignment and semantic consistency contrastive learning. Specifically, the
covariance alignment trains the encoder to uniformly recognize various styles and preserve the content information
of the feature, rather than removing the style-sensitive factor. Meanwhile, semantic consistency contrastive learning
enables the decoder to construct discriminative class embedding space and disentangles features that are vulnerable to misclassification. Through extensive experiments,
our approach outperforms existing DGSS methods, exhibiting robustness and superior performance for semantic segmentation on unseen target domains. The code is available
at https://github.com/root0yang/BlindNet.

2

Figure 1. Comparison of semantic segmentation results between the baseline (DeepLabV3+ with ResNet50 backbone) and
our BlindNet. Both models are trained on the source domain
(GTAV [43]) and tested on the target domain (Cityscapes [8]).

ous fields. Particularly, it plays a crucial role in autonomous
driving [1, 18] and robotic systems [34, 35]. Besides, with
the advent of large datasets, deep neural networks have
emerged as a trending approach for semantic segmentation
tasks, achieving impressive results [3, 5, 44, 54]. However,
there remains a major bottleneck detailing the meticulous
and labor-intensive process of dataset labeling. More particularly, this process not only consumes time but also poses
economic challenges [8, 46]. To address this challenge,
synthetic datasets have emerged as a compelling alternative. Specifically, these datasets, generated using threedimensional (3D) rendering techniques, offer vast amounts
of easily accessible data, eliminating the need for manual
labeling [43, 45]. However, a challenge arises when models trained on synthetic datasets are deployed in real-world
scenarios. More precisely, a domain shift problem arises
due to style factor discrepancies (e.g. texture, illumination,
and image quality) between synthetic and real-world data,
which affects the performance of the model, as shown in
Fig. 1.
To address the domain shift problem, domain adaptation
semantic segmentation (DASS) has been introduced [15,
17, 22, 25, 51, 62]. Specifically, DASS aims to bridge
the gap between source and target domains by aligning
their data distributions. However, a significant limitation of
DASS is its dependency on the target domain during train-

3616

