This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EGTR: Extracting Graph from Transformer for Scene Graph Generation
JeongYeon Nam1 Nokyung Park1,2,3 * Hyungmin Lee2 Seunghyun Park1
1
NAVER Cloud AI 2 NAVER 3 Korea University
{jinbae.im, jy.nam, nokyung.park99, hyungmin.lee, seung.park}@navercorp.com

Jinbae Im1

Abstract
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) is a challenging task of
detecting objects and predicting relationships between objects. After DETR was developed, one-stage SGG models based on a one-stage object detector have been actively studied. However, complex modeling is used to predict the relationship between objects, and the inherent relationship between object queries learned in the multi-head
self-attention of the object detector has been neglected. We
propose a lightweight one-stage SGG model that extracts
the relation graph from the various relationships learned in
the multi-head self-attention layers of the DETR decoder.
By fully utilizing the self-attention by-products, the relation
graph can be extracted effectively with a shallow relation
extraction head. Considering the dependency of the relation extraction task on the object detection task, we propose
a novel relation smoothing technique that adjusts the relation label adaptively according to the quality of the detected objects. By the relation smoothing, the model is
trained according to the continuous curriculum that focuses
on object detection task at the beginning of training and
performs multi-task learning as the object detection performance gradually improves. Furthermore, we propose
a connectivity prediction task that predicts whether a relation exists between object pairs as an auxiliary task of
the relation extraction. We demonstrate the effectiveness
and efficiency of our method for the Visual Genome and
Open Image V6 datasets. Our code is publicly available
at https://github.com/naver-ai/egtr.

1. Introduction
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) [8] aims to generate a scene
graph that represents objects as nodes and relationships between objects as edges from an image as shown in Fig. 1b.
SGG is a challenging task as it is required to go beyond
simply detecting objects but predicting the relationships between them based on a comprehensive understanding of the
* Most work was done during the internship at NAVER Cloud AI.

tree

girl
g
arin
we
riding on

pant

horse

(b) Scene Graph
tree

girl

0.2
pant

(a) Visual Genome example

6

0.11
horse

(c) Attention Graph

Figure 1. Motivation. SGG task aims to predict scene graph
(Fig. 1b) with objects as nodes and relations as edges. We draw
a plausible attention graph (Fig. 1c) simply by connecting objects
with high attention weights to edges from the self-attention layers of the pre-trained DETR. It shows the potential for the selfattention from the object detector to contain rich information that
aids in predicting the relations of the scene graph.

scene. Since a scene graph provides structural information of the image, it can be used for various vision tasks
that require a higher level of understanding and reasoning
about images such as image captioning [5, 10, 41], image
retrieval [8, 28], and visual question answering [14, 43].
Most previous studies [16, 19, 33, 39, 42] took twostage SGG approaches that detect objects first and then
predict their relations. However, these approaches incurred high computational costs and risks of error propagation from the object detection. To address the drawbacks of the two-stage approaches, one-stage SGG models that perform object detection and relation prediction at
once [3, 9, 17, 20, 26, 29, 35] have been studied recently,
leveraging one-stage object detectors such as DETR [1].
Since edges in a scene graph can be represented as subjectpredicate-object triplets, many studies embraced tripletbased approaches as shown in Figs. 2a and 2b. However,
object-triplet detection models [3, 17] required sophisticated triplet detectors to obtain necessary information for
triplet queries from the object detector. Moreover, triplet
detection models [9, 35] lacked the ability to detect objects
without relation such as “tree” in Fig. 1b, by focusing solely
on the triplet detection without an object detector. Considering that objects without relations account for more than

24229

