This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Paint-it: Text-to-Texture Synthesis via Deep Convolutional
Texture Map Optimization and Physically-Based Rendering
Kim Youwang1,2,4∗
1

Tübingen AI Center, Germany

3

Dept. of Electrical Engineering, POSTECH

5

University of Tübingen
4
6

2

Tae-Hyun Oh4,5,6

Gerard Pons-Moll1,2,3

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Germany
Grad. School of AI, POSTECH

Institute for Convergence Research and Education in Advanced Technology, Yonsei University

Figure 1. Paint-it. Given an untextured 3D mesh and the text description describing the desired appearance of the 3D mesh, Paint-it
automatically synthesizes high-fidelity physically-based rendering (PBR) texture maps by neural re-parameterized texture map optimization.

Abstract
We present Paint-it, a text-driven high-fidelity texture map
synthesis method for 3D meshes via neural re-parameterized
texture optimization. Paint-it synthesizes texture maps from
a text description by synthesis-through-optimization, exploiting the Score-Distillation Sampling (SDS). We observe that
directly applying SDS yields undesirable texture quality due
to its noisy gradients. We reveal the importance of texture
parameterization when using SDS. Specifically, we propose
Deep Convolutional Physically-Based Rendering (DC-PBR)
parameterization, which re-parameterizes the physicallybased rendering (PBR) texture maps with randomly initialized convolution-based neural kernels, instead of a standard
pixel-based parameterization. We show that DC-PBR inherently schedules the optimization curriculum according to texture frequency and naturally filters out the noisy signals from
SDS. In experiments, Paint-it obtains remarkable quality
PBR texture maps within 15 min., given only a text description. We demonstrate the generalizability and practicality of
∗ Work done during a visiting research period at the University of Tübingen.

Paint-it by synthesizing high-quality texture maps for largescale mesh datasets and showing test-time applications such
as relighting and material control using a popular graphics
engine. Project page: https://kim-youwang.github.io/paint-it.

1. Introduction
Crafting realistic and diverse 3D assets is the key component in industrial fields such as movies, games, and AR/VR
applications. Professional graphic designers strive to create
realistic or creative virtual humans, animals, and objects.
Still, the hand-designed generation of realistically textured
3D objects requires cumbersome and time-consuming efforts
with intensive labor and the pain of creation.
To reduce such burdens, methods for generating diverse
3D assets have been extensively studied [7, 10, 15, 26, 31, 32,
45]. Notably, the recent progress in neural volumetric representations, e.g., NeRF [30] and diffusion models [36, 37]
have advanced the development of text-driven 3D asset generation [21, 23, 25, 33], which leverages a cheaper guidance,
i.e., text description. While these methods generate coarse
14347

