This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual-Augmented Dynamic Semantic Prototype
for Generative Zero-Shot Learning
Wenjin Hou1,4 , Shiming Chen2∗ , Shuhuang Chen1 , Ziming Hong3 , Yan Wang4 , Xuetao Feng4 ,
Salman Khan2,5 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan2,6 , Xinge You1 *
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), China
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI 3 The University of Sydney
4
Alibaba Group 5 Australian National University 6 Linköping University
{houwj17, gchenshiming}@gmail.com

Abstract
Generative Zero-shot learning (ZSL) learns a generator
to synthesize visual samples for unseen classes, which is
an effective way to advance ZSL. However, existing generative methods rely on the conditions of Gaussian noise and
the predefined semantic prototype, which limit the generator
only optimized on specific seen classes rather than characterizing each visual instance, resulting in poor generalizations (e.g., overfitting to seen classes). To address this issue,
we propose a novel Visual-Augmented Dynamic Semantic
prototype method (termed VADS) to boost the generator to
learn accurate semantic-visual mapping by fully exploiting
the visual-augmented knowledge into semantic conditions.
In detail, VADS consists of two modules: (1) Visual-aware
Domain Knowledge Learning module (VDKL) learns the local bias and global prior of the visual features (referred to
as domain visual knowledge), which replace pure Gaussian
noise to provide richer prior noise information; (2) VisionOriented Semantic Updation module (VOSU) updates the
semantic prototype according to the visual representations
of the samples. Ultimately, we concatenate their output as
a dynamic semantic prototype, which serves as the condition of the generator. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our VADS achieves superior CZSL and GZSL performances on three prominent datasets and outperforms other
state-of-the-art methods with averaging increases by 6.4%,
5.9% and 4.2% on SUN, CUB and AWA2, respectively.

1. Introduction
Zero-shot learning [33], which transfers knowledge from
seen classes to unseen classes, has garnered much attention
recently. By establishing interactions between visual fea* Corresponding authors

youxg@mail.hust.edu.cn

tures and semantic prototypes (also referred to as attribute
vectors, side information, or semantic embeddings [47]),
generative ZSL methods exhibit impressive performance,
demonstrating the potential of feature synthesis. One of
the most successful frameworks is the conditional generative adversarial network (GAN) [17]. The main idea of
generative ZSL methods is to align semantic prototypes and
visual features to synthesize feature of unseen classes. Recent emerging studies have either designed more effective
frameworks [7, 19, 20, 31, 46] or addressed more specific issues related to visual-semantic alignment [4, 8, 12, 43, 53].
These methods have achieved significant improvements.
However, these methods rely on the conditions of Gaussian noise and the predefined semantic prototype (referred
to as the static semantic prototype), which limit the generator only optimized on specific seen classes rather than
characterizing each visual instance, resulting in poor generalizations (e.g., overfitting to seen classes). Fig. 1 illustrates these issues: (1) The noise is sampled from a Gaussian distribution N (0, 1), which lacks the dataset-specific
visual prior knowledge (e.g., global visual information “flying” and “still” and background information “sky” and
“grass”). As a result, the domain knowledge shared between seen and unseen classes cannot be utilized for feature
synthesis of unseen classes, limiting the knowledge transfer. (2) The predefined semantic prototype fails to characterize each instance well. For example, the attributes “wing
black”, “breast white” and “bill orange” of the Laysan Albatross are not fixed on different images. Due to these limitations, the visual features synthesized by existing works
[4, 6, 21, 24, 31, 43, 46] struggle to represent the distribution of real features, leading to poor generalization to unseen classes, as shown in Fig. 1(b). More intuitively, as
shown in Fig. 1(d), the features of unseen classes synthesized by these methods are confusing, resulting in the decision boundary overfitting to the seen classes.

23627

