This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Level Neural Scene Graphs for Dynamic Urban Environments
Tobias Fischer1
Lorenzo Porzi2
Samuel Rota Bulò2
Marc Pollefeys1
Peter Kontschieder2
1
2
ETH Zürich
Meta Reality Labs
https://tobiasfshr.github.io/pub/ml-nsg/

𝑡

𝑡

𝐓𝑐1

𝐏𝑠11

𝑡

𝑣𝑠11 , 𝜔𝑠11
𝑡

𝜉𝑜12

𝑡
𝜉𝑜11

𝑣𝑜1 , 𝜔𝑜1

𝑣𝑜2 , 𝜔𝑜2

Input

𝑡

𝑣𝑟

𝐏𝑠33

𝑡

𝜉𝑜35

𝑡

𝑣𝑠22 , 𝜔𝑠22
𝑡

𝜉𝑜23

𝑣𝑜3 , 𝜔𝑜3

𝑡

𝑡

𝐏𝑠22
𝜉𝑜24

𝑡

𝑡

𝑣𝑠33 , 𝜔𝑠33

𝑡

𝑣𝑜5 , 𝜔𝑜5

𝐓𝑐2

𝑣𝑜4 , 𝜔𝑜4

Multi-Level Neural Scene Graph

Novel Views

Figure 1. Overview. We represent sequences captured from moving vehicles in a shared geographic area with a multi-level scene graph.
Each dynamic object vo is associated with a sequence node vst and time t. The sequence nodes are registered in a common world frame at
the root node vr through the vehicle poses Pts , while the dynamic objects are localized w.r.t. the sequence node with pose ξot . Each camera
c is associated with an ego-vehicle position, i.e. node vst , through the extrinsic calibration Tc . The sequence and object nodes hold latent
codes ω that condition the radiance field, synthesizing novel views in various conditions with distinct dynamic objects.

Abstract
We estimate the radiance field of large-scale dynamic areas from multiple vehicle captures under varying environmental conditions. Previous works in this domain are either restricted to static environments, do not scale to more
than a single short video, or struggle to separately represent dynamic object instances. To this end, we present a
novel, decomposable radiance field approach for dynamic
urban environments. We propose a multi-level neural scene
graph representation that scales to thousands of images
from dozens of sequences with hundreds of fast-moving objects. To enable efficient training and rendering of our representation, we develop a fast composite ray sampling and
rendering scheme. To test our approach in urban driving
scenarios, we introduce a new, novel view synthesis benchmark. We show that our approach outperforms prior art by
a significant margin on both established and our proposed
benchmark while being faster in training and rendering.

1. Introduction
Estimating the radiance field of a dynamic urban environment from data collected by sensor-equipped vehicles is a
core challenge in closed-loop simulation for robotics and
in mixed reality. It is particularly relevant for applications
like autonomous driving and city-scale mapping, where
capture vehicles can be frequently deployed. The growing amount of available data provides great opportunities
for creating up-to-date digital twins of entire cities but also
poses unique challenges as increasingly heterogeneous data
sources must be processed. In particular, limited scene coverage, different lighting, weather, seasonal conditions, and
varying geometry due to distinct dynamic and transient objects make radiance field reconstruction of dynamic urban
environments extremely challenging.
Recently, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have enabled
significant progress in achieving realistic novel view synthesis from a set of input views [2, 31–33, 49]. These methods represent a static 3D scene with fully implicit [30, 31,
49] or low-level explicit structures [10, 13, 16, 23, 32, 43,

21125

