This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Region-Based Representations Revisited
Michal Shlapentokh-Rothman1 *
Sethuraman T V1

Heyi Tao1

Ansel Blume1 *
Jae Yong Lee1

Yao Xiao1

Wilfredo Torres2

Yuqun Wu1
Yu-Xiong Wang1

Derek Hoiem1,2
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
2
Reconstruct

Abstract

Region Feature Generation
Image Input

We investigate whether region-based representations are
effective for recognition. Regions were once a mainstay
in recognition approaches, but pixel and patch-based features are now used almost exclusively. We show that recent class-agnostic segmenters like SAM can be effectively
combined with strong self-supervised representations, like
those from DINOv2, and used for a wide variety of tasks,
including semantic segmentation, object-based image retrieval, and multi-image analysis. Once the masks and features are extracted, these representations, even with linear
decoders, enable competitive performance, making them
well suited to applications that require custom queries. The
representations’ compactness also makes them well-suited
to video analysis and other problems requiring inference
across many images.

1. Introduction
Over the past ten years, recognition capabilities have improved dramatically. For broader application, developing
scalable, flexible, and interpretable representations has become more important than ever. For example, we may want
to search large image collections with custom queries, create an interactive learning system, or perform complex inferences over many images or video frames.
Region-based representations could serve an important
role in these applications. Consider if an image could be
fully represented with a few dozen embeddings that represent surfaces, objects, parts, and other meaningful portions of the scene. Compared to embeddings over 16x16
patches, we could then reduce computation and memory
for downstream tasks by 10-20x, enabling aggregation of
information across regions from many images and efficient
object-based searches of image collections. We could simplify interaction by enabling people to operate on the level
of regions that correspond to intuitive portions of the scene,
rather than at the pixel or patch level. In the past, region* Equal Contribution. Correspondence:{michal5,blume5}@illinois.edu

Applications
Features
Segmentation

Regions

Object Retrieval

Video Classification

Figure 1. Our framework revisits the use of region features for
downstream applications. We generate region features by first segmenting an image, extracting image features, then pooling the image features across the region masks.

based representations were seen as a critical part of the
recognition solution (e.g. [25, 29, 30, 42, 48, 52]), but have
fallen to the wayside as deep network architectures excel at
processing pixels and patches. Now, given advances in automatic segmentation and unsupervised feature learning, it
is time to reexamine the capabilities, potential, and limitations of region-based representations.
In this paper, we explore design choices for region-based
representations and investigate their effectiveness for a variety of applications. Some of the design decisions include:
• How to generate regions? We ideally want a small number of regions that provide good segmentations for all the
surfaces, objects, and salient parts. We explore SAM and
some of its recent variants [32, 59], and SLIC [34] as a
complementary mechanism to improve completeness.
• What features are effective in regions? We compare features from CLIP [49], ImageNet [13], DINOv1 [6] and
DINOv2 [44].
• How to pool features? We find upsampling the features
and then averaging to work better than alternatives.
We explore applications of image semantic segmentation, object-based image retrieval, multi-view semantic segmentation, and activity classification. With semantic segmentation, we explore the design decisions of regions and
features and region and image-level decoders. We evaluate one-shot object-based image retrieval, which is useful

17107

