This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The devil is in the fine-grained details:
Evaluating open-vocabulary object detectors for fine-grained understanding
Lorenzo Bianchi1,2 , Fabio Carrara1 , Nicola Messina1 , Claudio Gennaro1 , Fabrizio Falchi1
1
CNR-ISTI, Pisa, Italy 2 University of Pisa, Italy
<name.surname>@isti.cnr.it

y

Eas

Attributes
color: dark green
color: brown, material: wood
color: brown, material wood
material: metal
material: metal

Box + Semi-structured description

LLM
Attribute
Substitution

✔ A dark green bench with a brown wooden back and seat and metal
arms and legs.
❌A dark yellow bench with a brown wooden back and seat, supported
by plastic arms and legs.
…
❌A white bench with a black metal back and seat, supported by metal
arms and legs.

Box + Captions (Positive & Negatives)

ViLD

GDino

ium

Difficulty-based Benchmarks

OWLv2

Color

Object & Parts
class: bench
- part: back
- part: seat
- part: leg
- part: arm

Med

Detic

CORA

Attribute-based Benchmarks

Mat

eria
l

0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
mAP

cy

aren

p
rans

T

Pattern

Instruction: Write a
one-sentence natural
language caption given
its semi-structured
description.

mAP
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0

Hard

Trivial

Fine-grained OVD Benchmarks

Figure 1. We propose a benchmark suite to evaluate fine-grained open-vocabulary detection (FG-OVD). We build several sets of dynamic
object-specific vocabularies, comprised of one positive and several negative captions, to probe the ability of open-vocabulary detectors to
discern detailed object properties, like color, pattern, or material. We craft positive captions from semi-structured descriptions of objects
and their parts employing a Large Language Model (LLM), while negative captions of different difficulty levels are built via attribute
substitution. By manipulating negative sets according to their difficulty levels or the types of attributes altered — categorized as Difficultybased and Attribute-based benchmarks — we acquire a nuanced comprehension of each detector’s capabilities across various scenarios.

Abstract
Recent advancements in large vision-language models
enabled visual object detection in open-vocabulary scenarios, where object classes are defined in free-text formats
during inference. In this paper, we aim to probe the stateof-the-art methods for open-vocabulary object detection to
determine to what extent they understand fine-grained properties of objects and their parts. To this end, we introduce an evaluation protocol based on dynamic vocabulary
generation to test whether models detect, discern, and assign the correct fine-grained description to objects in the
presence of hard-negative classes. We contribute with a
benchmark suite of increasing difficulty and probing different properties like color, pattern, and material. We further enhance our investigation by evaluating several stateof-the-art open-vocabulary object detectors using the proposed protocol and find that most existing solutions, which
shine in standard open-vocabulary benchmarks, struggle to

accurately capture and distinguish finer object details. We
conclude the paper by highlighting the limitations of current
methodologies and exploring promising research directions
to overcome the discovered drawbacks. Data and code are
available at https://lorebianchi98.github.io/FG-OVD/ .

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary object detection (OVD) consists of recognizing objects not present at training time, therefore solving
the limitations imposed by traditional detectors that could
only recognize a fixed pool of object classes. In the last
years, open-vocabulary detectors have captured large research attention thanks to their wide flexibility in many
potential downstream applications like autonomous driving [20], extended reality [19], and robotics [9, 10, 16].
The core idea behind open-vocabulary detectors is to establish a semantic connection between object regions and

22520

