This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Stealthy Wrongdoer: Feature-Oriented Reconstruction Attack
against Split Learning
Wenzhe Yi 1 Ziang Li 1 Juan Wang1 * Hongxin Hu 2
Yong Zhuang 1 Yaxin Liu 1
1
Key Laboratory of Aerospace Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of Education,
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University at Buffalo, SUNY
Xiaoyang Xu1

Mengda Yang1

{xiaoyangx, mengday, wenzhey, ziangli, yong.zhuang, yaxin.liu}@whu.edu.cn
jwang@whu.edu.cn, hongxinh@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Split Learning (SL) is a distributed learning framework
renowned for its privacy-preserving features and minimal
computational requirements. Previous research consistently highlights the potential privacy breaches in SL systems by server adversaries reconstructing training data.
However, these studies often rely on strong assumptions or
compromise system utility to enhance attack performance.
This paper introduces a new semi-honest Data Reconstruction Attack on SL, named Feature-Oriented Reconstruction Attack (FORA). In contrast to prior works, FORA relies on limited prior knowledge, specifically that the server
utilizes auxiliary samples from the public without knowing any client’s private information. This allows FORA
to conduct the attack stealthily and achieve robust performance. The key vulnerability exploited by FORA is the revelation of the model representation preference in the smashed
data output by victim client. FORA constructs a substitute client through feature-level transfer learning, aiming to
closely mimic the victim client’s representation preference.
Leveraging this substitute client, the server trains the attack model to effectively reconstruct private data. Extensive
experiments showcase FORA’s superior performance compared to state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, the paper
systematically evaluates the proposed method’s applicability across diverse settings and advanced defense strategies.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNN) have gained widespread usage in computer vision due to their excellent learning ability
and expressive power. Split Learning (SL) [2, 11, 16, 32, 38,
* Corresponding author.

42, 44] emerged as a distributed collaborative framework
that enables clients to cooperate with a server to perform
learning task. In SL, the complete DNN model is divided
into two parts, which are deployed on the client and server
respectively. For a normal training process in SL, the client
performs the computational process locally and communicates with the server solely based on intermediate features
(referred to as smashed data) and their corresponding gradients. In this case, the server does not have access to any private information (raw data, parameters, architecture) about
the client. Therefore, SL is considered effective in protecting the privacy of clients.
However, recent works [6, 10, 19, 31, 36] have shown
that there are still privacy risks associated with SL. It is
possible for the server to steal private information about
the client according to auxiliary knowledge. One particular concern is the Data Reconstruction Attack (DRA)
[6, 10, 31], where a server attempts to recover the training data of a client in SL systems. Depending on whether
the server affects the normal process of SL, we can categorize adversaries into malicious and semi-honest attackers.
Malicious servers such as FSHA [31] can manipulate the
SL training process to conduct more effective attack. However, the latest findings [5, 8] show that FSHA’s mischief
is easily detected by the client, leading to the termination of
SL training protocol For semi-honest attackers, e.g. PCAT
[10] and UnSplit [6], their superior camouflage makes them
less likely to be detected. But current semi-honest attackers often rely overly on assumptions that favor their performances. For example, UnSplit requires knowledge of the
client’s architecture and is only applicable to simple networks or datasets. As for PCAT, it unduly depends on the
availability of partial private data to assist in training the
pseudo-client. These assumptions contradict the basic principle of SL, which is to ensure that the client’s knowledge

12130

