This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Traceable Federated Continual Learning
Qiang Wang1 ,* Bingyan Liu1*†, Yawen Li2
1
School of Computer Science, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
School of Economics and Management, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
q.wang@bupt.edu.cn, bingyanliu@bupt.edu.cn, warmly0716@126.com

Abstract
Federated continual learning (FCL) is a typical mechanism to achieve collaborative model training among clients
that own dynamic data. While traditional FCL methods
have been proved effective, they do not consider the task
repeatability and fail to achieve good performance under
this practical scenario. In this paper, we propose a new
paradigm, namely Traceable Federated Continual Learning (TFCL), aiming to cope with repetitive tasks by tracing
and augmenting them. Following the new paradigm, we develop TagFed, a framework that enables accurate and effective Tracing, augmentation, and Federation for TFCL.
The key idea is to decompose the whole model into a series of marked sub-models for optimizing each client task,
before conducting group-wise knowledge aggregation, such
that the repetitive tasks can be located precisely and federated selectively for improved performance. Extensive experiments on our constructed benchmark demonstrate the
effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed framework. We
will release our code at: https:// github.com/
P0werWeirdo/TagFCL.

1. Introduction
With the popularity of federated learning (FL) [26, 27, 33],
more and more researchers are devoted to applying FL to a
variety of applications such as object detection [29], medical image analysis [28], and recommendation systems [39].
Despite being effective, most of the existing FL methods assume that client data are stable and will not be changed over
time. However, in real-world applications, data may come
continuously and we cannot predict the data variability in
advance. The research community has noticed this problem and proposes a new concept called federated continual learning (FCL) [8, 43], where each local client receives
data in a streaming manner and a central server attempts to
* The first two authors contributed equally.
† Bingyan Liu is the corresponding author.

Traditional FCL
Task Sequence
Previous Task

Learned Features
Previous Task

Current Task

#Task=3
Task Sequence
Previous Task

Learned Features
Previous Task

Current Task

#Task=2
Traceable FCL

Figure 1. Comparison of traditional FCL and traceable FCL in one
client. Here different colors denote different features. The white
color means that the neuron has no feature (i.e., unused). The
darker color indicates the stronger feature representation ability.

achieve federation in such a dynamic environment.
We notice that current FCL solutions pay more attention
to the typical problems existed in CL such as catastrophic
forgetting [8]. However, all of them obey the following
unpractical data setting: the upcoming task data are completely different from previous tasks. We argue that in realworld scenarios, similar or even identical task data have a
large possibility to appear many times. On the one hand,
the client itself is full of uncertainty. When the FCL process
runs for a long time, it is inevitable to encounter repetitive
tasks, especially for the federated scenario that may include
a large number of clients. On the other hand, previous
tasks may have limited data in that time and cannot achieve
good performance. Therefore, the developers have the motivation to further improve the performance by collecting
more data for that task in the future. In a word, the repetitive task sequence is commonly seen and should be regarded
as a default setting.
Unfortunately, to the best of our knowledge, existing
FCL techniques do not take the task repeatability into con-

12872

Previous Task

