This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Closely Interactive Human Reconstruction with Proxemics and Physics-Guided
Adaption
Buzhen Huang1,2 *
1

Chen Li1

Chongyang Xu3

National University of Singapore

2

Liang Pan2

Yangang Wang2

Southeast University

3

Gim Hee Lee1

Sichuan University

Abstract
Existing multi-person human reconstruction approaches
mainly focus on recovering accurate poses or avoiding penetration, but overlook the modeling of close interactions. In
this work, we tackle the task of reconstructing closely interactive humans from a monocular video. The main challenge of this task comes from insufficient visual information caused by depth ambiguity and severe inter-person occlusion. In view of this, we propose to leverage knowledge from proxemic behavior and physics to compensate
the lack of visual information. This is based on the observation that human interaction has specific patterns following the social proxemics. Specifically, we first design a latent representation based on Vector Quantised-Variational
AutoEncoder (VQ-VAE) to model human interaction. A
proxemics and physics guided diffusion model is then introduced to denoise the initial distribution. We design the
diffusion model as dual branch with each branch representing one individual such that the interaction can be modeled via cross attention. With the learned priors of VQVAE and physical constraint as the additional information,
our proposed approach is capable of estimating accurate
poses that are also proxemics and physics plausible. Experimental results on Hi4D, 3DPW, and CHI3D demonstrate
that our method outperforms existing approaches. The code
is available at https://github.com/boycehbz/
HumanInteraction.

1. Introduction
In everyday life, people continuously interact with each
other to achieve goals or simply to exchange states of mind
that enables us to live in groups and share skills and purposes. Analyzing human interactions in 3D space with
computer vision techniques may promote the understanding of our social intellect. However, current multi-person
1 The work was done while Buzhen Huang is a visiting student at National University of Singapore.

Figure 1. Our method reconstructs closely interactive humans with
plausible body poses, natural proxemic relationships and accurate physical contacts from single-view inputs. To address this
challenging task, we formulate the reconstruction as a distribution
adaption from the initial prediction (c). Compared to the existing
solution, BUDDI [34] (b), our method (d) is more robust to visual
ambiguity.

human reconstruction methods often focus on pose accuracy [4, 16, 53], penetration avoidance [20, 70] or spatial
distribution reasonableness [17, 18, 54, 61], and always ignore the important close interactions.
In this paper, we aim to reconstruct humans in close
proximity with their physical social interactions from a
monocular video. In addition to estimating plausible body
poses, the task focuses on modeling natural interactive behaviors and accurate physical contacts. The main challenge of this task comes from insufficient visual information caused by depth ambiguity and severe inter-person occlusion. This results in unsatisfactory prediction with high
uncertainty. To circumvent the problems, we propose to
leverage knowledge from proxemic behavior and physics to
compensate the lack of visual information. This is based on
the observation that human interaction has specific patterns
following the social proxemics, and human can still infer
plausible poses based on their prior knowledge even when
there is severe occlusion. Inspired by this observation, we

1011

