This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploiting Diffusion Prior for Generalizable Dense Prediction
Hsin-Ying Lee1

2

Hsin-Ying Lee3
3

Meta

Snap Research

Ming-Hsuan Yang1,4
4

Yonsei University

Ours

Depth

Normal

Oﬀ-the-shelf

Input

University of California, Merced

Input

1

Hung-Yu Tseng2

Normal

Depth

Segmentation

Figure 1. Generalized dense prediction. (left) We leverage the pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model [47] as a prior for various dense
prediction tasks. (right) With only a small amount of labeled training data in a limited domain (i.e., 10K bedroom images with labels) for
each task, our method performs favorably against SOTA predictors [5, 15, 26] on arbitrary images.

Abstract
Contents generated by recent advanced Text-to-Image
(T2I) diffusion models are sometimes too imaginative for
existing off-the-shelf dense predictors to estimate due to the
immitigable domain gap. We introduce DMP, a pipeline utilizing pre-trained T2I models as a prior for dense prediction tasks. To address the misalignment between deterministic prediction tasks and stochastic T2I models, we reformulate the diffusion process through a sequence of interpolations, establishing a deterministic mapping between input
RGB images and output prediction distributions. To preserve generalizability, we use low-rank adaptation to finetune pre-trained models. Extensive experiments across five
tasks, including 3D property estimation, semantic segmentation, and intrinsic image decomposition, showcase the
efficacy of the proposed method. Despite limited-domain
training data, the approach yields faithful estimations for
arbitrary images, surpassing existing state-of-the-art algorithms. The code is available at https://github.com/
shinying/dmp.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [11, 19, 47, 50] have
achieved unprecedented progress on text-guided image generation, producing highly imaginative and realistic images
from diverse and free-from textual descriptions. These advancements open up a new era of AI-aided content creation
with applications spanning various domains [1, 22, 43, 45,
49, 53, 61]. However, the creativity of images generated by
T2I models poses challenges for off-the-shelf dense (e.g.,
depth, normal, segmentation) prediction methods [5, 15, 26]
due to the domain gap. For example, the ZoeDepth [5]
approach fails to accurately predict the depth of the cubism painting shown in the sixth column in Figure 1. Such
property predictions are vital for understanding high-level
semantics of generated contents and can facilitate various
downstream applications such as 3D imaging [54] and relighting [73].
Existing dense prediction models are typically trained on
“real-world” images regardless of the training dataset scale.
While these models aim for generalization, bridging the do-

7861

