This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LoS: Local Structure-guided Stereo Matching
Kunhong Li1,2
1

Longguang Wang4

Sun Yat-Sen University
4

2

Ye Zhang1,2

Kaiwen Xue5

The Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-Sen University

Aviation University of Air Force

5

3

Shunbo Zhou5

Yulan Guo3∗

National University of Defense Technology

Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies Co., Ltd.

Figure 1. Example results of LoS on Middlebury, ETH3D, KITTI2012 and Holopix 50k. In each example, we show the left image,
estimated disparity map and slant plane. Note that, these are all unseen samples for LoS.

Abstract
Estimating disparities in challenging areas is difficult
and limits the performance of stereo matching models. In
this paper, we exploit local structure information (LSI) to
better handle these areas. Specifically, our LSI comprises
a series of key elements, including the slant plane (parameterised by disparity gradients), disparity offset details and
neighbouring relations. This LSI empowers our method
to effectively handle intricate structures, including object
boundaries and curved surfaces. We bootstrap the LSI
from monocular depth and subsequently refine it to better capture the underlying scene geometry constraints in
an iterative manner. Building upon the LSI, we introduce
the Local Structure-Guided Propagation (LSGP), which enhances the disparity initialization, optimization, and refinement processes. By combining LSGP with a Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), we present our novel stereo matching
method, referred to as Local Structure-guided stereo matching (LoS). Remarkably, LoS achieves top-ranking results on
four widely recognized public benchmark datasets (ETH3D,
Middlebury, KITTI 15 & 12) and robust vision challenge,
demonstrating the superior capabilities of our model.

1. Introduction
The primary objective of stereo matching is to identify accurate correspondences, referred to as disparities, between
pairs of input images. Existing learning-based methods
∗ Corresponding author: Yulan Guo (yulan.guo@nudt.edu.cn).

commonly regress the disparity map based on the raw feature correlations/costs. Specifically, most previous methods adopt filtering-based techniques to refine the cost volume and then regress accurate disparities. These methods
first construct a 3D/4D cost volume and then filter this volume using 2D/3D convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
However, these methods require a pre-defined disparity
range to produce satisfactory results. To remedy this limitation, another group of methods [18, 20, 46, 51] leverage optimization-based technique to optimize disparities directly using a 2D convolutional gated recurrent unit (ConvGRU) without relying on pre-defined disparity ranges.
Nonetheless, these methods usually require a substantial
number of iterations to achieve convergence.
Challenging areas in stereo pairs are the primary reason
why optimization-based methods necessitate numerous iterations to yield satisfactory results. As shown in Fig. 2,
these challenging areas in the left image of a stereo pair
encompass: Class 1, regions on the left side that are outside the visible range of the right view. Class 2, occluded
areas on the left side of foreground objects. Class 3, textureless areas. Class 4, edge areas (due to blurry edges
and image downsampling [4, 51]). For these challenging
areas, accurate disparities cannot be obtained solely from
the appearance information in these areas due to the ambiguity of pixel correspondence. Instead, geometry and
depth cues in a wider neighboring areas should be adopted
to reason accurate disparities. To this end, several efforts
have been made to formulate local geometry as a slant
plane[4, 14, 35, 36, 42], which is represented using either

19746

