This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GLiDR: Topologically Regularized Graph Generative Network for Sparse
LiDAR Point Clouds
Prashant Kumar1

Kshitij Madhav Bhat2
1

prashantk.nan@gmail.com

IIT Delhi

Vedang Bhupesh Shenvi Nadkarni3
2

IIT Indore

kshitijmbhat@gmail.com

3

BITS Pilani

vedang.nadkarni@gmail.com

Static Augmentation along LiDAR backbone

Prem Kalra1

SLAM

pkalra@cse.iitd.ac.in

Segmentation

GLiDR

Dynamic LiDAR

Best
Baseline

Figure 1. GLiDR outperforms the best baselines on SLAM results with sparse LiDAR scans. Binary segmentation masks of dynamic and
static points (blue denotes dynamic and red denotes static points) obtained using GLiDR are also better.

Abstract
Sparse LiDAR point clouds cause severe loss of detail
of static structures and reduce the density of static points
available for navigation. Reduced density can be detrimental to navigation under several scenarios. We observe
that despite high sparsity, in most cases, the global topology of LiDAR outlining the static structures can be inferred.
We utilize this property to obtain a backbone skeleton of
a LiDAR scan in the form of a single connected component that is a proxy to its global topology. We utilize the
backbone to augment new points along static structures to
overcome sparsity. Newly introduced points could correspond to existing static structures or to static points that
were earlier obstructed by dynamic objects. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to use such a strategy for
sparse LiDAR point clouds. Existing solutions close to our

approach fail to identify and preserve the global static LiDAR topology and generate sub-optimal points. We propose GLiDR, a Graph Generative network that is topologically regularized using 0-dimensional Persistent Homology (PH) constraints. This enables GLiDR to introduce newer static points along a topologically consistent global static LiDAR backbone. GLiDR generates precise static points using 32× sparser dynamic scans and
performs better than the baselines across three datasets.
GLiDR generates a valuable byproduct - an accurate binary segmentation mask of static and dynamic objects that
are helpful for navigation planning and safety in constrained environments. The newly introduced static points
allow GLiDR to outperform LiDAR-based navigation using SLAM in several settings. Source code is available at
https://github.com/GLiDR-CVPR2024/GLiDR.

15152

