This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OCAI: Improving Optical Flow Estimation by
Occlusion and Consistency Aware Interpolation
Jisoo Jeong

Hong Cai

Risheek Garrepalli Jamie Menjay Lin
Qualcomm AI Research†

Munawar Hayat

Fatih Porikli

{jisojeon, hongcai, rgarrepa, jmlin, hayat, fporikli}@qti.qualcomm.com

Abstract
The scarcity of ground-truth labels poses one major
challenge in developing optical flow estimation models that
are both generalizable and robust. While current methods
rely on data augmentation, they have yet to fully exploit
the rich information available in labeled video sequences.
We propose OCAI, a method that supports robust frame interpolation by generating intermediate video frames alongside optical flows in between. Utilizing a forward warping approach, OCAI employs occlusion awareness to resolve ambiguities in pixel values and fills in missing values by leveraging the forward-backward consistency of optical flows. Additionally, we introduce a teacher-student
style semi-supervised learning method on top of the interpolated frames. Using a pair of unlabeled frames and the
teacher model’s predicted optical flow, we generate interpolated frames and flows to train a student model. The
teacher’s weights are maintained using Exponential Moving Averaging of the student. Our evaluations demonstrate
perceptually superior interpolation quality and enhanced
optical flow accuracy on established benchmarks such as
Sintel and KITTI.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation and Video Frame Interpolation
(VFI) share a complementary relationship. Accurate optical
flow contributes significantly to various downstream tasks
such as video compression [26, 44], video denoising and
blur removal [3, 46, 49], action recognition [5, 22], and VFI
stands as one of these applications. Pixel-level correspondence by optical flow enables estimating pixel-level movement and generating intermediate frames (or inter-frames).
While utilizing flow-based methods is a common practice in
VFI [12, 20, 23, 27], leveraging inter-frames to train optical
flow models is relatively less explored.
While the scarcity of ground-truth data has long been
a critical challenge in learning-based optical flow estimation [8, 11, 13, 34, 38, 41], there has been little attention
† Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies, Inc.

Figure 1. Top: Many existing data augmentation approaches focus on modifying the existing frames [18, 24, 41]. Middle: While
RealFlow [10] employs optical flow model to generate new frames
and iteratively update the model with generated frames, it requires
compute expensive steps of depth estimation and EM optimization. Bottom: Our proposed OCAI allows flexible, robust video
interpolation at any intermediate time step, and leverages interpolated frames and flows to efficiently train the model in a semisupervised setting, significantly improving optical flow estimation.

into leveraging Video Frame Interpolation (VFI) to augment the training of optical flow networks. State-of-the-art
VFI models predominantly employ deep networks trained
to interpolate the exact middle frame between two consecutive time steps within a video sequence, which restricts
their capability to generate frames at other intermediate
time instances thus hampering their ability to produce opti-

19352

