This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multimodal Prompt Perceiver: Empower Adaptiveness, Generalizability and
Fidelity for All-in-One Image Restoration
Yuang Ai1,2 Huaibo Huang1,2B Xiaoqiang Zhou1,3 Jiexiang Wang1,3 Ran He1,2
MAIS & CRIPAC, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
1

shallowdream555@gmail.com, huaibo.huang@cripac.ia.ac.cn,
{xq525,jiexiang}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Real-World Deraining

Real-World Dehazing

Real-World Desnowing

Ⅰ
Raindrop Removal

Low-light Enhancement

Defocus Deblurring

Motion Deblurring

Mixed Degradations Removal

Under-Display Camera IR-TOLED

Under-Display Camera IR-POLED

Underwater IR

JPEG Compression Artifact Removal

Demosaicking

Demoireing

Real Denoising

Ⅱ

Ⅲ

Figure 1. Our MPerceiver excels in image restoration tasks with: (I) All-in-one: Addressing diverse degradations, including challenging
mixed ones, through a single pretrained network. (II) Zero-shot: Handling training-unseen degradations effortlessly. (III) Few-shot:
Adapting to new tasks with minimal data (about 3%-5% of data used by task-specific methods).

Abstract
Despite substantial progress, all-in-one image restoration (IR) grapples with persistent challenges in handling
intricate real-world degradations. This paper introduces
MPerceiver: a novel multimodal prompt learning approach
that harnesses Stable Diffusion (SD) priors to enhance
adaptiveness, generalizability and fidelity for all-in-one imB Corresponding author. Project Page.

age restoration. Specifically, we develop a dual-branch
module to master two types of SD prompts: textual for
holistic representation and visual for multiscale detail representation. Both prompts are dynamically adjusted by
degradation predictions from the CLIP image encoder, enabling adaptive responses to diverse unknown degradations. Moreover, a plug-in detail refinement module improves restoration fidelity via direct encoder-to-decoder information transformation. To assess our method, MPerceiver is trained on 9 tasks for all-in-one IR and outper-

25432

