This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-ES: Gradient-free Planning with Diffusion for Autonomous and
Instruction-guided Driving
Brian Yang

Huangyuan Su
Nikolaos Gkanatsios
Tsung-Wei Ke
Ayush Jain
Jeff Schneider
Katerina Fragkiadaki
Carnegie Mellon University

Abstract
Diffusion models excel at modeling complex and multimodal trajectory distributions for decision-making and control. Reward-gradient guided denoising has been recently
proposed to generate trajectories that maximize both a differentiable reward function and the likelihood under the data
distribution captured by a diffusion model. Reward-gradient
guided denoising requires a differentiable reward function
fitted to both clean and noised samples, limiting its applicability as a general trajectory optimizer. In this paper, we
propose Diffusion-ES, a method that combines gradient-free
optimization with trajectory denoising to optimize black-box
non-differentiable objectives while staying in the data manifold. Diffusion-ES samples trajectories during evolutionary search from a diffusion model and scores them using a
black-box reward function. It mutates high-scoring trajectories using a truncated diffusion process that applies a small
number of noising and denoising steps, allowing for much
more efficient exploration of the solution space. We show
that Diffusion-ES achieves state-of-the-art performance on
nuPlan, an established closed-loop planning benchmark
for autonomous driving. Diffusion-ES outperforms existing
sampling-based planners, reactive deterministic or diffusionbased policies, and reward-gradient guidance. Additionally,
we show that unlike prior guidance methods, our method can
optimize non-differentiable language-shaped reward functions generated by few-shot LLM prompting. When guided
by a human teacher that issues instructions to follow, our
method can generate novel, highly complex behaviors, such
as aggressive lane weaving, which are not present in the
training data. This allows us to solve the hardest nuPlan
scenarios which are beyond the capabilities of existing trajectory optimization methods and driving policies. 1

1 Project page: diffusion-es.github.io

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have shown to excel at modeling highly
complex and multimodal trajectory distributions for decisionmaking and control [1, 26]. Reward-gradient guidance
[26, 33, 59] has been used to test-time optimize differentiable
reward functions by alternating between denoising diffusion
steps and backpropagating reward gradients to the noised
trajectory. In this way, sampled trajectories are pushed towards the trajectory data manifold while also maximizing the
reward function at hand [26]. This decoupling of the reward
function from trajectory diffusion permits a single trajectory diffusion model to be used for maximizing a variety
of reward functions at test time. Reward-gradient guidance
requires the reward function to be differentiable and fitted
in both noisy and clean trajectories, which usually requires
re-training. This limits its applicability as a general solver
for trajectory optimization.
We propose Diffusion-ES, a reward-guided denoising
method for optimization of non-differentiable, black-box
objectives that samples and mutates trajectories using a diffusion model, guided by a reward function that operates only
on the clean, final, denoised samples. Naively combining
diffusion with sampling-based optimization does not work:
sampling-based optimizers, like CEM [49] or MPPI [63],
typically require a large population of samples across multiple iterations of selection and mutation to converge to good
solutions, which, when combined with the computational
cost of denoising inference, results in a prohibitively slow
search process. In Diffusion-ES, high-scoring trajectories
are mutated using a truncated diffusion-denoising process,
by adding a small amount of noise and denoising them back,
as shown in Figure 2 right. The amount of added noise
is progressively decreased across search iterations making
Diffusion-ES computationally viable.
The trajectory diffusion model used for test-time optimization in Diffusion-ES can in principle condition on any
scene-relevant information to narrow the sampling to a distribution of scene-relevant trajectories. In fact, the amount
of conditioning information controls a continuum between

15342

