This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LORS: Low-rank Residual Structure for Parameter-Efficient Network Stacking
Jialin Li, Qiang Nie, Weifu Fu, Yuhuan Lin, Guangpin Tao, Yong Liu, Chengjie Wang
Youtu Lab, Tencent
{jarenli, ryanwfu, gleelin, guangpintao, choasliu, jasoncjwang}@tencent.com, qnie.cuhk@gmail.com

Abstract
Deep learning models, particularly those based on
transformers, often employ numerous stacked structures,
which possess identical architectures and perform similar
functions. While effective, this stacking paradigm leads to
a substantial increase in the number of parameters, posing challenges for practical applications. In today’s landscape of increasingly large models, stacking depth can even
reach dozens, further exacerbating this issue. To mitigate this problem, we introduce LORS (LOw-rank Residual
Structure). LORS allows stacked modules to share the
majority of parameters, requiring a much smaller number of unique ones per module to match or even surpass
the performance of using entirely distinct ones, thereby
significantly reducing parameter usage. We validate our
method by applying it to the stacked decoders of a querybased object detector, and conduct extensive experiments
on the widely used MS COCO dataset. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method, as even
with a 70% reduction in the parameters of the decoder, our
method still enables the model to achieve comparable or
even better performance than its original.

1. Introduction
In the current era of prosperity for large models, a common
issue is the significant increase in the number of parameters, which presents challenges for training, inference, and
deployment. Various methods have been proposed to reduce the number of parameters in models, such as knowledge distillation [15, 20], which compresses large models
into smaller ones while trying to preserve their performance
but may still lead to a decrease in model capacity; pruning [16, 55], which removes redundant parameters from the
model but can affect the model’s stability; quantization [8],
which reduces the numerical precision of model parameters
to lower storage and computation but may cause model accuracy loss; and parameter sharing [24], which reduces the
number of parameters by sharing them across different layers but may limit the model’s expressiveness.

Figure 1. The LORS calculation process, which could be adaptive
or static, depending on whether an adaptively generated kernel is
used in the matrix manipulation for private parameters.

Different from the aforementioned methods, we have observed an important fact contributing to the large number of
parameters: the widespread use of stacking in neural networks. Stacking refers to those modules that have identical architectures and perform the same or similar functions,
but possess different parameters due to random initialization as well as training updates. Examples of stacking can
be found in numerous prominent neural networks, like the
classic ResNet model [18] and Transformers [46]. Particularly, Transformers heavily rely on stacked structures and
typically employ completely identical multi-layer stacks in
both encoders and decoders. It now serves as an indispensable component of many excellent models in fields such as
computer vision and natural language processing.
Although stacking is powerful for enhancing model capacity, as demonstrated by large language models, it also

15866

