This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Implicit Representation for Building Digital Twins of
Unknown Articulated Objects
Yijia Weng1,2 * Bowen Wen1 Jonathan Tremblay1 Valts Blukis1
Dieter Fox1 Leonidas Guibas2 Stan Birchfield1
1

NVIDIA

2

Stanford University

Abstract
We address the problem of building digital twins of unknown articulated objects from two RGBD scans of the
object at different articulation states. We decompose the
problem into two stages, each addressing distinct aspects.
Our method first reconstructs object-level shape at each
state, then recovers the underlying articulation model including part segmentation and joint articulations that associate the two states. By explicitly modeling point-level
correspondences and exploiting cues from images, 3D reconstructions, and kinematics, our method yields more accurate and stable results compared to prior work. It also
handles more than one movable part and does not rely
on any object shape or structure priors. Project page:
https:// github.com/ NVlabs/ DigitalTwinArt

1. Introduction
Articulated objects are all around us. Whenever we open
a door, close a drawer, turn on a faucet, or use scissors,
we leverage the complex, physics-based understanding of
various object parts and how they interact. Reconstructing
novel articulated objects from visual observations is therefore an important problem for robotics and mixed reality.
In this work, we aim to democratize the process of building a 3D reconstruction that accurately describes an articulated object, including the part geometries, segmentation
and their joint articulations, as shown in Figure 1.
The problem of generating digital twins of articulated
objects has been long studied [4, 5, 7, 9, 11, 14, 23, 33,
34, 39, 40]. Two recent approaches to this problem are
Ditto [11] and PARIS [16]. Both works reconstruct partlevel geometries and the articulation model based on observations of the object at two joint states. Ditto is a
feed-forward method that takes two multi-view fused point
clouds as input. It is trained on a collection of objects from
certain categories. Although Ditto shows generalizability to
* work done during internship at NVIDIA

t=0

Articulation reconstruction

t=1

Interactable digital twin

Figure 1. Our method requires two RGB-D scans of the object in each of
two articulation states (left). The output is a 3D reconstruction with parts
segmented, joint types identified, and joint axes estimated (top right). Note
that multiple joints are allowed. The resulting digital twin can be imported
into a physics-based simulator for interaction (bottom right).

objects unseen during training, it is not equipped with the
capability to handle arbitrary unknown objects drastically
different from the training categories. PARIS takes multiview posed images as input and optimizes an implicit representation directly from the input data without pretraining,
ensuring better generalizability. However, the optimization
process of PARIS depends significantly on initializations
and lacks stability, as we will show in the experimental results. In addition, both PARIS and Ditto only handle twopart objects.
In this paper, we take a step toward addressing the limitations of prior works by proposing a system with the following unique characteristics: a) the ability to handle arbitrary
novel objects, regardless of the discrepancy of their motion,
shape, or size from the training distribution; b) the scalability to objects with multiple moving parts; c) the robustness
to initializations of the high dimensional optimization space
of the articulation reconstruction problem.
Given multi-view RGB-D observations of the object at

3141

