This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LLaFS: When Large Language Models Meet Few-Shot Segmentation
Lanyun Zhu1 Tianrun Chen2 Deyi Ji3 Jieping Ye3 Jun Liu1 *
Singapore University of Technology and Design 1 Zhejiang University 2 Alibaba Group 3

Abstract
This paper proposes LLaFS, the first attempt to leverage
large language models (LLMs) in few-shot segmentation. In
contrast to the conventional few-shot segmentation methods
that only rely on the limited and biased information from the
annotated support images, LLaFS leverages the vast prior
knowledge gained by LLM as an effective supplement and
directly uses the LLM to segment images in a few-shot manner. To enable the text-based LLM to handle image-related
tasks, we carefully design an input instruction that allows
the LLM to produce segmentation results represented as
polygons, and propose a region-attribute table to simulate
the human visual mechanism and provide multi-modal guidance. We also synthesize pseudo samples and use curriculum learning for pretraining to augment data and achieve
better optimization. LLaFS achieves state-of-the-art results
on multiple datasets, showing the potential of using LLMs
for few-shot computer vision tasks.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is a fundamental task in computer vision with extensive applications. The development of deep
learning algorithms [7, 9, 12, 72, 73] trained on large-scale
datasets has brought significant advancements to this field
[3–5, 61, 69, 71]. However, annotating pixel-level segmentation ground truth on a large scale is extremely resourceintensive. Therefore, a more source-efficient learning strategy, few-shot segmentation, has received much attention
from academia and holds immense practical value.
In few-shot segmentation, the model should develop
category-specific segmentation capabilities based on only
a small amount of annotated data, called support images.
To achieve this, existing few-shot segmentation methods
[24, 27, 38, 42, 43, 49, 66, 67] typically adopt a supportfeature-guided framework. In this framework, relevant features of the target category are extracted from annotated
support images and used as guiding information to segment query images. To achieve higher performance, researchers have proposed many methods to explore better
ways for support feature extraction [24, 38, 43] and query
* Corresponding Author

segmentation assistance [17, 56, 62]. Although these efforts have demonstrated some success, their segmentation
performance is still far from satisfactory. This is because
the very limited number of support images contain only a
small, incomplete, and biased set of information, so the
framework that relies solely on these support-based features for query segmentation inherently suffers from information constraints and cannot achieve a sufficiently high
level of accuracy. Therefore, we believe that the further advancement of few-shot segmentation urgently requires an
entirely new framework, which should be capable of utilizing richer and more comprehensive information, thereby
breaking through the existing framework’s bottlenecks to
reach better results.
We discover that recent advances in large language models (LLMs) [2, 50, 70] can offer potential opportunities
to achieve this goal. Specifically, LLMs pre-trained on
large-scale corpora have accumulated a vast amount of prior
knowledge, which can effectively supplement the insufficient information in support images, thereby resulting in
the more effective guidance. Moreover, LLMs have shown
to be effective few-shot learners in the field of NLP [2].
This naturally inspires us to further extend their capabilities
to few-shot tasks in other modalities. Based on these insights, we hereby innovatively employ LLMs to tackle fewshot segmentation and introduce an entirely new framework
named LLaFS. Unlike some previous segmentation methods that also use language models (LMs) but only for auxiliary purposes, such as utilizing LMs to extract intermediate
features [13, 28, 64] or to generate attribute prompts [37],
our LLaFS directly employs LLMs to produce segmentation
results. This makes LMs no longer work as only auxiliary
tools, but fully unlock their complete potential in handling
the complex computer vision tasks in an end-to-end manner.
In this way, we provide an important exploration towards
a unified framework that allows LLMs to tackle few-shot
tasks in other modalities beyond NLP.
We find that integrating LLM to few-shot segmentation
is non-trivial as we face three critical technical challenges:
1) How to enable the text-based LLM to comprehend and
address an image processing task? 2) How to leverage
both the visual information from support images and the

3065

