This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Probabilistic Speech-Driven 3D Facial Motion Synthesis:
New Benchmarks, Methods, and Applications
Karren D. Yang, Anurag Ranjan, Jen-Hao Rick Chang, Raviteja Vemulapalli, Oncel Tuzel
Apple
{karren yang, anuragr, jenhao chang, r vemulapalli, ctuzel}@apple.com
https://github.com/apple/ml-audio2mesh

Abstract
We consider the task of animating 3D facial geometry
from speech signal. Existing works are primarily deterministic, focusing on learning a one-to-one mapping from
speech signal to 3D face meshes on small datasets with limited speakers. While these models can achieve high-quality
lip articulation for speakers in the training set, they are unable to capture the full and diverse distribution of 3D facial
motions that accompany speech in the real world. Importantly, the relationship between speech and facial motion
is one-to-many, containing both inter-speaker and intraspeaker variations and necessitating a probabilistic approach. In this paper, we identify and address key challenges that have so far limited the development of probabilistic models: lack of datasets and metrics that are suitable for training and evaluating them, as well as the difficulty of designing a model that generates diverse results
while remaining faithful to a strong conditioning signal as
speech. We first propose large-scale benchmark datasets
and metrics suitable for probabilistic modeling. Then, we
demonstrate a probabilistic model that achieves both diversity and fidelity to speech, outperforming other methods across the proposed benchmarks. Finally, we showcase useful applications of probabilistic models trained on
these large-scale datasets: we can generate diverse speechdriven 3D facial motion that matches unseen speaker styles
extracted from reference clips; and our synthetic meshes
can be used to improve the performance of downstream
audio-visual models.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been significant research interest in
animating 3D faces from speech signals [8, 9, 15, 32, 42]
with potential applications across immersive interactions,
content creation and synthetic data generation. Most existing works approach this problem by learning a determin-

istic mapping from speech to 3D face meshes in a datadriven manner [8, 9, 15, 42], leveraging advancements in
deep learning. These methods are typically optimized on
small datasets containing 10-20 speakers [8, 16] and can
achieve high-quality lip reconstruction for the speakers in
the training dataset [8, 15, 42]. However, these methods
fall short of capturing the one-to-many relationship between
speech and realistic facial motions.
Animating 3D faces from speech is a complex problem.
For a given speech utterance, there exists a multi-modal distribution of plausible facial motions capturing large variations in speaking style across a population. Even for a single speaker, the conditional distribution of facial motions
given speech is multi-modal, capturing intra-speaker variations such as emotions [9] and other paralingustic cues that
give nuance to the meaning of the speech. Modeling this
complex, one-to-many relationship between speech and 3D
facial motion necessitates a probabilistic approach, since
approximating a multi-modal distribution with a deterministic point estimate leads to predicting the mean [8, 15] or a
single mode [42] of the conditional distribution.

1.1. Challenges
Datasets. Learning this multi-modal distribution poses new
challenges for the field of speech-driven 3D facial animation. First is the limitation of existing datasets. Building a
useful probabilistic model that captures the wide variety of
speech and facial motions requires a large amount of data
from many speakers. However, existing public datasets are
small and contain utterances from few speakers [8,16], thus
offering limited opportunity for learning diverse 3D facial
motions. While a large-scale dataset is used in MeshTalk
[32], this dataset is proprietary and not available to the research community.
Metrics. The second challenge is the lack of proper evaluation metrics for probabilistic speech-driven facial motion
synthesis. Existing works use lip vertex error as the primary
metric for evaluating lip synchronization [8, 32]. While lip
vertex error is a useful proxy for lip articulation quality,

27294

