This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking the Evaluation Protocol of Domain Generalization
Han Yu, Xingxuan Zhang, Renzhe Xu, Jiashuo Liu, Yue He, Peng Cui*
Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University
yuh21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xingxuanzhang@hotmail.com, xrz199721@gmail.com
liujiashuo77@gmail.com, heyuethu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain generalization aims to solve the challenge of
Out-of-Distribution (OOD) generalization by leveraging
common knowledge learned from multiple training domains
to generalize to unseen test domains. To accurately evaluate
the OOD generalization ability, it is required that test data
information is unavailable. However, the current domain
generalization protocol may still have potential test data
information leakage. This paper examines the risks of test
data information leakage from two aspects of the current
evaluation protocol: supervised pretraining on ImageNet
and oracle model selection. We propose modifications to
the current protocol that we should employ self-supervised
pretraining or train from scratch instead of employing the
current supervised pretraining, and we should use multiple
test domains. These would result in a more precise evaluation of OOD generalization ability. We also rerun the
algorithms with the modified protocol and introduce new
leaderboards to encourage future research in domain generalization with a fairer comparison.

1. Introduction
The performance of traditional machine learning algorithms
heavily depends on the assumption that the training and test
data are independent and identically distributed (IID). However, in wild environments, the test distribution often differs
significantly from the training distribution. This mismatch
can lead to spurious correlations, ultimately causing the machine learning models to perform poorly and become unstable. Unfortunately, this limitation severely hinders the use
of machine learning in high-risk domains like autonomous
driving [27, 38], medical treatment [36], and law [4].
In recent years, there has been a growing interest among
researchers in addressing the Out-of-Distribution (OOD)
generalization problem, where the IID assumption does not
stand [66, 83]. This issue is addressed by various branches
* Corresponding author

of research, such as invariant learning [1, 13, 34, 49, 50],
distributionally robust optimization [17, 51, 52, 67, 75], stable learning [14, 23, 35, 65, 78, 82], and domain generalization [42, 76, 87, 94, 95]. Of these, domain generalization assumes the heterogeneity of training data. Specifically, domain generalization attempts to learn common or
causal knowledge from multiple training domains to develop a model capable of generalizing to unseen test data.
Despite a quantity of interesting and instructive works in
domain generalization, previously they do not have a common standard training and evaluation protocol. Aware of
this problem, DomainBed [19] proposes a framework for
the hyperparameter search and model selection of domain
generalization. It also sets a standard for experimental details like the model backbone, data split, data augmentation, etc. This unifies the protocol of domain generalization for subsequent works to follow. Nevertheless, conflicts
remain between the current standard protocol and the accurate and reliable evaluation of OOD generalization ability. Since domain generalization is depicted as the ability to
learn a model from diverse training domains that can generalize to unseen/unknown test data [76, 95], we should try
to mitigate possible test data information leakage for a more
precise evaluation of the OOD generalization ability.
In the current protocol, two key factors show the potential risk of test data information leakage. We make two recommendations for fairer and more accurate evaluation.
Recommendation 1 Domain generalization algorithms
should adopt self-supervised pretrained weights or random
weights as initialization when evaluated and compared with
each other.
Most domain generalization algorithms take advantage of
ImageNet supervised pretrained weights [15, 19] for better performance and faster convergence. Yet this introduces
the information on both images and category labels in ImageNet, which may bear a resemblance to the test domain.
Through comprehensive experiments, we demonstrate that
more utilization of supervised pretrained weights and less
utilization of training data can contribute to higher test do-

21897

