This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language Models as Black-Box Optimizers for Vision-Language Models
Shihong Liu*

Samuel Yu*

Zhiqiu Lin*

Deepak Pathak

Deva Ramanan

Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
Vision-language models (VLMs) pre-trained on webscale datasets have demonstrated remarkable capabilities
on downstream tasks when fine-tuned with minimal data.
However, many VLMs rely on proprietary data and are
not open-source, which restricts the use of white-box approaches for fine-tuning. As such, we aim to develop a blackbox approach to optimize VLMs through natural language
prompts, thereby avoiding the need to access model parameters, feature embeddings, or even output logits. We propose employing chat-based LLMs to search for the best text
prompt for VLMs. Specifically, we adopt an automatic “hillclimbing” procedure that converges to an effective prompt by
evaluating the performance of current prompts and asking
LLMs to refine them based on textual feedback, all within
a conversational process without human-in-the-loop. In a
challenging 1-shot image classification setup, our simple
approach surpasses the white-box continuous prompting
method (CoOp) by an average of 1.5% across 11 datasets
including ImageNet. Our approach also outperforms both
human-engineered and LLM-generated prompts. We highlight the advantage of conversational feedback that incorporates both positive and negative prompts, suggesting that
LLMs can utilize the implicit “gradient” direction in textual
feedback for a more efficient search. In addition, we find
that the text prompts generated through our strategy are not
only more interpretable but also transfer well across different VLM architectures in a black-box manner. Lastly, we
demonstrate our framework on a state-of-the-art black-box
VLM (DALL-E 3) for text-to-image optimization.

1. Introduction
Vision-language models [1, 28, 51, 64] (VLMs) excel
at a wide range of classic vision and multimodal [2, 10,
15, 32, 70] tasks, surpassing the performance of their fullysupervised counterparts on downstream tasks even when
fine-tuned with minimal data [34, 74]. However, fine-tuning
VLMs typically requires transparent white-box access to the
model weights, such as gradient-based approaches that rely

on backpropagation.
VLMs as black-box services. Despite community efforts to collect web-scale public datasets [55, 56] and to
replicate proprietary VLMs [3, 24], an increasing number of
models [1, 4, 13, 45, 64, 71] are not releasing their weights
due to privacy and legal concerns [30, 38]. Therefore, one
cannot use popular white-box fine-tuning strategies (such as
LoRA [23] and Adapter [22]) that rely on model weights,
feature embeddings, and output logits. Given that contemporary black-box VLMs [45, 47] like DALL-E [4, 52] still
offer a language-based user interface and may be accessed
through APIs that facilitate input and output in natural language, this allows users to customize these models through
optimizing textual prompts.
Manual prompting. Manual prompt engineering has
been proven successful in adapting black-box LLMs to language tasks [25, 66]. Similarly, carefully crafted prompts can
enhance the performance of VLMs. For instance, CLIP has
demonstrated improved zero-shot recognition performance
using specifically tailored prompts, such as "a photo of
a {class}" for Internet photos and "a satellite
image of a {class}" for satellite imagery. Despite
its effectiveness, manual prompting can be a laborious process, inspiring efforts to explore automated prompt creation
and thereby remove the need for human involvement. These
strategies typically leverage an LLM as a knowledge base to
create rich visual descriptors that augment the prompts for
each class [40, 50] in a zero-shot fashion.
Human-free prompting with conversational LLMs
(our approach). We show how to effectively leverage chatbased LLMs [45] to emulate human-level prompt engineering without any human input. We first address an illustrative
low-shot image classification task, aiming to find the best
class-agnostic prompt (or “template”) for image classification with CLIP. We start with a random set of prompts and
evaluate the one-shot training accuracy of each. Then, akin to
human prompt engineering, our method repeatedly presents
ChatGPT with the best and worst prompts, asking it to review
the results and suggest an improvement (see Figure 1).
Learning with implicit “gradients” provided through
conversational feedback. One of our key findings is that

12687

