This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

De-Diffusion Makes Text a Strong Cross-Modal Interface
Chen Wei1,2

Chenxi Liu1
1

Siyuan Qiao1

Zhishuai Zhang1
2

Google DeepMind

Alan Yuille2

Jiahui Yu1

Johns Hopkins University

(i) Transferable Prompts for Text-to-Image Generation

(ii) Multi-Modal Dialogue
What is unusual
Prompt about this image?

It is unusual to see a
Bard corgi riding a bicycle,

“a photograph

especially in a busy

closeup dog

city like New York…

corgi wearing
white hat corgi
yellow glasses…”

Stable Diffusion

Midjourney

Imagen
De-Diffusion

“a photograph closeup dog corgi wearing white hat corgi

encoder

yellow glasses atop on red handle bicycle street nyc
corgi

smiling

wearing

an

orange

fedora

smile

yellow

sunglasses people car multiple screen buildings street…”

decoder
(text2img
diffusion)

(iii) Multi-Modal Few-Shot Learning with LLMs

Prompt

Q: What is the tabby

“a photograph a
cat wearing
reddish red wool
sweater with

cat wearing?
A: Red sweater.

glasses…”

“a photograph

Q: What is the corgi

closeup dog

dog wearing?

corgi wearing
white hat corgi

Yellow sunglasses.
PaLM 2

A:

yellow glasses…”

Figure 1. De-Diffusion is an autoencoder whose decoder is a pre-trained text-to-image diffusion model. It encodes an input image into a
piece of information-rich text, which mixes comprehensive semantic concepts present in the image to be a “scrambled caption”. We group
semantics by color for illustration. De-Diffusion text can act as a flexible interface between different modalities, for example, enabling
diverse vision-language applications including: (i) providing transferable prompts for different text-to-image tools, (ii) enabling text-only
chatbots, e.g., Bard [1], to engage in multi-modal dialogue, and (iii) injecting image context into off-the-shelf large language models
(LLMs), e.g., PaLM 2 [5], to perform open-ended visual question answering by prompting the LLM with few-shot examples.

Abstract
We demonstrate text as a strong cross-modal interface.
Rather than relying on deep embeddings to connect image
and language as the interface representation, our approach
represents an image as text, from which we enjoy the interpretability and flexibility inherent to natural language.
We employ an autoencoder that uses a pre-trained text-toimage diffusion model for decoding. The encoder is trained
to transform an input image into text, which is then fed into
the fixed text-to-image diffusion decoder to reconstruct the

original input – a process we term De-Diffusion. Experiments validate both the precision and comprehensiveness
of De-Diffusion text representing images, such that it can
be readily ingested by off-the-shelf text-to-image tools and
LLMs for diverse multi-modal tasks. For example, a single
De-Diffusion model can generalize to provide transferable
prompts for different text-to-image tools, and also achieves
a new state of the art on open-ended vision-language tasks
by simply prompting large language models with few-shot
examples. Project page: dediffusion.github.io.

13492

