This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BEVNeXt: Reviving Dense BEV Frameworks for 3D Object Detection
Zhenxin Li1, 2 Shiyi Lan3 Jose M. Alvarez3 Zuxuan Wu1, 2†
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intell. Info. Processing, School of CS, Fudan University
2
Shanghai Collaborative Innovation Center of Intelligent Visual Computing 3 NVIDIA

Abstract
Recently, the rise of query-based Transformer decoders is
reshaping camera-based 3D object detection. These querybased decoders are surpassing the traditional dense BEV
(Bird’s Eye View)-based methods. However, we argue that
dense BEV frameworks remain important due to their outstanding abilities in depth estimation and object localization,
depicting 3D scenes accurately and comprehensively. This
paper aims to address the drawbacks of the existing dense
BEV-based 3D object detectors by introducing our proposed
enhanced components, including a CRF-modulated depth estimation module enforcing object-level consistencies, a longterm temporal aggregation module with extended receptive
fields, and a two-stage object decoder combining perspective
techniques with CRF-modulated depth embedding. These enhancements lead to a “modernized” dense BEV framework
dubbed BEVNeXt. On the nuScenes benchmark, BEVNeXt
outperforms both BEV-based and query-based frameworks
under various settings, achieving a state-of-the-art result of
64.2 NDS on the nuScenes test set.

1. Introduction
Visual-based 3D object detection [19, 30, 40, 63] is a
critical component of autonomous driving and intelligent
transportation systems. Unlike LiDAR-based systems with
access to depth data, the primary challenge in visual-based
3D object detection is accurately perceiving depth, a task
largely reliant on empirical knowledge of images. As an
important part of detection, object localization depends heavily on the accuracy of depth [49]. Precise and robust object
localization is the cornerstone of 3D perception, as it helps
identify obstacles [1], lays a foundation for scene forecasting [46, 71], and leads to reassuring planning [16, 55].
To detect 3D objects with visual information, two research directions have prevailed: dense BEV (Bird’s Eye
View)-based methods and sparse query-based methods. BEVbased methods transform image feature maps into one uni† Corresponding author.

NDS

Dense BEV-based

65

Sparse Query-based
StreamPETR

BEVNeXt
(ours)

SparseBEV

ResNet-101
StreamPETR

BEVNeXt
(ours)

FB-BEV

VoVNet-99

60
SparseBEV
SOLOFusion

55

Diameter (mATE)

ResNet-50
nuScenes val split

0.4

0.6

nuScenes test split

Figure 1. Previous SOTAs vs. BEVNeXt on the nuScenes 3D
Object Detection Benchmark. On the nuScenes val split and
test split, we compare BEVNeXt with previous SOTAs using
(ResNet-50, bottom in the left panel), (ResNet-101, top in the left
panel), and (VoVNet-99, right panel) as the backbone. BEVNeXt
outperforms all previous sparse query-based ones in terms of comprehensive performance, meanwhile generating much fewer localization errors. The diameter of each bubble represents the mean
Average Translation Error (mATE) each model produces. Higher
and smaller bubbles are better. Best viewed in color.

fied dense bird’s-eye-view feature map and thus apply detection decoders on it. In contrast, sparse query-based methods learn a set of object queries, which focus on sparse
foreground objects rather than background details, and then
predict 3D objects by leveraging multiple stages of crossattention between object queries and image features and
self-attention among object queries.
Despite the superior performance of recent query-based
methods over dense BEV-based approaches, we maintain
that retaining the dense feature map is advantageous for a
complete environmental understanding, regardless of background or foreground elements. This trait makes BEV-based
frameworks suitable for dense prediction tasks such as occupancy prediction [56, 57]. Further, the dense processing
equips them with robustness in object localization, which
1
20113

