This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Gated Fields: Learning Scene Reconstruction from Gated Videos
Andrea Ramazzina1 * Stefanie Walz1,2∗
1

Mercedes-Benz

2

Saarland University

3

Pragyan Dahal3

Politecnico di Milano

4

Mario Bijelic4,5
Torc Robotics

5

Felix Heide4,5

Princeton University

Abstract
Reconstructing outdoor 3D scenes from temporal observations is a challenge that recent work on neural fields has
offered a new avenue for. However, existing methods that
recover scene properties, such as geometry, appearance, or
radiance, solely from RGB captures often fail when handling poorly-lit or texture-deficient regions. Similarly, recovering scenes with scanning LiDAR sensors is also difficult due to their low angular sampling rate which makes
recovering expansive real-world scenes difficult. Tackling
these gaps, we introduce Gated Fields – a neural scene
reconstruction method that utilizes active gated video sequences. To this end, we propose a neural rendering approach that seamlessly incorporates time-gated capture and
illumination. Our method exploits the intrinsic depth cues
in the gated videos, achieving precise and dense geometry
reconstruction irrespective of ambient illumination conditions. We validate the method across day and night scenarios and find that Gated Fields compares favorably to RGB
and LiDAR reconstruction methods. Our code and datasets
are available here1 .

1. Introduction
Large-scale outdoor scene reconstruction is essential for advancing autonomous robotics, drones, and driver-assistance
systems, serving as the foundation for scene understanding, safe navigation, dataset generation and validation. Existing works in this domain [68, 76, 96] have typically
adopted a two-step approach. Initially, they infer depth
maps from different poses, utilizing time-of-flight sensors
or RGB captures. Subsequently, these depth estimates are
fused to produce a coherent 3D representation, using either
classical methodologies [25] or learned-based representations [72]. In contrast, more recent studies [16, 65, 79]
have proposed end-to-end strategies that bypass the estimation of local depth maps as an intermediate representation. Instead, they directly regress a Truncated Signed Distance Function (TSDF) [65, 79] or an occupancy volume
[16]. A rapidly growing body of work on neural rendering
[62, 92] offers not only geometrically-accurate scene recon* These authors contributed equally to this work.
1 https://light.princeton.edu/gatedfields/

Figure 1. From a single video of gated captures (top-row), we
reconstruct an accurate scene representation and render depth projections (mid-row, right) as accurate as LiDAR scans (mid-row,
left), and we recover 3D geometry and normals (bottom-row).

struction from posed RGB images but also to generate novel
perspectives from unobserved angles. Hinging on implicit
coordinate-based neural representations, RGB-based methods [7, 8, 55, 100] have been adapted to large open outdoor environments. A recent line of work [37, 71, 86, 93]
includes LiDAR scans for auxiliary depth supervision and
to improve scene reconstruction for urban environments.
However, recovery based on the RGB images exhibit is fundamentally limited in the presence of low light [63, 91] or
in the presence of scattering such as fog [49, 69].
A parallel direction of research investigates neural rendering techniques tailored to Time-of-Flight (ToF) sensors
as opposed to the conventional RGB cameras. Existing
methods [41, 84] tackle scene understanding with posed LiDAR scans, and have modeled the raw output from a singlephoton LiDAR system [59] or continuous-wave ToF sensor
[4] as additional depth supervision. However, all of these
existing methods struggle with recovering large unbounded
outdoor scenes: while continuous-wave ToF sensors [4] offer signal only in room-sized scenes, methods based on
scanning LiDAR suffer from low angular sampling which
mandates temporal aggregation. Specifically, even today’s
LiDAR sensors boasting 200 scan lines, lag drastically in
resolution compared to current HDR cameras that offer two
orders of magnitude higher vertical pixel counts nearing 10k
and three orders of magnitude higher total resolution.
Addressing these challenges, our work explores scene
reconstruction using active gated imaging. Gated imag-

10530

