This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MULAN: A Multi Layer Annotated Dataset for Controllable Text-to-Image
Generation
Petru-Daniel Tudosiu*1
Yongxin Yang1
2†
Steven McDonagh
Gerasimos Lampouras1
1

Shifeng Zhang1
Fei Chen1
1
Ignacio Iacobacci
Sarah Parisot*1

Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 2 University of Edinburgh

Abstract
Text-to-image generation has achieved astonishing results, yet precise spatial controllability and prompt fidelity
remain highly challenging. This limitation is typically addressed through cumbersome prompt engineering, scene
layout conditioning, or image editing techniques which often
require hand drawn masks. Nonetheless, pre-existing works
struggle to take advantage of the natural instance-level compositionality of scenes due to the typically flat nature of
rasterized RGB output images. Towards adressing this challenge, we introduce MuLAn: a novel dataset comprising
over 44K MUlti-Layer ANnotations of RGB images as multilayer, instance-wise RGBA decompositions, and over 100K
instance images. To build MuLAn, we developed a training
free pipeline which decomposes a monocular RGB image
into a stack of RGBA layers comprising of background and
isolated instances. We achieve this through the use of pretrained general-purpose models, and by developing three
modules: image decomposition for instance discovery and
extraction, instance completion to reconstruct occluded areas, and image re-assembly. We use our pipeline to create
MuLAn-COCO and MuLAn-LAION datasets, which contain a variety of image decompositions in terms of style,
composition and complexity. With MuLAn, we provide the
first photorealistic resource providing instance decomposition and occlusion information for high quality images,
opening up new avenues for text-to-image generative AI research. With this, we aim to encourage the development
of novel generation and editing technology, in particular
layer-wise solutions. MuLAn data resources are available at
https://MuLAn-dataset.github.io/

1. Introduction
Large scale generative diffusion models [27, 31] now enable
generation of high quality images from text prompt descrip* equal contribution, † work done in part at Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Figure 1. Example annotations from our MuLAn dataset. We
decompose an image into a multi-layer RGBA stack, where each
layer comprises an instance image with transparent alpha layer
(green overlays) and background image. For each scene, the second
row shows iterative addition of RGBA instance layers.

tions. These models are typically trained on large datasets
of captioned RGB images encompassing multiple styles and
contents. While such techniques have pushed the field of
text-guided image generation forward tremendously, precise
controllability of image appearance and composition (e.g.
local image attributes, countability) still remains a challenge
[14]. Prompt instructions can often lack precision or be misunderstood (e.g. counting errors, incorrect spatial positions,
bleeding of concepts, failure to add or remove instances),
and therefore require intricate prompt engineering to obtain
the desired result. Fine-tuning a generated image by even
slightly changing the prompt can result in a markedly different sample, further increasing the amount of effort required
to obtain the desired image.

22413

