This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MemSAM: Taming Segment Anything Model for
Echocardiography Video Segmentation
Xiaolong Deng1 , Huisi Wu1 *, Runhao Zeng2 , Jing Qin3
College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
2
College of Mechatronics and Control Engineering, Shenzhen University
3
Centre for Smart Health, School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
1

dengxiaolong2022@email.szu.edu.cn, {hswu, zengrh}@szu.edu.cn, harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
We propose a novel echocardiographical video segmentation model by adapting SAM to medical videos to address
some long-standing challenges in ultrasound video segmentation, including (1) massive speckle noise and artifacts,
(2) extremely ambiguous boundaries, and (3) large variations of targeting objects across frames. The core technique of our model is a temporal-aware and noise-resilient
prompting scheme. Specifically, we employ a space-time
memory that contains both spatial and temporal information to prompt the segmentation of current frame, and thus
we call the proposed model as MemSAM. In prompting,
the memory carrying temporal cues sequentially prompt the
video segmentation frame by frame. Meanwhile, as the
memory prompt propagates high-level features, it avoids
the issue of misidentification caused by mask propagation
and improves representation consistency. To address the
challenge of speckle noise, we further propose a memory reinforcement mechanism, which leverages predicted
masks to improve the quality of the memory before storing it. We extensively evaluate our method on two public datasets and demonstrate state-of-the-art performance
compared to existing models. Particularly, our model
achieves comparable performance with fully supervised approaches with limited annotations. Codes are available at
https://github.com/dengxl0520/MemSAM.

1. Introduction
Cardiovascular diseases are the leading cause of mortality
worldwide according to statistics of the World Health Organization (WHO) [6]. Echocardiography is an important yet
unique tool for assessing cardiovascular function. Due to its
portability, low cost, and real-time nature, echocardiography is commonly used as the first-line examination method
* Corresponding Author

Figure 1. The challenges of echocardiography video segmentation: (a) blurred contours, (b) speckle noise, and (c-d) the change
of scale across frames (two frames of the same video).

in clinical practice [1]. However, echocardiography usually
requires manual evaluation by experienced physicians, and
the quality of assessment heavily relies on physicians’ expertise [17, 19]. To the end, there are often large inter- and
intra-observer differences among manual assessments [16].
In addition, the assessment requires manual tracking of ventricular size, which is laborious, time-consuming, and errorprone. In this regard, automated assessment approaches are
highly demanded in clinical practice.
Echocardiographic assessment and diagnosis are usually
based on the interpretation of ejection fraction and ventricular volumes [4], which requires accurate segmentation of
key structures from echocardiographic videos such as the
left ventricular endocardium. However, automatic echocardiographic segmentation has always been a challenging
task. First, as shown in Figure 1 (a,b), due to limitations
of ultrasound imaging, there are a lot of adverse factors
affecting the quality of echocardiographic videos, such as
low signal-to-noise ratio, speckle noise, edge dropout, and
shadows caused by structures like dense muscle and ribs,
making it difficult to identify the boundaries of key anatomical structures [3, 30]. Second, shape and scale variations
of cardiac structures are large within and between videos
(see Figure 1 (c,d)). Finally, annotation of echocardiographic videos is labor-intensive and time-consuming, and
hence physicians usually only annotate end-systole and end-

9622

