This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAI3D: Segment Any Instance in 3D Scenes
Yingda Yin* 1,2 Yuzheng Liu* 2,3
Daniel Cohen-Or 5 Jingwei Huang 6
1

Yang Xiao* 4
Baoquan Chen 2,3

School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 National Key Lab of General AI, China
3
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
4
Ecole des Ponts ParisTech 5 Tel-Aviv University 6 Tencent

Abstract
Advancements in 3D instance segmentation have traditionally been tethered to the availability of annotated
datasets, limiting their application to a narrow spectrum
of object categories. Recent efforts have sought to harness vision-language models like CLIP for open-set semantic reasoning, yet these methods struggle to distinguish between objects of the same categories and rely on specific
prompts that are not universally applicable. In this paper, we introduce SAI3D, a novel zero-shot 3D instance
segmentation approach that synergistically leverages geometric priors and semantic cues derived from Segment Anything Model (SAM). Our method partitions a 3D scene into
geometric primitives, which are then progressively merged
into 3D instance segmentations that are consistent with the
multi-view SAM masks. Moreover, we design a hierarchical region-growing algorithm with a dynamic thresholding
mechanism, which largely improves the robustness of finegrained 3D scene parsing. Empirical evaluations on ScanNet, Matterport3D and the more challenging ScanNet++
datasets demonstrate the superiority of our approach. Notably, SAI3D outperforms existing open-vocabulary baselines and even surpasses fully-supervised methods in classagnostic segmentation on ScanNet++. Our project page is
at https://yd-yin.github.io/SAI3D.

1. Introduction
3D instance segmentation aims to parse a 3D scene into a
set of objects represented as binary foreground masks associated with semantic labels. Although 3D instance segmentation has made great progress, state-of-the-art methods are supervised, and heavily rely on precise 3D annotations. Consequently, these methods are confined to a narrow scope of object categories within specific datasets like
ScanNet [5] or KITTI [8]. This limitation considerably con* Equal contribution.

Zero-shot instance segmentation

“Shower Gel”

“Outlet”

“Coat”

Zero-shot query-based segmentation
Figure 1. SAI3D: A Zero-Shot Approach for 3D Instance Segmentation. SAI3D leverages geometric priors and 2D segmentation foundation models to perform training-free zero-shot 3D instance segmentation (top). Our generated 3D masks enable applications of open-vocabulary queries of fine-grained 3D instances
(bottom).

strains their applications in open-world scenarios such as
embodied agents and autonomous driving.
Advanced methods, based on vision-language foundation models like CLIP [36], have shown impressive performance in open-set semantic reasoning. These approaches
have prompted recent studies exploring how these foundation models can assist in comprehending 3D scenes (e.g.,
OpenScene [32] and LERF [18]).
Although achieving open-world 3D grounding, these approaches typically predict a heatmap without distinguishing
among different objects with the same semantics. Moreover, they rely on specific prompts that might not be readily
available for all objects within a 3D scene.

3292

