This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Logit Standardization in Knowledge Distillation
Shangquan Sun1,2 , Wenqi Ren3† , Jingzhi Li1 , Rui Wang1,2 , Xiaochun Cao3
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
{sunshangquan,lijingzhi,wangrui}@iie.ac.cn, {renwq3,caoxiaochun}@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
The development of deep neural networks (DNN) has revolutionized the field of computer vision in the past decade.
† Corresponding author.
This work has been supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62322216, 62025604, 62306308), in part by Shenzhen
Science and Technology Program (Grant No. JCYJ20220818102012025,
KQTD20221101093559018).

𝐳

ℒ!"

𝐯

logit

student

teacher

softmax [𝒵 𝐳 ]
𝐳

Softmax[𝒵 𝐯 ]
ℒ!"
𝐯
𝒵: 𝓏-score function

standardized logit

logit

Tiger
Cat
Dog
Frog
Bird

teacher
softmax(𝐯/𝒯)

Tiger
Cat
Dog
Frog
Bird

student
softmax(𝐳/𝒯)

ird
B

Fr
og

at
C

D

og

𝜹

Ti
ge
r

Knowledge distillation involves transferring soft labels
from a teacher to a student using a shared temperaturebased softmax function. However, the assumption of a
shared temperature between teacher and student implies
a mandatory exact match between their logits in terms of
logit range and variance. This side-effect limits the performance of student, considering the capacity discrepancy
between them and the finding that the innate logit relations
of teacher are sufficient for student to learn. To address this
issue, we propose setting the temperature as the weighted
standard deviation of logit and performing a plug-and-play
Z-score pre-process of logit standardization before applying softmax and Kullback-Leibler divergence. Our preprocess enables student to focus on essential logit relations from teacher rather than requiring a magnitude match,
and can improve the performance of existing logit-based
distillation methods. We also show a typical case where
the conventional setting of sharing temperature between
teacher and student cannot reliably yield the authentic distillation evaluation; nonetheless, this challenge is successfully alleviated by our Z-score. We extensively evaluate our
method for various student and teacher models on CIFAR100 and ImageNet, showing its significant superiority. The
vanilla knowledge distillation powered by our pre-process
can achieve favorable performance against state-of-the-art
methods, and other distillation variants can obtain considerable gain with the assistance of our pre-process. The
codes, pre-trained models and logs are released on Github.

𝐳=𝐯+𝜹

(a) Vanilla KD

𝒵 𝐳 = 𝒵(𝐯)

𝐳≠𝐯+𝜹

(b) KD w/ our logit standardization

Figure 1. Vanilla knowledge distillation implicitly enforces an exact match between the magnitudes of teacher and student logits. It
is an unnecessary side-effect because it is found sufficient to preserve the innate relations between their logits. Given the capacity gap between them, it is also challenging for a lightweight student to produce logits with the same magnitude as a cumbersome
teacher. In contrast, the proposed Z-score logit standardization
pre-process mitigates the side-effect. The standardized student
logits have arbitrary magnitude suitable for the student’s capacity
while preserving the essential relations learned from the teacher.

However, with increasing performance and capacity, the
model size and computational cost of DNN have also
been expanding. Despite of a tendency that larger models
have greater capacity, many efforts have been made by researchers to cut down model size without sacrificing much
accuracy. In addition to designing lightweight models,
knowledge distillation (KD) has emerged as a new approach
to achieve this goal. It involves transferring the knowledge
of a pre-trained heavy model, known as the teacher network,
to a small target model, known as the student network.
Hinton et al. [13] firstly proposes distilling a teacher’s
knowledge into a student by minimizing a Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence between their predictions. A scaling factor

15731

