This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Reconstruction-free Cascaded Adaptive Compressive Sensing
Chenxi Qiu, Tao Yue, Xuemei Hu
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
chenxiqiu@smail.nju.edu.cn, yuetao@nju.edu.cn, xuemeihu@nju.edu.cn

Φi

Abstract
x

1. Introduction
Compressive sensing provides an efficient way to sample
the scene information with sub-Nyquist rate [13], which
has been applied in a wide range of research fields, such as
medical imaging [29], wireless broadcasting [27], ultrafast
photography [17] and video snapshot compressive imaging [47, 48]. CS methods with uniform sampling [8, 26, 43,
52, 56, 59] propose to sample each region of the image with
the same sampling rate. Since the complexity and content in
different image regions are distributed non-uniformly, adaptively allocating different sampling rates based on scenedependent information is highly promising to realize efficient CS with high reconstruction fidelity. Therefore, different adaptive sampling methods are proposed [6, 34, 38, 49].

𝑖

x'n

𝓝

Scene-aware Adaptive Compressive Sensing (ACS) has
constituted a persistent pursuit, holding substantial promise
for the enhancement of Compressive Sensing (CS) performance. Cascaded ACS furnishes a proficient multi-stage
framework for adaptively allocating the CS sampling based
on previous CS measurements. However, reconstruction is
commonly required for analyzing and steering the successive CS sampling, which bottlenecks the ACS speed and impedes the practical application in time-sensitive scenarios.
Addressing this challenge, we propose a reconstructionfree cascaded ACS method, which requires NO reconstruction during the adaptive sampling process. A lightweight
Score Network (ScoreNet) is proposed to directly determine the ACS allocation with previous CS measurements
and a differentiable adaptive sampling module is proposed
for end-to-end training. For image reconstruction, we propose a Multi-Grid Spatial-Attention Network (MGSANet)
that could facilitate efficient multi-stage training and inferencing. By introducing the reconstruction-fidelity supervision outside the loop of the multi-stage sampling process,
ACS can be efficiently optimized and achieve high imaging
fidelity. The effectiveness of the proposed method is demonstrated with extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments, compared with the state-of-the-art CS algorithms.

Φi

yi

(a)

x
Reconstruction
fidelity
supervision

yi

y1, ..., yn

𝓝

x'n

(b)

Figure 1. The scheme comparison of n-stage ACS frameworks,
(a) the existing ACS methods with n times of reconstruction of
x′1 , x′2 , ..., x′n in the adaptive sampling loop, and (b) the proposed method which requires no reconstruction during the sampling loop. Only the final image reconstruction with all adaptive
measurements, i.e., y 1 , y 2 , .., y n , is required. RA denotes the
sampling rate allocation module and N i denotes the reconstruction at the i-th adaptive sampling stage.

Due to the efficiency of ACS in utilizing scene-dependent
information, it has been applied in various fields, such as
medical imaging [33], hyperspectral imaging [19], terahertz
(THz) imaging [44] and 3D imaging [11, 35].
Generally, adaptive sampling is performed in multistage, reconstruction based on previous measurements is required for determining the subsequent adaptive sampling.
Existing works propose to analyze the texture or saliency
distribution on the previously reconstructed coarse image
and allocate higher sampling rates to the regions with richer
textures [1, 6, 34, 38, 49]. However, the requirement of
image reconstruction in the loop of the adaptive sampling
process prevents ACS from efficient sampling for timesensitive scenarios. As shown in Fig. 1(a), for the existing
multi-stage ACS process with n stages, reconstruction lies
in the loop of the ACS process, which is required n times
for the successive reconstruction of the image and bottlenecks the imaging speed of ACS for practical applications.
In this paper, we propose a reconstruction-free cascaded
ACS framework, which requires NO reconstruction during
the multi-stage adaptive sampling process. As shown in
Fig. 1(b), during the sampling process, the adaptive allocation is determined directly based on the previous CS measurements, and only one reconstruction is required for the
final image reconstruction. Specifically, our method proposes a lightweight ScoreNet to score each block based on

2620

