This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Real-Time Exposure Correction via Collaborative Transformations and
Adaptive Sampling
Ziwen Li1 , Feng Zhang1 , Meng Cao2 , Jinpu Zhang1 , Yuanjie Shao3 , Yuehuan Wang1 *, Nong Sang1
1
National Key Laboratory of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence
3
School of Electronic Information and Communication, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{D201980722,fengzhangaia,shaoyuanjie,yuehwang,nsang}@hust.edu.cn, {mengcaopku,zjphust}@gmail.com

Abstract

SID
3D LUT
Ours

1. Introduction
Exposure correction [1] is a fundamental problem in
the field of computational photography and computer
* Corresponding author

FLOPs

219.3G

Most of the previous exposure correction methods learn
dense pixel-wise transformations to achieve promising results, but consume huge computational resources. Recently, Learnable 3D lookup tables (3D LUTs) have demonstrated impressive performance and efficiency for image
enhancement. However, these methods can only perform
global transformations and fail to finely manipulate local
regions. Moreover, they uniformly downsample the input
image, which loses the rich color information and limits the
learning of color transformation capabilities. In this paper, we present a collaborative transformation framework
(CoTF) for real-time exposure correction, which integrates
global transformation with pixel-wise transformations in
an efficient manner. Specifically, the global transformation adjusts the overall appearance using image-adaptive
3D LUTs to provide decent global contrast and sharp details, while the pixel transformation compensates for local
context. Then, a relation-aware modulation module is designed to combine these two components effectively. In addition, we propose an adaptive sampling strategy to preserve more color information by predicting the sampling
intervals, thus providing higher quality input data for the
learning of 3D LUTs. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our method can process high-resolution images in realtime on GPUs while achieving comparable performance
against current state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at https://github.com/HUST-IAL/CoTF.

54.8G

13.7G

1.8G

0.6G
2562

5122

Resolution

(a)

1024 2

RGB
[ 1, 1, 1 ]
[ 1, 1, 1 ]
[ 1, 1, 1 ]

Input

RGB
[ 13, 12, 9 ]
[ 13, 12, 9 ]
[ 13, 12, 9 ]

3D LUT

RGB
[ 24, 25, 24 ]
[ 29, 26, 22 ]
[ 31, 27, 22 ]

Ours

(b)

Figure 1. Comparison of different transformation methods. (a)
shows the computational effort of the different methods. We
can see that the computational effort of the pixel transformation method SID increases significantly with resolution, while our
method remains efficient at high resolution. (b) shows the pixel
mapping relations for different transformations. 3D LUT performs
a fixed global transformation based on pixel values, resulting in
some unsatisfactory local contrast. While our method considers
the pixel context and yields favorable results.

vision, and has been extensively studied over the last few
decades. Its purpose is to automatically correct over- or
underexposed images taken under undesirable lighting
conditions. Exposure correction plays an important role
in many applications such as autonomous driving [14] and
video understanding [3–8].
Recently, with the rapid development of deep learning,
many learning-based exposure correction methods [1, 15,
16, 18, 36] have been proposed and achieved promising performance. However, most of them elaborate complex network structures and learn dense pixel-wise transformations
with the computational burden proportional to the resolution of the input image. This leads to the huge computations
and endure the curse of dimensionality, when confronted
with high-resolution images. For example, in Figure 1(a),
when processing 256 × 256 images, SID [9] requires only
13.7G FLOPs of floating point operations. When the image

2984

