This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Density-Guided Semi-Supervised 3D Semantic Segmentation
with Dual-Space Hardness Sampling
Jianan Li1,2 , Qiulei Dong∗,1,2,3
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artiﬁcial Intelligence Systems,
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
1

lijianan211@mails.ucas.ac.cn, qldong@nlpr.ac.cn

Abstract
Densely annotating the large-scale point clouds is laborious. To alleviate the annotation burden, contrastive
learning has attracted increasing attention for tackling
semi-supervised 3D semantic segmentation. However,
existing point-to-point contrastive learning techniques in
literature are generally sensitive to outliers, resulting in
insufﬁcient modeling of the point-wise representations. To
address this problem, we propose a method named DDSemi
for semi-supervised 3D semantic segmentation, where a
density-guided contrastive learning technique is explored.
This technique calculates the contrastive loss in a pointto-anchor manner by estimating an anchor for each class
from the memory bank based on the ﬁnding that the cluster
centers tend to be located in dense regions. In this technique, an inter-contrast loss is derived from the perturbed
unlabeled point cloud pairs, while an intra-contrast loss is
derived from a single unlabeled point cloud. The derived
losses could enhance the discriminability of the features
and implicitly constrain the semantic consistency between
the perturbed unlabeled point cloud pairs. In addition,
we propose a dual-space hardness sampling strategy to
pay more attention to the hard samples located in sparse
regions of both the geometric space and feature space by
reweighting the point-wise intra-contrast loss. Experimental results on both indoor-scene and outdoor-scene datasets
demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms the
comparative state-of-the-art semi-supervised methods.

1. Introduction
3D semantic segmentation [13, 17, 23, 27, 30] is a fundamental task in computer vision and plays an essential role
*Corresponding author

Figure 1. Illustration of the point-to-point contrast (top) and pointto-anchor contrast (bottom). The circles represent the point features and the diamonds represent the anchors. Different colors
denote different categories. The direction of the arrows shows the
force of pull or push in contrastive learning. The point-to-point
contrast is prone to be affected by the confusing points while the
point-to-anchor contrast is robust to them.

in scene understanding. Most of the existing 3D segmentation models in literature are trained in a fully-supervised
manner, where the labor-intensive and time-consuming data
annotation is required. To address this issue, several semisupervised methods [11, 18, 20, 24, 36], weakly-supervised
methods [25, 26, 28, 43], and annotation-free methods
[5, 6, 39, 46] have been explored. Among them, semisupervised 3D semantic segmentation has drawn growing
interest, where the training data contains a small amount of
densely-labeled data and a large amount of unlabeled data.
A typical manner for handling the semi-supervised semantic segmentation tasks [1, 18, 37, 48] is to apply contrastive learning to explore the information encapsulated in
the unlabeled data while preserving the nutrition in the limited densely-labeled data.
Originating from the classiﬁcation task, contrastive
learning has become a prevailing technique in many visual tasks [7, 8, 12, 15]. However, as revealed in [32],

3260

