This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SRTube: Video-Language Pre-Training with Action-Centric Video Tube
Features and Semantic Role Labeling
Ju-Hee Lee and Je-Won Kang*
Dept. of Electronic and Electrical Engineering and Graduate Program in Smart Factory,
Ewha W. University, Seoul, South Korea
juhee69@ewhain.net,jewonk@ewha.ac.kr

Abstract
In recent years, large-scale video-language pre-training
(VidLP) has received considerable attention for its effectiveness in relevant tasks. In this paper, we propose a
novel action-centric VidLP framework that employs video
tube features for temporal modeling and language features
based on semantic role labeling (SRL). Our video encoder
generates multiple tube features along object trajectories,
identifying action-related regions within videos, to overcome the limitations of existing temporal attention mechanisms. Additionally, our text encoder incorporates highlevel, action-related language knowledge, previously underutilized in current VidLP models. The SRL captures actionverbs and related semantics among objects in sentences and
enhances the ability to perform instance-level text matching, thus enriching the cross-modal (CM) alignment process. We also introduce two novel pre-training objectives
and a self-supervision strategy to produce a more faithful
CM representation. Experimental results demonstrate that
our method outperforms existing VidLP frameworks in various downstream tasks and datasets, establishing our model
a baseline in the modern VidLP framework.

1. Introduction
Video-language pre-training (VidLP) models [7, 9, 16, 35,
43, 45] have been actively used for multi-modal learning.
Their effectiveness is acknowledged across various downstream tasks, including video question answering [21, 25],
video retrieval [17, 38], and video captioning [32, 47].
High-performance VidLP frameworks include key modules
such as temporal modeling and cross-modal (CM) alignment [12, 15, 50, 54]. In recent studies, video transformers
[34, 53] are used to establish baselines due to their ability
to generate rich and joint representations of video and language [2, 7, 9, 16, 43]. In [12], a baseline VidLP architec* Je-Won Kang is a corresponding author.

Figure 1. Our motivation is to bridge semantic gaps between video
and text using more organized action-related features and their semantic alignments in CM.

ture was built through the dissection and reassembly of the
crucial components, resulting in superior performance. This
approach seems to effectively construct the VidLP framework by empirically optimizing specific modules. However, when further expanding to a temporal direction, current video transformers [7, 9, 34] would deteriorate computational efficiency and overlook essential spatio-temporal
contexts within videos due to the conventional patch-wise
cross-attention. In [8, 27], visual features extracted from
single or just few frames often served as substitutes for temporal features, since the straightforward cross-attention exhibited limited abilities to capture temporal contexts.
To address this problem, recent VidLP studies have introduced object-centric video transformers [3, 20, 28, 48, 57]
to manage more relevant objects in adjacent frames. Existing object-centric image-language pre-training approaches
have used off-the-shelf object detection models to align
objects in images with words [28, 31]. However, these
schemes are infeasible to be applied to video, because they
require pre-extracted features of all the objects. To mi-

13689

