This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrastive Mean-Shift Learning for Generalized Category Discovery
Sua Choi

Dahyun Kang

Minsu Cho

Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), South Korea
https://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/cms

Abstract

Clustering is one of the most fundamental problems in unsupervised learning, which aims to partition instances of a
data collection into different groups [2, 15, 34, 42]. Unlike
the classification problem, it does not assume either predefined target classes or labeled instances in its standard setup.
However, in a practical scenario, some data instances may
be labeled for a subset of target classes so that we can leverage them to cluster all the data instances while also discovering the remaining unknown classes. The goal of Generalized Category Discovery (GCD) [48] is to tackle such
a semi-supervised image clustering problem given a small
amount of incomplete supervision.
Clustering is a transductive reasoning process based on
the neighborhood data in the given data collection. To learn
an image embedding for this clustering purpose, we are motivated to incorporate the neighborhood embeddings into
learning. We revisit mean shift [8, 11, 12, 18, 44], i.e., a
classic, powerful technique for mode seeking and clustering analysis. The mean-shift algorithm consists of iterative
mode-seeking steps of updating each data point by kernel-

sh

1. Introduction

!!

pu

We address the problem of generalized category discovery (GCD) that aims to partition a partially labeled collection of images; only a small part of the collection is labeled and the total number of target classes is unknown.
To address this generalized image clustering problem, we
revisit the mean-shift algorithm, i.e., a classic, powerful
technique for mode seeking, and incorporate it into a contrastive learning framework. The proposed method, dubbed
Contrastive Mean-Shift (CMS) learning, trains an embedding network to produce representations with better clustering properties by an iterative process of mean shift and contrastive update. Experiments demonstrate that our method,
both in settings with and without the total number of clusters being known, achieves state-of-the-art performance on
six public GCD benchmarks without bells and whistles.

pu

ll
push

!"
!
!

! " : different images in a batch
: mean-shifted embedding #
: image embedding "
: augmented image embedding " !
: augmented mean-shifted embedding # !

! : augmented image of !

Figure 1. Contrastive Mean-Shift (CMS) learning. We integrate mean shift [11] into contrastive learning [7, 24, 59]. In training, image embeddings proceed a single-step mean shift with their
kNNs. The contrastive learning objective pulls the mean-shifted
embeddings of I and I+ , while it pushes those from different image inputs. Colors denote different classes and k=4.

weighted aggregation of its neighboring data points; this
process is non-parametric and does not require any information about the target clusters, e.g., the number of clusters.
For GCD, we develop a GPU-friendly mean-shift variant
and incorporate it into a contrastive representation learning
framework [7, 24, 59].
We introduce Contrastive Mean-Shift (CMS) learning
for GCD. CMS learning aims to encode the semantic distance between image embeddings on a mean-shifted space
via contrastive learning. Precisely, we perform a single-step
mean shift for each image embedding by moving it toward
the mean of its neighbors in an embedding space. To perform stable mean shifts in the embedding space, we use k
nearest neighbors (kNNs) instead of typical distance-based
neighbors [8, 11]. In learning, an image I and its augmented image I0 are both mean-shifted and pull each other
on the embedding space while pushing I and different images (Fig. 1). The training objective with mean-shifted em1
23094

