This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-Attribute Interactions Matter for 3D Visual Grounding
Can Xu1 , Yuehui Han1 , Rui Xu1 , Le Hui2 , Jin Xie3,4∗ , Jian Yang1
1
PCA Lab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
School of Electronics and Information, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
3
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
4
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, China
volcanox123@gmail.com; {hanyh,xu ray,csjxie,csjyang}@njust.edu.cn; huile@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D Visual Grounding (VG) aims to locate the most relevant
object in a given point cloud scene based on a language
description. As a cornerstone of wide applications [6, 8,
14, 28, 43], such as vision-language navigation and au-

of the two brown
wooden doors,
choose the door
on the left when
facing them.

Fusion

Fusion

Exchanging

∙∙∙

∙∙∙

∙∙∙

Guided
∙∙∙

3D visual grounding aims to localize 3D objects
described by free-form language sentences. Following
the detection-then-matching paradigm, existing methods
mainly focus on embedding object attributes in unimodal
feature extraction and multimodal feature fusion, to
enhance the discriminability of the proposal feature
for accurate grounding. However, most of them ignore
the explicit interaction of multiple attributes, causing
a bias in unimodal representation and misalignment in
multimodal fusion. In this paper, we propose a multiattribute aware Transformer for 3D visual grounding,
learning the multi-attribute interactions to refine the
intra-modal and inter-modal grounding cues. Specifically,
we first develop an attribute causal analysis module to
quantify the causal effect of different attributes for the final
prediction, which provides powerful supervision to correct
the misleading attributes and adaptively capture other
discriminative features. Then, we design an exchangingbased multimodal fusion module, which dynamically
replaces tokens with low attribute attention between
modalities before directly integrating low-dimensional
global features. This ensures an attribute-level multimodal
information fusion and helps align the language and
vision details more efficiently for fine-grained multimodal
features. Extensive experiments show that our method can
achieve state-of-the-art performance on ScanRefer and
Sr3D/Nr3D datasets. The code is publicly available at
https://github.com/volcanoXC/MA2TransVG.

Single Attribute

Multi Attributes

(a) Previous 3D VG methods

(b) Our proposed method

Figure 1. Different from prior works, we capture the multiattribute interactions to guide the unimodal representation and
multimodal fusion for more accurate grounding.

tonomous robots, 3D VG has attracted increasing attention
from both academia and industry. However, limited by
the complexity of free-form language description and the
irregularity of sparse point clouds, achieving accurate 3D
visual grounding remains an open issue.
Existing 3D VG methods mainly follow a detectionthen-matching pipeline. Specifically, a pool of proposals
is first produced by the pre-trained general 3D object
detectors [11, 29, 37]. Then, the linguistic description
is associated with the visual feature of each proposal to
generate multimodal object representation, which will be
used to predict their referring confidence score for grounding. Since such a two-stage paradigm aims to collect
enough semantic cues to distinguish the target object, the

17253

