This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MTLoRA: A Low-Rank Adaptation Approach for Efficient Multi-Task Learning
Ahmed Agiza*
Brown University
Providence, RI

Marina Neseem*
Brown University
Providence, RI

Sherief Reda
Brown University
Providence, RI

ahmed agiza@brown.edu

marina neseem@brown.edu

sherief reda@brown.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
General-purpose vision and language models, particularly
those trained on large-scale datasets, show remarkable
adaptability to a wide range of downstream tasks [22, 30].
However, individually fine-tuning all parameters of these
models for every downstream task poses significant efficiency challenges. This approach becomes increasingly inefficient as the number of tasks grows, especially in envi* The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
1 https://github.com/scale-lab/MTLoRA.git

MTLoRA (Ours)

MTLoRA+ (Ours)
Adapter

Trainable Parameters (M)

Adapting models pre-trained on large-scale datasets to
a variety of downstream tasks is a common strategy in deep
learning. Consequently, parameter-efficient fine-tuning
methods have emerged as a promising way to adapt pretrained models to different tasks while training only a minimal number of parameters. While most of these methods
are designed for single-task adaptation, parameter-efficient
training in Multi-Task Learning (MTL) architectures is still
unexplored. In this paper, we introduce MTLoRA, a novel
framework for parameter-efficient training of MTL models.
MTLoRA employs Task-Agnostic and Task-Specific LowRank Adaptation modules, which effectively disentangle the
parameter space in MTL fine-tuning, thereby enabling the
model to adeptly handle both task specialization and interaction within MTL contexts. We applied MTLoRA to
hierarchical-transformer-based MTL architectures, adapting them to multiple downstream dense prediction tasks.
Our extensive experiments on the PASCAL dataset show
that MTLoRA achieves higher accuracy on downstream
tasks compared to fully fine-tuning the MTL model while
reducing the number of trainable parameters by 3.6×. Furthermore, MTLoRA establishes a Pareto-optimal trade-off
between the number of trainable parameters and the accuracy of the downstream tasks, outperforming current stateof-the-art parameter-efficient training methods in both accuracy and efficiency. Our code is publicly available.1

Baselines

Polyhistor

10

r64

8
6
4

r32
r16
r16

VL-Adapter
Compactor++ LoRA
VPT-deep
Bitfit
VPT-shallow
10
8
6
4
2

r4

0

r8
2

Relative Improvement to Single-Task Fine Tuning (%)
Figure 1. MTLoRA versus state-of-the-art parameter-efficient
training approaches using Swin-Tiny vision transformer as a backbone. r represents the different ranks for the low-rank decomposition modules inside MTLoRA.

ronments constrained by computational resources.
Therefore, there is a need to develop resource-efficient
fine-tuning techniques [12, 13, 21, 23]. These methods
aim to optimize training efficiency by limiting the number of trainable parameters, all while attempting to preserve or enhance task-specific fine-tuning. Most existing
parameter-efficient adaptation methods are primarily tailored for single-task adaptation, and they may lose their
effectiveness when applied to multi-task learning (MTL)
scenarios. This is attributed to the inherent complexity of
MTL, where the goal is to optimize the performance of a
single model across a spectrum of tasks, introducing an additional layer of complexity. Moreover, focusing solely on
individual task adaptation overlooks the potential benefits
of cross-task knowledge sharing. Such knowledge sharing
in an MTL context can significantly enhance the performance of each task [4, 37].
To realize multi-task adaptation using existing methods
[21, 23], individual modules specific to the different tasks
have to be added and adapted to one downstream task at
a time as shown in Figure 2a. This approach enables cus-

16196

