This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Inclusion Matching for Animation Paint Bucket Colorization
Yuekun Dai

Shangchen Zhou Qinyue Li Chongyi Li Chen Change Loy
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

https://ykdai.github.io/projects/InclusionMatching

Reference frame

Target frame

RAFT (AnimeRun) AnT (AnimeRun) AnT (Cadmium)

Ours

Ground truth

Figure 1. In the animation industry, digital painters use paint bucket tool to colorize drawn line arts frame by frame. Our proposed pipeline
streamlines this process by requiring the painters to colorize just one frame, after which the algorithm autonomously propagates the color to
subsequent frames, enabling automatic colorization. Compared with optical-ﬂow-based method RAFT [35] and segment-matching-based
method AnT [8], our method can achieve more robust results on challenging cases such as one-to-many matching, large deformation, and
tiny region colorization. In this ﬁgure, RAFT is trained on Sintel dataset [5] and ﬁnetuned on AnimeRun [30]. We use the most frequent
color in each segment to colorize each line-enclosed region. ©drawn by Nicca (Sriprachum Kongwisawamit), used with artist permission.

Abstract
Colorizing line art is a pivotal task in the production of
hand-drawn cel animation. This typically involves digital
painters using a paint bucket tool to manually color each
segment enclosed by lines, based on RGB values predetermined by a color designer. This frame-by-frame process is
both arduous and time-intensive. Current automated methods mainly focus on segment matching. This technique migrates colors from a reference to the target frame by aligning features within line-enclosed segments across frames.
However, issues like occlusion and wrinkles in animations
often disrupt these direct correspondences, leading to mismatches. In this work, we introduce a new learning-based
inclusion matching pipeline, which directs the network to
comprehend the inclusion relationships between segments
rather than relying solely on direct visual correspondences.
Our method features a two-stage pipeline that integrates a
coarse color warping module with an inclusion matching
module, enabling more nuanced and accurate colorization.
To facilitate the training of our network, we also develope a
unique dataset, referred to as PaintBucket-Character. This

dataset includes rendered line arts alongside their colorized
counterparts, featuring various 3D characters. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority
of our method over existing techniques.

1. Introduction
Colorizing line art is a critical step in hand-drawn animation
production. Initially, key animators create the characters’
keyframes, followed by in-between animators who generate intermediate frames and reﬁne keyframes for seamless
connection between each stroke, as described in [31]. These
line arts are then scanned into binary images, featuring a primary color palette of red, blue, green, and black, which represents highlights, shadows, special instructions (e.g., eye
irises), and normal lines respectively. These scanned images, with regions of transparent background as shown in
Fig. 1, are forwarded to digital painters. The painters use a
paint bucket tool and a designated color palette to ﬁll each
line-enclosed segment, including the color lines, which is
known as paint bucket colorization. Finally, special effect
artists add visual enhancements, such as anti-aliasing, to

25544

