This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UnSAMFlow: Unsupervised Optical Flow Guided by Segment Anything Model
Shuai Yuan*, Lei Luo, Zhuo Hui, Can Pu, Xiaoyu Xiang, Rakesh Ranjan, and Denis Demandolx
Meta Reality Labs
{shuaiyuan,luoleyouluole,harryhui,cpu,xiangxiaoyu,rakeshr,denisd}@meta.com

Abstract
Traditional unsupervised optical flow methods are vulnerable to occlusions and motion boundaries due to lack of
object-level information. Therefore, we propose UnSAMFlow, an unsupervised flow network that also leverages object information from the latest foundation model Segment
Anything Model (SAM). We first include a self-supervised
semantic augmentation module tailored to SAM masks. We
also analyze the poor gradient landscapes of traditional
smoothness losses and propose a new smoothness definition based on homography instead. A simple yet effective
mask feature module has also been added to further aggregate features on the object level. With all these adaptations, our method produces clear optical flow estimation
with sharp boundaries around objects, which outperforms
state-of-the-art methods on both KITTI and Sintel datasets.
Our method also generalizes well across domains and runs
very efficiently.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation [18, 36] involves finding pixel-level
correspondences between video frames, which has broad
applications such as video understanding [63], video editing [12, 28], and autonomous driving [13, 69].
Following the latest trend of deep learning in computer
vision [10, 16, 31], most recent methods have modeled the
optical flow problem under the supervised learning framework [9, 20, 22, 25, 27, 37, 49, 52, 55, 71], where groundtruth labels are used to train the networks. However, obtaining such labels for real-life videos is especially difficult
since it usually requires precise calibrations across multiple
sensors, leading to prohibitively high annotation costs [68].
This drawback makes these supervised techniques hard to
be applied to large-scale real applications.
Due to the high annotation costs, much recent work has
focused on the unsupervised training of optical flow [64].
Instead of ground-truth labels, unsupervised flow networks
* Affiliated with Meta at the time of this work.

Image & SAM Masks

UPFlow

UnSAMFlow (Ours)

Figure 1. Our UnSAMFlow utilizes object-level information from
SAM [30] to generate clear optical flow with sharp boundaries.

rely on two key principles to define losses [26, 32, 38, 41,
46, 51, 64]. Firstly, brightness constancy assumes that the
corresponding points across frames should maintain similar
local appearances. Secondly, the optical flow field should
be spatially smooth. However, these assumptions are compromised at occlusion regions [24, 57], where foreground
objects cover background appearances, and around motion
boundaries [61, 65], where the motion is cut off abruptly.
These issues are pervasive in real applications and have
posted great challenges to unsupervised optical flow [66].
Fundamentally, the issues with occlusions and motion
boundaries both stem from the low-level nature of optical
flow, where object-level information is generally missing.
To better handle occlusions, it is important to understand the
spatial relationships and interactions between objects. Also,
optical flow should be smooth only within the same continuous object region, while sharp motion boundaries are
allowed near object edges. Thus, object-level information
could play a key role in refining unsupervised optical flow.
Indeed, some previous methods have explored aggregating object information, using semantic segmentation to help
optical flow [21, 47, 60, 69]. However, though convenient,
the use of semantic segmentation is not precise because it
does not distinguish different instances of the same semantic class, which may have drastically different motions. It
is also constrained by the limited number of classes defined
and may not recognize novel objects in the open world.
In comparison, the latest Segment Anything Model [30]
(SAM) may be a better option. SAM is a general-purpose

19027

