This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fun with Flags: Robust Principal Directions via Flag Manifolds
Nathan Mankovich
University of Valencia

Gustau Camps-Valls
University of Valencia

Abstract
Principal component analysis (PCA), along with its extensions to manifolds and outlier contaminated data, have
been indispensable in computer vision and machine learning. In this work, we present a unifying formalism for PCA
and its variants, and introduce a framework based on the
flags of linear subspaces, i.e. a hierarchy of nested linear
subspaces of increasing dimension, which not only allows
for a common implementation but also yields novel variants, not explored previously. We begin by generalizing
traditional PCA methods that either maximize variance or
minimize reconstruction error. We expand these interpretations to develop a wide array of new dimensionality reduction algorithms by accounting for outliers and the data
manifold. To devise a common computational approach, we
recast robust and dual forms of PCA as optimization problems on flag manifolds. We then integrate tangent space approximations of principal geodesic analysis (tangent-PCA)
into this flag-based framework, creating novel robust and
dual geodesic PCA variations. The remarkable flexibility
offered by the ‘flagification’ introduced here enables even
more algorithmic variants identified by specific flag types.
Last but not least, we propose an effective convergent solver
for these flag-formulations employing the Stiefel manifold.
Our empirical results on both real-world and synthetic scenarios, demonstrate the superiority of our novel algorithms,
especially in terms of robustness to outliers on manifolds.

1. Introduction
Dimensionality reduction is at the heart of machine learning, statistics, and computer vision. Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) [27, 52] is a well-known technique for reducing the dimensionality of a dataset by linearly transforming the data into a new coordinate system where (most
of) the variation in the data can be described with fewer dimensions than the initial data. Thanks to its simplicity, effectiveness and versatility, PCA has quickly been extended
to nonlinear transforms [6, 46, 61], Riemannian manifolds [21, 37, 55] or to unknown number of subspaces [71].
These have proven indispensable for extracting meaningful
information from complex datasets.

Tolga Birdal
Imperial College London

In this paper, we present a unifying framework marrying
a large family of PCA variants such as robust PCA [36, 44,
57], dual PCA [69], PGA [63] or tangent PCA [21] specified by the norms and powers in a common objective function. Being able to accommodate all these different versions into the same framework allows us to innovate novel
ones, for example, tangent dual PCA, which poses a strong
method for outlier filtering on manifolds. We further enrich
the repertoire of available techniques by representing the
space of eigenvectors as ‘flags’ [4], a hierarchy of nested
linear subspaces, in a vein similar to [54]. This ‘flagification’ paves the way to a common computational basis, and
we show how all these formulations can be efficiently implemented via a single algorithm that performs Riemannian
optimization on Stiefel manifolds [8]. This algorithm additionally contributes to the landscape of optimization techniques for dimensionality reduction, and we prove its convergence for the particular case of dual PCA.
In summary, our contributions are:
• Generalization of PCA, PGA, and their robust versions
leading to new novel variants of these principal directions
• A unifying flag manifold-based framework for computing principal directions of (non-)Euclidean data yielding
novel (tangent) PCA formulations between L1 and L2 robust and dual principal directions controlled by flag types
• Novel weighting schemes, not only weighting the directions but also the subspaces composed of these directions.
• A practical way to optimize objectives on flags by mapping the problems into Stiefel-optimization, which removes the need to convey optimization on flag manifolds,
an issue remaining open to date [66, 77]
Our theoretical exposition translates to excellent and remarkable findings, validating the usefulness of our novel
toolkit in several applications, from outlier prediction to
shape analysis. The implementation can be found here.

2. Related Work
Our work will heavily combine PCA with flag manifolds.
PCA and its variants. Although there are many variants
of PCA [5, 11, 27–29, 61, 71, 78], we focus on certain
forms of Robust PCA (RPCA) [35, 44, 46] and Dual PCA
(DPCA) [69]. As opposed to RPCA, DPCA finds directions

330

