This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VTQA: Visual Text Question Answering via Entity Alignment and Cross-Media
Reasoning
*

Kang Chen
Xiangqian Wu
Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT)
Suzhou Research Institute of HIT
chenkangcs@stu.hit.edu.cn, xqwu@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Achieving the optimal form of Visual Question Answering
mandates a profound grasp of understanding, grounding,
and reasoning within the intersecting domains of vision
and language. Traditional VQA benchmarks have predominantly focused on simplistic tasks such as counting, visual
attributes, and object detection, which do not necessitate
intricate cross-modal information understanding and inference. Motivated by the need for a more comprehensive
evaluation, we introduce a novel dataset comprising 23,781
questions derived from 10,124 image-text pairs. Specifically, the task of this dataset requires the model to align
multimedia representations of the same entity to implement
multi-hop reasoning between image and text and finally use
natural language to answer the question. Furthermore, we
evaluate this VTQA dataset, comparing the performance of
both state-of-the-art VQA models and our proposed baseline model, the Key Entity Cross-Media Reasoning Network
(KECMRN). The VTQA task poses formidable challenges
for traditional VQA models, underscoring its intrinsic complexity. Conversely, KECMRN exhibits a modest improvement, signifying its potential in multimedia entity alignment
and multi-step reasoning. Our analysis underscores the diversity, difficulty, and scale of the VTQA task compared to
previous multimodal QA datasets. In conclusion, we anticipate that this dataset will serve as a pivotal resource
for advancing and evaluating models proficient in multimedia entity alignment, multi-step reasoning, and open-ended
answer generation. Our dataset and code is available at
https://visual-text-qa.github.io/.

1. Introduction
A paramount objective in AI research is to endow systems
with the capacity to comprehend the intricacies of the real
* corresponding author

world, akin to human understanding. Question Answering
(QA) stands out as an effective task for evaluating the cognitive capabilities of AI systems. To answer questions, people
need to extract information from multiple modalities, such
as text, images and structured data like knowledge bases,
graphs and tables. And furthermore, people need to align
the information and do multi-step reasoning between different modalities.
Although Visual Question Answering (VQA) [5] has
been widely researched as a multimedia QA task, VQA
models only extract information from image when answering questions and focus mainly on scene recognition, counting, color and other visual detection tasks, which do not
require much logical reasoning or assignment between different modalities. Only recently, there are some attempts to
introduce more modal information into VQA tasks. For example: (1) FVQA [24] and KBVQA [23] combine knowledge base (KB) with VQA task, which requires the ability
of knowledge understanding and multi-step reasoning. But
it is difficult to construct a comprehensive KB in real world,
thus limiting its ability to address open-ended questions;
(2) TextbookQA [10] and ScienceQA [14] use textbook as
data sources, involving texts, images, tables and other multimodal information. But most images in these datasets are
manually drawn schematic diagrams, and the questions are
all in a multiple-choice setting, which are far from the real
world.
To address these issues, more recently, there appear
some new datasets such as MultiModalQA [21] and MuMuQA [18], which involve reasoning across texts, images and tables. However, it’s noteworthy that all these
datasets are conducted with extracted QA. And in the MultiModalQA dataset, each image corresponds to a Wikipedia
entity, simplifying image reasoning to ranking images based
on these entities, which diminishes the necessity for crossmedia reasoning abilities. As for MuMuQA, although it requires grounding between image and text along with multihop reasoning, there are still some problems: (1) the data

27218

