This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VOODOO 3D: Volumetric Portrait Disentanglement for
One-Shot 3D Head Reenactment
Phong Tran1

Egor Zakharov2
1

MBZUAI

Long-Nhat Ho1
2

ETH Zurich

{the.tran, long.ho}@mbzuai.ac.ae

3

Source

Driver

VinAI Research

4

Liwen Hu4

Hao Li1,4

Pinscreen

anhtt152@vinai.io

liwen@pinscreen.com

Holographic Display

Anh Tuan Tran3

ezakharov@ethz.ch

hao@hao-li.com

Reenactment Geometry

Novel Views

View 1

View 2

Figure 1. We introduce VOODOO 3D: a high-fidelity 3D-aware one-shot head reenactment technique. Our method
transfers the expression of a driver to a source and produces view consistent renderings for holographic displays.

Abstract
We present a 3D-aware one-shot head reenactment
method based on a fully volumetric neural disentanglement
framework for source appearance and driver expressions.
Our method is real-time and produces high-fidelity and
view-consistent output, suitable for 3D teleconferencing
systems based on holographic displays. Existing cuttingedge 3D-aware reenactment methods often use neural radiance fields or 3D meshes to produce view-consistent appearance encoding, but, at the same time, they rely on linear face models, such as 3DMM, to achieve its disentanglement with facial expressions. As a result, their reenactment results often exhibit identity leakage from the driver
or have unnatural expressions. To address these problems,
we propose a neural self-supervised disentanglement approach that lifts both the source image and driver video
frame into a shared 3D volumetric representation based on
tri-planes. This representation can then be freely manipulated with expression tri-planes extracted from the driving
images and rendered from an arbitrary view using neural
radiance fields. We achieve this disentanglement via self-

supervised learning on a large in-the-wild video dataset.
We further introduce a highly effective fine-tuning approach
to improve the generalizability of the 3D lifting using the
same real-world data. We demonstrate state-of-the-art performance on a wide range of datasets, and also showcase
high-quality 3D-aware head reenactment on highly challenging and diverse subjects, including non-frontal head
poses and complex expressions for both source and driver.

1. Introduction
Creating 3D head avatars from a single photo is a core capability in making a wide range of consumer AR/VR and
telepresence applications more accessible, and user experiences more engaging. Graphics engine-based 3D avatar
digitization methods [9, 14, 33, 37, 46, 47, 49, 57] are suitable for today’s video games and virtual worlds, and many
commercial solutions exist (AvatarNeo [5], AvatarSDK [1],
ReadyPlayerMe [6], in3D [2], etc.). However, the photorealism achieved by modern neural head reenactment tech-

10336

