This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AlignSAM: Aligning Segment Anything Model to Open Context via
Reinforcement Learning
Duojun Huang1,2 Xinyu Xiong1 Jie Ma1 Jichang Li1,3 Zequn Jie4 Lin Ma4 Guanbin Li1,2†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
2
GuangDong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology
3
The University of Hong Kong 4 Meituan

Abstract

1. Introduction
Compared to traditional computer vision tasks [13, 24, 25,
52, 53], segmentation stands as a fundamental task, playing a pivotal role in visual understanding systems. Accord† Corresponding author is Guanbin Li. This work was supported in part
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NO. 62322608), and
in part by the Open Project Program of the Key Laboratory of Artificial
Intelligence for Perception and Understanding, Liaoning Province (AIPU,
No. 20230003).

Vision-Language Model (VLM)

Powered by massive curated training data, Segment Anything Model (SAM) has demonstrated its impressive generalization capabilities in open-world scenarios with the
guidance of prompts. However, the vanilla SAM is classagnostic and heavily relies on user-provided prompts to
segment objects of interest. Adapting this method to diverse tasks is crucial for accurate target identification and
to avoid suboptimal segmentation results. In this paper,
we propose a novel framework, termed AlignSAM, designed
for automatic prompting for aligning SAM to an open context through reinforcement learning. Anchored by an agent,
AlignSAM enables the generality of the SAM model across
diverse downstream tasks while keeping its parameters
frozen. Specifically, AlignSAM initiates a prompting agent
to iteratively refine segmentation predictions by interacting
with the foundational model. It integrates a reinforcement
learning policy network to provide informative prompts to
the foundational models. Additionally, a semantic recalibration module is introduced to provide fine-grained labels of prompts, enhancing the model’s proficiency in handling tasks encompassing explicit and implicit semantics.
Experiments conducted on various challenging segmentation tasks among existing foundation models demonstrate
the superiority of the proposed AlignSAM over state-of-theart approaches. Project page: https://github.com/
Duojun-Huang/AlignSAM-CVPR2024.

Text
Prompt

Saliency
Detection

Shadow
Detection

Blur
Detection

Glass
Detection

Agent 1

Agent 2

Agent 3

Agent 4

Segment Anything Model (SAM)

(a)
Image
SAM
Prediction

(b)

Text

Image

VLM

SAM
Prediction

(c)

Image
(Extra)
Paras

(d)

SAM

In-context
Examples

Prediction

Figure 1. Conceptual comparisons of our method and previous
approaches. Frozen and learnable parameters are highlighted in
blue and orange, respectively. (a) The proposed method. (b)
Text-guided methods [28, 46]. (c) PEFT methods [4, 59]. (d) Incontext learning methods [29, 60]. Observed that the proposed
agent-based auto-prompting effectively grasps vision and linguistic cues, unleashing the potential of the foundation segmentation
model in various contexts, such as saliency detection, shadow detection, blur detection, and glass detection.

ing to different semantic criteria for grouping pixels, various downstream segmentation tasks have emerged, such as
saliency detection [34, 50, 64], shadow detection [12, 66],
and glass-like object detection [8, 57]. Although significant progress has been achieved, the development of a unified framework that can accommodate the wide variations
inherent in the formulations of diverse segmentation tasks
continues to pose a challenge.
Recent breakthroughs in Vision Foundation Models
(VFMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities in zero-

3205

