This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MoMask: Generative Masked Modeling of 3D Human Motions
Chuan Guo⇤

Yuxuan Mu⇤

Muhammad Gohar Javed⇤
Li Cheng
University of Alberta

Sen Wang

{cguo2, ymu3, javed4, lcheng5}@ualberta.ca
https://ericguo5513.github.io/momask/

A person performs a standing back kick.

Walking forward and steps over an object,
and then continue walking.

Taking two strides forward, pivot swiftly on
left foot, and then walk the other way.

Figure 1. Our MoMask, when provided with a text input, generates high-quality 3D human motion with diversity and precise control over
subtleties such as ”two strides forward”, ”pivot on left foot”, and ”pivot swiftly”.

Abstract
We introduce MoMask, a novel masked modeling framework for text-driven 3D human motion generation. In MoMask, a hierarchical quantization scheme is employed to
represent human motion as multi-layer discrete motion tokens with high-fidelity details. Starting at the base layer,
with a sequence of motion tokens obtained by vector quantization, the residual tokens of increasing orders are derived and stored at the subsequent layers of the hierarchy. This is consequently followed by two distinct bidirectional transformers. For the base-layer motion tokens,
a Masked Transformer is designated to predict randomly
masked motion tokens conditioned on text input at training stage. During generation (i.e. inference) stage, starting from an empty sequence, our Masked Transformer iteratively fills up the missing tokens; Subsequently, a Residual
Transformer learns to progressively predict the next-layer
tokens based on the results from current layer. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MoMask outperforms the stateof-art methods on the text-to-motion generation task, with
1 These authors contributed equally to this work.

an FID of 0.045 (vs e.g. 0.141 of T2M-GPT) on the HumanML3D dataset, and 0.228 (vs 0.514) on KIT-ML, respectively. MoMask can also be seamlessly applied in related tasks without further model fine-tuning, such as textguided temporal inpainting.

1. Introduction
Generating 3D human motions from textual descriptions,
aka text-to-motion generation, is a relatively new task that
may play an important role in a broad range of applications
such as video games, metaverse, and virtual reality & augmented reality. In the past few years, it has generated intensive research interests [9, 15, 16, 21, 23, 36, 42, 49, 50].
Among them, it has become popular to engage generative
transformers in modeling human motions [13, 16, 21, 49].
In this pipeline, motions are transformed into discrete tokens through vector quantization (VQ), then fed into e.g.
an autoregressive model to generate the sequence of motion
tokens in an unidirectional order. Though achieving impressive results, these methods shares two innate drawbacks. To
begin with, the VQ process inevitably introduces approxi-

1900

