This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ConsistNet: Enforcing 3D Consistency for Multi-view Images Diffusion
Jiayu Yang1,2 , Ziang Cheng1,2 , Yunfei Duan1 , Pan Ji1 , Hongdong Li2
1
Tencent, 2 Australian National University
{jiayu.yang, ziang.cheng, hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au,
kownseduan@global.tencent.com, panji@tencent.com

Input image

3D consistent images generated by ConsistNet + Zero123-XL [22]

Figure 1. We present ConsistNet, a plug-in module for image diffusion models like Zero123-XL [7] to generate multi-view consistent
images. The ConsistNet is designed to be lightweight and efficient, allowing Zero123-XL [7] to generate 16 multi-view consistent images
in 11 seconds, which is 10x faster than recent competing method [23].

Abstract
Given a single image of a 3D object, this paper proposes
a novel method (named ConsistNet) that can generate multiple images of the same object, as if they are captured from
different viewpoints, while the 3D (multi-view) consistencies among those multiple generated images are effectively
exploited. Central to our method is a lightweight multi-view
consistency block that enables information exchange across
multiple single-view diffusion processes based on the underlying multi-view geometry principles. ConsistNet is an
extension to the standard latent diffusion model and it consists of two submodules: (a) a view aggregation module that
unprojects multi-view features into global 3D volumes and
infers consistency, and (b) a ray aggregation module that
samples and aggregates 3D consistent features back to each
view to enforce consistency. Our approach departs from
previous methods in multi-view image generation, in that it
can be easily dropped in pre-trained LDMs without requir-

ing explicit pixel correspondences or depth prediction. Experiments show that our method effectively learns 3D consistency over a frozen Zero123-XL backbone and can generate 16 surrounding views of the object within 11 seconds
on a single A100 GPU. Our code will be made available on
https://github.com/JiayuYANG/ConsistNet.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in the Latent Diffusion Models
(LDM) [1, 28] for image generation have brought about remarkable success in generating high-quality images with
compelling details. However, when applied to generate
multiple-view images of the same object, vanilla LDMs are
unable to ensure the 3D-consistencies among the generated
multiple images. This is primarily due to the lack of mechanisms to enforce such 3D consistency information among

7079

