This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalizable Novel-View Synthesis using a Stereo Camera
Haechan Lee1,∗

Wonjoon Jin2,∗

Seung-Hwan Baek1,2

Sunghyun Cho1,2

POSTECH 1 GSAI & 2 CSE

near

{gocks8, jinwj1996, shwbaek, s.cho}@postech.ac.kr

In this paper, we propose the first generalizable view synthesis approach that specifically targets multi-view stereocamera images. Since recent stereo matching has demonstrated accurate geometry prediction, we introduce stereo
matching into novel-view synthesis for high-quality geometry reconstruction. To this end, this paper proposes a novel
framework, dubbed StereoNeRF, which integrates stereo
matching into a NeRF-based generalizable view synthesis
approach. StereoNeRF is equipped with three key components to effectively exploit stereo matching in novel-view
synthesis: a stereo feature extractor, a depth-guided planesweeping, and a stereo depth loss. Moreover, we propose
the StereoNVS dataset, the first multi-view dataset of stereocamera images, encompassing a wide variety of both real
and synthetic scenes. Our experimental results demonstrate
that StereoNeRF surpasses previous approaches in generalizable view synthesis.

1. Introduction
Novel-view synthesis is a long-standing ill-posed problem
in computer vision and graphics, which is inherently challenging due to the necessity of predicting both the geometry
and texture from images of a target scene. Recently, Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [24] have achieved photorealistic
results by jointly optimizing geometry and radiance fields
with a coordinate-based network. However, the need for
per-scene optimization, which has to learn representations
for each target scene individually, restricts its applicability,
as it requires additional training time for such optimization.
Recent approaches [2, 4, 16, 21, 30, 32, 33, 38] have
addressed this issue of synthesizing novel-view images onthe-fly for unseen scenes without per-scene optimization.
Early studies [4, 33, 38] utilize an image encoder to train a
generic view interpolation function, enabling the estimation
of NeRF parameters from unseen input images in a feedforward manner. However, this single feed-forward manner for estimating geometry and color exacerbates the ill∗ Equal contribution.

far

Abstract

(a) Baseline

(b) Baseline

(c) Ours

(using stereo images)

(using stereo images)

Figure 1. Novel-view synthesis results of a baseline method [16]
and ours. The baseline shows degraded performances, even trained
using stereo-camera images (b). In contrast, fully exploiting
stereo-camera images, our method shows superior results (c).

posedness, resulting in low-quality geometries and rendering results. For better geometry reasoning, MVSNeRF [2]
and GeoNeRF [16] leverage the multi-view stereo (MVS)
approach to handle occlusions in a 3D scene. Nonetheless,
they struggle with inaccurate geometry prediction and limited synthesis accuracy, as shown in the synthesis result of
GeoNeRF (Fig. 1 (a)).
To tackle this challenge, we propose the first generalizable NeRF approach that leverages stereo-camera images, which are easily accessible thanks to the ubiquity of
stereo cameras in most mobile devices. Recent advance in
learning-based stereo estimation has demonstrated accurate
geometry prediction, often even outperforming learningbased MVS methods as shown in Fig. 2. The superior performance of stereo estimation can be attributed to several
key factors. First, unlike MVS that assumes arbitrary number of inputs with arbitrary camera positions and orientations, stereo matching assumes two stereo inputs with
a fixed baseline. This constraint allows a more optimal
network architecture that can effectively find dense correspondences between input images, and significantly eases
the training difficulty. Moreover, larger scale of stereomatching datasets [12, 23, 27] compared to MVS datasets
has facilitated remarkable generalization capabilities in
stereo estimation network. Therefore, we aim to harness
this accurate geometric information from stereo images to
alleviate the ill-posedness of generalizable view synthesis.

4939

