This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An N-Point Linear Solver for Line and Motion Estimation with Event Cameras
Ling Gao1 * Daniel Gehrig2 * Hang Su1

Davide Scaramuzza2

Laurent Kneip1

1

2

Mobile Perception Lab, ShanghaiTech University, China
Robotics and Perception Group, University of Zurich, Switzerland

Abstract
Event cameras respond primarily to edges—formed by
strong gradients—and are thus particularly well-suited for
line-based motion estimation. Recent work has shown that
events generated by a single line each satisfy a polynomial
constraint which describes a manifold in the space-time
volume. Multiple such constraints can be solved simultaneously to recover the partial linear velocity and line parameters. In this work, we show that, with a suitable line
parametrization, this system of constraints is actually linear in the unknowns, which allows us to design a novel linear solver. Unlike existing solvers, our linear solver (i) is
fast and numerically stable since it does not rely on expensive root finding, (ii) can solve both minimal and overdetermined systems with more than 5 events (i.e. N ≥ 5),
and (iii) admits the characterization of all degenerate cases
and multiple solutions. The found line parameters are
singularity-free and have a fixed scale, which eliminates the
need for auxiliary constraints typically encountered in previous work. To recover the full linear camera velocity we
fuse observations from multiple lines with a novel velocity
averaging scheme that relies on a geometrically-motivated
residual, and thus solves the problem more efficiently than
previous schemes which minimize an algebraic residual.
Extensive experiments in synthetic and real-world settings
demonstrate that our method surpasses the previous work
in numerical stability, and operates over 600 times faster.
Project page: https://mgaoling.github.io/eventail/

1. Introduction
Man-made scenes contain a multitude of straight lines, and
exploiting these lines for motion estimation is an important feature of modern mobile vision systems like AR/VR
devices and robotic systems [17, 23, 25, 42]. However,
computer vision algorithms aimed at leveraging these line
features still suffer from fundamental limitations when using standard frame-based sensing: During high-speed motion and challenging illumination conditions, these sensors
* indicates equal contribution

suffer from motion blur and saturation effects, which have
deleterious effects on line feature extraction. Event cameras [10] are biologically inspired sensors that address the
limitation of frame-based sensors by instead only measuring the changes in intensity at a per-pixel level, and they do
this with high dynamic range, low motion blur, high temporal resolution, and high spatial data-sparsity.
Due to their working principle, event cameras respond
primarily to edges—formed by strong gradients—and are
thus particularly well-suited for line-based motion estimation. A recent breakthrough [12] in event-based motion
estimation introduced an incidence relation that enforces
the intersection of bearing vectors emitted by events and
a corresponding line that generates those events. Using
this relation, a 5-point minimal solver was designed that
recovers the parameters of a minimal two-point-two-plane
parametrization of the line and two velocity ratios in the
plane perpendicular to the line, using the Gröbner basis
method and polynomial elimination theory. However, this
solver suffers from several limitations: First, it relies on a
non-minimal line representation using four degrees of freedom (DoF) that (i) fails to realize that, in the absence of
scale, only three DoF are needed, and (ii) encounters singularities when describing lines parallel to the two planes.
Secondly, to solve for the motion and line parameters, previous work employs a polynomial solver, which (i) is by definition minimal and thus incapable of incorporating more
than five events, and (ii) relies on root finding algorithms
that are expensive to run and suffer from instabilities that
are not easily detected.
This work addresses these limitations with two important
innovations: First, it introduces a new line representation
based on the angle-axis representation of a rotation matrix,
which is singularity-free and only depends on three DoF and
thus implicitly enforces scale ambiguity. Second, in formulating the incidence relation with this new parametrization,
we derive a simple algorithm for determining motion and
line parameters that only relies on solving a linear system
and simple vector operations and is thus orders of magnitude faster than the polynomial solver in [12]. This linear
system is easily extended to N > 5 events, with a minimal increase in complexity, which enables solution refine-

14596

