This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Universal Robustness via Median Randomized Smoothing for Real-World
Super-Resolution
Zakariya Chaouai

Mohamed Tamaazousti

zakariya.chaouai@cea.fr

mohamed.tamaazousti@cea.fr

Université Paris-Saclay, CEA, List, F-91120, Palaiseau, France

Abstract
Most of the recent literature on image Super-Resolution
(SR) can be classified into two main approaches. The first
one involves learning a corruption model tailored to a specific dataset, aiming to mimic the noise and corruption in
low-resolution images, such as sensor noise. However, this
approach is data-specific, tends to lack adaptability, and its
accuracy diminishes when faced with unseen types of image
corruptions. A second and more recent approach, referred
to as Robust Super-Resolution (RSR), proposes to improve
real-world SR by harnessing the generalization capabilities
of a model by making it robust to adversarial attacks. To
delve further into this second approach, our paper explores
the universality of various methods for enhancing the robustness of deep learning SR models. In other words, we
inquire: “Which robustness method exhibits the highest degree of adaptability when dealing with a wide range of adversarial attacks ?”. Our extensive experimentation on both
synthetic and real-world images empirically demonstrates
that median randomized smoothing (MRS) is more general
in terms of robustness compared to adversarial learning
techniques, which tend to focus on specific types of attacks.
Furthermore, as expected, we also illustrate that the proposed universal robust method enables the SR model to handle standard corruptions more effectively, such as blur and
Gaussian noise, and notably, corruptions naturally present
in real-world images. These results support the significance
of shifting the paradigm in the development of real-world
SR methods towards RSR, especially via MRS.

1. Introduction
The aim of single-image super-resolution (SISR) is to improve the resolution of a given low-resolution (LR) image,
by producing a high-resolution (HR) image that is clear and
without artifacts. SISR is widely used in a range of realworld applications, such as oceanography [9], surveillance
[35], and medical images [12]. However, super-resolving

an image poses a considerable challenge due to the ill-posed
nature of the problem, since multiple HR solutions can correspond to a single LR image. There are several well-known
methods for scaling high-resolution images, such as linear
interpolation methods [17] or the estimation of covariance
or correlation in LR data [2, 23]. Unfortunately, these methods often produce results that appear blurred, noisy and
have difficulty in faithfully capturing high-frequency image
details.
In recent years, SISR methods based on deep neural networks (DNNs) have made considerable progress [8, 21, 29,
33, 37] and offer much better quality for the upscaled image. Despite this progress, DNNs have been shown to be
vulnerable to adversarial attacks, whether in classification
[11, 27, 31] or in SR [6, 7] (see Figure 1). The inevitability
and universality of adversarial examples is rooted in their
definition. It is possible to systematically introduce additive perturbations into the input, causing the model to misclassify an example. The susceptibility to adversarial inputs
poses a potential issue, hindering the application of deep
learning methods in security and safety-critical contexts. It
is important to note that even state-of-the-art SR models
[24, 37] tend to perform poorly on real-world images that
contain some corruption or amount of sensor noise. Since
the majority of SR models are trained in a supervised way,
requiring matching pairs of HR and LR images, LR images
are typically generated from HR images by using bicubic
downscaling.
The recognition of this constraint spurred the investigation of real-world SR on datasets with synthetic and natural corruptions. Several benchmarks [25, 26] design realworld artifacts and corruptions under different assumptions
or from varying sensors. Consequently, some methods in
real-world SR [10, 14] generate photo-realistic results only
when they are evaluated on a specific dataset for which they
were trained, but they fail to generalize to new datasets with
unseen corruptions. A more recent approach, Castillo et al.
[4], referred to as Robust Super-Resolution (RSR), proposes
to improve real-world SR by harnessing the generalization
capabilities of a model, making it robust to unseen noise by

9059

