This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Plug-and-Play Diffusion Distillation
Yi-Ting Hsiao1,2*, Siavash Khodadadeh2 , Kevin Duarte2 , Wei-An Lin2 , Hui Qu2
Mingi Kwon2*,3 , Ratheesh Kalarot2
1

University of Michigan

2

Adobe Inc. (ASML)

3

Yonsei University

Abstract
Diffusion models have shown tremendous results in image generation. However, due to the iterative nature of the
diffusion process and its reliance on classifier-free guidance, inference times are slow. In this paper, we propose a new distillation approach for guided diffusion models in which an external lightweight guide model is trained
while the original text-to-image model remains frozen.We
show that our method reduces the inference computation of
classifier-free guided latent-space diffusion models by almost half, and only requires 1% trainable parameters of the
base model. Furthermore, once trained, our guide model
can be applied to various fine-tuned, domain-specific versions of the base diffusion model without the need for additional training: this ”plug-and-play” functionality drastically improves inference computation while maintaining the
visual fidelity of generated images. Empirically, we show
that our approach is able to produce visually appealing results and achieve a comparable FID score to the teacher
with as few as 8 to 16 steps.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [5, 24, 25] represent a novel category
of generative models that have shown remarkable performance on a variety of established benchmarks in generative modeling. Specifically, conditional diffusion models
[17] emerged with significantly improved sample quality by
classifier-free guidance (CFG) [4].
However, the sampling speed of diffusion models stands
out as a significant obstacle to their adoption in practical
scenarios [20]. Specifically, the process of iteratively reducing noise in images typically requires a considerable
number of iterations, posing challenges for efficient execution. For example, even when using widely adopted stateof-the-art diffusion models such as Stable Diffusion [17],
more than 20 denoising steps are required to generate highquality images. Moreover, when applying classifier-free
* Work done during internships at Adobe Inc.

❄
,∅

𝑔

,“text”

,“text”

𝑔

“text”

(a) Classifier free guidance

Domain A

Guide model

🔥

(b) Our method

Domain B

Domain C

(c) Plug-and-Play to various base models

Figure 1. We trained a guide model to replace classifier-free guidance that can be plug-and-play to other base models with different
domains.

guidance, two forward passes — one for the conditioned
and another for the unconditioned diffusion model — are
needed per denoising step, further increasing the computational cost.
One standard approach to address the speed issues is
through distillation, where a student model, initialized with
the weights of the teacher diffusion model, is trained to
regress to the output of the teacher that runs for multiple
denoising steps [11, 21]. However, the standard diffusion
distillation approach has the following limitations. First,
the number of trainable parameters of the student model is
the same (or comparable) as that of the teacher diffusion
model. But recent state-of-the-art diffusion models such as
Imagen [19], eDiff-I [1], and SDXL [14] often have billions
of parameters, and distilling these large models requires a
tremendous amount of computation. Second, it has been
shown that diffusion models can be finetuned to different
domains. When finetuned on a collection of customized
images, diffusion models can be adapted to generate content with novel structures and aesthetic styles. When finetuned with only a few images, prior work has shown that
novel concepts can be learned [18]. However, with standard
distillation on the base model, these finetuned models are
no longer applicable. Re-training on the distilled student

13743

