This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SHINOBI: Shape and Illumination using Neural Object Decomposition via
BRDF Optimization In-the-wild
Andreas Engelhardt†
University of Tübingen
Abhishek Kar
Google Research

Yuanzhen Li
Google Research

Jonathan T. Barron
Google Research

Yunzhi Zhang†
Stanford University

Mark Boss∗
Unity

Amit Raj
Google Research

Deqing Sun
Google Research

Hendrik P. A. Lensch
University of Tübingen

Ricardo Martin Brualla
Google Research
Varun Jampani∗
Google Research

Normals

Illumination

…

Neural Volume
& Camera Parameters

In-the-wild images

Basecolor
Decomposition

Metallic

Roughness

Figure 1. Object reconstruction using SHINOBI. SHINOBI decomposes challenging in-the-wild image collections into shape, material
and illumination using a neural field representation while also optimizing camera parameters. Visit the project page at Project page:
https://shinobi.aengelhardt.com

Abstract
We present SHINOBI, an end-to-end framework for the reconstruction of shape, material, and illumination from object
images captured with varying lighting, pose, and background.
Inverse rendering of an object based on unconstrained image
collections is a long-standing challenge in computer vision
and graphics and requires a joint optimization over shape,
radiance, and pose. We show that an implicit shape representation based on a multi-resolution hash encoding enables
faster and robust shape reconstruction with joint camera
alignment optimization that outperforms prior work. Further,
to enable the editing of illumination and object reflectance
* Current affiliation is Stability AI.
† Work done during a Student Researcher position at Google.

(i.e. material) we jointly optimize BRDF and illumination together with the object’s shape. Our method is class-agnostic
and works on in-the-wild image collections of objects to
produce relightable 3D assets for several use cases such as
AR/VR, movies, games, etc.

1. Introduction
We present a category-agnostic technique to jointly reconstruct 3D shape and material properties of objects from unconstrained in-the-wild image collections. This data regime
poses multiple challenges as images are captured in different
environments using a variety of devices resulting in varying backgrounds, illumination, camera poses, and intrinsics.
In addition, camera baselines tend to be large. Fig. 1 (left)
shows examples from an input image set. Many graphics

19636

