This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Quality of Compressed Images by Mitigating Enhancement Bias
Towards Compression Domain
Qunliang Xing1 , Mai Xu1, *, Shengxi Li1 , Xin Deng1 , Meisong Zheng, Huaida Liu, Ying Chen
1
Beihang University

Abstract
Existing quality enhancement methods for compressed
images focus on aligning the enhancement domain with the
raw domain to yield realistic images. However, these methods exhibit a pervasive enhancement bias towards the compression domain, inadvertently regarding it as more realistic than the raw domain. This bias makes enhanced images closely resemble their compressed counterparts, thus
degrading their perceptual quality. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective method to mitigate this bias and
enhance the quality of compressed images. Our method employs a conditional discriminator with the compressed image as a key condition, and then incorporates a domaindivergence regularization to actively distance the enhancement domain from the compression domain. Through
this dual strategy, our method enables the discrimination
against the compression domain, and brings the enhancement domain closer to the raw domain. Comprehensive
quality evaluations confirm the superiority of our method
over other state-of-the-art methods without incurring inference overheads.

1. Introduction
With the emergence of the big data era, we have been witnessing an explosive growth in images and videos. According to statistics from Domo [19], Instagram users shared
approximately 66 thousand images every minute in 2022,
marking an 18.3-fold increase over the past decade (i.e.,
3.6 thousand in 2013). Similar trends have been observed on other internet servers, including WeChat and
Twitter. To efficiently store and transmit this vast volume of images, several lossy image compression standards
have been developed, such as joint photographic experts
group (JPEG) [40], JPEG 2000 [27], and high-efficiency
video coding (HEVC) [37]. However, images compressed
with these standards inevitably suffer from compression artifacts, such as the effects of ringing, blocking, and blur* Corresponding author.

Enh. domain
Ours with [44]

Enh. domain [44]
6.13

Biased

Comp. domain

Compressed

10.58
9.73

9.36 Debiased 8.77

Raw domain

Comp. domain

[44]

Ours with [44]

9.73

Raw domain

Raw

Figure 1. Top: Frechet inception distance (FID) [18] scores between enhancement, compression, and raw domains on the DIV2K
validation set [1]. Bottom: Visualization of residual to the compressed image. The results illustrate the enhancement bias towards
the compression domain. Our method effectively mitigates this
bias, bringing the enhancement domain closer to the raw domain.1

ring [34]. These artifacts may significantly degrade the
quality of user experience (QoE) [20, 33].
To address the issue of quality degradation, a series of
methods have been proposed to enhance the quality of compressed images. Unfortunately, the majority of these methods [11, 15, 42, 45, 47, 48, 54] focus on improving pixelwise fidelity, limited in generating realistic textures as noted
by Blau et al. [6]. In response to this limitation, several methods [12, 23] have ventured into enhancing perceptual quality by predominantly leveraging perception-driven
super-resolution (SR) baselines that employ generative adversarial networks (GANs) [13]. By iteratively training
a discriminator and a generator, the discriminator is optimized to discriminate between the enhancement and raw
domains, and then guides the generator to produce realistic
enhancement-domain images.
In fact, existing methods focus on aligning the enhancement domain with the raw domain, neglecting the crucial
1 Three image domains correspond to the distributions of enhanced, raw,
and compressed images. Distances between domains are represented in
triangle plots, adhering to the triangle inequality [46] in our practice.

25501

