This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Material Palette: Extraction of Materials from a Single Image
Ivan Lopes1 Fabio Pizzati2 Raoul de Charette1
1
2
Inria
University of Oxford
https://astra-vision.github.io/MaterialPalette

Figure 1. Material Palette. We introduce the task of material extraction from a single real-world image without any prior knowledge.
Given an image as input (left and right), our method extracts Physically-Based Rendering (PBR) materials from input regions, which are
either provided by a user (right) or output of a segmenter such as SAM [25] (left). The extracted Spatially Varying BRDF (SVBRDFs)
encode material intrinsics (Albedo\Normal\Roughness). These can be reused for realistic material editing of 3D scenes (center).

Abstract
Physically-Based Rendering (PBR) is key to modeling
the interaction between light and materials, and finds extensive applications across computer graphics domains. However, acquiring PBR materials is costly and requires special
apparatus. In this paper, we propose a method to extract
PBR materials from a single real-world image. We do so
in two steps: first, we map regions of the image to material concept tokens using a diffusion model, allowing the
sampling of texture images resembling each material in the
scene. Second, we leverage a separate network to decompose the generated textures into spatially varying BRDFs
(SVBRDFs), offering us readily usable materials for rendering applications. Our approach relies on existing synthetic material libraries with SVBRDF ground truth. It
exploits a diffusion-generated RGB texture dataset to allow generalization to new samples using unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA). Our contributions are thoroughly
evaluated on synthetic and real-world datasets. We further demonstrate the applicability of our method for editing
3D scenes with materials estimated from real photographs.
Along with video, we share code and models as open-source
on the project page: https://github.com/astravision/MaterialPalette

1. Introduction
Whether it is a soft blanket, a rugged carpet, or a crumbling
stone, humans can identify materials from a photograph.
Besides geometry understanding, this ability derives from
our sensing of how light interacts with materials, allowing
us to identify the substance at stake without even touching
it. In sciences, this has pushed research in spectrophotometry [18] or light sensing [4], while in the arts Vermeers
and Caravaggio, among others, have used this long standing observation to convey the feeling of materials in their
paintings. Modern CG artists also deploy significant efforts to mimic realistic light-material interaction, through
the design of Physically-Based Rendering (PBR) materials.
While many libraries of material assets exist, no dataset can
capture the true variety of real-world materials. What is
more, capturing real-world materials is still a complex endeavor requiring special apparatus [2]. In many scenarios,
however, one may wish to estimate a material from an RGB
image, for example, to capture a unique marble stone during
a trip or the fur of a wild animal from a souvenir photo.
Hence, we formulate the novel task of extracting PBR
materials from a single real-world image, as shown in
Fig. 1. Given a set of regions, our method solves this task by
generating corresponding textures along with their Spatially
Varying BRDFs (SVBRDFs) without a priori knowledge
about the capturing viewpoint, scene geometry or lighting.

4379

