This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffMorpher: Unleashing the Capability of Diffusion Models for
Image Morphing
Kaiwen Zhang1,2*
1

Tsinghua University

Yifan Zhou3
2

Xudong Xu2
3

Shanghai AI Laboratory

Bo Dai2

Xingang Pan3

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

Project page: https://kevin-thu.github.io/DiffMorpher page/
Generated intermediate images

Input A

Input B

Figure 1. Given two input images, our approach can generate a sequence of intermediate images, delivering a smooth and natural transition
between them. This is achieved purely by harnessing the prior knowledge of a pre-trained diffusion model, i.e., Stable Diffusion [33].

Abstract
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable image generation quality surpassing previous generative models.
However, a notable limitation of diffusion models, in comparison to GANs, is their difficulty in smoothly interpolating
between two image samples, due to their highly unstructured latent space. Such a smooth interpolation is intriguing as it naturally serves as a solution for the image morphing task with many applications. In this work, we address this limitation via DiffMorpher, an approach that enables smooth and natural image interpolation by harnessing the prior knowledge of a pre-trained diffusion model.
Our key idea is to capture the semantics of the two images
by fitting two LoRAs to them respectively, and interpolate
between both the LoRA parameters and the latent noises
* Work done during internship at Shanghai AI Laboratory.

Corresponding Author.

to ensure a smooth semantic transition, where correspondence automatically emerges without the need for annotation. In addition, we propose an attention interpolation and
injection technique, an adaptive normalization adjustment
method, and a new sampling schedule to further enhance
the smoothness between consecutive images. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DiffMorpher achieves starkly
better image morphing effects than previous methods across
a variety of object categories, bridging a critical functional
gap that distinguished diffusion models from GANs.

1. Introduction
Image morphing [1, 49, 54] is a popular technique for image transformation, lying at the intersection of computer vision and computer graphics with continuous attention over
decades. Given two images of topologically similar objects
and optionally a set of correspondence key points, a morphing process generates a sequence of reasonable interme-

7912

