This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

I’M HOI: Inertia-aware Monocular Capture of 3D Human-Object Interactions
Chengfeng Zhao1

Juze Zhang1,2,3
Jiashen Du1
Ziwei Shan1
Junye Wang1
Jingyi Yu1
Jingya Wang1
Lan Xu1,†
1
2
ShanghaiTech University Shanghai Advanced Research Institute, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zhaochf2022,zhangjz,dujsh2022,shanzw2022,wangjy22022,yujingyi,wangjingya,xulan1}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Figure 1. Taking a monocular RGB video and a single inertial measurement unit (IMU) sensor recording, our approach, I’m-HOI, efficiently
and robustly captures challenging and dynamic human-object interactions (HOI), such as skateboarding.

Abstract
We are living in a world surrounded by diverse and “smart”
devices with rich modalities of sensing ability. Conveniently
capturing the interactions between us humans and these
objects remains far-reaching. In this paper, we present I’mHOI, a monocular scheme to faithfully capture the 3D motions of both the human and object in a novel setting: using
a minimal amount of RGB camera and object-mounted Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU). It combines general motion
inference and category-aware refinement. For the former,
we introduce a holistic human-object tracking method to
fuse the IMU signals and the RGB stream and progressively
recover the human motions and subsequently the companion
object motions. For the latter, we tailor a category-aware
motion diffusion model, which is conditioned on both the raw
IMU observations and the results from the previous stage
under over-parameterization representation. It significantly
refines the initial results and generates vivid body, hand, and
object motions. Moreover, we contribute a large dataset
with ground truth human and object motions, dense RGB
† Corresponding author

inputs, and rich object-mounted IMU measurements. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of I’m-HOI
under a hybrid capture setting. Our dataset and code will
be released to the community.

1. Introduction
Capturing human-object interactions (HOI) is essential to
understanding how we humans connect with the surrounding
world, with numerous applications in robotics, gaming, or
VR/AR. Yet, an accurate and convenient solution remains
challenging in the vision community.
For high-fidelity capture of human-object interactions,
early high-end solutions [6, 9, 29] require dense cameras,
while recent approaches [4, 10, 26, 70] require less RGB
or RGBD video inputs (from 3 to 8 views). Yet, such a
multi-view setting is still undesirable for consumer-level
daily usage. Instead, the monocular method with more handiest captured devices is more attractive. Specifically, most
recent methods [80, 82, 83, 101, 104] track the rigid and
skeletal motions of objects and humans using a pre-scanned
template or parametric model [46] from a single RGB video
input. Yet, inherently due to the RGB-setting, they remain

729

