This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaxQ: Multi-Axis Query for N:M Sparsity Network
Jingyang Xiang1

Siqi Li1
Junhao Chen1
Zhuangzhi Chen2
Tianxin Huang1
Linpeng Peng1
Yong Liu1 *
1
APRIL Lab, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China
2
IVSN, Zhejiang University of Technology, Hangzhou, China

Abstract
N:M sparsity has received increasing attention due to
its remarkable performance and latency trade-off compared with structured and unstructured sparsity. However, existing N:M sparsity methods do not differentiate
the relative importance of weights among blocks and leave
important weights underappreciated. Besides, they directly apply N:M sparsity to the whole network, which will
cause severe information loss. Thus, they are still suboptimal. In this paper, we propose an efficient and effective Multi-Axis Query methodology, dubbed as MaxQ, to
rectify these problems. During the training, MaxQ employs a dynamic approach to generate soft N:M masks,
considering the weight importance across multiple axes.
This method enhances the weights with more importance
and ensures more effective updates. Meanwhile, a sparsity strategy that gradually increases the percentage of
N:M weight blocks is applied, which allows the network
to heal from the pruning-induced damage progressively.
During the runtime, the N:M soft masks can be precomputed as constants and folded into weights without causing any distortion to the sparse pattern and incurring additional computational overhead. Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that MaxQ achieves consistent improvements across diverse CNN architectures in various computer vision tasks, including image classification, object
detection and instance segmentation. For ResNet50 with
1:16 sparse pattern, MaxQ can achieve 74.6% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet and improve by over 2.8% over the
state-of-the-art. Codes and checkpoints are available at
https://github.com/JingyangXiang/MaxQ.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved
great success in various computer vision tasks, including
image classification [17, 39], object detection [12, 18], se* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Comparison of the accuracy-sparse pattern Pareto curve
of the ResNet50 on ImageNet. MaxQ shows the top-performing
Pareto frontier compared with previous N:M sparsity methods [1,
25, 44, 45].

mantic segmentation [7, 13]. However, the expensive memory and computational overhead have presented challenges
for deploying them on mobile or edge devices. Therefore, it
is vital to study the network compression to reduce its runtime overhead while maximally retaining its performance.
Among the many compression methods [15, 22, 24, 33,
37], network sparsity stands out as a highly effective tool
for achieving practical memory and FLOPs saving. Most
researchers have paid their attention to structured sparsity [20, 21, 30] and unstructured sparsity [16, 28]. However, both of them have certain shortcomings in terms of
performance and acceleration, limiting their application.
How to realize a better trade-off remains an open problem,
as it hinges on factors like the granularity of sparsity and
hardware design.
Recently, N:M sparsity [35], a fine-grained sparsity pattern, is considered a highly promising solution. It can
achieve a better trade-off between performance and latency
compared to structured and unstructured sparsity thanks to
its hardware and software co-design [29, 35]. Several studies have enhanced the performance of N:M sparsity. The
pioneer work ASP [35] proposes to remove the two weights

15845

