This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Correlation Clustering and Tree Preserving Embedding
Morteza Haghir Chehreghani
Chalmers University of Technology
Gothenburg, Sweden

Mostafa Haghir Chehreghani
Amirkabir University of Technology (Tehran Polytechnic)
Tehran, Iran

morteza.chehreghani@chalmers.se

mostafa.chehreghani@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a hierarchical correlation clustering method
that extends the well-known correlation clustering to produce hierarchical clusters applicable to both positive and
negative pairwise dissimilarities. Then, in the following, we
study unsupervised representation learning with such hierarchical correlation clustering. For this purpose, we first investigate embedding the respective hierarchy to be used for
tree preserving embedding and feature extraction. Thereafter, we study the extension of minimax distance measures
to correlation clustering, as another representation learning paradigm. Finally, we demonstrate the performance of
our methods on several datasets.

1. Introduction
Data clustering plays an essential role in unsupervised
learning and exploratory data analysis. It is used in a variety of applications including web mining, network analysis, image segmentation, bioinformatics, user analytics and
knowledge management. Its goal is to partition the data into
groups in a way that the objects in the same cluster are more
similar according to some criterion, compared to the objects
in different clusters.
Many clustering methods partition the data into K flat
clusters for example, K-means [55], spectral clustering
[62,68] and correlation clustering [8]. In many applications,
however, the clusters are preferred to be presented at different levels, encompassing both high-level and detailed information. Hierarchical clustering is useful to produce such
structures, usually encoded by a dendrogram. A dendrogram is a tree data structure where each node corresponds
to a cluster, with the leaf nodes (those at the bottom of the
tree) containing only one object. Higher-level clusters are
formed by aggregating lower-level clusters and the intercluster dissimilarity between them.
Hierarchical clustering can be performed either in an agglomerative (i.e., bottom-up) or in a divisive (i.e., top-down)
manner [56]. Agglomerative methods are often computa-

tionally more efficient, making them more popular in practice [64]. In both approaches, the clusters are aggregated or
split based on various criteria, such as single, average, centroid, complete and Ward. Several studies aim to improve
these methods. The works in [49,52] focus on the statistical
significance of hierarchical clustering. [24,25,65] formulate
this problem as an optimization problem and propose approximate solutions. [82] considers multiple dissimilarities
for a pair of clusters, and [11, 17] suggest merging multiple clusters at each step instead of one. [6] employs global
information to eliminate the influence of noisy similarities,
and [19] proposes to apply agglomerative methods to small
subsets of the data instead of individual data objects. [33,38]
augment agglomerative methods with probabilistic models,
and finally, [23,60] propose efficient but approximate methods for hierarchical clustering.
On the other hand, most clustering methods, either flat or hierarchical, assume non-negative pairwise
(dis)similarities. However, in several practical applications,
pairwise similarities can be any real number, positive or
negative. For example, it could be preferable for a user or
oracle to indicate whether two objects are similar (considered a positive relation) or dissimilar (considered a negative relation), rather than solely providing a positive (nonnegative) pairwise similarity, even if the two objects are dissimilar. The former approach yields more precise information because, in the latter scenario, the dissimilarity between
two objects (i.e., zero similarity) could be confused with a
lack of available information. Some relevant applications
for this setting include image segmentation with higher order correlation information [47, 48], webpage segmentation
[12], community detection over graphs [67], social media
mining [73], analysis of connections over web [43], dealing
with attraction/rejection data [26], automated label generation from clicks [3] and entity resolution [7, 34].
Hence, a specialized clustering model known as correlation clustering has been developed to work with such data.
This model was first introduced on the graphs with only
+1 or −1 pairwise similarities [7, 8], and then was generalized to the graphs with arbitrary positive or negative

23083

