This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Surveillance Video-and-Language Understanding: New Dataset,
Baselines, and Challenges

1

Tongtong Yuan1 , Xuange Zhang1 , Kun Liu2 , Bo Liu1 *, Chen Chen3 , Jian Jin4 , Zhenzhen Jiao5
Beijing University of Technology, CN 2 Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, CN
3
Center for Research in Computer Vision, University of Central Florida, USA
4
Institute of Industrial Internet of Things, CAICT, CN
5
Beijing Teleinfo Technology Co., Ltd., CAICT, CN
{yuantt, liubo}@bjut.edu.cn, szxg923@emails.bjut.edu.cn, liu_kun@bupt.cn,
chen.chen@crcv.ucf.edu, jin.jian@caict.ac.cn, jiaozhenzhen@teleinfo.cn

Abstract
Surveillance videos are important for public security.
However, current surveillance video tasks mainly focus on
classifying and localizing anomalous events. Existing methods are limited to detecting and classifying the predefined
events with unsatisfactory semantic understanding, although
they have obtained considerable performance. To address
this issue, we propose a new research direction of surveillance video-and-language understanding (VALU), and construct the first multimodal surveillance video dataset. We
manually annotate the real-world surveillance dataset UCFCrime with fine-grained event content and timing. Our newly
annotated dataset, UCA (UCF-Crime Annotation)1 , contains
23,542 sentences, with an average length of 20 words, and its
annotated videos are as long as 110.7 hours. Furthermore,
we benchmark SOTA models for four multimodal tasks on
this newly created dataset, which serve as new baselines for
surveillance VALU. Through experiments, we find that mainstream models used in previously public datasets perform
poorly on surveillance video, demonstrating new challenges
in surveillance VALU. We also conducted experiments on
multimodal anomaly detection. These results demonstrate
that our multimodal surveillance learning can improve the
performance of anomaly detection. All the experiments highlight the necessity of constructing this dataset to advance
surveillance AI.

1. Introduction
Surveillance videos are crucial and indispensable for public
security. In recent years, various surveillance-video-oriented
* corresponding author
1 The dataset is provided at https://xuange923.github.io/

Surveillance-Video-Understanding.

Figure 1. Annotation examples in our UCA dataset, including finegrained sentence queries and the corresponding timing.

tasks have been widely studied, e.g., anomaly detection,
anomalous/human action recognition, etc. However, the
existing surveillance video datasets [20, 25, 26, 38] just provide the category labels and timing of anomalous events,
and require all categories to be predefined. Thus, the related
methods are still limited to detecting and classifying predefined events merely, lacking the semantic understanding
capacity of video content. However, automatic understanding of surveillance video content is crucial to enhance the
existing investigative measures. Some surveillance applications often need to search for specific event queries rather
than board categories, i.e., using queries to retrieve events
in surveillance videos. Meanwhile, intelligent surveillance
exhibits a trend toward multimodal directions, especially in
video-and-text interaction.
A large number of multimodal video datasets [31, 32, 36]
have been released, on which various multimodal learning
tasks [1, 16, 17] are being explored to semantically understand the video content. However, to our knowledge,
surveillance-video-oriented multimodal learning is still understudied. For example, some tasks for investigating detailed cases in public security such as temporal sentence
grounding in surveillance video, and surveillance video captioning, have been rarely proposed and studied. One main
reason is that the current surveillance datasets lack sentencelevel language annotations, which hinders the learning of

22052

