This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PTQ4SAM: Post-Training Quantization for Segment Anything
Chengtao Lv1∗ , Hong Chen1∗ , Jinyang Guo1,3† , Yifu Ding1 , Xianglong Liu1,2,4
1
State Key Laboratory of Complex & Critical Software Environment, Beihang University
2
Zhongguancun Laboratory 3 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
4
Institute of data space, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center

Abstract
Segment Anything Model (SAM) has achieved impressive
performance in many computer vision tasks. However, as a
large-scale model, the immense memory and computation
costs hinder its practical deployment. In this paper, we propose a post-training quantization (PTQ) framework for Segment Anything Model, namely PTQ4SAM. First, we investigate the inherent bottleneck of SAM quantization attributed
to the bimodal distribution in post-Key-Linear activations. We analyze its characteristics from both per-tensor
and per-channel perspectives, and propose a Bimodal Integration strategy, which utilizes a mathematically equivalent sign operation to transform the bimodal distribution
into a relatively easy-quantized normal distribution offline.
Second, SAM encompasses diverse attention mechanisms
(i.e., self-attention and two-way cross-attention), resulting
in substantial variations in the post-Softmax distributions.
Therefore, we introduce an Adaptive Granularity Quantization for Softmax through searching the optimal power-oftwo base, which is hardware-friendly. Extensive experimental results across various vision tasks (instance segmentation, semantic segmentation and object detection), datasets
and model variants show the superiority of PTQ4SAM. For
example, when quantizing SAM-L to 6-bit, we achieve lossless accuracy for instance segmentation, about 0.5% drop
with theoretical 3.9× acceleration. The code is available at
https://github.com/chengtao-lv/PTQ4SAM .

1. Introduction
With remarkable zero-shot ability and user-friendly flexible
prompt technique, Segment Anything Model (SAM) [20]
has recently become a novel foundation model in a range of
generic vision applications, including image segmentation
[3, 21, 23, 70], object detection [50, 54], tracking [4, 38, 63]
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: jinyangguo@buaa.edu.cn

voidinterval
interval
void

(a) bimodal distribution

(b) post-Softmax distribution

Figure 1. The histogram of two special distributions in SAM:
(a) bimodal distribution in post-Key-Linear activations. (b)
post-Softmax distributions of self-attention, token-to-image crossattention and image-to-token cross-attention.

and other downstream tasks [31, 33, 49, 52, 64, 66]. However, the transformer architectures in SAM require intensive
computation and memory footprint, which hurdles the practical deployment on resource-constrained edge-devices.
To address this issue, several quantization approaches [5,
10, 17, 26, 27, 42, 43, 56, 59] were proposed to convert weights and activations from floating-point to lowbit. There are two categories of quantization methods: 1)
Quantization-Aware Training (QAT) and 2) Post-Training
Quantization (PTQ). QAT retrains a model by utilizing
the whole labeled training dataset, which will be timeconsuming due to the corresponding massive dataset (SA1B). On the other hand, PTQ is more promising because it
only requires small unlabeled samples to calibrate the pretrained networks. In this paper, we focus on designing the
PTQ approach as it is more effective in practical usage.
Although previous PTQ methods have showcased significant accomplishments in various scenarios, including convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [5, 26, 42, 56, 59], vision transformers (ViTs) [7, 27, 67] as well as large language models (LLMs) [57, 58, 61], directly adopting these
methods to Segment Anything Models will raise two unique
challenges that necessitate a revisiting of traditional PTQ
schemes: 1) we observe the bimodal distribution appears
in post-Key-Linear activations, i.e., the output activations of key linear, as shown in Figure 1a. The two peaks

15941

