This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multiview Aerial Visual Recognition (MAVREC):
Can Multi-view Improve Aerial Visual Perception?
Aritra Dutta1 , Srijan Das2 , Jacob Nielsen3 , Rajatsubhra Chakraborty2 , and Mubarak Shah4
1
AI Initiative, UCF, 2 UNC Charlotte, 3 IMADA, SDU, 4 CRCV, UCF
https://mavrec.github.io

European Landscape
MAVREC Pre-training

Object
Detector

Other Regions
Conventional Pre-training

DRONE

Object
Detector

Aerial-View

Aerial-View
Ground-View

Inference

Inference
GROUND CAMERA

Detections on MAVREC aerial

Detections on MAVREC aerial

Figure 1. Illustration of the geography-aware model using our proposed MAVREC dataset (green box) collected in the rural and urban
European landscape vs. the conventional aerial object detector (blue box) pretrained only on aerial images from VisDrone [91] captured in
Asia. The conventional approach fails to detect aerial objects from the MAVREC dataset precisely. In contrast, our object detector pretrained
on the ground and aerial images from the MAVREC dataset contextualizes the object proposals of that specific geography and enhances the
aerial visual perception, thus outperforming other object detectors pre-trained on popular ground-view dataset (MS-COCO [44]) or other
aerial datasets collected from different geographies; also, see Figure 5.

Abstract
Despite the commercial abundance of UAVs, aerial data
acquisition remains challenging, and the existing Asia and
North America-centric open-source UAV datasets are smallscale or low-resolution and lack diversity in scene contextuality. Additionally, the color content of the scenes, solar
zenith angle, and population density of different geographies
influence the data diversity. These factors conjointly render
suboptimal aerial-visual perception of the deep neural network (DNN) models trained primarily on the ground view
data, including the open-world foundational models.
To pave the way for a transformative era of aerial detection, we present Multiview Aerial Visual RECognition
or MAVREC, a video dataset where we record synchronized scenes from different perspectives — ground camera
and drone-mounted camera. MAVREC consists of around
2.5 hours of industry-standard 2.7K resolution video se-

quences, more than 0.5 million frames, and 1.1 million annotated bounding boxes. This makes MAVREC the largest
ground and aerial view dataset, and the fourth largest
among all drone-based datasets across all modalities and
tasks. Through our extensive benchmarking on MAVREC, we
recognize that augmenting object detectors with ground view
images from the corresponding geographical location is a
superior pre-training strategy for aerial detection. Building
on this strategy, we benchmark MAVREC with a curriculumbased semi-supervised object detection approach that leverages labeled (ground and aerial) and unlabeled (only aerial)
images to enhance aerial detection.

1. Introduction
Object detection and tracking employing UAV (or drone)based aerial videos are essential in many downstream applications, such as autonomous driving [15, 53], robotics [81],

22678

