This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Style Injection in Diffusion: A Training-free Approach
for Adapting Large-scale Diffusion Models for Style Transfer
Jiwoo Chung∗ , Sangeek Hyun∗ , Jae-Pil Heo†
Sungkyunkwan University
{wldn0202, hsi1032, jaepilheo}@g.skku.edu

1. Introduction
Recent advances in Diffusion Models (DMs) have led to
breakthroughs in various generative applications such as
text-to-image synthesis [30, 33, 35] and image or video editing [2, 4, 6, 14, 19, 41, 48]. One of these efforts is also applied to the task of style transfer [10, 18, 45, 47, 53]; given
style and content images, modifying the style of the content
image to possess the given style.
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

𝐾!
𝑉!

Cross-Attn

Image feat. 𝑄!

Self-Attn

Decoder block in DM

Image 𝑧!"#

Decoder blk

Denoising
U-Net

Decoder forward path

𝑉!%

Self-Attn

ResBlk

%
Style 𝑧!#$

Style 𝑧!%

Decoder block in DM
$
Content feat. 𝑄!

𝑄𝐾𝑉 !"

Self-Attn

Decoder blk

ResBlk

"
Content 𝑧!#$

𝐾!%

Style feat.

Cross-Attn Cross-Attn

(a) General usage of self-attention in DM
Content 𝑧!"

Decoder blk

Despite the impressive generative capabilities of diffusion models, existing diffusion model-based style transfer methods require inference-stage optimization (e.g.
fine-tuning or textual inversion of style) which is timeconsuming, or fails to leverage the generative ability of
large-scale diffusion models. To address these issues, we
introduce a novel artistic style transfer method based on
a pre-trained large-scale diffusion model without any optimization. Specifically, we manipulate the features of selfattention layers as the way the cross-attention mechanism
works; in the generation process, substituting the key and
value of content with those of style image. This approach
provides several desirable characteristics for style transfer
including 1) preservation of content by transferring similar styles into similar image patches and 2) transfer of style
based on similarity of local texture (e.g. edge) between content and style images. Furthermore, we introduce query
preservation and attention temperature scaling to mitigate
the issue of disruption of original content, and initial latent Adaptive Instance Normalization (AdaIN) to deal with
the disharmonious color (failure to transfer the colors of
style). Our experimental results demonstrate that our proposed method surpasses state-of-the-art methods in both
conventional and diffusion-based style transfer baselines.
Codes are available at github.com/jiwoogit/StyleID.

Image 𝑧!

ResBlk

Abstract

Style injection (key, value)

(b) Our adaptation of self-attention for style transfer
Figure 1. Manipulation of self-attention features for style
transfer. (a) General self-attention (SA) deploys the query, key,
and value features from a single image in both the training and
inference phases. (b) At inference phase, we suggest that manipulating features of self-attention of pre-trained large-scale DM is an
effective way to transfer the styles; injection of key and value of
styles into SA of contents is a proper way for transferring styles.
c
As a result, style-injected content zt−1
would maintain contents
while modifying its style to resemble the target style.

General approaches for diffusion model-based style
transfer leverage the generative capability of pre-trained
DM. Some of these works focus on explicit disentangling
style and content for interpretable and controllable style
transfer [45], or inversion of the style image into the textual latent space of a large-scale text-to-image DM [53].
However, these methods additionally require gradient-based
optimization for fine-tuning and textual inversion [34] for
each style image, which is time-consuming. Without this
issue, DiffStyle [18] introduces training-free style transfer,
but they are known to be hardly applicable to Latent Diffusion Model [33] which is widely adopted for training largescale text-to-image DM such as Stable Diffusion [33], hindering the users from taking advantage of the prominent
generative ability of large-scale models.

8795

