This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lookahead Exploration with Neural Radiance Representation for
Continuous Vision-Language Navigation
Zihan Wang1,2 , Xiangyang Li1,2 , Jiahao Yang1,2 , Yeqi Liu1,2 , Junjie Hu3,4 , Ming Jiang5 , Shuqiang Jiang1,2
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA
4
Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI, USA
5
Department of Human-centered Computing, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, USA
zihan.wang@vipl.ict.ac.cn, lixiangyang@ict.ac.cn, {jiahao.yang, yeqi.liu}@vipl.ict.ac.cn,
junjie.hu@wisc.edu, mj200@iu.edu, sqjiang@ict.ac.cn

Instruction: Walk past the bed and exit the bedroom through the door.
Enter the toilet, and then stop before the window.

Abstract
Vision-and-language navigation (VLN) enables the
agent to navigate to a remote location following the natural
language instruction in 3D environments. At each navigation step, the agent selects from possible candidate locations and then makes the move. For better navigation planning, the lookahead exploration strategy aims to effectively
evaluate the agent’s next action by accurately anticipating
the future environment of candidate locations. To this end,
some existing works predict RGB images for future environments, while this strategy suffers from image distortion
and high computational cost. To address these issues, we
propose the pre-trained hierarchical neural radiance representation model (HNR) to produce multi-level semantic
features for future environments, which are more robust and
efficient than pixel-wise RGB reconstruction. Furthermore,
with the predicted future environmental representations, our
lookahead VLN model is able to construct the navigable
future path tree and select the optimal path via efficient
parallel evaluation. Extensive experiments on the VLN-CE
datasets confirm the effectiveness of our method. The code
is available at https://github.com/MrZihan/HNR-VLN

1. Introduction
Vision-and-language navigation (VLN) tasks [5, 22, 23, 31]
require an agent to understand natural language instructions
and move to the destination. In the continuous environment setting (VLN-CE) [22], the navigation agent is free
to traverse any unobstructed location with low-level actions
(i.e., turn left 15 degrees, turn right 15 degrees, or move
forward 0.25 meters), similar to some visual navigation
tasks [41, 42, 45–47]. As a result, the agent is more prone

2

2
1

3

1

3

1
2
1

2
(a)

3

3
(b)

Figure 1. Illustration of different methods to represent the navigable candidate locations. (a) uses the single-view observation (yellow sector area). (b) uses the panorama of the candidate location
(blue circular area) to anticipate the future environment.

to entering the visual blind area compared to the discrete
environment setting with perfectly predefined navigable locations. This phenomenon raises a challenge to accurately
represent future environments with visual occlusions, leading to incorrect action decisions.
As illustrated in Figure 1(a), previous approaches [8, 9,
25, 26] mainly rely on single-view visual observation of the
current location to perceive candidate locations, thus leading to a small restricted view (yellow sector area) due to
the visual occlusions. In contrast, as shown in Figure 1(b),
a comprehensive panorama of the candidate location (blue
circular area) is much more helpful to the agent for understanding the future environment and capturing critical visual cues in action decisions. Lookahead exploration [1, 11]
aims to enable an agent to explore steps forward before
making a navigation decision. Unlike other lookahead approaches, we adopt a strategy of exploring steps forward
with environment anticipation, which helps current action
decisions by predicting the future outcome of actions.

13753

