This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generate Like Experts: Multi-Stage Font Generation by Incorporating
Font Transfer Process into Diffusion Models
Bin Fu1 , Fanghua Yu1 , Anran Liu3 , Zixuan Wang1 , Jie Wen4 , Junjun He2 , and Yu Qiao1,2 *
1

ShenZhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 3 The University of Hong Kong
4
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
1

{bin.fu, zx.wang8, yu.qiao}@siat.ac.cn, 2 {hejunjun, qiaoyu}@pjlab.org.cn
3

liuar616@connect.hku.hk, 4 jiewen pr@126.com

Abstract
Few-shot font generation (FFG) produces stylized font
images with a limited number of reference samples, which
can significantly reduce labor costs in manual font designs.
Most existing FFG methods follow the style-content disentanglement paradigm and employ the Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) to generate target fonts by combining the decoupled content and style representations. The
complicated structure and detailed style are simultaneously
generated in those methods, which may be the sub-optimal
solutions for FFG task. Inspired by most manual font design
processes of expert designers, in this paper, we model font
generation as a multi-stage generative process. Specifically,
as the injected noise and the data distribution in diffusion
models can be well-separated into different sub-spaces, we
are able to incorporate the font transfer process into these
models. Based on this observation, we generalize diffusion methods to model font generative process by separating
the reverse diffusion process into three stages with different
functions: The structure construction stage first generates
the structure information for the target character based on
the source image, and the font transfer stage subsequently
transforms the source font to the target font. Finally, the
font refinement stage enhances the appearances and local
details of the target font images. Based on the above multistage generative process, we construct our font generation framework, named MSD-Font, with a dual-network approach to generate font images. The superior performance
demonstrates the effectiveness of our model. The code is
available at: https://github.com/fubinfb/MSD-Font .

* Corresponding author: Yu Qiao

1. Introduction
Designing new fonts is time-consuming and labor-intensive
work for humans, especially for some glyph-rich scripts
(e.g., Chinese and Korean). The few-shot font generation (FFG) task aims to automatically generate new stylized fonts with a few reference images, and it has received
significant interest due to its academic and commercial values. As the requirement of this task is to render the character images into the target font style, current FFG methods
[17, 27, 28, 39] usually employ the Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) to perform few-shot font generation under
the style-content disentanglement paradigm. These models
usually simultaneously generate the complicated structure
and detailed style of target font images by combining the
content features from source characters and the style representations from reference font images. Although many
methods have been proposed to obtain better content and
style representations, the generated font images still contain
artifacts, inconsistent styles, and broken structures.
Inspired by the common practice of expert designers, we
find the following characteristics that may be crucial for
high-quality font generation: As font design requires preserving the global structure of the target characters, designers usually generate a new font by modifying from a similar existing font, which can be viewed as a transfer process
from the source font to the target font. Thus, most manual
font designs can be regarded as a multi-stage process, including template font generation for global structure, font
transfer from the template font to the target font, and refinement of fine-grained details. In light of this, we think
that the multi-stage generative process is an effective solution for high-quality font generation, since the problems of
broken structures, inconsistent styles, and artifacts can be

6892

