This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Explaining the Implicit Neural Canvas: Connecting Pixels to Neurons
by Tracing their Contributions
Namitha Padmanabhan∗

Matthew Gwilliam∗ Pulkit Kumar
Max Ehrlich Abhinav Shrivastava

Shishira R Maiya

University of Maryland, College Park
https://namithap10.github.io/xinc

Abstract
The many variations of Implicit Neural Representations
(INRs), where a neural network is trained as a continuous
representation of a signal, have tremendous practical utility
for downstream tasks including novel view synthesis, video
compression, and image super-resolution. Unfortunately,
the inner workings of these networks are seriously understudied. Our work, eXplaining the Implicit Neural Canvas
(XINC), is a unified framework for explaining properties of
INRs by examining the strength of each neuron’s contribution to each output pixel. We call the aggregate of these
contribution maps the Implicit Neural Canvas and we use
this concept to demonstrate that the INRs we study learn to
“see” the frames they represent in surprising ways. For example, INRs tend to have highly distributed representations.
While lacking high-level object semantics, they have a significant bias for color and edges, and are almost entirely
space-agnostic. We arrive at our conclusions by examining how objects are represented across time in video INRs,
using clustering to visualize similar neurons across layers
and architectures, and show that this is dominated by motion. These insights demonstrate the general usefulness of
our analysis framework.

1. Introduction
Leveraging neural networks to represent data, where the
network computes feature maps and embeddings for various visual inputs, is central to computer vision. Recently, implicit neural representations (INRs) have emerged
as an exciting, radically different approach where a multilayer perceptron (MLP) or convolutional neural network
(CNN) is overfit on an image as a generative network,
becoming a continuous approximation of the discrete visual data [39, 40, 44, 48, 49]. The most well-known
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. How do INRs “see” the images they represent? We
propose XINC, which we use to show what parts of a learned
visual signal are important to each neuron of an INR. Here, we
take a sample from the neural canvas, with contribution maps for
5 neurons sampled from the last layer of a NeRV trained on a
Cityscapes [11] video. Some neurons attend to colors and textures, while others focus on low-level features like edges.

type of INRs are Neural Radiance Fields, where a network learns to represent a scene, allowing for continuous scene representation for novel view synthesis, editing,
etc. [17, 35, 42, 54, 56]. However, INRs are useful for
many other tasks as well, in particular, visual data compression [5, 7–9, 13, 14, 19, 30, 32, 50, 57, 58].
In spite of their immense utility, the inner workings of
INRs remain relatively under-explored. While some studies shed light on MLP-based INRs [55], NeRF [56], and
the impact of hypernetworks [10, 55], the hidden details of
non-coordinate methods such as NeRV [7] are quite opaque.
This is not completely unique to INRs – explainability and
interpretability are still massive challenges for other areas
in vision as well [1, 2, 18, 38]. Nevertheless, there is a significant gap for understanding INRs, considering that popular analysis techniques such as NetDissect [3] and GradCAM [46] do not transfer to INRs in straightforward ways.

10957

