This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BEHAVIOR Vision Suite: Customizable Dataset Generation via Simulation
Yunhao Ge1,2∗ , Yihe Tang1∗ , Jiashu Xu3∗ , Cem Gokmen1∗ , Chengshu Li1 , Wensi Ai1 ,
Benjamin Jose Martinez1 , Arman Aydin1 , Mona Anvari1 , Ayush K Chakravarthy1 , Hong-Xing Yu1 ,
Josiah Wong1 , Sanjana Srivastava1 , Sharon Lee1 , Shengxin Zha4 , Laurent Itti2 , Yunzhu Li1,7 ,
Roberto Martı́n-Martı́n6 , Miao Liu4 , Pengchuan Zhang5 , Ruohan Zhang1 , Li Fei-Fei1 , Jiajun Wu1
1

5

Stanford University 2 University of Southern California 3 Harvard University 4 GenAI, Meta
FAIR, Meta 6 The University of Texas at Austin 7 The University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign

Abstract
The systematic evaluation and understanding of computer vision models under varying conditions require large
amounts of data with comprehensive and customized labels,
which real-world vision datasets rarely satisfy. While current synthetic data generators offer a promising alternative,
particularly for embodied AI tasks, they often fall short for
computer vision tasks due to low asset and rendering quality, limited diversity, and unrealistic physical properties. We
introduce the BEHAVIOR Vision Suite (BVS), a set of tools
and assets to generate fully customized synthetic data for
systematic evaluation of computer vision models, based on
the newly developed embodied AI benchmark, BEHAVIOR1K. BVS supports a large number of adjustable parameters at the scene level (e.g., lighting, object placement),
the object level (e.g., joint configuration, attributes such as
“filled” and “folded”), and the camera level (e.g., field of
view, focal length). Researchers can arbitrarily vary these
parameters during data generation to perform controlled
experiments. We showcase three example application scenarios: systematically evaluating the robustness of models across different continuous axes of domain shift, evaluating scene understanding models on the same set of images, and training and evaluating simulation-to-real transfer for a novel vision task: unary and binary state prediction. Project website: https://behavior-visionsuite.github.io/

1. Introduction
Large-scale datasets and benchmarks have fueled computer
vision research in the past decade [2, 9, 11, 19–21, 23, 32,
∗ equal contribution
† correspondence to yunhaoge@cs.stanford.edu,
{yihetang, zharu}@stanford.edu

40, 44, 53, 63]. Driven by these datasets and benchmarks,
thousands of models and algorithms tackling different perception challenges are being proposed every year, on the
topics of object detection [71], segmentation [30], action
recognition [58], video understanding [38] and beyond. Despite their success, real-world datasets face inherent limitations. First, the ground-truth object/pixel-level labels are
either prohibitively expensive to acquire (e.g., segmentation
masks) [39] or suffering from inaccuracies (e.g., depth sensing) [46]. Consequently, each real dataset often only offers
limited labels, hindering the development and evaluation of
computer vision models that perform a wide range of perception tasks on the same input. Even when annotations are
affordable and accurate, real-world datasets are limited by
the availability of source images. For example, images of
rare events, such as traffic accidents or low-light conditions,
might be difficult to acquire from the Internet or real-world
sensors. Finally, once collected, these real-world datasets
have a fixed data distribution and cannot be easily changed.
This makes it challenging for researchers to conduct customized experiments, often leading to models that overfit
the datasets and eventually rendering the entire benchmarks
obsolete [25, 26, 34, 52].
To avoid this limitation, researchers and practitioners
have devised various methods to generate synthetic datasets
that complement the real ones [17]. In the realm of indoor
scene understanding, 3D reconstruction datasets [4, 49, 62]
provide a promising avenue to generate source images
from arbitrary viewpoints and free (geometric) annotations.
However, due to the imperfect nature of 3D reconstruction techniques, the rendered images are not very realistic. Since each entire scene is a static mesh, these datasets
offer very limited customizability beyond camera trajectories. Recent synthetic indoor datasets (often designed by
3D artists) [12, 36, 37, 51] not only offer free geometric and
semantic annotations, but also support object layout reconfiguration as objects are usually independent CAD models.

22401

