This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improved Zero-Shot Classification by Adapting VLMs with Text Descriptions
Oindrila Saha
Grant Van Horn
Subhransu Maji
University of Massachusetts, Amherst
{osaha, gvanhorn, smaji}@umass.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Recent improvements in zero-shot classification have
been due, in part, to success in training VLMs at scale.
Models such as CLIP [29], ALIGN [11], and BLIP [16] use
massive datasets of image and text pairs to learn a common
embedding between visual and natural language domains.
However, we find existing VLMs show poor performance in
encoding visual attributes in fine-grained domains, beyond

vesper
sparrow

LLM

birds

LLM

Images

Size and Shape: A medium-sized, stocky
sparrow with a rounded head and a short
stout beak.
Plumage and Markings: Features brown,
streaky back and wings, with white or light
underparts that also have defined streaks.
Notable white outer tail feathers visible in
flight, a white eye-ring, and a distinct dark
shoulder patch.
Habitat: Prefers open fields, grasslands, and
woodland edges.

Difficulty of collection

The zero-shot performance of existing vision-language
models (VLMs) such as CLIP [29] is limited by the availability of large-scale, aligned image and text datasets in
specific domains. In this work, we leverage two complementary sources of information—descriptions of categories
generated by large language models (LLMs) and abundant,
fine-grained image classification datasets—to improve the
zero-shot classification performance of VLMs across finegrained domains. On the technical side, we develop methods to train VLMs with this “bag-level” image-text supervision. We find that simply using these attributes at testtime does not improve performance, but our training strategy, for example, on the iNaturalist [41] dataset, leads to
an average improvement of 4-5% in zero-shot classification accuracy for novel categories of birds [42] and flowers [23]. Similar improvements are observed in domains
where a subset of the categories was used to fine-tune the
model. By prompting LLMs in various ways, we generate
descriptions that capture visual appearance, habitat, and
geographic regions and pair them with existing attributes
such as the taxonomic structure of the categories. We systematically evaluate their ability to improve zero-shot categorization in natural domains. Our findings suggest that
geographic priors can be just as effective and are complementary to visual appearance. Our method also outperforms prior work on prompt-based tuning of VLMs. We release the benchmark, consisting of 14 datasets at https:
//github.com/cvl-umass/AdaptCLIPZS, which
will contribute to future research in zero-shot recognition.

Vesper sparrow with a small conical beak,
brown heavily streaked body, long tail and
white eye-ring around its black eye.

Birds have feathers, toothless beaks of varied
shapes; wings, a common trait even among
non-fliers; a streamlined body with an upright,
two-legged stance; and eyes on the sides of
their heads for wide vision.

Figure 1. Motivation. Collecting image captions in fine-grained domains
requires expertise (top row), but LLMs can generate structured (e.g., shape
or appearance) and accurate descriptions of categories at both the coarse
(e.g., birds) and fine-grained level (e.g., Vesper Sparrow). Rich descriptions of fine-grained categories can be paired with existing datasets, such as
iNaturalist [41] and NABirds [39] to generate coarsely-aligned image-text
datasets for fine-tuning VLMs. This improves their zero-shot performance
on a range of benchmarks, generalizing to novel categories and tasks.

simply recognizing the name of the category. For example, we observe concatenating visual attribute descriptions
to the species name for the bird species in the CUB [42]
dataset improves the zero-shot classification from 50.5%
to only 50.7%, while for Cars [14], the performance even
drops slightly (see Tab. 1). Although the datasets on which
VLMs are trained are extensive, they often lack the details
that experts may require for fine-grained categorization. At
the same time, collecting large-scale image-caption datasets
in these domains requires significant effort, making training
similar models challenging.
In this work, we leverage two complementary sources
of information—large language models (LLMs) and abundant, fine-grained image classification datasets—to improve
the zero-shot classification performance of VLMs across
a variety of fine-grained domains. Concretely, we generate large datasets of images aligned with text by pairing
images within a category with descriptions of that category generated by LLMs as seen in Fig. 1. We find this
approach works well, as images within a fine-grained domain share many attributes, unlike in coarse categories with

17542

