This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mask4Align: Aligned Entity Prompting with Color Masks for Multi-Entity
Localization Problems
Haoquan Zhang1 Ronggang Huang1 Yi Xie1∗ Huaidong Zhang1 *
1
School of Future Technology, South China University of Technology
haoquanzhang@outlook.com

rghuang@gmail.com

ftyixie@mail.scut.edu.cn

huaidongz@scut.edu.cn

Q: Who will steal the ball from the player?

A: The PURPLE player

Q: Which apple is nearest to the given one?

A: The YELLOW apple

Q: Where will the man go?

A: The BLUE path

Q: Who is followed by the given person?

A: The BLUE person

Figure 1. The figure shows six examples of multi-entity localization in Visual Question Answering (VQA). Each scenario includes a
question, the original image, an image with color masks, an answer with color, and the corresponding visualized results.

Abstract
In Visual Question Answering (VQA), recognizing and
localizing entities pose significant challenges. Pretrained
vision-and-language models have addressed this problem
by providing a text description as the answer. However,
in visual scenes with multiple entities, textual descriptions
struggle to distinguish the entities from the same category
effectively. Consequently, the VQA dataset is limited by the
limitations of text description and cannot adequately cover
scenarios involving multiple entities. To address this challenge, we introduce a Mask for Align (Mask4Align) method,
which can determine the entity’s position in the given image
that best matches the user-input question. This method incorporates colored masks into the image, enabling the VQA
model to handle discrimination and localization challenges
associated with multiple entities. To process an arbitrary
number of similar entities, Mask4Align is designed hierarchically to discern subtle differences, achieving precise localization. Since Mask4Align directly utilizes pre-trained
* Corresponding authors

models, it does not introduce additional training overhead.
Extensive experiments conducted on both the gaze target
prediction task dataset and our proposed multi-entity localization dataset showcase the superiority of Mask4Align.
Code and dataset are available at https://github.
com/HaoquanZhang/mask4align.

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) [11] combines computer vision and natural language processing to answer
questions about images, often presented in natural language, covering various aspects of image content. VQA
systems fuse image features with textual context to comprehend both the visual content and question semantics, delivering precise answers. In recent years, VQA has gained
attention for its practical applications in human-computer
interaction [6, 10] and image retrieval [39–43].
While the design of VQA datasets incorporates a comprehensive range of possible scenarios, tailored questions,
and accurate answers, its structure still does not fully simulate human VQA behaviors in daily life. For instance, in

13373

