This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Pixels to Graphs: Open-Vocabulary Scene Graph Generation with
Vision-Language Models
Rongjie Li1 * Songyang Zhang2 * Dahua Lin 2 Kai Chen 2‡ Xuming He1,3‡
1
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
2
Shanghai AI Laboratory
3
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
{lirj2, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn, {zhangsongyang,lindahua,chenkai}@pjlab.org.cn,

Abstract
Scene graph generation (SGG) aims to parse a visual
scene into an intermediate graph representation for downstream reasoning tasks. Despite recent advancements, existing methods struggle to generate scene graphs with novel
visual relation concepts. To address this challenge, we
introduce a new open-vocabulary SGG framework based
on sequence generation. Our framework leverages visionlanguage pre-trained models (VLM) by incorporating an
image-to-graph generation paradigm. Specifically, we generate scene graph sequences via image-to-text generation
with VLM and then construct scene graphs from these sequences. By doing so, we harness the strong capabilities of VLM for open-vocabulary SGG and seamlessly integrate explicit relational modeling for enhancing the VL
tasks. Experimental results demonstrate that our design not
only achieves superior performance with an open vocabulary but also enhances downstream vision-language task
performance through explicit relation modeling knowledge.

1. Introduction
The main objective of scene graph generation (SGG) is to
parse an image into a graph representation that describes
visual scenes in terms of object entities and their relationship. Such a generated scene graph can serve as a structural
and interpretable representation of visual scenes, facilitating connections between visual perception and reasoning
[36]. In particular, it has been widely used in various visionlanguage (VL) tasks, including visual question answering
[8, 10, 11, 29, 32], image captioning [41, 42], referring expressions [40] and image retrieval [12].
Most previous works have focused on addressing the
* Equal contribution and this work was partially done when Li was
a research intern at the Shanghai AI Laboratory. ‡ denotes corresponding author. Code is available: https://github.com/SHTUPLUS/
Pix2Grp_CVPR2024

Entity ROI

Predicate Classifier
Task Specific
VLM

Man
Man

Wear

Boot

Rein

Horse

(A)

What relation between
horse and left person?
Short Answer:

Generate SG
from Image

(

,

Rein

,

)

Horse

VLM

(

,

Next

,

)

Man

As
initialization

(

,

Ride

,

)

Man

VLM

Hold

(B)

Figure 1. An illustration of open-vocabulary SGG paradigm
comparison. (A) previous work adopt the task-specific VLM as
predicate classifiers from given entity proposals; (B) Our framework offers a unified framework for generating scene graph with
novel predicates from images directly and conducting VL tasks.

SGG problems in a close-world setting. While much effort
has been made in tackling long-tailed data bias [6, 31, 52]
and insufficient labeling [3, 19, 50], the typical label space
of those methods only covers a limited subset of the diverse visual relationships in the real world. This can result in incomplete scene representations and also domain
gaps when used as intermediate representations in downstream vision-language tasks [37]. To address this limitation, recent works [7, 47, 51] start to tackle the SGG problem under various open-vocabulary settings by exploiting
the image-text matching capability of pre-trained visionlanguage models (VLM). Nevertheless, these attempts typically focus on a simplified setting of the open-vocabulary
SGG task, such as allowing only novel entities [7, 47] (OvSGG), or a subtask of SGG, such as classifying open-set
predicates with given entity pairs [7, 51], as shown in part

28076

