This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Feature to Gaze: A Generalizable Replacement
of Linear Layer for Gaze Estimation
Yiwei Bao Feng Lu *
State Key Laboratory of VR Technology and Systems, School of CSE, Beihang University
{baoyiwei, lufeng}@buaa.edu.cn

Deep-learning-based gaze estimation approaches often
suffer from notable performance degradation in unseen target domains. One of the primary reasons is that the Fully
Connected layer is highly prone to overfitting when mapping the high-dimensional image feature to 3D gaze. In this
paper, we propose Analytical Gaze Generalization framework (AGG) to improve the generalization ability of gaze
estimation models without touching target domain data.
The AGG consists of two modules, the Geodesic Projection
Module (GPM) and the Sphere-Oriented Training (SOT).
GPM is a generalizable replacement of FC layer, which
projects high-dimensional image features to 3D space analytically to extract the principle components of gaze. Then,
we propose Sphere-Oriented Training (SOT) to incorporate the GPM into the training process and further improve
cross-domain performances. Experimental results demonstrate that the AGG effectively alleviate the overfitting problem and consistently improves the cross-domain gaze estimation accuracy in 12 cross-domain settings, without requiring any target domain data. The insight from the Analytical Gaze Generalization framework has the potential to
benefit other regression tasks with physical meanings.

1. Introduction
Eye gaze reveals where human attention lands, which has
been widely applied in a variety of territories, such as
VR/AR systems [3, 15, 26], medical analysis [4, 13, 14] and
human-computer interaction[17, 27, 34]. Gaze estimation
methods can be classified into two categories: model-based
approaches and appearance-based approaches. Both approaches have their own strengths and weaknesses. Modelbased approaches estimate gaze by modeling the anatomical
structure of the eyeball. These methods achieve remarkable
accuracy in controlled environment. But they typically require dedicated hardware such as infrared cameras and light
sources. Appearance-based approaches use cost-effective
* Corresponding Author. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 62372019.

512D

Conventional

Abstract

Face Images

Overfitted

→ Generalization

1500+ params

FC Layer

Features

Replaced by
Geodesic Projection Module (GPM) — 10 params
Sphere

Isometric
Mapping
512D

Alignment
3D

𝜃𝜃

2D

2D

Gaze

Less Overfitting
𝜓𝜓

Generalize
Source
Domain

Unseen
Domains

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed AGG framework for generalizing gaze estimation models to unseen target domains.

web cameras. They typically train Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) in an end-to-end way, enabling them to
predict gaze direction from user face/eye images directly. In
recent years, appearance-based approaches have garnered
great interest due to their simplified hardware requirements
and the potential for widespread applications.
However, appearance-based methods suffer from severe
performance degradation in cross-domain settings. To improve the cross-domain performance, various domain adaptation approaches have been proposed, i.e., adversarial
learning [12, 32], contrastive learning [33] and collaborative
learning [20]. However, these approaches require a number of target domain samples for adaptation, which is not
always attainable in real-world scenarios. More recently,
Cheng et al. proposed to generalize gaze estimation model
by purifying gaze feature during source domain training
[8]. The gaze generalization task is more practical yet more
challenging, because it does not have access to any target
domain data.
One of the significant reasons for the poor cross-domain
performances is the overfitting problem. Gaze estimation
CNNs are trained to extract high-dimensional image features (e.g. 512D) from input face images and map these
features to gaze (3D unit vector) by a Fully Connected layer
with thousands of parameters. The numerous parameters
of the FC layer easily overfit to gaze irrelevant factors
within the high-dimensional image features during the

1409

