This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VTimeLLM: Empower LLM to Grasp Video Moments
Bin Huang, Xin Wang,* Hong Chen, Zihan Song, Wenwu Zhu*
Tsinghua University
{huangb23, h-chen20, songzh23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{xin wang,wwzhu}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable text understanding capabilities, which have been extended as Video LLMs to handle video data for comprehending visual details. However, existing Video LLMs
can only provide a coarse description of the entire video,
failing to capture the precise start and end time boundary of specific events. In this paper, we solve this issue via proposing VTimeLLM, a novel Video LLM designed for fine-grained video moment understanding and
reasoning with respect to time boundary. Specifically, our
VTimeLLM adopts a boundary-aware three-stage training
strategy, which respectively utilizes image-text pairs for feature alignment, multiple-event videos to increase temporalboundary awareness, and high-quality video-instruction
tuning to further improve temporal understanding ability as
well as align with human intents. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that in fine-grained time-related comprehension tasks for videos such as Temporal Video Grounding
and Dense Video Captioning, VTimeLLM significantly outperforms existing Video LLMs. Besides, benefits from the
fine-grained temporal understanding of the videos further
enable VTimeLLM to beat existing Video LLMs in video dialogue benchmark, showing its superior cross-modal understanding and reasoning abilities. 1

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have garnered significant
attention due to their exceptional capabilities in text understanding and generation [23, 31]. However, harnessing the potential of LLMs for understanding and reasoning over multimodal data, especially videos, still remains
a substantial challenge. This is because analyzing videos
requires deep understanding of both visual details and
temporal dynamics for models. Several preliminary at* Corresponding Authors.
1 Our project page is at https : / / github . com / huangb23 /

VTimeLLM

0s

1s

3s

5s
7s
9s
11s
13s
15s
Ground Truth: From 0s to 4s.
During which time period in the video does the event 'person
close the laptop' happen?

16s

(VideoChat) The man closes the laptop from 13.0 second to 13.6 second. ❌
(VideoLLaMA) The event happens at the 15-second mark.

❌

(VTimeLLM, ours) The person closes the laptop from 00 to 30. (0s ~ 4.8s) ✔

Figure 1. Existing Video LLMs, such as VideoChat and VideoLLaMA, exhibit a deficiency in boundary awareness, leading to
challenges in accurately capturing the precise timestamps of specific events.

tempts [15, 20, 34] utilize LLMs for video understanding.
Nevertheless, these works predominantly focus on generation of generic video captions and can merely offer surfacelevel summaries of the content, thus failing to capture the
relationships between specific moment boundaries and the
bounded events, as shown in Figure 1.
To tackle the problem, in this paper, we investigate improving the boundary-aware ability of Video LLM, which
faces the following two challenges.
1. There is a scarcity of large-scale video datasets with accurate boundary annotations to train the Video LLM for
temporal alignment.
2. It is non-trivial to design effective temporal-related video
tasks for training LLM to understand the content of multiple moments within videos.
To address these challenges, we propose VTimeLLM,
a novel Video LLM that can perceive fine-grained segments in videos with better temporal reasoning ability.
VTimeLLM consists of i) a visual encoder and a visual
adapter to process the input video, and ii) a tailored LLM
to understand both text and video content, which is trained
via a novel boundary-aware three-stage training strategy.
Specifically, visual features are aligned with LLM’s semantic space through image-text training in the first stage.

14271

