This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Accept the Modality Gap: An Exploration in the Hyperbolic Space
Sameera Ramasinghe

Violetta Shevchenko
Gil Avraham
Amazon, Australia

Ajanthan Thalaiyasingam

Abstract
Recent advancements in machine learning have spotlighted the potential of hyperbolic spaces as they effectively
learn hierarchical feature representations. While there has
been progress in leveraging hyperbolic spaces in singlemodality contexts, its exploration in multimodal settings remains under explored. A recent work has sought to transpose Euclidean multimodal learning techniques to hyperbolic spaces, by adopting a geodesic distance based contrastive loss. However, we show both theoretically and empirically that such spatial proximity based contrastive loss
significantly disrupts hierarchies in the latent space. To
remedy this, we advocate that the cross-modal representations should accept the inherent modality gap between text
and images, and introduce a novel approach to measure
cross-modal similarity that does not enforce spatial proximity. Our approach shows remarkable capabilities in preserving unimodal hierarchies while aligning the two modalities. Our experiments on a series of downstream tasks
demonstrate that a better latent structure emerges with our
objective function while being superior in text-to-image and
image-to-text retrieval tasks.

1. Introduction
Hierarchical structures are a fundamental component of the
natural world. Multimodal foundational models that try to
learn a holistic view of the world with a shared image and
text representation, e.g., CLIP [28], have primarily leveraged Euclidean and spherical geometries. However, the intrinsic geometric constraints of these spaces often fall short
in capturing the complexity and granularity of hierarchical
information. This limitation sparks a compelling case for
hyperbolic spaces as they offer continuous approximation
for tree-like hierarchical structures [6, 9, 12, 18, 34].
Although hierarchical embeddings in the hyperbolic
space have been previously explored in unimodal settings [11, 12, 18], learning shared representations of different types of modalities – such as text and images – while
preserving hierarchies remains under explored. Current
multimodal models measure the similarity of cross-modal

Figure 1. Comparison between geodesic-based (left) and our
angle-based contrastive losses (right) in the hyperbolic space.
Only the space component is shown for clarity. In our angle-based
contrastive loss (details in Fig. 3), the images can be placed anywhere along the axis emanating from the text embedding (highlighted in yellow), which allows hierarchy among images.

embeddings through spatial proximity in the underlying
shared embedding space. Such spatial proximity based contrastive loss clusters matching concepts across modalities
together, while pushing apart non-matching ones. Despite
wide-spread usage, the alignment between image and text
modalities is an ill-posed problem, and these learned representations are shown to have misalignment between modalities, defined as the modality-gap [23].
We argue that modality gap is rooted in the intrinsic differences in the representational nature and information content of visual and linguistic data. Text, with its structured
syntax and semantically rich lexicon, conveys abstract concepts and relationships explicitly. Images, in contrast, capture concrete instances of the world, expressing complex
scenes and hierarchical relationships implicitly through visual cues. Thus, models that seek to minimize distance metrics between modalities may struggle to capture the nuanced
associations between text and images. This often results in
an oversimplified alignment that glosses over the rich, oneto-many correspondences from text to image.
A recent work [6] attempts to leverage this cross-modal
hierarchy that text descriptions are more generic than images using an entailment loss, to learn a unified image-text
representation in the hyperbolic space. Nevertheless, it still
heavily relies on the spatial proximity based contrastive loss
between image and text modalities, and suffers the same
pitfalls as the Euclidean and spherical counterparts. In this

27263

