This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Slice3D: Multi-Slice, Occlusion-Revealing, Single View 3D Reconstruction
Yizhi Wang1 , Wallace Lira1 , Wenqi Wang2 , Ali Mahdavi-Amiri1 , Hao Zhang1
1
Simon Fraser University 2 Tsinghua University
Multi-slice Images

Slice3D

DISN

One-2-3-45

View Synthesis
by Zero-1-to-3

𝑋

Input View

𝑌
Slicer

Inconsistency

𝑍

Figure 1. Our single-view 3D reconstruction method, Slice3D, predicts multi-slice images to reveal occluded parts without changing the
camera (in contrast to multi-view synthesis), and then lifts the slices into a 3D model. This leads to better recovery of occluded parts
than both encoder-decoder based methods such as DISN [65] and 3D reconstructions from diffusion-synthesized multi-view images (via
Zero-1-to-3 [29]) such as One-2-3-45 [28], where the key challenge of the latter is multi-view inconsistency, as shown on the right.

Abstract
We introduce multi-slice reasoning, a new notion for
single-view 3D reconstruction which challenges the current
and prevailing belief that multi-view synthesis is the most
natural conduit between single-view and 3D. Our key observation is that object slicing is a more direct, and hence
more advantageous, means to reveal occluded structures
than altering camera views. Specifically, slicing can peel
through any occluder without obstruction, and in the limit
(i.e., with infinitely many slices), it is guaranteed to unveil
all hidden object parts. We realize our idea by developing
Slice3D, a novel method for single-view 3D reconstruction
which first predicts multi-slice images from a single RGB
input image and then integrates the slices into a 3D model
using a coordinate-based transformer network to product a
signed distance function. The slice images can be regressed
or generated, both through a U-Net based network. For the
former, we inject a learnable slice indicator code to designate each decoded image into a spatial slice location, while
the slice generator is a denoising diffusion model operating
on the entirety of slice images stacked on the input channels.
We conduct extensive evaluation against state-of-the-art alternatives to demonstrate superiority of our method, especially in recovering complex and severely occluded shape
structures, amid ambiguities. All Slice3D results were produced by networks trained on a single Nvidia A40 GPU,
with an inference time of less than 20 seconds.

1. Introduction
Single-view 3D reconstruction has been one of the extensively studied problems in computer vision. Despite the
rapid advances on learning-based approaches to tackle this
problem, including the latest attempts to leverage large
foundational models and powerful diffusion-based generators, the most fundamental challenge still remains: how to
faithfully reconstruct occluded parts from just one view?
Conventional encoder-decoder based methods, e.g., [9,
17, 25, 44, 53, 65], rely on direct 3D supervision to learn
mappings from global or local image features to 3D, but
such features from just a single view often do not have
the capacity to handle severe occlusion. Also, recent eviInfinite Slicing

…

…
…

…

…

…
…

…

(a)

Four Slices

S1 S2 S3 S4

Four Views

Parallel projection

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 2. Multi-view vs. multi-slice for occlusion revelation, with
orange edges showing revealed parts and black edges showing occluded parts. In the limit, multi-view (i.e., infinitely many views)
may still leave undisclosed parts (a), e.g., the bulb, while infinitely
many slices would guarantee complete structure revelation (b).
With limited slices (c) and views (d), four each, the multi-slice approach tends to reveal more shape structures.

9881

