This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GaussianAvatar: Towards Realistic Human Avatar Modeling
from a Single Video via Animatable 3D Gaussians
Liangxiao Hu†,1 , Hongwen Zhang2 , Yuxiang Zhang3 , Boyao Zhou3 , Boning Liu3 ,
Shengping Zhang∗,1,4 , Liqiang Nie1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Beijing Normal University
3
Tsinghua University 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{lx.hu, s.zhang}@hit.edu.cn, zhanghongwen@bnu.edu.cn, yx-z19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{bzhou22, liuboning}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, nieliqiang@gmail.com

Reference Pose

Animation

Novel View Synthesis

Figure 1. We propose GaussianAvatar, which learns animatable 3D Gaussians to represent detailed human avatars from a single video. Our
method maintains a 3D consistent appearance even when animated by out-of-distribution motions.

Abstract
We present GaussianAvatar, an efficient approach to creating realistic human avatars with dynamic 3D appearances from a single video. We start by introducing animatable 3D Gaussians to explicitly represent humans in various poses and clothing styles. Such an explicit and animatable representation can fuse 3D appearances more efficiently and consistently from 2D observations. Our representation is further augmented with dynamic properties to
support pose-dependent appearance modeling, where a dynamic appearance network along with an optimizable feature tensor is designed to learn the motion-to-appearance
mapping. Moreover, by leveraging the differentiable motion
† Work done during an internship at Tsinghua University.
∗ Corresponding author.

condition, our method enables a joint optimization of motions and appearances during avatar modeling, which helps
to tackle the long-standing issue of inaccurate motion estimation in monocular settings. The efficacy of GaussianAvatar is validated on both the public dataset and our collected dataset, demonstrating its superior performances in
terms of appearance quality and rendering efficiency. The
code and dataset are available at https://github.com/
aipixel/GaussianAvatar .

1. Introduction
Creating a customized human avatar from a single video
has great potential for many applications including virtual
and augmented reality, the Metaverse, gaming, and movie
industries. This task is appealing yet challenging, as the

634

