This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WaveFace: Authentic Face Restoration with Efficient Frequency Recovery
Yunqi Miao
University of Warwick

Jiankang Deng*
Imperial College London

Jungong Han*
University of Sheffield

Yunqi.Miao.1@warwick.ac.uk

jiankangdeng@gmail.com

jungonghan77@gmail.com

LQ

GPEN (CVPR21)

VQFR (ECCV22)

RestoreFormer (CVPR22)

HQ

Ours

DifFace (Arxiv23)

DR2 (CVPR23)

DWT

WaveFace
IWT

Figure 1. Left: Illustration of our frequency-aware BFR scheme. Restoration is performed in the frequency domain instead of the pixel
domain. Right: Comparisons with state-of-the-art face restoration methods on degraded images. Previous methods struggle to restore
facial details or the original identity while our WaveFace achieves a good balance of realness and fidelity with fewer artifacts.

Abstract
Although diffusion models are rising as a powerful solution for blind face restoration, they are criticized for two
problems: 1) slow training and inference speed, and 2) failure in preserving identity and recovering fine-grained facial details. In this work, we propose WaveFace to solve the
problems in the frequency domain, where low- and highfrequency components decomposed by wavelet transformation are considered individually to maximize authenticity as
well as efficiency. The diffusion model is applied to recover
the low-frequency component only, which presents general
information of the original image but 1/16 in size. To preserve the original identity, the generation is conditioned on
the low-frequency component of low-quality images at each
denoising step. Meanwhile, high-frequency components at
multiple decomposition levels are handled by a unified network, which recovers complex facial details in a single
step. Evaluations on four benchmark datasets show that: 1)
WaveFace outperforms state-of-the-art methods in authen-

ticity, especially in terms of identity preservation, and 2)
authentic images are restored with the efficiency 10× faster
than existing diffusion model-based BFR methods.

1. Introduction
Blind face restoration (BFR) aims to recover high-quality
(HQ) facial images from various degradations, including
down-sampling, blurriness, noise, and compression artifact [1, 26, 35]. BFR is challenging since the types of
degradation are generally unknown in real-world scenarios.
Improvements in the restoration quality over the past few
years mainly benefit from the usage of multiple facial priors. Geometric priors, including facial landmarks [3] and
parsing maps [2, 24], are employed to provide explicit facial structure information. Reference priors, such as HQ
images/features [8, 29, 38], are used as guidance during facial restoration. Generative priors are generally obtained
by pre-trained generation models such as StyleGAN [13],
* Corresponding author

6583

