This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RichDreamer: A Generalizable Normal-Depth Diffusion Model for
Detail Richness in Text-to-3D
Lingteng Qiu1,3 *† Guanying Chen2,1 * Xiaodong Gu3 *
Mutian Xu1 Yushuang Wu2,1 Weihao Yuan3 Zilong Dong3
Liefeng Bo3 , Xiaoguang Han1,2‡

3

Qi Zuo

1

SSE, CUHKSZ

Dragon
Flower-like Wings

2

FNii, CUHKSZ

Alibaba Group

Mini
China Town

The Nine-tailed
Fox

Phoenix
Fire

Einstein Rides
a Motorcycle

Simba
Lion King

3

Age-old
Dragon

James Rides
a Unicorn

Majestic
Peacock Throne

Robotic
Beetle

Crocheted Doll
with Crown

Dogs
Play Poker
Cybernetic
Raven

Crocodile
Play Drum

Crocodile
Astronaut

Crocodile
Chef

Crocodile
Warrior

Crocodile
LEGO

Crocodile
Plush Toy

Figure 1. 3D Generation Results and Applications of RichDreamer. RichDreamer can generate highly-detailed and diverse 3D content
from free-form user prompts. Our method achieves this by first generating the object geometry based on a generalizable Normal-Depth
diffusion model, followed by modeling the physically-based rendering (PBR) materials. Notably, the diverse crocodile-theme objects at the
bottom highlights the generalization ability of our method. The abbreviation of text prompts are shown beside the corresponding objects
(full prompts can be found in the supplementary materials).

Abstract
Lifting 2D diffusion for 3D generation is a challenging
problem due to the lack of geometric prior and the complex entanglement of materials and lighting in natural images. Existing methods have shown promise by first creating the geometry through score-distillation sampling (SDS)
applied to rendered surface normals, followed by appearance modeling. However, relying on a 2D RGB diffusion
model to optimize surface normals is suboptimal due to
the distribution discrepancy between natural images and
normals maps, leading to instability in optimization. In
this paper, recognizing that the normal and depth information effectively describe scene geometry and be automatically estimated from images, we propose to learn a
generalizable Normal-Depth diffusion model for 3D generation. We achieve this by training on the large-scale
*
†

Equal contribution.
Work done during internship at Alibaba.
‡ Corresponding author: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn.

LAION dataset together with the generalizable image-todepth and normal prior models. In an attempt to alleviate
the mixed illumination effects in the generated materials,
we introduce an albedo diffusion model to impose datadriven constraints on the albedo component. Our experiments show that when integrated into existing text-to-3D
pipelines, our models significantly enhance the detail richness, achieving state-of-the-art results. Our project page is
at https://aigc3d.github.io/richdreamer/.

1. Introduction
Image generation models have witnessed notable advancements in controllable image synthesis [56, 61]. This remarkable progress can be attributed to the scalability of
generative models [21, 68] and utilization of the large-scale
training datasets consisting of billions of image-caption
pairs scrapped from the internet [63]. Conversely, due to the
limited scale of the publicly available 3D datasets, existing
3D generative models are primarily evaluated for category-

9914

