This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViVid-1-to-3: Novel View Synthesis with Video Diffusion Models
Jeong-gi Kwak1,2 *† Erqun Dong1,3,4 *† Yuhe Jin1 Hanseok Ko2
Shweta Mahajan1, 5
Kwang Moo Yi1, 4
1
2
University of British Columbia
Korea University 3 McGill University
4
5
Haiper Ltd.
Vector Institute for AI
https://ubc-vision.github.io/vivid123/
Target camera trajectory

View-conditioned
Diffusion model
(Zero-1-to-3 XL)

Guidance
Input
image

Target camera
trajectory

ViVid
Figure 1. Teaser – we present a strikingly simple training-free method to make already available novel-view synthesis diffusion models
more consistent both in terms of the desired viewing angle and the content—combining it with video diffusion. As shown in the example,
the results of our method are more consistent with the input images and correspond more to the target views.

Abstract
Generating novel views of an object from a single image
is a challenging task. It requires an understanding of the underlying 3D structure of the object from an image and rendering high-quality, spatially consistent new views. While
recent methods for view synthesis based on diffusion have
shown great progress, achieving consistency among various
view estimates and at the same time abiding by the desired
camera pose remains a critical problem yet to be solved.
In this work, we demonstrate a strikingly simple method,
where we utilize a pre-trained video diffusion model to solve
this problem. Our key idea is that synthesizing a novel view
could be reformulated as synthesizing a video of a camera going around the object of interest—a scanning video—
* Equal contribution
† Work done while visiting University of British Columbia

which then allows us to leverage the powerful priors that a
video diffusion model would have learned. Thus, to perform
novel-view synthesis, we create a smooth camera trajectory
to the target view that we wish to render, and denoise using
both a view-conditioned diffusion model and a video diffusion model. By doing so, we obtain a highly consistent novel
view synthesis, outperforming the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis from a single image is an interesting
problem in Computer Vision as it requires an understanding
of the 3D characteristics of an object or a scene, simply by
looking at a 2D image. Recent methods have utilized Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [26, 78], and more recently diffusion models [7, 73], including those that expand upon Stable Diffusion [50] such as Zero-1-to-3 [34]. While recent

6775

