This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Incorporating Geo-Diverse Knowledge into Prompting for Increased
Geographical Robustness in Object Recognition

1

Kyle Buettner1 , Sina Malakouti2 , Xiang Lorraine Li1,2 , Adriana Kovashka1,2
Intelligent Systems Program, 2 Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
{buettnerk, sem238}@pitt.edu, {xianglli, kovashka}@cs.pitt.edu
https://krbuettner.github.io/GeoKnowledgePrompting

Abstract
Existing object recognition models have been shown to
lack robustness in diverse geographical scenarios due to
domain shifts in design and context. Class representations
need to be adapted to more accurately reflect an object concept under these shifts. In the absence of training data
from target geographies, we hypothesize that geographically diverse descriptive knowledge of categories can enhance robustness. For this purpose, we explore the feasibility of probing a large language model for geography-based
object knowledge, and we examine the effects of integrating knowledge into zero-shot and learnable soft prompting with CLIP. Within this exploration, we propose geography knowledge regularization to ensure that soft prompts
trained on a source set of geographies generalize to an unseen target set. Accuracy gains over prompting baselines on
DollarStreet while training only on Europe data are up to
+2.8/1.2/1.6 on target data from Africa/Asia/Americas, and
+4.6 overall on the hardest classes. Competitive performance is shown vs. few-shot target training, and analysis is
provided to direct future study of geographical robustness.

1. Introduction
The performance of object recognition models degrades
when tested in new geographies (e.g., cities, countries, continents) [7, 21, 33, 39, 43]. Numerous factors contribute to
the challenging problem of geographical domain shift, such
as cross-geography changes in object design/parts, materials, and context. These changes in turn may be due to cultural, climate, or economic differences around the world.
Recent work has shown standard adaptation techniques fail
when used for geographical domain shifts [21, 33], but there
has yet to be significant progress in the creation of techniques that improve geographical robustness. Such progress
is necessary to ensure equitable use of AI in the future.

Figure 1. Descriptive knowledge can address concept shifts
across geographies. Observe the wide range of object designs and
contexts in the DollarStreet [11] category tools around the world.
Our work’s premise is that textual representations for classes in
vision-language models can be enhanced to better suit diverse object representations across geographies. Map made with [16].

Overall, models need representations that adequately
capture a category’s various forms around the world. A
natural solution is to collect training data of objects from
different regions. However, this approach is expensive,
takes significant effort, and is difficult for regions with limited Internet access. Fortunately, geographical shifts have a
unique property compared to other common domain shifts
(e.g. ones due to artistic style or weather changes)—they
can be addressed with descriptive knowledge about concept changes. In other words, it is possible to describe the
features of an object in a region and use this information
to adapt a model’s default representation. For instance, as
shown in Fig. 1, for rural areas in Papua New Guinea, tools
can be described as being used for “cooking, hunting, and
fishing”, and for rural areas in Malawi, tools may often be
“made of metal and wood, for farming”. Models should account for diverse presentations and contexts of a category
and not be limited to biased presentations (e.g. if the model
learns tools as just being “metallic with logos”).
We examine the effects of probing geo-diverse knowledge in two ways. First, we analyze whether a vision-

13515

