This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

pix2gestalt: Amodal Segmentation by Synthesizing Wholes
Ege Ozguroglu1 Ruoshi Liu1 Dı́dac Surı́s1 Dian Chen2 Achal Dave2 Pavel Tokmakov2 Carl Vondrick1
1

Columbia University 2 Toyota Research Institute
gestalt.cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
We introduce pix2gestalt, a framework for zero-shot
amodal segmentation, which learns to estimate the shape
and appearance of whole objects that are only partially
visible behind occlusions. By capitalizing on large-scale
diffusion models and transferring their representations to
this task, we learn a conditional diffusion model for reconstructing whole objects in challenging zero-shot cases, including examples that break natural and physical priors,
such as art. As training data, we use a synthetically curated
dataset containing occluded objects paired with their whole
counterparts. Experiments show that our approach outperforms supervised baselines on established benchmarks. Our
model can furthermore be used to significantly improve the
performance of existing object recognition and 3D reconstruction methods in the presence of occlusions.

1. Introduction
Although only parts of the objects in Figure 1 are visible,
you are able to visualize the whole object, recognize the
category, and imagine its 3D geometry. Amodal completion
is the task of predicting the whole shape and appearance of
objects that are not fully visible, and this ability is crucial
for many downstream applications in vision, graphics, and
robotics. Learned by children from an early age [30], the
ability can be partly explained by experience, but we seem
to be able to generalize to challenging situations that break
natural priors and physical constraints with ease. In fact,
we can imagine the appearance of objects during occlusions
that cannot exist in the physical world, such as the horse in
Magritte’s The Blank Signature.
What makes amodal completion challenging compared
to other synthesis tasks is that it requires grouping for both
the visible and hidden parts of an object. To complete an object, we must be able to first recognize the object from partial observations, then synthesize only the missing regions
for the object. Computer vision researchers and gestalt psychologists have extensively studied amodal completion in
the past [10, 17, 18, 21, 33, 35, 51, 55], creating models that explicitly learn figure-ground separation. However,
the prior work has been limited to representing objects in

closed-world settings, restricted to only operating on the
datasets on which they trained.
In this paper, we propose an approach for zero-shot
amodal segmentation and reconstruction by learning to synthesize whole objects first. Our approach capitalizes on
denoising diffusion models [14], which are excellent representations of the natural image manifold and capture all
different types of whole objects and their occlusions. Due
to their large-scale training data, we hypothesize such pretrained models have implicitly learned amodal representations (Figure 2), which we can reconfigure to encode object grouping and perform amodal completion. By learning
from a synthetic dataset of occlusions and their whole counterparts, we create a conditional diffusion model that, given
an RGB image and a point prompt, generates whole objects
behind occlusions and other obstructions.
Our main result is showing that we are able to achieve
state-of-the-art amodal segmentation results in a zero-shot
setting, outperforming the methods that were specifically
supervised on those benchmarks. We furthermore show that
our method can be used as a drop-in module to significantly
improve the performance of existing object recognition and
3D reconstruction methods in the presence of occlusions.
An additional benefit of the diffusion framework is that it allows sampling several variations of the reconstruction, naturally handling the inherent ambiguity of the occlusions.

2. Related Work
We briefly review related work in amodal completion, analysis by synthesis, and denoising diffusion models for vision.

2.1. Amodal Completion and Segmentation
In this work, we define amodal completion as the task of
generating the image of the whole object [10, 51], amodal
segmentation as generating the segmentation mask of the
whole object [18, 21, 33, 35, 55], and amodal detection as
predicting the bounding box of the whole object [15, 17].
Most prior work focuses on the latter two tasks, due to
the challenges in generating the (possibly ambiguous) pixels behind an occlusion. In addition, to our knowledge, all
prior work on these tasks is limited to a small closed-world

3931

