This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EgoExoLearn: A Dataset for Bridging Asynchronous
Ego- and Exo-centric View of Procedural Activities in Real World
Yifei Huang†‡ , Guo Chen‡ , Jilan Xu‡ , Mingfang Zhang‡ , Lijin Yang, Baoqi Pei
Hongjie Zhang, Lu Dong, Yali Wang∗♯ , Limin Wang∗♭ , Yu Qiao∗
OpenGVLab, Shanghai AI Laboratory
♯Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS
♭Nanjing University

Abstract
Being able to map the activities of others into one’s own
point of view is a fundamental human skill even from a
very early age. Taking a step toward understanding this
human ability, we introduce EgoExoLearn, a large-scale
dataset that emulates the human demonstration following
process, in which individuals record egocentric videos as
they execute tasks guided by exocentric-view demonstration videos. Focusing on the potential applications in daily
assistance and professional support, EgoExoLearn contains egocentric and demonstration video data spanning
120 hours captured in daily life scenarios and specialized
laboratories. Along with the videos we record high-quality
gaze data and provide detailed multimodal annotations, formulating a playground for modeling the human ability to
bridge asynchronous procedural actions from different viewpoints. To this end, we present benchmarks such as crossview association, cross-view action planning, and crossview referenced skill assessment, along with detailed analysis. We expect EgoExoLearn can serve as an important resource for bridging the actions across views, thus
paving the way for creating AI agents capable of seamlessly learning by observing humans in the real world. The
dataset and benchmark codes are available at https:
//github.com/OpenGVLab/EgoExoLearn.

1. Introduction
Even as a child, humans can observe the actions of others
and then map them to their own view [4, 34, 100, 105]. With
this ability to asynchronously bridge activities from egocentric and exocentric views [95, 103], humans can watch
others’ demonstrations and replicate the procedures in a new
environment. This ability is especially beneficial when actual physical trials carry the potential of high costs [24], e.g.,
conducting dangerous chemical experiments.
In the wake of recent advancements in AI systems, one
∗ Corresponding authors. † Project lead. ‡ Equal key contributions.

goal for the next generation of AI agents is to perform tasks
in a more embodied setting [94]. However, different from
humans, training these AI agents usually requires demonstration videos taken in a similar environment [75, 119] and
from a congruent perspective with the AI agents, (e.g., the
egocentric point of view [43, 59, 108, 134]). While great
effort has been made into the collection of egocentric data in
different scenarios [18, 30, 106], it remains crucial for the
AI agents to directly learn from demonstration videos taken
in a different place and from a different viewpoint [35, 148].
Realizing this capability can unleash the full potential of
public instructional video data [82] and is also useful in
the human-robot cooperation scenario, especially in novel
environments [57, 77, 128].
Current works towards this goal can be roughly divided
into two directions. One way is to learn models in simulated
environments [11, 64, 79, 89, 92], but it remains difficult for
models in this setting to generalize in the real world [126].
The other direction is to learn from human activity in realworld scenarios. However, attempts to directly combine
existing multiview datasets often yield datasets of inferior
quality or scale [124, 143]. Meanwhile, the few existing
datasets in this direction [99, 106, 109] only record ego- and
exo-view videos in the same environment and in a timesynchronized manner. In reality, when following demonstrations it is often needed to bridge a series of procedural
actions performed in a different place and at a different time.
However, currently, no dataset is available for the exploration of how to bridge asynchronous procedural activities
in realistic egocentric and exocentric viewpoints.
To address this lack of dataset issue, we introduce
EgoExoLearn, a large-scale dataset containing demonstration videos and corresponding egocentric videos where the
camera wearers follow the demonstrations and perform the
same task in a different environment, as shown in Figure 1.
Targeting two potential applications, i.e., daily assistance and
professional support, EgoExoLearn consists of 747 video
sequences spanning a total of 120 hours of footage, ranging
from daily food-making to specialized laboratory experi-

22072

