This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Diversity and Realism of Distilled Dataset:
An Efficient Dataset Distillation Paradigm

1

Peng Sun1,2
Zhejiang University

2

Bei Shi2 Daiwei Yu3,∗ Tao Lin2,†
Westlake University 3 Independent Researcher

sunpeng@westlake.edu.cn, shibei0430@gmail.com, ydw.ccm@gmail.com, lintao@westlake.edu.cn

…

Update

…

…
Synthesize
Soft Label

Outer Loop

ResNet-18
Top-1 Accuracy (%)

Image

MobileNet-V2
EfficientNet-B0

Ours

42 40

31

SOTA

21

15 12

Inner Loop

Optimization-based Paradigm

Proposed Paradigm

40

65

73

2113 3783 4412

Data Synthesis Time (ms)

Figure 1. Proposed paradigm vs. optimization-based paradigm. Left is the mainstream optimization-based dataset distillation and middle
is our proposed non-optimizing paradigm. Right is top-1 validation accuracy vs. synthesis time per image on ImageNet-1K with IPC = 10
(10 Images Per Class). Models used for distillation include ResNet-18, EfficientNet-B0, and MobileNet-V2; we use ResNet-18 for evaluation.

Abstract
Contemporary machine learning, which involves training large neural networks on massive datasets, faces significant computational challenges. Dataset distillation, as a recent emerging strategy, aims to compress real-world datasets
for efficient training. However, this line of research currently
struggles with large-scale and high-resolution datasets, hindering its practicality and feasibility. Thus, we re-examine
existing methods and identify three properties essential for
real-world applications: realism, diversity, and efficiency.
As a remedy, we propose RDED, a novel computationallyefficient yet effective data distillation paradigm, to enable
both diversity and realism of the distilled data. Extensive empirical results over various model architectures and
datasets demonstrate the advancement of RDED: we can
distill a dataset to 10 images per class from full ImageNet1K [6] within 7 minutes, achieving a notable 42% accuracy
with ResNet-18 [14] on a single RTX-4090 GPU (while
the SOTA only achieves 21% but requires 6 hours). Code:
https://github.com/LINs-lab/RDED.
† Corresponding author.

∗ Work done during Daiwei’s visit to Westlake University.

1. Introduction
The success of modern deep learning could be largely attributed to the fact of scaling and increasing both neural architectures and training datasets [12, 14, 16, 17]. Though this
pattern shows great potential to propel artificial intelligence
forward, the challenge of high computational requirements
remains a noteworthy concern [4, 39, 45]. Dataset distillation methods have recently emerged [39, 45] and attracted
attention for their exceptional performance [1, 2, 38, 50–52].
The key idea is compressing original full datasets by synthesizing and optimizing a small dataset, where training a model
using the synthetic dataset can achieve a similar performance
to the original.
However, these methods suffer a high computational burden [5, 44] due to the bi-level optimization-based paradigm.
Moreover, the synthetic images exhibit certain non-realistic
features (see Figure 2b and 2d) that have materialized due
to overfitting to a specific architecture used during the optimization process, which leads to difficulties in generalizing
to other architectures [2, 31].
A notable work [2] investigates the relationship between
realism and expressiveness in synthetic datasets. The findings reveal a trade-off: more realistic images come at the

9390

