This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MaskINT: Video Editing via Interpolative Non-autoregressive Masked
Transformers
Haoyu Ma1,2 *, Shahin Mahdizadehaghdam2 , Bichen Wu2 , Zhipeng Fan2 , Yuchao Gu3 ,
Wenliang Zhao2 , Lior Shapira2 , Xiaohui Xie1
1
University of California, Irvine, 2 GenAI, Meta, 3 National University of Singapore
Project Page: https://maskint.github.io

Abstract
Recent advances in generative AI have significantly enhanced image and video editing, particularly in the context
of text prompt control. State-of-the-art approaches predominantly rely on diffusion models to accomplish these tasks.
However, the computational demands of diffusion-based
methods are substantial, often necessitating large-scale
paired datasets for training, and therefore challenging the
deployment in real applications. To address these issues,
this paper breaks down the text-based video editing task
into two stages. First, we leverage an pre-trained text-toimage diffusion model to simultaneously edit few keyframes
in an zero-shot way. Second, we introduce an efficient
model called MaskINT, which is built on non-autoregressive
masked generative transformers and specializes in frame interpolation between the edited keyframes, using the structural guidance from intermediate frames. Experimental results suggest that our MaskINT achieves comparable performance with diffusion-based methodologies, while significantly improve the inference time. This research offers a
practical solution for text-based video editing and showcases the potential of non-autoregressive masked generative
transformers in this domain.

1. Introduction
Text-based video editing, which aims to modify a video’s
content or style in accordance with a provided text description while preserving the motion and semantic layout, plays
an important role in a wide range of applications, including
advertisement, live streaming, and the movie industry, etc.
This challenging task requires that edited video frames not
only match the given text prompt but also ensure the consistency across all video frames.
Recently, numerous studies have showcased the impressive capabilities of diffusion models [22] in image genera* Work done during an internship at GenAI, Meta

tion and editing with text prompts [6, 13, 39, 44, 45, 51, 61].
When extending these foundation text-to-image (T2I) models to video generation and editing, a challenge is to maintain the temporal consistency. Existing solutions can be
mainly divided into two ways: One is to finetune T2I models with additional temporal modules on paired text-video
datasets [5, 9, 17, 23, 32]. However, the lack of extensive
paired text-video datasets hinders these works from attaining the same level of performance as seen in image editing.
The other involves leveraging a T2I models in a zero-shot
manner [8, 19, 29, 41, 62]. These works find that extending the spatial self-attention across frames can produce consistent content across frames [56]. However, extended attention can lead to inconsistent editing of details due to its
implicit temporal constraints. Moreover, while these techniques can generate high-fidelity videos, using cumbersome
diffusion models to generate all frames is time-consuming.
The integration of the extended spatial-temporal attention
further exacerbates the running time, making them less
practical for real-world applications. This raises the question: Is it necessary to utilize tedious diffusion models to
generate all video frames?
In this paper, we propose MaskINT, an efficient promptbased video editing framework designed to generate highquality videos swiftly (Fig. 1). MaskINT disentangles the
task into two separate stages. In the first stage, we utilize
pre-trained T2I models with extended attention to jointly
edit only two keyframes (i.e., the initial and last frames)
from the video clip, guided by the provided text prompt.
In the second stage, we introduce a novel structure-aware
frame interpolation module based on non-autoregressive
generative Transformers [10, 11, 60], which generates all
intermediate frames in parallel with structural cues and iteratively refine predictions in a few steps. Our framework
offers several advantages: First, through the disentanglement of frame editing and interpolation, MaskINT eliminates the requirement for paired text-video datasets during training, thereby enabling us to train the MaskINT using large-scale video-only datasets. Second, the usage of

7403

