This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LASO: Language-guided Affordance Segmentation on 3D Object
Yicong Li1 , Na Zhao2 ,* Junbin Xiao1 , Chun Feng3 , Xiang Wang3⇤†, Tat-seng Chua1 ,
1

National University of Singapore, 2 Singapore University of Technology and Design,
3
University of Science and Technology of China,
liyicong@u.nus.edu,na zhao@sutd.edu.sg,junbin@comp.nus.edu.sg
fengchun3364@mail.ustc.edu.cn,xiangwang1223@gmail.com,dcscts@nus.edu.sg

1. Introduction
Affordance describes specific regions on an object that enable or facilitate certain human interactions. In this context,
* Corresponding author.
† Xiang Wang is also affiliated with Institute of Artificial Intelligence,

Institute of Dataspace, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center.

Where would your hand touch, when you
try to open this microwave?

Open

To hold this mug securely, which areas
should your palm and fingers grip?

Grasp

Affordance Knowledge
While trying to move this chair, at which
points on the chair will you exert force?
How can you go through this door?

Move

Referred Point Cloud

Segmenting affordance in 3D data is key for bridging
perception and action in robots. Existing efforts mostly focus on the visual side and overlook the affordance knowledge from a semantic aspect. This oversight not only limits their generalization to unseen objects, but more importantly, hinders their synergy with large language models (LLMs) which are excellent task planners that can decompose an overarching command into agent-actionable
instructions. With this regard, we propose a novel task,
Language-guided Affordance Segmentation on 3D Object
(LASO), which challenges a model to segment a 3D object’s part relevant to a given affordance question. To facilitate the task, we contribute a dataset comprising 19,751
point-question pairs, covering 8434 object shapes and 870
expert-crafted questions. As a pioneer solution, we further propose PointRefer, which highlights an adaptive fusion module to identify target affordance regions at different scales. To ensure a text-aware segmentation, we adopt
a set of affordance queries conditioned on linguistic cues
to generate dynamic kernels. These kernels are further
used to convolute with point features and generate a segmentation mask. Comprehensive experiments and analyses validate PointRefer’s effectiveness. With these efforts,
We hope that LASO can steer the direction of 3D affordance, guiding it towards enhanced integration with the
evolving capabilities of LLMs. Code and data are available
at https://github.com/yl3800/LASO.

Situated Question

Abstract

Open

Figure 1. Illustration of LASO, language-guided affordance segmentation on 3D object. Given an object point cloud and a question, the model is expected to segment the functional part delineated in question.

the task of 3D affordance segmentation is raised to identify
parts of 3D objects that imply a certain function. It has been
deemed as a critical step in bridging perception and operation in the physical world for an embodied agent, thus has
shown substantial impact on practical applications such as
robotic manipulation [10, 14, 31].
Recently, the advancement of Large Language Models (LLMs) has enabled their deployment as task planners, breaking down an intricate instruction into a sequence of affordance-aware, robot-executable instructions
[12, 35, 36]. This equips intelligent agents with the capability to undertake complex tasks. For example, the overarching command “Pass me the mug in the microwave” can
be systematically deconstructed into a series of affordanceaware inquiries: Q1) “How to get to the microwave?”,
Q2) “How to open the microwave”, Q3) “How to grab the
mug?”, and Q4) “How to return to the user?” Ideally, each
query would correspond to a predefined subtask that effectively translates language instructions into actionable steps.
While Q1 and Q4 are related to language-conditioned path
planning [42] and navigation [37], Q2 and Q3, which involve the ‘open microwave’ and ‘grab the mug’ actions, ex-

14251

