This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rapid 3D Model Generation with Intuitive 3D Input
Shangzhan Zhang1 *
Chaotao Ding2 *
Tianrun Chen1,4 *
Chunan Yu2
Ying Zang2†
Zejian Li3†
Sida Peng3
Lingyun Sun1
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
School of Information Engineering, Huzhou University
3
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
4
KOKONI3D, Moxin (Huzhou) Technology Co., LTD.
tianrun.chen@kokoni3d.com

{zhang3z, zejianlee, sunly}@zju.edu.cn

{2021388117, 2022388238}@stu.zjhu.edu.cn

02750@zjhu.edu.cn

Figure 1. We propose Deep3DVRSketch, a pioneering way of 3D modeling which
takes 3D sketches drawn by novice users in AR/VR devices as input and accordingly generates consistent high-quality 3D models, alleviating requirements of human skill and effort in traditional modeling.

Abstract
With the emergence of AR/VR, 3D models are in tremendous demand. However, conventional 3D modeling with
Computer-Aided Design software requires much expertise
and is difficult for novice users. We find that AR/VR devices, in addition to serving as effective display mediums,
can offer a promising potential as an intuitive 3D model
creation tool, especially with the assistance of AI generative models. Here, we propose Deep3DVRSketch, the first
3D model generation network that inputs 3D VR sketches
from novice users and generates highly consistent 3D models in multiple categories within seconds, irrespective of the
users’ drawing abilities. We also contribute KO3D+, the
largest 3D sketch-shape dataset. Our method pre-trains a
conditional diffusion model on quality 3D data, then finetunes an encoder to map 3D sketches onto the generator’s
manifold using an adaptive curriculum strategy for limited
ground truths. In our experiment, our approach achieves
state-of-the-art performance in both model quality and fidelity with real-world input from novice users, and users
can even draw and obtain very detailed geometric structures. In our user study, users were able to complete the

3D modeling tasks over 10 times faster using our approach
compared to conventional CAD software tools. We believe
that our Deep3DVRSketch and KO3D+ dataset can offer
a promising solution for future 3D modeling in metaverse
era. Check the project page at http://research.
kokoni3d.com/Deep3DVRSketch.

1. Introduction
Today, a surge in demand for versatile and customizable
3D content has been catalyzed by the emerging trend of
AR/VR [6, 55]. The virtual landscapes of the metaverse
are calling out for creators with visions of immersive experiences waiting to be actualized. Yet the traditional tools of
3D modeling with computer-aided design (CAD) software
pose barriers to crafting such imaginative domains. Existing
widely-used CAD platforms demand substantial technical
proficiency, including both command knowledge to understand numerous software functions and strategic knowledge
to decompose designs into sequential modeling commands
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding Author

12554

