This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MART: Masked Affective RepresenTation Learning via
Masked Temporal Distribution Distillation
https://zzcheng.top/MART
Zhicheng Zhang1,2
Pancheng Zhao1,2
Eunil Park3
Jufeng Yang1,2,‡
1
VCIP & TMCC & DISSec, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2
Nankai International Advanced Research Institute (SHENZHEN· FUTIAN)
3
College of Computing, Sungkyunkwan University
gloryzzc6@sina.com,pc.zhao99@gmail.com,eunilpark@skku.edu,yangjufeng@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Limited training data is a long-standing problem for
video emotion analysis (VEA). Existing works leverage the
power of large-scale image datasets for transferring while
failing to extract the temporal correlation of affective cues
in the video. Inspired by psychology research and empirical theory, we verify that the degree of emotion may vary
in different segments of the video, thus introducing the sentiment complementary and emotion intrinsic among temporal segments. We propose an MAE-style method for learning robust affective representation of videos via masking,
termed MART. First, we extract the affective cues of the lexicon and verify the extracted one by computing its matching
score with video content, in terms of sentiment and emotion
scores alongside the temporal dimension. Then, with the
verified cues, we propose masked affective modeling to recover temporal emotion distribution. We present temporal
affective complementary learning that pulls the complementary part and pushes the intrinsic one of masked multimodal
features, where the constraint is set with cross-modal attention among features to mask the video and recover the degree of emotion among segments. Extensive experiments on
five benchmarks show the superiority of our method in video
sentiment analysis, video emotion recognition, multimodal
sentiment analysis, and multimodal emotion recognition.

1. Introduction
Video emotion analysis (VEA) aims to uncover the underlying attitudes of viewers to videos [75]. With the population of video in social media [30, 80, 85], VEA has been
developed for various applications in mental health protection (video violence detection [37]), online education toolk‡ Corresponding Author.

Time

Emotion
Distribution

Emotion
Joy
Audio

Gentle tone
Laughing

Visual

Text

P2: Godfather. I have
P1: Nazoline,my friend.
a daughter, she and
What can I do for you?
Enzo …

P2: You understand
everything, thank you.

Figure 1. A segment from The Godfather (1972) and the corresponding emotion scores predicted by [84]. The colored texts
indicate the emotional words given by looking up the affective lexicon [7] and the rectangles show the related video content towards
emotional words.

its (automatically analyzing student’s attitude [4]), commercial analytics (consumer sentiment analysis [28, 32]), etc.
Entering the deep learning era [21, 67, 72], more and more
researchers pay attention to building machines for understanding human emotions [44, 47].
State-of-the-art VEA methods leverage the power of
deep networks to extract affective representation and training networks in a fully supervised manner [48, 84]. Such
a paradigm has shown its effectiveness but fatally required large-scale labeled datasets. It is time-consuming
and extremely expensive to annotate emotional labels of
videos [81]. Especially when considering the emotional nature of subjective perception [83], a video is required to be
annotated multiple times (e.g., 6 in PERR [16] and 10 in

12830

