This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TEA: Test-time Energy Adaptation
Yige Yuan1,2 , Bingbing Xu1 *, Liang Hou3 , Fei Sun1 , Huawei Shen1,2 , Xueqi Cheng1,2
1
CAS Key Laboratory of AI Safety, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Kuaishou Technology
{yuanyige20z, xubingbing, sunfei, shenhuawei, cxq}@ict.ac.cn, lianghou96@gmail.com

Abstract
Test Time Adaptation (TTA) aims to improve model generalizability when test data diverges from training distribution, with the distinct advantage of not requiring access
to training data and processes, especially valuable in the
context of pre-trained models. However, current TTA methods fail to address the fundamental issue: covariate shift,
i.e., the decreased generalizability can be attributed to the
model’s reliance on the marginal distribution of the training data, which may impair model calibration and introduce confirmation bias. To address this, we propose a
novel energy-based perspective, enhancing the model’s perception of target data distributions without requiring access to training data or processes. Building on this perspective, we introduce Test-time Energy Adaptation (TEA),
which transforms the trained classifier into an energy-based
model and aligns the model’s distribution with the test
data’s, enhancing its ability to perceive test distributions
and thus improving overall generalizability. Extensive experiments across multiple tasks, benchmarks and architectures demonstrate TEA’s superior generalization performance against state-of-the-art methods. Further in-depth
analyses reveal that TEA can equip the model with a comprehensive perception of test distribution, ultimately paving
the way toward improved generalization and calibration1 .

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks, despite their remarkable performance under the assumption of independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) training and test data [26, 33, 59], significantly degrade in real-world scenarios where unseen test
data diverges from the training distribution. This limitation,
known as distribution shift or domain shift, emphasizes the
pressing need for generalizability across shifted test distributions [49, 57, 61, 67]. To tackle this issue, recent studies
* Corresponding author
1 Code is available at https://github.com/yuanyige/tea

Figure 1. Performance vs. energy on model trained with original
distribution, tested across various shifted distributions. Upper: error rate change within energy score groups. Lower: loss variation
with energy scores, each point denoting a distribution. Marker
styles and opacity reflect distribution types and divergence.

of Test Time Adaptation (TTA) [37, 60, 70] began considering the incorporation of unlabeled test data and leveraging
it to fine-tune the source model in an unsupervised manner. This paradigm has garnered significant attention due
to its ability to operate without access to training data or
involvement with the training process. In the era of large
open-source models [9, 58, 63], where models are publicly
available but the training data and training process remain
inaccessible due to privacy and resource restrictions [6, 23],
TTA emerges as especially beneficial and practical.
Existing TTA methods can be broadly categorized into
three classes [37]. Normalization-based methods [41, 52]
adjust the BatchNorm statistics of the model with test data
statistics. Entropy-based methods [45, 46, 60] fine-tune
the model by minimizing the prediction entropy. Pseudolabeling-based methods [34, 36] utilize test-time generated
labels for updates. While these methods have been empiri-

23901

