This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Loose Inertial Poser: Motion Capture with IMU-attached Loose-Wear Jacket
Chengxu Zuo1
1

Yiming Wang1
Lishuang Zhan1
Shihui Guo1∗†
Feng Xu2
Yipeng Qin3

School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
3

2

Xinyu Yi2

School of Software and BNRist, Tsinghua University, China

School of Computer Science & Informatics, Cardiff University, UK

Abstract
Existing wearable motion capture methods typically demand tight on-body fixation (often using straps) for reliable
sensing, limiting their application in everyday life. In this
paper, we introduce Loose Inertial Poser, a novel motion
capture solution with high wearing comfortableness, by integrating four Inertial Measurement Units (IMUs) into a
loose-wear jacket. Specifically, we address the challenge
of scarce loose-wear IMU training data by proposing a
Secondary Motion AutoEncoder (SeMo-AE) that learns to
model and synthesize the effects of secondary motion between the skin and loose clothing on IMU data. SeMoAE is leveraged to generate a diverse synthetic dataset of
loose-wear IMU data to augment training for the pose estimation network and significantly improve its accuracy.
For validation, we collected a dataset with various subjects and 2 wearing styles (zipped and unzipped). Experimental results demonstrate that our approach maintains
high-quality real-time posture estimation even in loosewear scenarios. Our dataset and code are available at:
https://github.com/ZuoCX1996/Loose-Inertial-Poser.

1. Introduction
Wearable motion capture enjoys its advantages in terms
of portability, privacy friendliness and robustness against
extreme lighting/occlusion compared to vision-based approaches. Recent works achieve posture estimation with a
sparse number (3-6) of IMUs [13, 16, 33, 54, 55]. However,
these methods still require the IMU sensors to be tightly attached to the body for stable measurement, which inevitably
This work is supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China (62072383, 61702433), the public technology service platform
project of Xiamen City (No.3502Z20231043), the Fundamental Research
Funds for the Central Universities (20720210044). This work is partially
supported by Royal Society (IEC \NSFC \211022) *Corresponding author: Shihui Guo (guoshihui@xmu.edu.cn) †Also with Key Laboratory of
Digital Protection and Intelligent Processing of Intangible Cultural Heritage of Fujian and Taiwan, Ministry of Culture and Tourism.

Figure 1. Loose Inertial Poser (LIP) achieves real-time upper-body
motion capture through a loose-wear jacket equipped with 4 IMUs.

produces uncomfortable wearing experiences. Ideally, if
motion capture can be achieved with our daily (mostly
loose) clothes, the burden on users could be largely reduced,
benefiting applications such as chronic disease monitoring
and ubiquitous body-centric interaction.
The use of loose-wear clothes leads to the challenge that
the secondary motion between clothes and human bodies
degrades the quality of IMU readings for measurements of
body orientation and acceleration. One direct approach to
handle this data fluctuation is to train the model with a large
volume of data that covers all possible secondary motions.
Naively, such data can be collected by simulating IMUattached clothing on existing human pose datasets. Nevertheless, in the case of loose wearing, IMU data simulation
should encompass various body types and dressing styles,
meaning that data simulation must cover a wide range of

2209

