This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Driving Everywhere with Large Language Model Policy Adaptation
Boyi Li1 Yue Wang1,2 Jiageng Mao2 Boris Ivanovic1 Sushant Veer1 Karen Leung1,3 Marco Pavone1,4
1
NVIDIA 2 University of Southern California 3 University of Washington 4 Stanford University

Abstract
Adapting driving behavior to new environments, customs, and laws is a long-standing problem in autonomous
driving, precluding the widespread deployment of autonomous vehicles (AVs). In this paper, we present LLaDA,
a simple yet powerful tool that enables human drivers and
autonomous vehicles alike to drive everywhere by adapting
their tasks and motion plans to traffic rules in new locations. LLaDA achieves this by leveraging the impressive
zero-shot generalizability of large language models (LLMs)
in interpreting the traffic rules in the local driver handbook.
Through an extensive user study, we show that LLaDA’s
instructions are useful in disambiguating in-the-wild unexpected situations. We also demonstrate LLaDA’s ability to
adapt AV motion planning policies in real-world datasets;
LLaDA outperforms baseline planning approaches on all
our metrics. Please check our website for more details:
LLaDA.

1. Introduction
Despite the rapid pace of progress in autonomous driving,
autonomous vehicles (AVs) continue to operate primarily in
geo-fenced areas. A key inhibitor for AVs to be able to drive
everywhere is the variation in traffic rules and norms across
different geographical regions. Traffic rule differences in
different geographic locations can range from significant
(e.g., left-hand driving in the UK and right-hand driving in
the US) to subtle (e.g., right turn on red is acceptable in San
Francisco but not in New York city). In fact, adapting to
new driving rules and common practice is difficult for humans and AVs alike; failure to adapt to local driving norms
can lead to unpredictable and unexpected behaviors which
may result in unsafe situations [15, 35]. Studies have shown
that tourists are more susceptible to accidents [25, 26] that
can sometimes result in injury or death [28]. This calls for
a complete study of policy adaption in current AV systems.
At the same time, LLMs have recently emerged as frontrunners for zero- or few-shot adaptation to out-of-domain
data in various fields, including vision and robotics [6,
16, 17]. Inspired by these works, our goal is to build

Get Driver License from California

Autonomous
Driving

Drive Everywhere with Language Policy

Figure 1. LLaDA enables drivers to obtain instructions in any region all over the world. For instance, the driver gets a driver’s
license in California, USA, our system enables providing prompt
instructions when the driver drives in different regions with different situations.

a Large Language Driving Assistant (LLaDA) that can
rapidly adapt to local traffic rules and customs (Figure 1).
Our method consists of three steps: First, we leverage existing methods to generate an executable policy; second, when
presented with an unexpected situation described in natural language (either by a human prompt or a VLM such as
GPT-4V [24] or LINGO-1 [32]), we leverage a Traffic Rule
Extractor (TRE) to extract informative traffic rules relevant
to the current scenario from the local traffic code; finally,
we pass the TRE’s output along with the original plan to a
pre-trained LLM (GPT-4V [24] in this paper) to adapt the
plan accordingly. We test our method on the nuScenes [2]
dataset and achieve improvements in motion planning under
novel scenarios. We also provide extensive ablation studies
and visualizations to further analyze our method.
Contributions. Our core contributions are three-fold:
1. We propose LLaDA, a training-free mechanism to assist
human drivers and adapt autonomous driving policies to
new environments by distilling leveraging the zero-shot
generalizability of LLMs.
2. LLaDA can be immediately applied to any autonomous
driving stack to improve their performance in new locations with different traffic rules.
3. Our method achieves performance improvements over
previous state-of-the-arts, as verified by user studies and
experiments on the nuScenes dataset.

14948

