This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weakly-Supervised Audio-Visual Video Parsing with Prototype-based
Pseudo-Labeling
Kranthi Kumar Rachavarapu
IIT Madras

Kalyan Ramakrishnan
University of Oxford

Rajagopalan A. N.
IIT Madras

kranthi.rachavarapu@gmail.com

kalyanr@robots.ox.ac.uk

raju@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
In this paper, we address the weakly-supervised AudioVisual Video Parsing (AVVP) problem, which aims at labeling events in a video as audible, visible, or both, and
temporally localizing and classifying them into known categories. This is challenging since we only have access to
video-level (weak) event labels when training but need to
predict event labels at the segment (frame) level at test time.
Recent methods employ multiple-instance learning (MIL)
techniques that tend to focus solely on the most discriminative segments, resulting in frequent misclassifications. Our
idea is to first construct several “prototype” features for
each event class by clustering key segments identified for
the event in the training data. We then assign pseudo labels
to all training segments based on their feature similarities
with these prototypes and re-train the model under weak
and strong supervision. We facilitate this by structuring the
feature space with contrastive learning using pseudo labels.
Experiments show that we outperform existing methods for
weakly-supervised AVVP. We also show that learning with
weak and iteratively re-estimated pseudo labels can be interpreted as an expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm,
providing further insight for our training procedure.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we explore the problem of weakly-supervised
Audio-Visual Video Parsing (AVVP) [48], where the goal
is to classify events in a video and localize them over time
and modalities, given only video-level (weak) event labels
for training. Such a formulation is attractive since it forgoes
the need for expensive and tedious fine-grained labeling.
Moreover, other weakly-supervised video-based temporal
prediction tasks can be posed as special cases of AVVP.
For instance, Audio-Visual Event Localization (AVEL) [47]
considers events that are simultaneously audible and visible,
whereas Temporal Action Localization (TAL) [10] considers only visible events. AVVP is challenging as an event

1 Sec

GT
MIL
Ours

GT
MIL
Ours

Guitar
Guitar
Guitar

2 Sec

3 Sec

4 Sec

5 Sec

Guitar

Singing
Singing
Singing
Visual frames are similar but predicted labels are different
Visual frames are different but predicted labels are same

Figure 1. Example predictions of a model trained using MIL under
weak supervision [48] and our method. For clarity, we only show
visual events. The MIL model detects the event “Guitar” correctly
in the beginning, but there are some mistakes (red dotted boxes)
later on. Moreover, although the last three frames are similar, they
are labeled inconsistently by the model. Our method consistently
localizes well. “GT” is the ground truth.

could occur in just the audio stream, visual stream, or both
at the same time. Audio-visual data is ubiquitous, with
highly variable events in terms of appearance and duration.
Recent methods for weakly-supervised AVVP [30, 48]
use multiple-instance learning (MIL) [7] techniques that
optimize for video-level labels during training and make
frame-level predictions during evaluation. Here, videolevel predictions are obtained by pooling (aggregating) the
frame-level predictions. A drawback of MIL approaches is
that a model may learn to focus solely on the most discriminative (“prominent”) instances (here, audio/visual frames
in a video) and still minimize the training loss successfully.
This means such models may not reliably detect the full
temporal extent of events. Fig. 1 shows an example where
an MIL model [48] for AVVP fails to localize events accurately. Moreover, the model labels frames that are visually
similar differently. Another reason for misclassifications in
MIL models is that they typically contain a frame-level classifier with a single weight vector per event class. However,
this may be insufficient to capture the intra-class variation

18952

