This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HashPoint: Accelerated Point Searching and Sampling for Neural Rendering
Jiahao Ma1,2 , Miaomiao Liu1 , David Ahmedt-Aristizabal2 , Chuong Nguyen2
Australian National University1 , CSIRO Data612
{jiahao.ma, miaomiao.liu}@anu.edu.au
{jiahao.ma, david.ahmedtaristizabal, chuong.nguyen}@data61.csiro.au

(a) HashPoint combines rasterization and ray-tracking approaches to optimize point searching and adaptive sampling on primary surfaces. (A) A ray
intersects at six surfaces a∼f. (B) Zoomed-in surfaces to show sample points in green and red, with the nearby retrieved point cloud in blue. A shift from
green to red represents increasing blend weight of the sample points. (C) The graph illustrates opacity and rendering weight changes along a camera ray.
The first peak, labeled ‘a’, indicates the primary surface where the ray first hit. Higher rendering weights mean more significant sample points. Notably,
the primary surface often dominates the rendering process. (D) Sampling across multiple surfaces versus our HashPoint which accelerates the process via
sampling solely on the primary surface.

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of efficient
point searching and sampling for volume neural rendering. Within this realm, two typical approaches are employed: rasterization and ray tracing. The rasterizationbased methods enable real-time rendering at the cost of
increased memory and lower fidelity. In contrast, the
ray-tracing-based methods yield superior quality but demand longer rendering time. We solve this problem by our
HashPoint method combining these two strategies, leveraging rasterization for efficient point searching and sampling, and ray marching for rendering. Our method optimizes point searching by rasterizing points within the camera’s view, organizing them in a hash table, and facilitating
rapid searches. Notably, we accelerate the rendering process by adaptive sampling on the primary surface encountered by the ray. Our approach yields substantial speed-up
for a range of state-of-the-art ray-tracing-based methods,
maintaining equivalent or superior accuracy across synthetic and real test datasets. The code will be available at
https://jiahao-ma.github.io/hashpoint/.

1. Introduction
Photo-realistic rendering, a significant challenge in
computer vision, has seen notable advancements with
NeRF [36] and its extensions [4, 5, 33, 65]. Approaches
in [14, 36, 36, 61, 65] rely on global MLPs to reconstruct
radiance fields across the entire space through ray march-

ing. However, this method results in slow per-scene neural
network fitting and extensive, often unnecessary, sampling
of vast empty space, leading to prohibitive reconstruction
and rendering times. To overcome this challenge, point
clouds are introduced as a straightforward representation
of surfaces in space, forming point-based neural radiance
fields [2, 10, 11, 23, 25, 41, 46, 48, 62, 66]. Point clouds approximate scene geometry and encode appearance features,
expediting the rendering process by sampling and aggregating features near multiple surfaces represented by the point
cloud. Existing methods in this field typically adopt two
rendering strategies: rasterization and ray tracing.
In the rasterization framework [2, 8, 17, 23–25, 32, 46,
64, 66], points are initially projected onto the image plane,
where pixel values are determined by the color of the nearest point using z-buffer mechanism. While this approach
enables real-time rendering, it often exhibits visible holes
stemming from the density of the point cloud. To address
this limitation, some methods [2, 13, 23, 46, 66] leverage
networks such as U-Net [47] for hole filling by employing
feature downsampling and upsampling. However, this approach struggles to generate high-fidelity details. Alternative strategies are to assign each point as a 3D shape such
as an oriented disk [17, 24, 32, 42, 64] or a sphere [27].
Nevertheless, determining the optimal size for these shapes
is a challenging task. Small shapes can lead to gaps in the
rendering, while larger ones may introduce artifacts. Additionally, significant memory is often required for storage.

4462

