This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GLID: Pre-training a Generalist Encoder-Decoder Vision Model
Jihao Liu1,2 ∗

Jinliang Zheng5 ∗ Yu Liu2,3
Hongsheng Li1,3,4
2
CUHK MMLab
SenseTime Research
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 CPII under InnoHK
5
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
1

Abstract

51.2

52.7

76.7
75.8

This paper proposes a GeneraLIst encoder-Decoder
(GLID) pre-training method for better handling various
downstream computer vision tasks. While self-supervised
pre-training approaches, e.g., Masked Autoencoder, have
shown success in transfer learning, task-specific subarchitectures are still required to be appended for different downstream tasks, which cannot enjoy the benefits of
large-scale pre-training. GLID overcomes this challenge
by allowing the pre-trained generalist encoder-decoder to
be fine-tuned on various vision tasks with minimal taskspecific architecture modifications. In the GLID training
scheme, pre-training pretext task and other downstream tasks
are modeled as “query-to-answer” problems, including the
pre-training pretext task and other downstream tasks. We
pre-train a task-agnostic encoder-decoder with query-mask
pairs. During fine-tuning, GLID maintains the pre-trained
encoder-decoder and queries, only replacing the topmost
linear transformation layer with task-specific linear heads.
This minimizes the pretrain-finetune architecture inconsistency and enables the pre-trained model to better adapt to
downstream tasks. GLID achieves competitive performance
on various vision tasks, including object detection, image
segmentation, pose estimation, and depth estimation, outperforming or matching specialist models such as Mask2Former,
DETR, ViTPose, and BinsFormer.

1. Introduction
Pre-training with self-supervision on large-scale unlabeled
images has achieved great success in visual representation learning. The representative Masked Image Modeling
(MIM) [1, 2, 13, 15, 18, 38, 41] methods demonstrate that
the pre-trained models have impressive scale capabilities
and can greatly boost performance on downstream vision
tasks, including image classification, object detection, image
segmentation, pose estimation, depth estimation, etc.
* Equal contribution

49.7

47.5

Object
Detection
mAP ↑

Pose
Estimation
mAP ↑

Semantic
Segment
mIoU ↑

30.9

44.7
43.0

Panoptic
Segment
PQ ↑

MAE Backbone-only

29.7

0.327
0.293

Instance
Segment
mAP ↑

Depth
Estimation
RMSE ↓

GLID

Figure 1. MAE backbone-only pre-training vs. GLID pre-training.
The GLID pre-training allows the pre-trained encoder-decoder to
be fine-tuned on various vision tasks without task-specific decoder
designs and outperforms MAE backbone-only pre-training.

Despite the significant progress made by MIM pretraining, existing approaches still face architectural gaps
between the upstream pre-training and downstream finetuning. In particular, existing approaches [2, 18, 38] mainly
focus on pre-training the vision backbone. However, to
tackle the aforementioned downstream vision tasks, taskspecific sub-architectures are still needed, e.g., a new detection decoder for object detection [5] and a segmentation
decoder for panoptic segmentation [9]. Those task-specific
sub-architectures are complicated and need to be trained
from scratch on downstream tasks and therefore cannot enjoy
the benefits from large-scale pre-training. Such designs lag
behind the progress in natural language processing where the
same architecture can handle both the pre-training tasks and
downstream tasks with minimal differences. More recently,
there have been notable advancements in tackling diverse vision tasks with a generalist architecture [9, 19, 20, 23, 31, 37]
and can achieve competitive performance compared to the
task-specific specialist models. However, only the vision
backbones in their generalist architectures are pre-trained
while the heavy decoders still need to be trained from scratch
on downstream tasks. Consequently, these generalist approaches typically require a large amount of task-specific
data to achieve satisfactory performance.
To tackle the aforementioned problems, this paper introduces a self-supervised pre-training method to pre-train a
GeneraLIst encoder-Decoder (GLID) vision model, which

22851

