This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ReconFusion: 3D Reconstruction with Diffusion Priors
Rundi Wu1,2 * Ben Mildenhall1 * Philipp Henzler1 Keunhong Park1 Ruiqi Gao3 Daniel Watson3
Pratul P. Srinivasan1 Dor Verbin1 Jonathan T. Barron1 Ben Poole3 Aleksander Hołyński1 *
1

Google Research

2

Columbia University

3

Google DeepMind

* denotes equal contribution

PSNR

ReconFusion
Zip-NeRF

ReconFusion

30
25

15
10 3 6 9 18 27 54 81
Number of Views

Zip-NeRF [2]

20

3 views

9 views

54 views

Figure 1. Methods for reconstructing a 3D scene from images, such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF), often exhibit artifacts when
trained with few input views. ReconFusion uses a diffusion model trained for novel view synthesis to regularize NeRF optimization. When the reconstruction problem is severely underconstrained (3 and 9 views), this prior can greatly improve robustness and
often prevent catastrophic failures. Even in the case of significantly more observations (54 views), ReconFusion improves quality and
helps reduce “floater” artifacts common to volumetric reconstruction methods like NeRF. We encourage the reader to view the results
on reconfusion.github.io to see the clear improvement our method can provide in few-view captures of a variety of real world scenes.

Abstract
3D reconstruction methods such as Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRFs) excel at rendering photorealistic novel
views of complex scenes. However, recovering a highquality NeRF typically requires tens to hundreds of input
images, resulting in a time-consuming capture process. We
present ReconFusion to reconstruct real-world scenes using only a few photos. Our approach leverages a diffusion
prior for novel view synthesis, trained on synthetic and multiview datasets, which regularizes a NeRF-based 3D reconstruction pipeline at novel camera poses beyond those captured by the set of input images. Our method synthesizes
realistic geometry and texture in underconstrained regions
while preserving the appearance of observed regions. We
perform an extensive evaluation across various real-world
datasets, including forward-facing and 360-degree scenes,
demonstrating significant performance improvements over
previous few-view NeRF reconstruction approaches. Please
see our project page at reconfusion.github.io.

1. Introduction
Advances in 3D reconstruction have enabled the transformation of images of real-world scenes into 3D models
which produce photorealistic renderings from novel viewpoints [26, 32]. Methods like NeRF [32] optimize a 3D
representation whose renderings match observed input images at given camera poses. However, renderings from
under-observed views are artifact-prone, particularly in less
densely captured areas. As such, recovering a high-quality
NeRF requires exhaustive scene capture, where each region
is photographed from multiple angles multiple times.
NeRF’s dense capture requirement poses a major challenge, necessitating tens to hundreds of images for even
simple objects to ensure a clean reconstruction (Fig. 1).
Many methods aim to reduce the reliance on dense captures
by developing heuristic low-level regularizers based on reconstructed depth [10, 16, 41], visibility [27, 49], appearance [35, 64], or image-space frequencies [65]. However,

21551

