This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V ∗ : Guided Visual Search as a Core Mechanism in Multimodal LLMs
Penghao Wu †
UC San Diego

Saining Xie
New York University

pew011@ucsd.edu

saining.xie@nyu.edu
Contextual cues:

Initial answer:

Question:

“The glass is most likely to

“Sorry, the current visual information is not
enough. I need to find the glass first.”

What color is the liquid in the glass?

[search starts] appear on the dining table.”

1
2

[search
iterations]
image resolution: 1920

830

V*: LLM‐guided
Search

<question>

VQA
LLM

What color is the liquid
in the glass?
<global image>

Final answer:
“The liquid in the glass is green.”

[tokenize VWM] <searched targets>

,…

[search ends;
construct VWM]

<target locations>

GPT4‐V answer:
“The liquid in the glass appears to be a shade of pink.”

𝑙𝑜𝑐

𝑥1, 𝑦1, 𝑥2, 𝑦2 , …

[targets
located]

3

Visual Working Memory (VWM)

Figure 1. The visual search mechanism enables humans to identify a target within a multitude of stimuli, streamlining the organization of
information critical for problem-solving and reasoning. In this work, we explore this core mechanism in the context of MLLMs, addressing
its absence, which currently impedes precise visual grounding, especially for high-resolution images. In this example, the VQA LLM could
not immediately answer the question, thus activating V∗ , an LLM-guided visual search process that uses common sense and contextual
cues to search for the required details. Throughout this informed search, it builds a visual working memory (VWM), tokenizing the overall
context and the areas of interest related to the targets, which are then re-fed to the VQA LLM, enabling it to accurately answer the question.

1. Introduction
Abstract
When we look around and perform complex tasks, how
we see and selectively process what we see is crucial. However, the lack of this visual search mechanism in current
multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) hinders their ability to focus
on important visual details, especially when handling highresolution and visually crowded images. To address this, we
introduce V∗ , an LLM-guided visual search mechanism that
employs the world knowledge in LLMs for efficient visual
querying. When combined with an MLLM, this mechanism
enhances collaborative reasoning, contextual understanding, and precise visual grounding. This integration results
in a new MLLM meta-architecture, named Show, sEArch,
and TelL (SEAL). We further create V∗ Bench, a benchmark
specifically designed to evaluate MLLMs in their ability to
process high-resolution images and focus on visual details.
Our study highlights the necessity of incorporating visual
search capabilities into multimodal systems. The code is
available here.
† Work done during an internship at NYU.

One of the hallmarks of human intelligence is being able
to process and integrate multi-sensory information to perform complex tasks. A salient aspect of our cognitive reasoning process involving visual information is the ability
to conduct visual search – the process of efficiently recognizing and localizing key objects within intricate real-world
scenes. This mechanism plays a fundamental role in the
interaction with the environment and happens everywhere,
from finding keys on a cluttered table to searching for a
friend in the crowd. Besides, it is also an indispensable step
for complex tasks that require multiple reasoning steps. The
intricacy of visual search has been studied for a long time
in cognitive science and vision science [37, 46, 48, 50–52].
While visual search seems intuitive for humans, it is actually a complex process underpinned by a series of complex behaviors. To accomplish this task efficiently, topdown feature guidance and contextual scene guidance are
two fundamental factors, guiding humans’ visual search
process [51]. The top-down feature guidance directs humans’ attention to items with specific features or attributes
(e.g. color, shape, and orientation) based on the specifica13084

