This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Salient Instance Detection
Xin Tian1
1

Ke Xu2,†

Huawei Technologies

2

Rynson Lau2,†

City University of Hong Kong

{xin.tian.831, kkangwing}@gmail.com, Rynson.Lau@cityu.edu.hk
†

joint corresponding authors

Abstract
The significant amount of manual efforts in annotating
pixel-level labels has triggered the advancement of unsupervised saliency learning. However, without supervision
signals, state-of-the-art methods can only infer region-level
saliency. In this paper, we propose to explore the unsupervised salient instance detection (USID) problem, for a
more fine-grained visual understanding. Our key observation is that self-supervised transformer features may exhibit local similarities as well as different levels of contrast
to other regions, which provide informative cues to identify salient instances. Hence, we propose SCoCo, a novel
network that models saliency coherence and contrast for
USID. SCoCo includes two novel modules: (1) a global
background adaptation (GBA) module with a scene-level
contrastive loss to extract salient regions from the scene
by searching the adaptive “saliency threshold” in the selfsupervised transformer features, and (2) a locality-aware
similarity (LAS) module with an instance-level contrastive
loss to group salient regions into instances by modeling the
in-region saliency coherence and cross-region saliency contrasts. Extensive experiments show that SCoCo outperforms
state-of-the-art weakly-supervised SID methods and carefully designed unsupervised baselines, and has comparable
performances to fully-supervised SID methods.

1. Introduction
Salient Instance Detection (SID) aims to detect instancelevel salient objects. It can provide a fine-grained visual understanding of the scene, and is therefore able to facilitate
a wide range of applications, e.g., image captioning [21],
scene text recognition [20], medical image analysis [19],
and others [1, 4, 43, 48, 91]. However, existing SID methods either require pixel-level labels [25, 74] or image-level
labels [62] as supervisions, which are expensive to prepare.
Despite the advancements in unsupervised saliency detection [32, 44, 57, 72, 79, 81, 87, 88], none of the existing
methods have demonstrated the capability to learn instancelevel saliency, which essentially requires fine-grained dif-

(a) Image

(b) FOUND [57] (c) SelfMask [55]

(d) Ours

(e) GT

Figure 1. Existing unsupervised salient object detection methods, FOUND [57] (b) and SelfMask [55] (c), cannot differentiate
salient instances (rows 1 and 2), but tend to detect strong semantic
instances, e.g., the woman in row 2. In contrast, our method (d)
correctly detects all salient instances by modeling saliency coherence and different levels of saliency contrast.

ferentiation not only between salient and non-salient regions but also between different salient regions (Figure 1).
In this paper, we propose to study this unexplored task, i.e.,
unsupervised salient instance detection (USID).
Our key observation of this problem is built upon the
advanced self-supervised transformer representations. We
observe that their features exhibit saliency coherence (high
similarities) within local regions and may show varying degrees of saliency contrast (lower similarities and dissimilarities) between different regions. In Figure 2, we visualize global saliency information within the self-supervised
transformer features (b-d), and the saliency coherence and
contrast between three feature pixels and the rest of the image (e-g), where each of these pixels is randomly selected
from a salient instance. While the transformer features
themselves may exhibit some degree of global saliency contrast (b-d), the computed pixel-based correlations show that
each selected pixel tends to have high saliency coherence
with pixels of the same instance but different levels of
saliency contrast to pixels of other instances and the background (e-g). This observation inspires us to mine regional
saliency coherence and contrast information for USID.
In this paper, we propose a novel approach, called
SCoCo, to model Saliency Coherence and Contrast information from deep self-supervised features to address the
USID problem. Specifically, SCoCo first models scenelevel saliency contrast to determine the “saliency thresh-

2702

