This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multimodal Representation Learning by Alternating Unimodal Adaptation
Xiaohui Zhang,* Jaehong Yoon, Mohit Bansal, Huaxiu Yao
UNC-Chapel Hill
xzhang47@nd.edu, huaxiu@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Multimodal learning, which integrates data from diverse
sensory modes, plays a pivotal role in artificial intelligence.
However, existing multimodal learning methods often struggle with challenges where some modalities appear more
dominant than others during multimodal learning, resulting
in suboptimal performance. To address this challenge, we
propose MLA (Multimodal Learning with Alternating Unimodal Adaptation). MLA reframes the conventional joint
multimodal learning process by transforming it into an alternating unimodal learning process, thereby minimizing
interference between modalities. Simultaneously, it captures
cross-modal interactions through a shared head, which undergoes continuous optimization across different modalities.
This optimization process is controlled by a gradient modification mechanism to prevent the shared head from losing
previously acquired information. During the inference phase,
MLA utilizes a test-time uncertainty-based model fusion
mechanism to integrate multimodal information. Extensive
experiments are conducted on five diverse datasets, encompassing scenarios with complete modalities and scenarios
with missing modalities. These experiments demonstrate the
superiority of MLA over competing prior approaches. Our
code is available at https://github.com/Cecile-hi/MLA.

1. Introduction
Multimodal learning, which draws inspiration from the multisensory perception mechanisms in humans, has gained significant prominence in the field of artificial intelligence [31,
32, 42]. However, recent multimodal learning methods often struggle to fully integrate rich multimodal knowledge
across different modalities, and we argue that a key factor
is modality laziness. In multimodal representation learning, some modalities are more dominant than others [9, 26],
so the model will optimize for these dominant modalities
and tend to ignore others, resulting in suboptimal performance [17, 30, 37]. This is because collected multimodal
data are often not well entangled with each other, or their
* Work was done during Xiaohui Zhang’s remote internship at UNC.

data size varies. In a more extreme scenario, critical modality data may be missing depending on the conditions during
the data collection phase [20]. This is particularly one of
the main challenges in multimodal learning on uncurated
real-world data.
A few recent works have been introduced to balance the
influence of dominating versus subordinate modalities in
the optimization process [26, 48]. However, these methods necessitate joint optimization of different modes to update the multiple modality-specific encoders simultaneously,
which degenerates the adaptation for subordinate modalities
to some extent, thereby limiting overall multi-modal performance [37]. In contrast, we aim to tackle this problem in a
conceptually different way by decomposing the conventional
multimodal joint optimization scenario into an alternating
unimodal learning scenario, leading to an approach named
Multimodal Learning with Alternating Unimodal Adaptation (MLA). The key idea of MLA is to alternately optimize
the encoder of each modality, while simultaneously integrating cross-modal information.
Concretely, as shown in Figure 1, the predictive function of each modality in our approach includes a modalityspecific encoder and a shared head across all modalities.
In the alternating unimodal learning paradigm, the predictive functions for each modality are optimized alternately
to eliminate interference across modalities. Simultaneously,
the shared head is optimized continuously across modalities,
essentially capturing cross-modal information. However, in
this optimization process, the head is susceptible to losing
previously learned information from other modalities when
it encounters a new modality, which is referred to as modality forgetting. To address this issue, we introduce a gradient
modification mechanism for the shared head to encourage
the orthogonalization of gradient directions between modalities. After learning the modality-specific encoders and the
shared head, we further propose a test-time dynamic modality fusion mechanism to integrate multimodal information.
Since there are information gaps among different modalities
contributing to the prediction, we evaluate the significance
of each modality and use this evaluation to assign weights
to the predictions generated by each modality. Our method

27456

