This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continual Segmentation with Disentangled Objectness Learning
and Class Recognition
Yizheng Gong1,2
1

Siyue Yu1

Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University

Xiaoyang Wang1,2,3
2

Jimin Xiao1, *
3

University of Liverpool

Metavisioncn

y.gong21@liverpool.ac.uk, siyue.yu@xjtlu.edu.cn, wangxy@liverpool.ac.uk, jimin.xiao@xjtlu.edu.cn

Abstract

Unseen classes

niart
peehs

slaminA

DeepLabv3

Mask2Former

(a) Mask proposal transferred to unseen classes.
Step 1

Step 2

(1-15, including table & people)

(15-20, including plant & TV)

egamI

3vbaLpeeD

htu rt dnuorG

rem roF2ksaM

* Corresponding author.

woc ,god ,esroh ,drib

Neural nets have dominated computer vision, from object
recognition [18] to fine-grained classification [28, 29], segmentation [8, 48], and detection [59]. However, the success
is only sound for single-shot learning, i.e., training once to
perform well with fully annotated datasets without considering the later learning process. Continual learning aims to
mimic human learning by gradually obtaining knowledge in
a sequential fashion [15, 17]. Particularly, continual learning shines in dense prediction tasks, such as semantic segmentation [3, 5, 12], since the annotations are laborious to
obtain, and sometimes the learned samples are inaccessible, such as the nature of stream data in autonomous driving [34] or patient privacy in medical imaging [35].

selciheV

1. Introduction

rac ,sub ,taob ,enalp

Most continual segmentation methods tackle the problem as a per-pixel classification task. However, such a
paradigm is very challenging, and we find query-based segmenters with built-in objectness have inherent advantages
compared with per-pixel ones, as objectness has strong
transfer ability and forgetting resistance. Based on these
findings, we propose CoMasTRe by disentangling continual
segmentation into two stages: forgetting-resistant continual
objectness learning and well-researched continual classification. CoMasTRe uses a two-stage segmenter learning
class-agnostic mask proposals at the first stage and leaving
recognition to the second stage. During continual learning,
a simple but effective distillation is adopted to strengthen
objectness. To further mitigate the forgetting of old classes,
we design a multi-label class distillation strategy suited
for segmentation. We assess the effectiveness of CoMasTRe on PASCAL VOC and ADE20K. Extensive experiments
show that our method outperforms per-pixel and querybased methods on both datasets. Code will be available at
https://github.com/jordangong/CoMasTRe.

Learned classes

(b) Mask proposals after finetuning on new classes.

Figure 1. Hidden properties inside query-based segmenters.
Objectness in query-based methods helps generalize mask proposals on unseen classes similar to learned classes (top). Additionally,
because of the transfer ability of objectness, query-based methods
are resistant to catastrophic forgetting of mask proposals (bottom).

However, machines tend to forget the early tasks if we
train them to learn the new ones, also termed as catastrophic forgetting [16], which is the critical obstacle toward
continual learning. Moreover, dense prediction tasks tackled as per-pixel classification or regression by analyzing
patterns around each pixel are inherently difficult, which
makes the continual learning of these tasks even more challenging. Could we mitigate forgetting in continual segmentation in a more feasible way? The answer lies in a new
paradigm: mask classification, streamlining continual segmentation as learning without forgetting of class-agnostic
binary masks and class recognition, via query-based seg-

3848

