This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hearing Anything Anywhere
Mason Long Wang1 * Ryosuke Sawata1,2∗ Samuel Clarke1
Ruohan Gao1,3 Shangzhe Wu1 Jiajun Wu1
1
Stanford University 2 Sony AI 3 University of Maryland, College Park
masonlwang.com/hearinganythinganywhere

Abstract
Recent years have seen immense progress in 3D computer vision and computer graphics, with emerging tools
that can virtualize real-world 3D environments for numerous Mixed Reality (XR) applications. However, alongside
immersive visual experiences, immersive auditory experiences are equally vital to our holistic perception of an environment. In this paper, we aim to reconstruct the spatial
acoustic characteristics of an arbitrary environment given
only a sparse set of (roughly 12) room impulse response
(RIR) recordings and a planar reconstruction of the scene,
a setup that is easily achievable by ordinary users. To this
end, we introduce D IFF RIR, a differentiable RIR rendering
framework with interpretable parametric models of salient
acoustic features of the scene, including sound source directivity and surface reflectivity. This allows us to synthesize novel auditory experiences through the space with
any source audio. To evaluate our method, we collect a
dataset of RIR recordings and music in four diverse, real environments. We show that our model outperforms state-ofthe-art baselines on rendering monaural and binaural RIRs
and music at unseen locations, and learns physically interpretable parameters characterizing acoustic properties of
the sound source and surfaces in the scene.

1. Introduction
Much of the impetus to realize immersive virtual reality
(VR) stems from the desire to recreate and share real scenes
and experiences. Motivated by this goal, recent progress in
3D computer vision and computer graphics has led to tools
that can virtualize real-world 3D environments using simple consumer devices (e.g., cellphone cameras) for numerous Mixed Reality (XR) applications. Alongside immersive visual experiences, immersive auditory experiences are
equally vital to our holistic perception of an environment.
For instance, while the interior of Carnegie Hall in New
* Equal contribution.

York City is visually beautiful, one cannot fully appreciate the majesty of its design without experiencing a musical
performance in-person and hearing its unique acoustics.
In this paper, our goal is to capture the acoustic intrinsics
of a real-world scene using a sparse set of measurements,
in order to render arbitrary source audio at any location,
hence the name, “Hearing Anything Anywhere”. This is
analogous to the task of sparse-view novel view synthesis
(NVS) in computer vision and graphics [5, 34, 50].
However, there are two key differences between light
and sound that make common approaches to visual NVS
inapplicable to audio. First, light is typically emitted from
continuous sources and travels steadily and almost instantly
through space, resulting in a largely stationary visual scene.
In contrast, sound signals are usually time-varying and
travel through space at a much slower pace, resulting in a
constantly changing 4D acoustic field with both numerous
early reflections and late reverberations. Second, a single
camera captures millions of pixels in a split second, each
recording a distinct light ray from a particular direction. In
contrast, a typical microphone only records an amalgamation of sound waves arriving to a single location from all directions, with different times-of-arrival. Therefore, while it
is possible to capture the appearance of a 3D scene by simply walking through it with a camera, the same approach
falls short to record the entire 4D acoustic field.
Thus, capturing a fully immersive acoustic field often
necessitates setting up hundreds of microphones densely
across the space [30, 38, 40, 45], which is impractical for
many consumer use cases. In this work, we attempt to capture real-world acoustic spaces with a basic hardware setup,
e.g., 12 microphones, which can be easily scaled to arbitrary
environments.
To capture the acoustic properties of the scene, we measure a room impulse response (RIR) between the sound
source and each microphone location. An RIR is a timeseries signal that estimates how a perfect impulse emitted
from the source, traveling and bouncing in the room, would
be perceived at the listener location. RIRs effectively capture a room’s intrinsic acoustic properties between source

11790

