This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoHair: High-Fidelity Hair Modeling from a Monocular Video
Keyu Wu1 Lingchen Yang2 Zhiyi Kuang1 Yao Feng2,4 Xutao Han1
Yuefan Shen1 Hongbo Fu3,5 Kun Zhou1 Youyi Zheng1†
1

Zhejiang University 2 ETH Zurich 3 City University of Hong Kong
4
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
5
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

a) Input video

b) Hair geometry

c) Hair strands

Figure 1. We propose a generic framework for 3D hair modeling from monocular videos (a). It commences with a coarse raw geometry
produced by volumetric representations. Subsequently, we extract the exterior geometry of the hair from the raw geometry and combine it
with an inferred interior structure to obtain the complete 3D hair geometry (b). Finally, we recover the corresponding 3D hair model at the
strand level. Our method can reconstruct diverse hairstyles and achieve high-fidelity hair modeling results (c).

Abstract
Undoubtedly, high-fidelity 3D hair is crucial for achieving realism, artistic expression, and immersion in computer
graphics. While existing 3D hair modeling methods have
achieved impressive performance, the challenge of achieving high-quality hair reconstruction persists: they either require strict capture conditions, making practical applications difficult, or heavily rely on learned prior data, obscuring fine-grained details in images. To address these
challenges, we propose MonoHair,a generic framework to
achieve high-fidelity hair reconstruction from a monocular video, without specific requirements for environments.
Our approach bifurcates the hair modeling process into two
main stages: precise exterior reconstruction and interior
structure inference. The exterior is meticulously crafted
using our Patch-based Multi-View Optimization (PMVO).
This method strategically collects and integrates hair information from multiple views, independent of prior data,
to produce a high-fidelity exterior 3D line map. This map
† Corresponding author: Youyi Zheng.

not only captures intricate details but also facilitates the
inference of the hair’s inner structure. For the interior,
we employ a data-driven, multi-view 3D hair reconstruction method. This method utilizes 2D structural renderings
derived from the reconstructed exterior, mirroring the synthetic 2D inputs used during training. This alignment effectively bridges the domain gap between our training data
and real-world data, thereby enhancing the accuracy and
reliability of our interior structure inference. Lastly, we
generate a strand model and resolve the directional ambiguity by our hair growth algorithm. Our experiments
demonstrate that our method exhibits robustness across diverse hairstyles and achieves state-of-the-art performance.
For more results, please refer to our project page https:
//keyuwu-cs.github.io/MonoHair/

1. Introduction
Hair is a key feature in digital humans, and a detailed
3D hair model will undoubtedly enhance their realism
[3, 7, 10, 12, 14]. However, hair modeling is an intricate
endeavor, fraught with challenges at every turn. The high

24164

