This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MedM2G: Unifying Medical Multi-Modal Generation via Cross-Guided
Diffusion with Visual Invariant
Chenlu Zhan1,2 Yu Lin2 Gaoang Wang1,2 (B) Hongwei Wang1,2(B) Jian Wu3
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
ZIU-UIUC Institute, Zhejiang University
3
Second Affiliated Hospital School of Medicine, and School of Public Health, Zhejiang University
{chenlu.22, yulin, gaoangwang, hongweiwang}@intl.zju.edu.cn
wujian2000@zju.edu.cn
Multi-Modality Generation
Medical Report Generation (Image-to-Text)

Medical Image Generation (Text-to-Image) X-ray

Medical Image-to-Image Generation

Multi-Modality Generation

Ap portable upright view of the chest.
Port-a-cath resides over the right chest
wall with catheter tip in the region of the
mid svc. Streaky opacities in the lung
bases likely reflect areas of atelectasis. The
cardiomediastinal silhouette is normal.
Imaged osseous structures are intact.

MRI Synthesis

CT

A lung with a visible
pleural effusion

MRI

MRI-CT Translation

A photo of a lung xray with
a visible pleural effusion

CT-X-ray Translation

Medical Generation Tasks:

✔Multi-Modality Generation
️Medical Report Generation
✔
️
✔Medical Image Generation
️
✔ MRI Synthesis
️MRI-CT Translation
✔
️
✔ CT-X-ray Translation
️

Figure 1. Our MedM2G on multiple medical generative tasks. By effectively extracting clinical visual knowledge of multiple medical
modalities and adopting the latent multi-flow cross-guided diffusion process, MedM2G has the capability of the unified medical image-totext, text-to-image diffusion, as well as the unified generation of medical modalities (CT, MRI, X-ray).

Abstract
Medical generative models, acknowledged for their
high-quality sample generation ability, have accelerated the
fast growth of medical applications. However, recent works
concentrate on separate medical generation models for distinct medical tasks and are restricted to inadequate medical multi-modal knowledge, constraining medical comprehensive diagnosis. In this paper, we propose MedM2G, a
Medical Multi-Modal Generative framework, with the key
innovation to align, extract, and generate medical multimodal within a unified model. Extending beyond single or
two medical modalities, we efficiently align medical multimodal through the central alignment approach in the unified
space. Significantly, our framework extracts valuable clinical knowledge by preserving the medical visual invariant of
each imaging modal, thereby enhancing specific medical information for multi-modal generation. By conditioning the
adaptive cross-guided parameters into the multi-flow diffusion framework, our model promotes flexible interactions
among medical multi-modal for generation. MedM2G is the
Corresponding Authors(B) : Hongwei Wang and Gaoang Wang.

first medical generative model that unifies medical generation tasks of text-to-image, image-to-text, and unified generation of medical modalities (CT, MRI, X-ray). It performs
5 medical generation tasks across 10 datasets, consistently
outperforming various state-of-the-art works.

1. Introduction
Recently various advanced medical generative works based
on denoising diffusion models [18, 43, 44, 46] have significantly improved the efficiency of medical diagnostics
tasks, such as medical text-to-image [26, 60], image-to-text
generation tasks [61, 62], MRI-CT transaction task [7, 39],
MRI synthesis task [23, 44, 63]. The generation of medical modality concentrates on capturing the distinctive specific medical knowledge of each modal and extends to corresponding medical applications.
However, most of these medical generative models [39,
49, 57, 60] rely on distinct single-flow pipelines for specialized generative tasks [23, 44] with cumbersome and slow
processes. In real-world medical scenarios that demand the
integration of multiple medical modalities for analysis, this
generative approach faces substantial limitations in its ex-

11502

