This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Road to Portability: Compressing End-to-End Motion Planner for
Autonomous Driving
Changsheng Li1 *, Dongchun Ren2 , Ye Yuan1 , Guoren Wang1,3
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 ALLRIDE.AI
3
Hebei Province Key Laboratory of Big Data Science and Intelligent Technology

Kaituo Feng1 ,

kaituofeng@gmail.com, lcs@bit.edu.cn, Dongchun.ren@allride.ai
yuan-ye@bit.edu.cn, wanggrbit@126.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
End-to-end motion planning has recently emerged as a
promising direction in autonomous driving [3, 10, 28, 29,
* Corresponding author

Driving Score

End-to-end motion planning models equipped with deep
neural networks have shown great potential for enabling
full autonomous driving. However, the oversized neural networks render them impractical for deployment on
resource-constrained systems, which unavoidably requires
more computational time and resources during reference.
To handle this, knowledge distillation offers a promising approach that compresses models by enabling a smaller student model to learn from a larger teacher model. Nevertheless, how to apply knowledge distillation to compress motion planners has not been explored so far. In this paper,
we propose PlanKD, the first knowledge distillation framework tailored for compressing end-to-end motion planners.
First, considering that driving scenes are inherently complex, often containing planning-irrelevant or even noisy information, transferring such information is not beneficial
for the student planner. Thus, we design an information
bottleneck based strategy to only distill planning-relevant
information, rather than transfer all information indiscriminately. Second, different waypoints in an output planned
trajectory may hold varying degrees of importance for motion planning, where a slight deviation in certain crucial
waypoints might lead to a collision. Therefore, we devise a
safety-aware waypoint-attentive distillation module that assigns adaptive weights to different waypoints based on the
importance, to encourage the student to accurately mimic
more crucial waypoints, thereby improving overall safety.
Experiments demonstrate that our PlanKD can boost the
performance of smaller planners by a large margin, and
significantly reduce their reference time.

60
50
40
30
20
10
00

52.9M

26.3M
InterFuser
InterFuser+PlanKD
26.3M
11.7M
3.8M
11.7M
3.8M

20

40

60

Inference Time (ms / frame)

80

100

Figure 1. An illustration for the performance degradation of InterFuser [30] on Town05 Long Benchmark [29] as the number of parameters decreases. By leveraging our PlanKD, the performance
of compact motion planners can be enhanced, and the inference
time can be significantly lowered. The inference time is evaluated
on GeForce RTX 3090 GPU in a server. Best viewed in color.

37, 44, 45], which directly maps raw sensor data to planned
motions. This learning-based paradigm shows the merit of
reducing heavy reliance on hand-crafted rules and mitigating the accumulation of errors within intricate cascading
modules (typically, detection-tracking-prediction-planning)
[37, 45]. Despite the success, the oversized architecture of deep neural networks in the motion planner poses
challenges for deployment in resource-constrained environments, such as an autonomous delivery robot that relies on
computing power from an edge device. Furthermore, even
within regular vehicles, the computational resources on onboard devices are often limited [31]. Thus, directly deploying deep and large planners unavoidably requires more
computational time and resources during reference, making
it challenging to respond rapidly to potential dangers. To
mitigate this issue, a straightforward approach is to reduce
the number of network parameters by using smaller backbones, while we observe that the performance of the endto-end planning model will drop dramatically, as shown in
Figure 1. For example, although the inference time of InterFuser [30] (a typical end-to-end motion planner) is lowered
when reducing the number of parameters from 52.9M to

15099

