This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoDe: An Explicit Content Decoupling Framework for Image Restoration
Enxuan Gu1 , Hongwei Ge1 ,* Yong Guo2
1
Dalian University of Technology, 2 South China University of Technology

Abstract
The performance of image restoration (IR) is highly dependent on the reconstruction quality of diverse contents
with varying complexity. However, most IR approaches
model the mapping between various complexity contents
of inputs and outputs through the repeated feature calculation propagation mechanism in a unified pipeline, which
leads to unsatisfactory results. To address this issue, we
propose an explicit Content Decoupling framework for IR,
dubbed CoDe, to end-to-end model the restoration process
by utilizing decoupled content components in a divide-andconquer-like architecture. Specifically, a Content Decoupling Module is first designed to decouple content components of inputs and outputs according to the frequency spectra adaptively generated from the transform domain. In addition, in order to harness the divide-and-conquer strategy
for reconstructing decoupled content components, we propose an IR Network Container. It contains an optimized
version, which is a streamlining of an arbitrary IR network, comprising the cascaded modulated subnets and a
Reconstruction Layers Pool. Finally, a Content Consistency
Loss is designed from the transform domain perspective to
supervise the restoration process of each content component and further guide the feature fusion process. Extensive experiments on several IR tasks, such as image superresolution, image denoising, and image blurring, covering
both real and synthetic settings, demonstrate that the proposed paradigm can effectively take the performance of the
original network to a new state-of-the-art level in multiple
benchmark datasets (e.g., 0.34dB@Set5 ×4 over DAT).

1. Introduction
Image restoration (IR) has been a long-standing problem
for its highly practical value in various low-level vision applications, such as image super-resolution (SR), denoising,
and deblurring. It is a typical ill-posed problem due to the
irreversible nature of the image degradation process. Recent
advances in IR have been led by deep learning-based methods, as they can learn strong and generalizable priors from
* Corresponding author. Email: hwge@dlut.edu.cn

Figure 1. The most representative sample to illustrate our motivation: We observed that the contents in different regions of an
image may follow different patterns/distributions, while many IR
methods employ computationally complex networks consisting of
repeated computational modules in a unified pipeline, to recover
such regions resulting in wrongly restored results. This patch is
img092 from Urban100 [18] dataset.

large-scale datasets. Existing deep learning-based IR approaches typically follow the two main architectures: convolutional neural networks (CNN) architecture and Transformer [38] architecture. For example, stacked denoising
auto-encoder [39] is one of the best well-known CNN-based
models for image denoising, Dong et al. proposed SRCNN [13] for image SR and multi-scale CNN (MSCNN)
was proposed for image deblurring by Nah et al. [31]. The
deep CNN models with the convolution operation have been
proven to be effective for IR tasks [22, 28, 42, 52, 53]. As an
alternative to CNN, Transformer-based [38] methods were
designed via utilizing the self-attention mechanism to capture global interactions between contexts and has shown
promising performance in IR problems [4, 6, 27]. Due to
the powerful fitting ability of deep learning-based methods with the image-to-image regression strategy, the performance and reconstruction quality of IR has been improved
significantly.
However, we have identified several issues with current CNN-based and Transformer-based IR methods. These
methods have demonstrated excellent average restoration
performance across various benchmarks, while they often
occasionally produce poor/wrong results in some regions
and obtain unsatisfactory results. As shown in Fig. 1, all
the considered methods produce some anti-diagonal lines
(from bottom left to top right) but the lines in the groundtruth image should be in the opposite direction, i.e., the
diagonal (from top left to the bottom right). Overall, the
quality of different regions in the restored/predicted image

2920

