This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transcending the Limit of Local Window:
Advanced Super-Resolution Transformer with Adaptive Token Dictionary

1

Leheng Zhang1 Yawei Li2,3 Xingyu Zhou1 Xiaorui Zhao1 Shuhang Gu1 *
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich
3
Integrated Systems Laboratory, ETH Zürich
{lehengzhang12, shuhanggu}@gmail.com
https://github.com/LabShuHangGU/Adaptive-Token-Dictionary

Token Dictionary

…

Training Dataset

Learn

…

(a) window-based self-attention

(b) token dictionary cross-attention

(c) category-based self-attention

Figure 1. Three different kinds of attention mechanism: (a) window-based self-attention exploits tokens in the same local window to enhance
image tokens; (b) our proposed token dictionary cross-attention leverages the auxiliary dictionary to summarize and incorporate global
information to the image tokens; (c) our proposed category-based self-attention adopts category labels to divide image tokens.

Abstract
Single Image Super-Resolution is a classic computer vision problem that involves estimating high-resolution (HR)
images from low-resolution (LR) ones. Although deep neural networks (DNNs), especially Transformers for superresolution, have seen significant advancements in recent
years, challenges still remain, particularly in limited receptive field caused by window-based self-attention. To address
these issues, we introduce a group of auxiliary Adaptive
Token Dictionary to SR Transformer and establish an ATDSR method. The introduced token dictionary could learn
prior information from training data and adapt the learned
prior to specific testing image through an adaptive refinement step. The refinement strategy could not only provide
global information to all input tokens but also group image
tokens into categories. Based on category partitions, we
further propose a category-based self-attention mechanism
designed to leverage distant but similar tokens for enhancing input features. The experimental results show that our
method achieves the best performance on various single
image super-resolution benchmarks.
* corresponding author

1. Introduction
The task of single image super-resolution (SR) aims to recover clean high-quality (HR) images from a solitary degraded low-quality (LR) image. Since each LR image may
correspond to a mass of possible HR counterparts, image
SR is a classical ill-posed and challenging problem in the
fields of computer vision and image processing. This practice is significant as it transcends the resolution and accuracy
limitations of cost-effective sensors and improves images
produced by outdated equipment.
The evolution of image super-resolution techniques has
shifted from earlier methods like Markov random fields [14]
and Dictionary Learning [39] to advanced deep learning
approaches. The rise of deep neural networks, particularly
convolutional neural networks (CNNs), marked a significant
improvement in this field, with models effectively learning
mapping functions from LR to HR images [9, 10, 17, 23,
43]. More recently, Transformer-based neural networks have
outperformed CNNs in image super-resolution by employing
self-attention mechanisms to better model long-range image
structures [4, 21, 22].
Despite recent advances in image SR, several challenges
remain unresolved. One major issue faced by SR transform-

2856

