This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Generalizable Tumor Synthesis
Qi Chen1 Xiaoxi Chen2 Haorui Song3 Zhiwei Xiong1
Alan Yuille3 Chen Wei3 Zongwei Zhou3, *
1

University of Science and Technology of China
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
Johns Hopkins University

Code and Visual Turing Test: https://github.com/MrGiovanni/DiffTumor

Abstract
Tumor synthesis enables the creation of artificial tumors
in medical images, facilitating the training of AI models for
tumor detection and segmentation. However, success in tumor synthesis hinges on creating visually realistic tumors
that are generalizable across multiple organs and, furthermore, the resulting AI models being capable of detecting
real tumors in images sourced from different domains (e.g.,
hospitals). This paper made a progressive stride toward
generalizable tumor synthesis by leveraging a critical observation: early-stage tumors (< 2cm) tend to have similar imaging characteristics in computed tomography (CT),
whether they originate in the liver, pancreas, or kidneys.
We have ascertained that generative AI models, e.g., Diffusion Models, can create realistic tumors generalized to a
range of organs even when trained on a limited number of
tumor examples from only one organ. Moreover, we have
shown that AI models trained on these synthetic tumors can
be generalized to detect and segment real tumors from CT
volumes, encompassing a broad spectrum of patient demographics, imaging protocols, and healthcare facilities.

1. Introduction
Tumor synthesis enables the creation of artificial tumor examples in medical images [11, 42, 88], it is particularly
valuable when there is a dearth or complete absence of pervoxel annotated real tumors (e.g., early-stage tumors) for
effective AI training. Typically, to train AI models for tumor detection in multiple (N ) organs, annotated real tumor examples from each of these organs are necessary, and
ideally, in substantial numbers [14, 43, 54, 55, 97]. Furthermore, AI models often fail to generalize across images
from different hospitals, which may vary due to variations
* Correspondence to Zongwei Zhou ( ZZHOU 82@ JH . EDU )

in imaging protocols, patient demographics, and scanner
manufacturers [61, 95, 96]. The challenge amplifies with
the need for extensive manual annotations, a task that could
demand up to 25 human years for annotating just one tumor type [1, 9, 83]. The task of collecting and annotating
a comprehensive dataset encompassing tumors from multiple organs (N ) and images from numerous hospitals (M ) is
daunting, considering both annotation cost and complexity
(N × M ). We hypothesize that tumor synthesis could solve
this challenge by creating various tumor types across nontumor images from multiple hospitals, even when only one
tumor type is available, thereby simplifying the complexity
from N × M to 1 × M .
Success in tumor synthesis hinges on creating visually
realistic tumors that are generalizable across multiple organs and, furthermore, the resulting AI models being generalizable in detecting real tumors in images sourced from
different hospitals. Previous studies have introduced generative models to create synthetic medical data (not limited to tumors) such as polyp detection from colonoscopy
videos [69], COVID-19 detection from Chest X-ray [26,
56, 87], and diabetic lesion detection from retinal images [78]—refer to §5 for a comprehensive review. However, these studies have primarily focused on enhancing the
detection and segmentation of specific tumors without fully
exploring the wider generalizability of these models across
different organs and patient demographics.
This paper made a progressive stride toward generalizable tumor synthesis by leveraging a critical observation:
early-stage tumors (< 2cm) tend to have similar imaging
characteristics in computed tomography (CT)1 . Early-stage
tumors typically present small, round, or oval shapes with
minimal deformation and exhibit relatively simple and uni1 Note that, owing to the public dataset constraints, we have only ver-

ified the similarity across early hepatocellular carcinoma and intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma from the liver, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
from the pancreas, and renal cell carcinoma from kidneys.

11147

