This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Understanding and Improving Source-free Domain Adaptation
from a Theoretical Perspective
Yu Mitsuzumi1,2 Akisato Kimura1 Hisashi Kashima2
1
NTT Corporation 2 Kyoto University
yu.mitsuzumi@ntt.com

akisato@ieee.org

Abstract

kashima@i.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Unsupervised Domain Adaptation Source-free Domain Adaptation
Problem
Source

Source

Source-free Domain Adaptation (SFDA) is an emerging
and challenging research area that addresses the problem
of unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) without source
data. Though numerous successful methods have been proposed for SFDA, a theoretical understanding of why these
methods work well is still absent. In this paper, we shed
light on the theoretical perspective of existing SFDA methods. Specifically, we find that SFDA loss functions comprising discriminability and diversity losses work in the same
way as the training objective in the theory of self-training
based on the expansion assumption, which shows the existence of the target error bound. This finding brings two
novel insights that enable us to build an improved SFDA
method comprising 1) Model Training with Auto-Adjusting
Diversity Constraint and 2) Augmentation Training with
Teacher-Student Framework, yielding a better recognition
performance. Extensive experiments on three benchmark
datasets demonstrate the validity of the theoretical analysis
and our method.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has suffered from the domain-shift problem
where models perform well on domains seen in the training phase but struggle with unseen domains. Unsupervised
domain adaptation (UDA) is a promising solution: it transfers knowledge learned from a labeled source domain to an
unlabeled target domain. UDA methods show their effectiveness on various computer vision tasks such as classification [25, 26, 54], object detection [6, 37, 59], segmentation [15, 16, 50], etc.; however, they typically require
both source and target domain data, which limits their applicability as this requirement poses privacy concerns about
the source data and entails computational inefficiency. Recently, researchers have shifted focus to another direction of
UDA called source-free domain adaptation (SFDA). SFDA
bypasses the above issues by not using raw data from the

Target

Domain
Discrepancy

Theory
Target Error

Source Error

Source Error

minimize

Source Error
Domain Discrepancy

Methods
Distribution Matching
Pseudo Labeling

Target

C

Develop

Adaptation
Loss
Discriminability s.t. Diversity
(Self-Training)

Upper bounded

(Constraint)

Target Error

C'

Develop

Our Method
Adversarial Learning
etc.

Source Estimation

Clustering

Pseudo Labeling

Consistency

Figure 1. Overview of our work. Unsupervised domain adaptation has a theoretical background that has yielded a variety of
methods. By contrast, the theoretical perspectives on source-free
domain adaptation (SFDA) have not been well explored. Our research motivations are (1) to shed light on the theoretical perspectives of existing SFDA methods, and (2) to propose an improved
method based on the theoretical insights.

source data. Instead, SFDA performs the training with a
source-pre-trained model and unlabeled target data. Various
SFDA methods have been proposed, including source estimation [11, 17, 33, 42, 49], pseudo-labeling [19, 34, 51],
clustering [21–23], consistency [5, 52, 53, 57], and even
without source data, they outperform UDA methods.
Despite these promising achievements, a theoretical understanding of SFDA methods is still lacking. As shown in
Fig. 1, UDA studies rely on the theoretical notion that the
target error can be upper-bounded by the source error and
the discrepancy between the two domains [3, 30, 55, 58],
and develop various approaches such as distribution matching [26, 27, 44], adversarial learning [12, 28, 45, 54], and
pseudo-labeling [20, 25, 60, 61]. By contrast, the theoretical
analyses of SFDA are either absent or not general enough
and cannot form the basis for the development of new methods. Moreover, the theory of UDA is not directly applicable
to SFDA due inaccessibility of source data.
In this paper, we shed light on the theoretical perspective of existing SFDA methods through the theory of selftraining based on the expansion assumption [48]. Selftraining is an approach that utilizes the current model pre-

28515

