This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Emotional Speech-driven 3D Body Animation via Disentangled Latent Diffusion
Kiran Chhatre1
Radek Daněček2
Nikos Athanasiou2
Giorgio Becherini2
Christopher Peters1
Michael J. Black2
Timo Bolkart2 *
2
1
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Germany

Abstract
Existing methods for synthesizing 3D human gestures
from speech have shown promising results, but they do not
explicitly model the impact of emotions on the generated
gestures. Instead, these methods directly output animations
from speech without control over the expressed emotion. To
address this limitation, we present AMUSE, an emotional
speech-driven body animation model based on latent diffusion. Our observation is that content (i.e., gestures related to speech rhythm and word utterances), emotion, and
personal style are separable. To account for this, AMUSE
maps the driving audio to three disentangled latent vectors: one for content, one for emotion, and one for personal
style. A latent diffusion model, trained to generate gesture
motion sequences, is then conditioned on these latent vectors. Once trained, AMUSE synthesizes 3D human gestures
directly from speech with control over the expressed emotions and style by combining the content from the driving
speech with the emotion and style of another speech sequence. Randomly sampling the noise of the diffusion model
further generates variations of the gesture with the same
emotional expressivity. Qualitative, quantitative, and perceptual evaluations demonstrate that AMUSE outputs realistic gesture sequences. Compared to the state of the art, the
generated gestures are better synchronized with the speech
content, and better represent the emotion expressed by the
input speech. Our code is available at amuse.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Animating 3D bodies from speech has a wide range of applications, such as telepresence in AR/VR, avatar animation
in games and movies, and to embody interactive digital assistants. While methods for speech-driven 3D body animation have recently shown great progress [5, 7, 31, 56, 101],
existing methods do not adequately address one crucial factor: the impact of emotion from the driving speech signal on
the generated gestures. Emotions and their expressions play
* Now at Google.

Gestures from neutral speech input.

... choose a major that is easy to ﬁnd a good job in the future...
Gestures from surprise synchronized with neutral speech input.

... choose a major that is easy to ﬁnd a good job in the future...

Figure 1. Goal. AMUSE generates realistic emotional 3D body
gestures directly from a speech sequence (top). It provides user
control over the generated emotion by combining the driving
speech sequence with a different emotional audio (bottom).

a fundamental role in human communication [29, 35, 65]
and have become an important consideration when designing computer systems that interact with humans in a natural manner [78, 79]. They are of central concern when
synthesizing human animations for a wide variety of application contexts, such as Socially Interactive Agents [61].
Because of this, speech-driven animation systems must not
only align movement with the rhythm of the speech, but
should also be capable of generating gestures that are perceived as expressing the suitable emotion.
Many factors contribute to the perception of emotion
and personal idiosyncrasies, such as facial expressions [19],
gaze and eye contact [42], physiological responses [47],
tone of voice [87], body language [66], and gestures [39].
When it comes to 3D animation, the most relevant factors

1942

