This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vision-and-Language Navigation via Causal Learning
끫歪

끫歪

Liuyi 끫武
Wang, 끫歨Zongtao
He, Ronghao Dang, Mengjiao Shen, Chengju Liu,* Qijun Chen∗
끫歨
끫武
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China
{wly, xingchen327, dangronghao, liuchengju, qjchen}@tongji.edu.cn, mojo.shum@outlook.com

1. Introduction
Effective environment perception, language understanding, and historical utilization are at the core of visionand-language navigation (VLN) [4]. Despite significant
progress, deploying VLN in the real world remains a huge
challenge, primarily due to diversities and uncertainties in
environments and instructions. A key hindrance is dataset
bias [79, 82], e.g., agents may overfit to familiar visual environments, resulting in diminished performance in environments with diverse appearances and layouts [24]. This
over-reliance on specific patterns, like biased structural trajectories and repeated entity components, raises concerns
about the robustness and generalizability of VLN systems.
One way to mitigate dataset bias in VLN is to build
* Corresponding author.

Content
related

Back-door
Adjustment

Causal Inference
끫武

끫歪

do
끫歨

끫武

Unobservable Style
Confounder related

끫歪

끫歨

Causal
Model

Observable
Confounder

Model
Optimization

Walk straight and then make a right. Walk straight until
you reach the pool table and then wait there.

Confounder
Assumption

In the pursuit of robust and generalizable environment
perception and language understanding, the ubiquitous
challenge of dataset bias continues to plague vision-andlanguage navigation (VLN) agents, hindering their performance in unseen environments. This paper introduces the
generalized cross-modal causal transformer (GOAT), a pioneering solution rooted in the paradigm of causal inference.
By delving into both observable and unobservable confounders within vision, language, and history, we propose
the back-door and front-door adjustment causal learning
(BACL and FACL) modules to promote unbiased learning
by comprehensively mitigating potential spurious correlations. Additionally, to capture global confounder features,
we propose a cross-modal feature pooling (CFP) module
supervised by contrastive learning, which is also shown to
be effective in improving cross-modal representations during pre-training. Extensive experiments across multiple
VLN datasets (R2R, REVERIE, RxR, and SOON) underscore the superiority of our proposed method over previous
state-of-the-art approaches. Code is available at https:
//github.com/CrystalSixone/VLN-GOAT.

Instruction: Exit the stairs, and then make a right.

Task
Formulation

Abstract

Front-door
Adjustment

Figure 1. In response to language instructions, the VLN agent
is required to navigate to the target based on visual cues. This
paper introduces a causal learning pipeline using the do-operator
to reduce bias from confounders in VLN action prediction.

broader and more diverse datasets, which is what numerous
recent studies have focused on. These include using speaker
models to generate pseudo instructions [14, 16, 61, 62, 64,
65], synthesizing cross-environmental trajectories [26, 39],
transferring image styles [30, 34], collecting data from the
web [18, 36, 44, 70], and labeling more fine-grained, entityaligned instructions [10, 21, 29]. However, achieving a perfectly balanced dataset devoid of bias is nearly impossible.
Consequently, we often find ourselves caught in a cycle of
“creating a dataset” - “identifying bias” - “creating a new
dataset”. Therefore, we are prompted to move from diagnosis to treatment [73], transitioning from the continuous
collection of new datasets to the development of unbiased
models that can confront and mitigate bias.
However, existing methods that focus on model designing mainly concentrate on introducing more types of inputs
(e.g., objects [2, 12, 13, 23, 35, 63] and depth [3, 20, 40,
77]), or constructing the global graph [8, 9, 46] to represent environments. These efforts, although valuable, often
overlook underlying dataset biases and the essential causal
logic behind the task. In fact, the reason why humans can
well execute various instructions and navigate in unknown
environments is that we can learn the inherent causality of
events beyond biased observation, achieving good analogical association capability. Therefore, for the first time, we
propose to use causal inference [51] to equip VLN agents
with similar cognitive abilities that we have, and then allow

13139

