This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Graph Contrastive Learning via Adaptive Positive Sampling
Jiaming Zhuo1 , Feiyang Qin1 , Can Cui1 , Kun Fu1 , Bingxin Niu1 , Mengzhu Wang1 ,
Yuanfang Guo2 , Chuan Wang3* , Zhen Wang4,5 , Xiaochun Cao6 , Liang Yang1 *
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Hebei University of Technology, Tianjin, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Institute of Information Engineering Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
4
School of Cybersecurity, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
5
OPtics and ElectroNics (iOPEN), Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
6
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Shenzhen, China
jiaming.zhuo@outlook.com, feiyangqinzzu@163.com, 594021820@qq.com, fukun@hebut.edu.cn,
niubingxin666@163.com, dreamkily@gmail.com, andyguo@buaa.edu.cn, wangchuan@iie.ac.cn,
w-zhen@nwpu.edu.cn, caoxiaochun@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yangliang@vip.qq.com

Abstract
Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL), a Self-Supervised
Learning (SSL) architecture tailored for graphs, has shown
notable potential for mitigating label scarcity. Its core idea
is to amplify feature similarities between the positive sample
pairs and reduce them between the negative sample pairs.
Unfortunately, most existing GCLs consistently present suboptimal performances on both homophilic and heterophilic
graphs. This is primarily attributed to two limitations of
positive sampling, that is, incomplete local sampling and
blind sampling. To address these limitations, this paper introduces a novel GCL framework with an adaptive positive
sampling module, named grapH contrastivE Adaptive posiTive Samples (HEATS). Motivated by the observation that
the affinity matrix corresponding to optimal positive sample sets has a block-diagonal structure with equal weights
within each block, a self-expressive learning objective incorporating the block and idempotent constraint is presented. This learning objective and the contrastive learning objective are iteratively optimized to improve the adaptability and robustness of HEATS. Extensive experiments on
graphs and images validate the effectiveness and generality
of HEATS.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning (SSL), has been a highly regarded
methodology within the unsupervised learning field. It generates supervision signals for model training by extracting
* Chuan Wang and Liang Yang are corresponding authors.

latent data patterns from the unannotated data [8]. As a notable branch of SSL, Contrastive Learning (CL) emphasizes
producing the supervision signals using the established rule,
i.e., bringing similar samples (positive samples) closer and
pushing dissimilar samples (negative samples) apart. Based
on this rule, Graph Contrastive Learning (GCL) extends the
applied range to non-Euclidean graphs by employing techniques like graph augmentations and graph encoders. It has
achieved remarkable performance on various downstream
tasks, such as node classification [15, 32].
To generate the discriminative node representations from
GCLs, the positive sample set of each node should contain
all nodes from the same class (i.e., TRUE positive samples),
while the negative ones should consist of nodes from different classes (i.e., TRUE negative samples). Subsequently, to
extend the TRUE positive sample sets, certain research endeavors in GCLs focus on identifying semantically relevant
samples within node neighborhoods [12, 20, 26, 30, 34],
leveraging the homophily assumption [1, 16]. Despite their
consistent performance improvements on the homophilic
graphs, where adjacent nodes typically belong to the same
class, the improvements are limited. More critically, their
robustness to the heterophilic graphs, where adjacent nodes
tend to be from different classes, is severely constrained.
These drawbacks are attributed to two limitations of positive sampling. (1) Incomplete local sampling. Most graphs
are sparse, and nodes of the same class are typically situated
beyond each other’s neighborhoods. Therefore, the positive
sample sets for most GCLs tend to be incomplete, which
could lead to the absence of shared information between the
same class. (2) Blind sampling. In dealing with blindness
caused by a lack of supervised guidance, the endeavors of

23179

