This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient LoFTR: Semi-Dense Local Feature Matching with Sparse-Like Speed
Yifan Wang∗

Xingyi He∗

Sida Peng†

Dongli Tan

Xiaowei Zhou

Zhejiang University
ROMA
(28.9)

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image matching is the cornerstone of many 3D computer
vision tasks, which aim to find a set of highly accurate correspondences given an image pair. The established matches
between images have broad usages such as reconstructing
the 3D world by structure from motion (SfM) [1, 18, 25, 43]
or SLAM system [30, 31], and visual localization [38, 40],
etc. Previous methods typically follow a two-stage pipeline:
they first detect [37] and describe [49] a set of keypoints on
each image, and then establish keypoint correspondences by
handcrafted [27] or learning-based matchers [26, 39]. These
detector-based methods are efficient but suffer from robustly
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author: Sida Peng. The authors
from Zhejiang University are affiliated with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG.

19

ScanNet
Relative Pose AUC @ 5

We present a novel method for efficiently producing semidense matches across images. Previous detector-free
matcher LoFTR has shown remarkable matching capability
in handling large-viewpoint change and texture-poor
scenarios but suffers from low efficiency. We revisit its
design choices and derive multiple improvements for
both efficiency and accuracy. One key observation is that
performing the transformer over the entire feature map is
redundant due to shared local information, therefore we
propose an aggregated attention mechanism with adaptive
token selection for efficiency. Furthermore, we find spatial
variance exists in LoFTR’s fine correlation module, which is
adverse to matching accuracy. A novel two-stage correlation
layer is proposed to achieve accurate subpixel correspondences for accuracy improvement. Our efficiency optimized
model is ∼ 2.5× faster than LoFTR which can even surpass
state-of-the-art efficient sparse matching pipeline SuperPoint + LightGlue. Moreover, extensive experiments show
that our method can achieve higher accuracy compared
with competitive semi-dense matchers, with considerable
efficiency benefits. This opens up exciting prospects for
large-scale or latency-sensitive applications such as image
retrieval and 3D reconstruction. Project page: https:
//zju3dv.github.io/efficientloftr/.

AspanFormer
Ours

QuadTree

18

TopicFM
Ours (Opt)

17
LoFTR

16
SP + LG (Opt)

15
0

10

20

30

40

Image Pairs Per Second (640x 480)

Figure 1. Matching Accuracy and Efficiency Comparisons. Our
method achieves competitive accuracy compared with semi-dense
matchers ( ) at a significantly higher speed. Compared with dense
matcher ROMA ( ), our method is ∼ 7.5× faster. Moreover, our
efficiency optimized model ( ) can surpass the robust sparse matching pipeline ( ) SuperPoint (SP) + LightGlue (LG) on efficiency
with considerably better accuracy.

detecting repeatable keypoints across challenging pairs, such
as extreme viewpoint changes and texture-poor regions.
Recently, LoFTR [46] introduces a detector-free matching
paradigm with transformer to directly establish semi-dense
correspondences between two images without detecting keypoints. With the help of the transformer mechanism to capture the global image context and the detector-free design,
LoFTR shows a strong capability of matching challenging
pairs, especially in texture-poor scenarios. To reduce the
computation burden, LoFTR adopts a coarse-to-fine pipeline
by first performing dense matching on downsampled coarse
features maps, where transformer is applied. Then, the feature locations of coarse matches on one image are fixed,
while their subpixel correspondences are searched on the
other image by cropping feature patches based on coarse
match, performing the feature correlation, and calculating
expectation over the correlation patch.
Despite its impressive matching performance, LoFTR

21666

