This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Can’t make an Omelette without Breaking some Eggs: Plausible Action
Anticipation using Large Video-Language Models
Nakul Agarwal1
Himangi Mittal1,2 *
1
Honda Research Institute, USA
hmittal@andrew.cmu.edu

2

Shao-Yuan Lo1
Kwonjoon Lee1
Carnegie Mellon University

{nakul agarwal, shao-yuan lo, kwonjoon lee}@honda-ri.com

Abstract
We introduce PlausiVL, a large video-language model
for anticipating action sequences that are plausible in the
real-world. While significant efforts have been made towards anticipating future actions, prior approaches do
not take into account the aspect of plausibility in an action sequence. To address this limitation, we explore the
generative capability of a large video-language model in
our work and further, develop the understanding of plausibility in an action sequence by introducing two objective functions, a counterfactual-based plausible action sequence learning loss and a long-horizon action repetition
loss. We utilize temporal logical constraints as well as
verb-noun action pair logical constraints to create implausible/counterfactual action sequences and use them to train
the model with plausible action sequence learning loss.
This loss helps the model to differentiate between plausible and not plausible action sequences and also helps the
model to learn implicit temporal cues crucial for the task of
action anticipation. The long-horizon action repetition loss
puts a higher penalty on the actions that are more prone
to repetition over a longer temporal window. With this penalization, the model is able to generate diverse, plausible
action sequences. We evaluate our approach on two largescale datasets, Ego4D and EPIC-Kitchens-100, and show
improvements on the task of action anticipation.

1. Introduction
Having the ability to predict future events is a critical component in the decision-making process of an AI agent. For
example, for an autonomous driving car, being able to anticipate the next sequence of actions for cars, pedestrians, and
other agents in the scene can ensure safety of pedestrians as
well as vehicles. To enable this, the model should be able
to reason effectively from the spatial as well as temporal in* This work was done as Himangi Mittal’s internship project at Honda
Research Institute, USA.

Video-Text Alignment

Action Anticipation
Prompt

Video
Q-Former
….

Video

….

Large
Language
Model (LLM)

Learning Plausible Action Anticipation
take eggs, cook omelette, crack eggs, whisk eggs, whisk eggs, whisk eggs
w/o Plausible Action Sequence Learning Loss (Temporally Implausible Actions,
cook omelette
crack eggs)

take eggs, cook omelette, crack eggs, whisk eggs, whisk eggs, whisk eggs
w/o Long-Horizon Action Repetition loss (Repetitive actions, whisk eggs)

take eggs, crack eggs, whisk eggs, whisk eggs, cook omelette, turn omlette
Plausible Action Sequence Learning Loss + Long-Horizon Action Repetition Loss

Figure 1. We present a large video-language model for learning
to anticipate action sequences that are plausible in the real-world.
We show an example of a kitchen-based environment. By using
a large video-language model , we leverage their generative capabilities to anticipate future actions and further train the model
with two devised objective functions: plausible action sequence
learning loss and long-horizon action repetition loss. Without the
plausible action sequence learning loss, the model has less temporal understanding and generates a temporally implausible action
sequence of cook omlette ̸→ crack eggs. Similarly, without the
long-horizon action repetition loss, the model generates less diverse actions and repeats the same action, whisk eggs → whisk
eggs → whisk eggs. When training the model with the two objective functions combined, our method is able to generate plausible action sequences which are temporally accurate, crack eggs →
cook omlette and more diverse with less repetition, whisk eggs →
whisk eggs → cook omlette.

formation of the visual scene. This has led to a growing interest in the task of Action Anticipation. Action anticipation
refers to the predictive task of forecasting future actions or
activities given a sequence of visual data, typically videos.
For example, in a kitchen-based environment, if a human
has performed the following series of actions, open fridge
→ take eggs → close fridge, the model should be able to

18580

