This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deformable 3D Gaussians for High-Fidelity Monocular Dynamic Scene
Reconstruction
Ziyi Yang1,2

Xinyu Gao1
1

Shaohui Jiao2

Zhejiang University

Predicted Depth

(a) Input Images

Wen Zhou2

Predicted Color

(b) View Synthesis

2

Yuqing Zhang1

Xiaogang Jin1†

ByteDance Inc.

Predicted Depth

Predicted Color

(c) Time Synthesis

(d) HyperNeRF

Figure 1. Given a set of monocular multi-view images and camera poses (a), our proposed method can reconstruct accurate dynamic scene
geometry and render high-quality images in both the novel-view synthesis (b) and time interpolation (c) tasks. In real-world datasets with
intricate details, our method outperforms HyperNeRF [37] (d) in terms of rendering quality and time performance.

Abstract
Implicit neural representation has paved the way for new
approaches to dynamic scene reconstruction. Nonetheless,
cutting-edge dynamic neural rendering methods rely heavily on these implicit representations, which frequently struggle to capture the intricate details of objects in the scene.
Furthermore, implicit methods have difficulty achieving
real-time rendering in general dynamic scenes, limiting
their use in a variety of tasks. To address the issues,
we propose a deformable 3D Gaussians splatting method
that reconstructs scenes using 3D Gaussians and learns
them in canonical space with a deformation field to model
monocular dynamic scenes. We also introduce an annealing smoothing training mechanism with no extra overhead,
which can mitigate the impact of inaccurate poses on the
smoothness of time interpolation tasks in real-world scenes.
Through a differential Gaussian rasterizer, the deformable
3D Gaussians not only achieve higher rendering quality
but also real-time rendering speed. Experiments show that
our method outperforms existing methods significantly in
terms of both rendering quality and speed, making it wellsuited for tasks such as novel-view synthesis, time interpo-

lation, and real-time rendering. Our code is available at
https://github.com/ingra14m/Deformable-3D-Gaussians.

1. Introduction
High-quality reconstruction and photorealistic rendering of
dynamic scenes from a set of input images is critical for a
variety of applications, including augmented reality/virtual
reality (AR/VR), 3D content production, and entertainment. Previously used methods for modeling these dynamic scenes relied heavily on mesh-based representations,
as demonstrated by methods described in [10, 18, 23, 46].
However, these strategies frequently face inherent limitations, such as a lack of detail and realism, a lack of semantic
information, and difficulties in accommodating topological
changes. With the introduction of neural rendering techniques, this paradigm has undergone a significant shift. Implicit scene representations, particularly as implemented by
NeRF [34], have demonstrated commendable efficacy in
tasks such as novel-view synthesis, scene reconstruction,
and light decomposition.
To improve inference efficiency in NeRF-based static

20331

