This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Correcting Diffusion Generation through Resampling
Yujian Liu
UC Santa Barbara

Yang Zhang
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Tommi Jaakkola
MIT CSAIL

Shiyu Chang
UC Santa Barbara

yujianliu@ucsb.edu

yang.zhang2@ibm.com

tommi@csail.mit.edu

chang87@ucsb.edu

SD

SD + PF

SD

SD + PF

SD

SD + PF

Cat on chair peering over top of table at glass of
beverage.

A couch, table, chairs and a tv are featured in a
den with blue carpeting.

Two donuts, banana, cup and a book on the table.

A dining room table with a bottle of wine and wine
glasses and a pot of carrots

A bathroom with a white toilet sitting next to a
bathroom sink.

A man sitting on a bed with a dog while holding
a cell phone.

Figure 1. Sample images generated by Stable Diffusion v2.1 with and without our particle filtering algorithm (PF). The left two columns
illustrate the missing object errors, and the right column illustrates the unnatural distortions. Missing objects are highlighted in red.

Abstract
Despite diffusion models’ superior capabilities in modeling complex distributions, there are still non-trivial distributional discrepancies between generated and groundtruth images, which has resulted in several notable problems in image generation, including missing object errors
in text-to-image generation and low image quality. Existing methods that attempt to address these problems mostly
do not tend to address the fundamental cause behind these
problems, which is the distributional discrepancies, and
hence achieve sub-optimal results. In this paper, we propose a particle filtering framework that can effectively address both problems by explicitly reducing the distributional
discrepancies. Specifically, our method relies on a set of external guidance, including a small set of real images and
a pre-trained object detector, to gauge the distribution gap,
and then design the resampling weight accordingly to correct the gap. Experiments show that our methods can effectively correct missing object errors and improve image
quality in various image generation tasks. Notably, our
method outperforms the existing strongest baseline by 5% in
object occurrence and 1.0 in FID on MS-COCO. Our code
is available at https://github.com/UCSB-NLP-

Chang/diffusion_resampling.git.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models have achieved impressive success in generating high-quality images in various image-generation applications [2, 5, 13, 19, 22, 24, 28, 30, 39, 42–44, 46, 47,
49, 50, 53–56, 60, 65, 66]. Such success can be ascribed to
diffusion models’ superior capability in modeling complex
data distributions and thus low distributional discrepancies
between the real and generated images. However, the diffusion generation process still introduces distributional discrepancies in modeling data distributions, due to the limited
representation power of the denoising network, the errors
introduced in discretizing and numerically solving the continuous ODE or SDE denoising trajectories [31, 64], etc.
Such distributional discrepancies have led to several notable problems in image generation. For example, in text-toimage generation, diffusion models suffer from the missing
object errors, i.e., objects that are mentioned in the input
text are sometimes not generated [17, 41, 61]. As shown in
Figure 1 top-left, given the input description ‘Cat on chair
peering over top of table at glass of beverage’, the stable diffusion model [47], a powerful text-to-image model,

8713

