This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Faces that Speak:
Jointly Synthesising Talking Face and Speech from Text
Youngjoon Jang^{1*} Ji-Hoon Kim^{1*} Junseok Ahn^1 Doyeop Kwak^1
Hong-Sun Yang^2 Yoon-Cheol Ju^2 Il-Hwan Kim^2 Byeong-Yeol Kim^2 Joon Son Chung^1
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, 2 42dot Inc., Republic of Korea
Project page with demo: https://mm.kaist.ac.kr/projects/faces-that-speak
Unified model
Text-driven
TFG

Motion
condition

Speaker
condition

Face-stylised
TTS

Text

Figure 1. Our framework integrates Talking Face Generation (TFG) and Text-to-Speech (TTS) systems, generating synchronised natural
speech and a talking face video from a single portrait and text input. Our model is capable of variational motion generation by conditioning
the TFG model with the intermediate representations of the TTS model. The speech is conditioned using the identity features extracted in
the TFG model to align with the input identity.

Abstract
The goal of this work is to simultaneously generate natural talking faces and speech outputs from text. We achieve
this by integrating Talking Face Generation (TFG) and
Text-to-Speech (TTS) systems into a unified framework. We
address the main challenges of each task: (1) generating
a range of head poses representative of real-world scenarios, and (2) ensuring voice consistency despite variations
in facial motion for the same identity. To tackle these issues, we introduce a motion sampler based on conditional
flow matching, which is capable of high-quality motion code
generation in an efficient way. Moreover, we introduce
a novel conditioning method for the TTS system, which
utilises motion-removed features from the TFG model to
yield uniform speech outputs. Our extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method effectively creates naturallooking talking faces and speech that accurately match the
input text. To our knowledge, this is the first effort to build a
multimodal synthesis system that can generalise to unseen
identities.
∗ Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the field of talking face synthesis has attracted growing interest, driven by the advancements in
deep learning techniques and the development of services
within the metaverse. This versatile technology has diverse
applications in movie and TV production, virtual assistants,
video conferencing, and dubbing, with the goal of creating
animated faces that are synchronised with audio to enable
natural and immersive human-machine interactions.
Previous studies in deep learning-based talking face synthesis have focused on enhancing the controllability of facial movements and achieving precise lip synchronisation.
Some notable works [5, 14, 15, 27, 39, 57, 60, 70] incorporate 2D or 3D structural information to improve motion
representations. From this, recent research has naturally
diverged into two primary strands along the target applications of TFG: one strand [42, 65, 73, 76] concentrates
on generating expressive facial movements only from audio
conditions. Meanwhile, the other strand [6, 24, 25, 36, 62,
75] aims to enhance the controllability of talking faces by
introducing a target video as an additional condition. Despite these advancements, the audio-driven TFG methods

8818

