This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Facial Identity Anonymization via Intrinsic and Extrinsic Attention Distraction
Zhenzhong Kuang1

Xiaochen Yang1

Yingjie Shen1

Chao Hu1

Jun Yu* 1, 2

1

2

School of Computer Science, Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), Shenzhen, China
{zzkuang, xcyang, shenyingjie, chaos, yujun}@hdu.edu.cn

Abstract
The unprecedented capture and application of face images raise increasing concerns on anonymization to fight
against privacy disclosure. Most existing methods may suffer from the problem of excessive change of the identityindependent information or insufficient identity protection.
In this paper, we present a new face anonymization approach by distracting the intrinsic and extrinsic identity attentions. On the one hand, we anonymize the identity information in the feature space by distracting the intrinsic
identity attention. On the other, we anonymize the visual
clues (i.e. appearance and geometry structure) by distracting the extrinsic identity attention. Our approach allows
for flexible and intuitive manipulation of face appearance
and geometry structure to produce diverse results, and it
can also be used to instruct users to perform personalized
anonymization. We conduct extensive experiments on multiple datasets and demonstrate that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
By making full use of face images, modern AI technologies
have enabled us a more convenient life [9, 24, 39]. However, this may raise a wide social concern on privacy because face images are easy to capture but cannot be easily
changed. Although some strict constraints (e.g. laws) were
set up in the last few years [37, 56, 63], the privacy disclosure events continue to emerge one after another.
Anonymization has attracted increasing attention, which
usually has two basic requirements. The first one is to ensure identity safety by fighting against re-identification. Another is to preserve the data utility, such as image quality,
face detectability, expression and user-defined attributes,
which may vary under different scenarios. Besides protecting the original identity, we also take identity intrusion into
consideration to reduce the risk of bringing troubles for the
others. The kind of technology has multiple advantages,
* Jun Yu is the corresponding author

Feature

Geometry

Appearance

Figure 1. Demonstration of our approach for face anonymization.

such as: (1) prevent unauthorized users, organizations and
applications from freely collecting and using personal data;
(2) help people to avoid troubles by blocking the relationship disclosure between identity and the other factors, such
as location, action, event and so on; (3) maintain the data
usability in various applications, like autonomous driving
and remote medical system, without worrying about information leakage even if the data were attacked or misused.
Traditional methods (e.g. pixelation and blurring [34,
58]), seem simple and effective for privacy protection, but
may easily damage the image content and quality, resulting in poor data reusability (e.g. face may become undetectable). Recently, the generative method (e.g. GAN) show
promising performances on supporting realistic face synthesis [13, 20, 23, 44], which makes it possible to improve image quality and utility preservation. On this basis, many excellent anonymization trials were conducted from different
viewpoints [1, 3, 6, 18, 19, 25, 29, 37, 43, 49, 50, 55, 65].
However, many of them may suffer from the problem of excessive change of the identity-independent information to
ensure anonymity, or insufficient identity protection in order
to preserve more data utility. The former may lead to performance drop on utility preservation, and the latter may lead
to degraded protection against re-identification or identity
intrusion, which would prevent the existing methods from
achieving a good privacy-utility (PU) tradeoff.
To address the above problem, we present a new face
anonymization approach by exploiting the intrinsic and extrinsic face characteristics for identity attention distraction,
where a deep generative model is employed to synthesize

12406

