This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Efficient Hyperparameter Optimization with Adaptive Fidelity Identification
Jiantong Jiang1 , Zeyi Wen2,3 ,* Atif Mansoor1 , Ajmal Mian1
1
The University of Western Australia, 2 HKUST (Guangzhou), 3 HKUST
jiantong.jiang@research.uwa.edu.au, wenzeyi@ust.hk, {atif.mansoor, ajmal.mian}@uwa.edu.au

Abstract
Hyperparameter Optimization and Neural Architecture
Search are powerful in attaining state-of-the-art machine
learning models, with Bayesian Optimization (BO) standing out as a mainstream method. Extending BO into the
multi-fidelity setting has been an emerging research topic
in this field, but faces the challenge of determining an appropriate fidelity for each hyperparameter configuration to
fit the surrogate model. To tackle the challenge, we propose
a multi-fidelity BO method named FastBO, which excels in
adaptively deciding the fidelity for each configuration and
providing strong performance while ensuring efficient resource usage. These advantages are achieved through our
proposed techniques based on the concepts of efficient point
and saturation point for each configuration, which can be
obtained from the empirical learning curve of the configuration, estimated from early observations. Extensive experiments demonstrate FastBO’s superior anytime performance
and efficiency in identifying high-quality configurations and
architectures. We also show that our method provides a way
to extend any single-fidelity method to the multi-fidelity setting, highlighting the wide applicability of our approach.

1. Introduction
Hyperparameters are crucial in machine learning pipelines.
Hyperparameter optimization (HPO) [11] and Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [9] aims to find the hyperparameters or architectures that can yield good performance without human experts. Among different HPO and NAS methods, Bayesian Optimization (BO) [2, 14, 40] is an effective model-based method that has shown remarkable success [8, 39]. BO maintains a surrogate model of the target performance metric based on past evaluations of hyperparameter configurations, which guides the choice of more
promising configurations to evaluate.
Despite its sample efficiency, standard BO requires a
full evaluation of each configuration, involving full-scale
* Zeyi Wen is the corresponding author.

training and testing of models, which can be highly timeconsuming, particularly with the recent trend to larger models. To avoid expensive full evaluations, multi-fidelity
methods [4, 16, 25, 26] have been proposed, where the fidelities refer to the levels of performance metrics obtained
under different resource levels. These methods follow the
principle of successive halving (SHA) [16]: initially, they
evaluate a set of randomly selected configurations using a
small number of resources; then, based on the low-fidelity
performances, the poorly-performing ones are successively
eliminated, while the well-performing ones continue to
be evaluated with increasing resources. Follow-up studies [10, 22, 27, 37, 47] propose model-based multi-fidelity
methods, replacing the random configuration selection with
a more informed model to improve sample efficiency.
Nevertheless, current model-based multi-fidelity methods face a major limitation: they are built upon the SHA
framework, which operates under the assumption that learning curves of different configurations rarely intersect. This
assumption does not hold in practice [46], i.e., early performance observations cannot always indicate the final fidelity
performance at the full resource level. This leads to a fundamental challenge when extending model-based methods
to the multi-fidelity setting: What is the appropriate fidelity
for each configuration to fit the surrogate model? In other
words, which fidelity can provide performance observations
that reliably indicate the final fidelity performance? Existing methods struggle to address this fundamental challenge.
In particular, BOHB [10] and Hyper-Tune [27] fit separate
surrogate models for different fidelities, failing to capture
inter-fidelity correlations. FTBO [44] and A-BOHB [22]
fit a joint model but require strong assumptions to remain
tractable. Another work by Salinas et al. [37] suggests using the last observed fidelity performance to fit the surrogate model. However, it widens the gap between poorlyand well-performing configurations at the early stage, potentially leading to an inaccurate surrogate model.
To this end, we propose a multi-fidelity extension of BO,
namely FastBO, which tackles the challenge of deciding the
appropriate fidelity for each configuration to fit the surrogate model. FastBO identifies a so-called efficient point for

26181

