This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MA-LMM: Memory-Augmented Large Multimodal Model
for Long-Term Video Understanding
Bo He1,2 * Hengduo Li2 Young Kyun Jang2 Menglin Jia2 Xuefei Cao2
Ashish Shah2 Abhinav Shrivastava1 Ser-Nam Lim3
1

University of Maryland, College Park

2

3

Meta

University of Central Florida

https://boheumd.github.io/MA-LMM/

Abstract

1. Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have gained significant popularity in the natural language processing field. By pretraining on large-scaled textual data, LLMs (e.g. GPT [1–4],
LLaMA [5, 6]) have demonstrated remarkable abilities to
perform both generative and discriminative tasks with a unified framework. Recently, there has been a growing interest
in utilizing LLMs on multimodal tasks. By integrating LLMs
with visual encoders, they can take images and videos as
input and show incredible capabilities in various visual understanding tasks, such as captioning, question answering [7–
13], classification, detection, and segmentation [14–20].
* Work done during Bo’s internship at Meta.

Visual
Encoder

Querying
Transformer

LLM

What did the man
hold at the start of
the video?

Long-Term Memory Bank

GPU Memory (GB)

With the success of large language models (LLMs), integrating the vision model into LLMs to build vision-language
foundation models has gained much more interest recently.
However, existing LLM-based large multimodal models (e.g.,
Video-LLaMA, VideoChat) can only take in a limited number
of frames for short video understanding. In this study, we
mainly focus on designing an efficient and effective model
for long-term video understanding. Instead of trying to process more frames simultaneously like most existing work, we
propose to process videos in an online manner and store
past video information in a memory bank. This allows our
model to reference historical video content for long-term
analysis without exceeding LLMs’ context length constraints
or GPU memory limits. Our memory bank can be seamlessly integrated into current multimodal LLMs in an off-theshelf manner. We conduct extensive experiments on various
video understanding tasks, such as long-video understanding, video question answering, and video captioning, and
our model can achieve state-of-the-art performances across
multiple datasets.

Text

45
40
35
30
25
20
15

InstructBLIP
VideoChat-Embed
Video-LLaMA
Ours

100

101

102

Number of Frames

103

Figure 1. (a) We propose the long-term memory bank to autoregressively store and accumulate past video information, different
from previous methods directly feeding the visual encoder’s outputs
into the querying transformer. (b) GPU memory consumption v.s.
video frame length of existing multimodal methods and MA-LMM
during inference. Circle sizes represent the number of text tokens.

To handle video inputs, some prior large multimodal models [7, 9] directly feed the concatenated query embeddings
of each frame along the temporal axis into LLMs. However,
the inherent context length limitation of LLMs and GPU
memory consumption restrict the number of video frames
that can be processed. For example, LLaMA has a context
length limitation of 2048 while large multimodal models like
LLaVA [8] and BLIP-2 [7, 9] take in 256 and 32 tokens per
image respectively. Therefore, this design is not practical
and feasible when video duration is much longer (e.g. movies
and TV shows). To address these issues, a naive solution is
to apply average pooling along the temporal axis like VideoChatGPT [21], but this leads to inferior performances as it

13504

