This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Patch Diffusion Models for High-Resolution Video Generation
Ivan Skorokhodov1,2

Willi Menapace1,3

Snap Inc.1

KAUST2

Aliaksandr Siarohin1
University of Trento3

Abstract
Diffusion models have demonstrated remarkable performance in image and video synthesis. However, scaling them
to high-resolution inputs is challenging and requires restructuring the diffusion pipeline into multiple independent
components, limiting scalability and complicating downstream applications. In this work, we study patch diffusion
models (PDMs) — a diffusion paradigm which models the
distribution of patches, rather than whole inputs, keeping
up to ⇡0.7% of the original pixels. This makes it very efficient during training and unlocks end-to-end optimization
on high-resolution videos.
We improve PDMs in two principled ways. First, to enforce consistency between patches, we develop deep context fusion — an architectural technique that propagates the
context information from low-scale to high-scale patches
in a hierarchical manner. Second, to accelerate training
and inference, we propose adaptive computation, which allocates more network capacity and computation towards
coarse image details. The resulting model sets a new stateof-the-art FVD score of 66.32 and Inception Score of 87.68
in class-conditional video generation on UCF-101 2562 ,
surpassing recent methods by more than 100%. Then, we
show that it can be rapidly fine-tuned from a base 36 ⇥ 64
low-resolution generator for high-resolution 64⇥288⇥512
text-to-video synthesis. To the best of our knowledge,
our model is the first diffusion-based architecture which
is trained on such high resolutions entirely end-to-end.
Project webpage: https://snap-research.github.io/hpdm.

1. Introduction
Recently, diffusion models (DMs) have achieved remarkable performance in image and video synthesis, greatly
surpassing previous dominant generative paradigms, such
as GANs [16], VAEs [33] and autoregressive models [5].
However, scaling them to high-resolution inputs broke their
end-to-end nature, since training the full-scale monolithic
foundational generator led to infeasible computational demands [23, 44]. Splitting the architecture into several stages

Sergey Tulyakov1

Latent Diffusion Model (LDM)

E
2562

D

Patch Diffusion Model (PDM)

2562

auto-encoder (stage I)
642

642 diffusion model

diffusion (stage II)

tiled inference

Cascaded Diffusion Model (CDM)
642

base diffusion (stage I)

en
d
tr -to
ai -e
ni nd
ng

sample patches
& add noise

642

1282 diffusion upsampler (stage II)

1282

2562 diffusion upsampler (stage III)

2562

Figure 1. Comparing existing diffusion paradigms: Latent Diffusion Model (LDM) [44, 60] (upper left), Cascaded Diffusion
Model (CDM) [23] (bottom left), and Patch Diffusion Model (this
work) during training (upper right) and inference (bottom right).
In our work, we develop hierarchical patch diffusion, which never
operates on full-resolution inputs, but instead optimizes the lower
stages of the hierarchy to produce spatially aligned context information for the later pyramid levels to enforce global consistency
between patches.

satisfied the immediate practical needs, but having multiple
components in the pipeline makes it harder to tune and complicates downstream tasks like editing or distillation.
For example, LDM [44] trains a diffusion model in the
latent space of an autoencoder, which requires an additional
extensive hyperparameters search. The original work has
dedicated more than a dozen experiments to it (see Tab. 8
of [44]), and the search for its optimal design is still ongoing [3, 8, 41]. Moreover, retraining an auto-encoder requires retraining the latent generator, resulting in extra computational costs. Also, having multiple components complicates downstream applications: for example, SnapFusion [35] had to come with two unrelated sets of techniques
to distill the generator and the auto-encoder separately.

7569

