This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LED: A Large-scale Real-world Paired Dataset for Event Camera Denoising
Yuxing Duan1
1
National Key Lab of Multispectral Information Intelligent Processing Technology
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

Figure 1. Illustration of the paired raw/denoised event datasets. The proposed real-world event denoising datasets contribute to addressing
the inevitable Background Activity (BA) noise encountered by event cameras application under varying camera settings and illumination.

Abstract
Event camera has significant advantages in capturing
dynamic scene information while being prone to noise interference, particularly in challenging conditions like low
threshold and low illumination. However, most existing research focuses on gentle situations, hindering event camera
applications in realistic complex scenarios. To tackle this
limitation and advance the field, we construct a new paired
real-world event denoising dataset (LED), including 3K sequences with 18K seconds of high-resolution (1200*680)
event streams and showing three notable distinctions compared to others: diverse noise levels and scenes, largerscale with high-resolution, and high-quality GT. Specifically, it contains stepped parameters and varying illumination with diverse scenarios. Moreover, based on the
property of noise events inconsistency and signal events
consistency, we propose a novel effective denoising framework(DED) using homogeneous dual events to generate the
GT with better separating noise from the raw. Furthermore, we design a bio-inspired baseline leveraging LeakyIntegrate-and-Fire (LIF) neurons with dynamic thresholds
to realize accurate denoising. The experimental results
demonstrate that the remarkable performance of the proposed approach on different datasets.The dataset and code
are at https://github.com/Yee-Sing/led.

1. Introduction
Event cameras possess unique imaging advantages and
are demonstrating tremendous potential for various applications [4, 11, 33, 37]. Unlike traditional frame cameras using
integration sampling [46], event camera is differential sampling [29], evading the restriction of exposure period. However, due to this sampling mechanism, random fluctuations
in analog signals can easily form noise events. In contrast
to the dominance of signal components in images, the noise
and signal in event cameras are encoded with same magnitude, easily disturbing inherent structural features, such
as lane lines shown in Fig. 1. BA noise detrimentally impact on subsequent tasks like reconstruction [36, 39], motion estimation [40, 41]and event-based object detection [5].
Therefore, event denoising becomes a fundamental issue,
notably in the booming event-based vision community.
Paired data is a key issue for event denoising in the deeplearning era, thus an intuitive idea is to construct paired data
through simulators [17, 22, 38]. However, the image-based
simulation cannot be equivalent to reality because of the domain gap. To obtain the ‘clean part’ from the real-world
event, multi-modal data was incorporated to help paired
event generation. APS images gradient combined with IMU
are used to indicate the event probability within frame period [2]. By jointly estimating the motion parameters with

25637

