This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlowVid: Taming Imperfect Optical Flows for Consistent Video-to-Video Synthesis

Input
Stylization

Input

Stylization

Input

Feng Liang* 1 , Bichen Wu† 2 , Jialiang Wang2 , Licheng Yu2 , Kunpeng Li2 , Yinan Zhao2 , Ishan Misra2 ,
Jia-Bin Huang2 , Peizhao Zhang2 , Peter Vajda2 , Diana Marculescu1
1
The University of Texas at Austin, 2 Meta GenAI
{jeffliang,dianam}@utexas.edu, {wbc,stzpz,vajdap}@meta.com
https://jeff-liangf.github.io/projects/flowvid

Object Swap

Prompt: a Chinese ink painting of a panda eating bamboo

Prompt: a koala eating bamboo

Local Edits

Prompt: a Greek statue wearing headphones

Local Edits

Object Swap

Prompt: a woman wearing headphones, in flat 2d anime

Prompt: a woman with black hair wearing headphones

Prompt: a panda with a pig nose eating bamboo

Figure 1. We present FlowVid to synthesize a consistent video given an input video and a target prompt. Our model supports multiple
applications: (1) global stylization, such as converting the video to 2D anime (2) object swap, such as turning the panda into a koala bear (3)
local edit, such as adding a pig nose to a panda.

Abstract
Diffusion models have transformed the image-to-image
(I2I) synthesis and are now permeating into videos. However, the advancement of video-to-video (V2V) synthesis
has been hampered by the challenge of maintaining temporal consistency across video frames. This paper proposes
a consistent V2V synthesis framework by jointly leveraging
spatial conditions and temporal optical flow clues within the
source video. Contrary to prior methods that strictly adhere
to optical flow, our approach harnesses its benefits while
handling the imperfection in flow estimation. We encode the
optical flow via warping from the first frame and serve it
as a supplementary reference in the diffusion model. This
enables our model for video synthesis by editing the first
* Work partially done during an internship at Meta GenAI.
† Corresponding author.

frame with any prevalent I2I models and then propagating
edits to successive frames. Our V2V model, FlowVid, demonstrates remarkable properties: (1) Flexibility: FlowVid works
seamlessly with existing I2I models, facilitating various modifications, including stylization, object swaps, and local edits.
(2) Efficiency: Generation of a 4-second video with 30 FPS
and 512×512 resolution takes only 1.5 minutes, which is
3.1×, 7.2×, and 10.5× faster than CoDeF, Rerender, and
TokenFlow, respectively. (3) High-quality: In user studies,
our FlowVid is preferred 45.7% of the time, outperforming
CoDeF (3.5%), Rerender (10.2%), and TokenFlow (40.4%).

1. Introduction
Text-guided Video-to-video (V2V) synthesis, which aims to
modify the input video according to given text prompts, has
wide applications in various domains, such as short-video
creation and more broadly in the film industry. Notable ad-

8207

