This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Concept Connectome (VCC): Open World Concept Discovery and their
Interlayer Connections in Deep Models
Matthew Kowal1,3
1

Richard P. Wildes1,2

Konstantinos G. Derpanis1,2,3

2

York University, Samsung AI Centre Toronto, 3 Vector Institute

yorkucvil.github.io/VCC

Abstract
Understanding what deep network models capture in
their learned representations is a fundamental challenge
in computer vision. We present a new methodology to understanding such vision models, the Visual Concept Connectome (VCC), which discovers human interpretable concepts and their interlayer connections in a fully unsupervised manner. Our approach simultaneously reveals ﬁnegrained concepts at a layer, connection weightings across
all layers and is amendable to global analysis of network
structure (e.g. branching pattern of hierarchical concept
assemblies). Previous work yielded ways to extract interpretable concepts from single layers and examine their impact on classiﬁcation, but did not afford multilayer concept
analysis across an entire network architecture. Quantitative
and qualitative empirical results show the effectiveness of
VCCs in the domain of image classiﬁcation. Also, we leverage VCCs for the application of failure mode debugging to
reveal where mistakes arise in deep networks.

1. Introduction
This paper focuses on interpreting the intermediate representations of deep networks for computer vision. The goal
is understanding how various encoded concepts impact a
model’s prediction as well as concepts in other layers. We
deﬁne concepts as abstractions that generalize from particular instances, including those deﬁned locally (e.g. color
and orientation), regionally (e.g. texture and shading) and
from higher-level considerations (e.g. object parts, wholes
and groupings). Human-interpretable concepts are of particular interest in increasing human understanding of models; however, extracting these concepts encoded in deep networks remains an open challenge in computer vision due to
the complexity and opaque nature of these models.
Understanding what concepts are learned by deep models and how they are encoded is important for both science
and applications. For science, understanding what information drives a model’s encoding of different concepts may indicate directions to advance performance. For applications,

several negative consequences of deploying opaque vision
models have been documented, e.g. [8, 24].
Previous work has focused on interpreting models via
feature attribution, which measures the contribution of individual inputs to a model’s output [10, 46, 59]; so, explanations are of single pixels and may be difﬁcult to interpret.
Other work generates images that maximize activation of a
model’s features [19, 38, 54]. Like feature attribution, these
approaches are qualitative and place most of the burden
on the user to determine the concepts revealed. Conceptbased interpretability, which identiﬁes human-interpretable
abstractions in a model’s latent space [20, 23, 29, 32], yield
quantitative contributions of a concept to the model’s output
and explanations on the class-level (vs. pixel-level). These
approaches are easier to understand and validate; however,
they have not been used to explore interlayer relationships.
As it stands, no approaches can quantify the interlayer
affect of a given distributed concept at one layer, l, to another concept at a different layer, l0 (rather than the model
output). Even though it is well established that deep networks learn to build concepts hierarchically as information
ﬂows through the network [39, 54], understanding the hierarchical representations has been under-researched. Indeed,
little is known about the characteristics of this concept hierarchy for today’s models. Questions abound: How many
concepts exist in a network? What are the connections and
weights between concepts? Does the model architecture impact the hierarchical structure of concept abstractions?
In response to these questions, we take inspiration from
the biological notion of a connectome [47], deﬁned as “a
comprehensive structural description of the network of elements and connections forming a brain.” Analogously, we
present the Visual Concept Connectome (VCC), a comprehensive structural description of a deep pretrained network
model in terms of human-interpretable concepts and their
relationships that form the internal representation maintained by the model; Fig. 1 shows an example. Notably,
VCC generation works in the open-world setting, i.e. the
concepts and interlayer connections are discovered without
the need for any predeﬁned concept dictionary.

10895

