This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EpiDiff: Enhancing Multi-View Synthesis via Localized Epipolar-Constrained
Diffusion
Zehuan Huang1 * Hao Wen1 * Junting Dong2 * Yaohui Wang2 Yangguang Li3 Xinyuan Chen2
Yan-Pei Cao3 Ding Liang3 Yu Qiao2 Bo Dai2† Lu Sheng1†
Beihang University

2

Shanghai AI Laboratory

3

VAST

Uniform elevations

Elevation 30°

1

Input Image

Generated multiview-consistent and realistic images

Reconstructed meshes

Figure 1. EpiDiff is able to efficiently generate multi-view consistent and high-quality images from a single view input. Instead of limited
to fixed viewpoints, EpiDiff can generate relatively arbitrary multi-views. EpiDiff is lightweight and only takes 12 seconds to generate 16
multi-view images. The generated multiview images can be used to recover 3D shapes by neural reconstruction methods [17, 57].

Abstract
Generating multiview images from a single view facilitates the rapid generation of a 3D mesh conditioned on
a single image. Recent methods [31] that introduce 3D
global representation into diffusion models have shown the
potential to generate consistent multiviews, but they have
reduced generation speed and face challenges in maintaining generalizability and quality. To address this issue, we
propose EpiDiff, a localized interactive multiview diffusion
model. At the core of the proposed approach is to insert
a lightweight epipolar attention block into the frozen diffusion model, leveraging epipolar constraints to enable crossview interaction among feature maps of neighboring views.
The newly initialized 3D modeling module preserves the
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding author

original feature distribution of the diffusion model, exhibiting compatibility with a variety of base diffusion models.
Experiments show that EpiDiff generates 16 multiview images in just 12 seconds, and it surpasses previous methods
in quality evaluation metrics, including PSNR, SSIM and
LPIPS. Additionally, EpiDiff can generate a more diverse
distribution of views, improving the reconstruction quality
from generated multiviews. Please see the project page at
huanngzh.github.io/EpiDiff/.

1. Introduction
3D reconstruction from a single image has a wide range
of applications in augmented/virtual reality, robotic simulation, and gaming. However, this task presents significant
challenges due to the complexity of accurately interpreting

9784

