This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Interpolation with Diffusion Models
Siddhant Jain∗
Google Research

Daniel Watson∗
Google DeepMind

Eric Tabellion
Google Research

siddhantjain@google.com

watsondaniel@google.com

etabellion@google.com

Aleksander Hołyński
Google Research

Ben Poole
Google DeepMind

Janne Kontkanen
Google Research

holynski@google.com

pooleb@google.com

jkontkanen@google.com

Abstract
We present VIDIM, a generative model for video interpolation, which creates short videos given a start and end
frame. In order to achieve high fidelity and generate motions unseen in the input data, VIDIM uses cascaded diffusion models to first generate the target video at low resolution, and then generate the high-resolution video conditioned on the low-resolution generated video. We compare VIDIM to previous state-of-the-art methods on video
interpolation, and demonstrate how such works fail in most
settings where the underlying motion is complex, nonlinear,
or ambiguous while VIDIM can easily handle such cases.
We additionally demonstrate how classifier-free guidance
on the start and end frame and conditioning the superresolution model on the original high-resolution frames
without additional parameters unlocks high-fidelity results.
VIDIM is fast to sample from as it jointly denoises all the
frames to be generated, requires less than a billion parameters per diffusion model to produce compelling results,
and still enjoys scalability and improved quality at larger
parameter counts. Please see our project page at vidiminterpolation.github.io.

1. Introduction
Diffusion Models [15, 49, 50] have recently exploded in
popularity for generative modeling of images and other
forms of continuous data such as audio [5] and video [18].
Compared to previous methods for generative modeling
such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [12], diffusion models enjoy significantly more training stability due
to the fact that they optimize the evidence lower bound
(ELBO) [24], as opposed to having the complex dynamics
of two models in a zero-sum game like GANs, and do not
∗ Equal contribution.

suffer from posterior collapse like variational autoencoders
(VAEs) due to the limited form of the approximate posterior. This ease of training has led to significant advances
in generative modeling, such as compelling results in textto-image [38, 40, 44] and text-to-video [17, 55] generation,
image-conditioned generation tasks [43], and even 3D novel
view synthesis [27, 36, 58].
In this paper, we explore the specific task of video interpolation with diffusion models. Video interpolation refers
to the problem of generating intermediate frames between
two consecutive frames of video. Video interpolation techniques have been used for many desirable applications, e.g.,
generating slow motion videos from existing videos, video
frame rate up-sampling (e.g. 30 fps → 60 fps) or interpolating between near-duplicate photographs.
Numerous methods have been proposed in prior
work [11], but even the state-of-the-art [20, 26, 39] fails
to generate plausible interpolations when the start and end
frame become increasingly distinct, as these methods rely
on linear or unambiguous motion. Moreover, while existing video diffusion models can be used for the video interpolation task [17, 18], as we carefully study in this work,
quantitative and qualitative results improve significantly by
explicitly training generative models that are conditioned on
the start and end frames, as generative models have the key
advantage of producing samples, as opposed to predicting
the mean. As we will show, this is also strongly supported
by ratings from human observers.
In this work, we show that diffusion based generative
models can overcome the limitations of prior state-of-theart models for video interpolation. We summarize our main
contributions below:
• We develop a cascaded video interpolation diffusion
model, which we dub VIDIM, capable of generating
high-quality videos in between two input frames.
• We carefully ablate some of the design choices of
VIDIM, including parameter sharing to process condi7341

