This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HumMUSS: Human Motion Understanding using State Space Models
Arnab Mondal
Mila & Apple

Stefano Alletto
Apple

Denis Tome
Apple

arnab.mondal@mila.quebec

salletto@apple.com

d tome@apple.com

Runtime

New FPS

Train speed

Memory

Transformer Based
Model

Time
Predicted 3d
skeleton and mesh

Input sequence
of 2d poses

(current state)

Memory

HumMUSS
Input
2d pose

Time
Predicted 3d
skeleton and mesh

(next state)

Figure 1. HumMUSS vs. Transformer-Based Models for sequential prediction of 3D poses and human meshes from 2D keypoint videos.
Top: Transformer-based models attend to a history of 2D poses/keypoints to predict the current frame’s output. Bottom: HumMUSS,
being a stateful model, efficiently utilizes only the current frame and its current state for predictions, ensuring constant memory and time
complexity. HumMUSS also generalizes to new frame rates and enhances the training speed without compromising the prediction accuracy.

Abstract
Understanding human motion from video is essential for
a range of applications, including pose estimation, mesh recovery and action recognition. While state-of-the-art methods predominantly rely on transformer-based architectures,
these approaches have limitations in practical scenarios.
Transformers are slower when sequentially predicting on
a continuous stream of frames in real-time, and do not generalize to new frame rates. In light of these constraints, we
propose a novel attention-free spatiotemporal model for human motion understanding building upon recent advancements in state space models.
Our model not only matches the performance of
transformer-based models in various motion understanding
tasks but also brings added benefits like adaptability to different video frame rates and enhanced training speed when
working with longer sequences of keypoints. Moreover, the
proposed model supports both offline and real-time applications. For real-time sequential prediction, our model is both
memory efficient and several times faster than transformerbased approaches while maintaining their high accuracy.

1. Introduction
Understanding human motion is crucial for various computer vision applications, including body keypoints tracking [16, 32, 84, 109], human mesh estimation [13, 102]
or action recognition [19, 107]. While recent advancements have enabled a plethora of real-world applications
focusing on real-time requirements and mobile deployment [5, 98], this field is dominated by Transformer-based
architectures [46, 98, 109]. Although these models attain
remarkable accuracy, they face practical challenges: processing long video sequences with Transformers can be
slow, and they do not generalize well to unseen frame
rates. Moreover, Transformers are highly inefficient in
terms of memory and speed for real-time sequential prediction [54, 69, 83] compared to state-based sequence models.
In this work, we propose to look beyond attention-based
architectures for learning motion representations and leverage recent advancements in State Space Models (SSMs)
[25, 26, 28, 62, 91] to address the practical limitations of
Transformers. In particular, we propose a novel attentionfree spatiotemporal architecture, named HumMUSS, which
utilizes SSMs to learn human motion representations. HumMUSS consists of several stacked blocks, each containing

2318

