This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UniGarmentManip: A Unified Framework for Category-Level Garment
Manipulation via Dense Visual Correspondence
Ruihai Wu*1,4 Haoran Lu*2,1 Yiyan Wang 3,1 Yubo Wang 2,1 Hao Dong†1,4
1
CFCS, School of CS, PKU 2 School of EECS, PKU 3 School of CS&T, BIT
4
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of CS, PKU

Abstract
Garment manipulation (e.g., unfolding, folding and
hanging clothes) is essential for future robots to accomplish home-assistant tasks, while highly challenging due to
the diversity of garment configurations, geometries and deformations. Although able to manipulate similar shaped
garments in a certain task, previous works mostly have
to design different policies for different tasks, could not
generalize to garments with diverse geometries, and often rely heavily on human-annotated data. In this paper,
we leverage the property that, garments in a certain category have similar structures, and then learn the topological
dense (point-level) visual correspondence among garments
in the category level with different deformations in the selfsupervised manner. The topological correspondence can be
easily adapted to the functional correspondence to guide the
manipulation policies for various downstream tasks, within
only one or few-shot demonstrations. Experiments over
garments in 3 different categories on 3 representative tasks
in diverse scenarios, using one or two arms, taking one or
more steps, inputting flat or messy garments, demonstrate
the effectiveness of our proposed method. Project page:
https://warshallrho.github.io/unigarmentmanip.

1. Introduction
Next-generation robots should have the abilities to manipulate a large variety of objects in our daily life, including
rigid objects, articulated objects [8] and deformable objects [45]. Compared with rigid and articulated objects, deformable objects are much more difficult to manipulate, for
the highly large and nearly infinite state and action spaces,
and complex kinematic and dynamics. Garments, such as
shirts and trousers, are essential types of deformable objects, due to the potentially wide-range applications for both
industrial and domestic scenarios. Manipulating garments,
such as unfolding, folding and dressing up, has garnered
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

significant interest in robotics and computer vision fields.
There have been a long range of studies on manipulating relatively simple shaped deformable objects, such as
square-shaped cloths [23, 45, 46], ropes and cables [33, 45,
46], and bags [2, 5]. Nevertheless, manipulating garments
presents a substantial challenge, as it necessities the comprehensive understanding of more diverse geometries (garments in a certain category have different shapes, let alone
in different categories), more complex states (various geometries with diverse self-deformations), and more difficult
goals (e.g., garments require multiple fine-grained actions
fold step by step). Many existing studies on garment manipulation rely on large-scale annotated data [1, 4], which
is labor-intensive and time-consuming, hindering the scalability in the scenarios of real-world applications. Besides,
many works design quite different methods to tackle different specific tasks [1, 4, 41, 50], making it difficult to efficiently share and reuse information among different tasks.
Different from other object types, garments possess a
property that, in a certain category, while different garments may have different geometries, they usually share the
same structure. For example, tops (such as T-shirts, jackets
and jumpers), are composed of certain components (a body
with two sleeves and a collar), and the topological structures of the components are usually the same, even though
the length, width and geometries of a certain component in
different garments may be quite different. Thanks to such
similarity in structure shared among garments in the category level, it is easy for humans to fulfill a task on unseen
novel garments using the experience of manipulating only
one or a few garments in the same category. Therefore,
we empower robots with the above one/few-shot generalization ability humans have in diverse tasks, by leveraging
such structural similarity among garments.
Among multiple ways to describe and represent garments (e.g., poses [7, 51], lines [10, 58] and keypoints [57]),
skeleton [34], i.e., a graph of keypoints covering significant points on garment edges and joints to represent the
topology of 3D objects, is suitable for describing the abovementioned structures shared among garments. The skele-

16340

