This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PAIR Diffusion: A Comprehensive Multimodal Object-Level Image Editor
Vidit Goel1,2,* Elia Peruzzo3,*,† Yifan Jiang 4 Dejia Xu4 Xingqian Xu2,1
Nicu Sebe3 Trevor Darrell5 Zhangyang Wang1,4 Humphrey Shi1,2
1

Picsart AI Research (PAIR)

2

SHI Labs @ Georgia Tech & UIUC

3

University of Trento

4

5

UT Austin

UC Berkeley

https://github.com/Picsart-AI-Research/PAIR-Diffusion
Input Image

Appearance Editing at Object Level

Structure Editing

Edit Both

(a)
Appearance Editing

Add Objects and Shape Editing

Multimodal Control

Prompt - A picture of car on a road

Prompt - A picture of a beach with carpet, a beer
cup, and a dog

Prompt - A picture of park with snow in it

(b)
Figure 1. PAIR Diffusion framework allows the appearance and structure editing of an image at the object level. Our framework is general
and can enable object-level editing capabilities in both (a) unconditional diffusion models and (b) foundational diffusion models. Using our
framework with a foundational diffusion model allows for comprehensive in-the-wild object-level editing capabilities.

Abstract
Generative image editing has recently witnessed extremely fast-paced growth. Some works use high-level conditioning such as text, while others use low-level conditioning.
Nevertheless, most of them lack fine-grained control over the
* Denotes equal contribution.

†Work performed while interning at Picsart AI Research.

properties of the different objects present in the image, i.e.
object-level image editing. In this work, we tackle the task
by perceiving the images as an amalgamation of various
objects and aim to control the properties of each object in
a fine-grained manner. Out of these properties, we identify
structure and appearance as the most intuitive to understand
and useful for editing purposes. We propose PAIR Diffusion,
a generic framework that enables a diffusion model to control the structure and appearance properties of each object in
the image. We show that having control over the properties

8609

