This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BSNet: Box-Supervised Simulation-assisted Mean Teacher for 3D Instance
Segmentation
Jiahao Lu1 , Jiacheng Deng1 , Tianzhu Zhang1,2, *
1

University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Deep Space Exploration Lab

{lujiahao, dengjc}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tzzhang@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
3D instance segmentation (3DIS) is a crucial task, but
point-level annotations are tedious in fully supervised settings. Thus, using bounding boxes (bboxes) as annotations has shown great potential. The current mainstream
approach is a two-step process, involving the generation
of pseudo-labels from box annotations and the training of
a 3DIS network with the pseudo-labels. However, due
to the presence of intersections among bboxes, not every
point has a determined instance label, especially in overlapping areas. To generate higher quality pseudo-labels
and achieve more precise weakly supervised 3DIS results,
we propose the Box-Supervised Simulation-assisted Mean
Teacher for 3D Instance Segmentation (BSNet), which devises a novel pseudo-labeler called Simulation-assisted
Transformer. The labeler consists of two main components.
The ﬁrst is Simulation-assisted Mean Teacher, which introduces Mean Teacher for the ﬁrst time in this task and constructs simulated samples to assist the labeler in acquiring prior knowledge about overlapping areas. To better
model local-global structure, we also propose Local-Global
Aware Attention as the decoder for teacher and student labelers. Extensive experiments conducted on the ScanNetV2
and S3DIS datasets verify the superiority of our designs.
Code is available at https://github.com/peoplelu/BSNet.

1. Introduction
3D instance segmentation is a fundamental task in 3D scene
understanding, primarily focused on predicting masks and
categories for every foreground object within a scene. Current instance segmentation methods are mainly in fully supervised settings [25, 30, 34, 36, 37] and achieve commendable results. However, the time-consuming nature of pointlevel annotations poses a signiﬁcant challenge. In contrast,
annotating instances with 3D bboxes (object-level) is notably easier, requiring only the annotations for center points
and dimensions (length, width, height). Nevertheless, a no* Corresponding Author

(a)

Non-overlapping
area
Overlapping
area

(b)

(c) Heuristics

Simulation
generation

Ours

Gaussian Process

…

Split
Real scene

Local modeling
Local modeling

Global modeling
Global modeling

Non-overlapping
area
Overlapping sample

Simulated sample

Real sample

Base Model

Mean Teacher

Weight
Initialization
Strong
supervision

…
Predictions

Predictions

Predictions

Predictions

Weak
supervision

Simulation-assisted Mean Teacher

GT

GT

Figure 1. (a) The visualization of an overlapping sample. (b) The
proposed Simulation-assisted Mean Teacher helps the labeler acquire prior knowledge from simulated samples. (c) Our method
improves local-global structure modeling of overlapping samples
to generate better pseudo-labels (especially in yellow circles).

table limitation stems from the use of bboxes, which cannot
capture the detailed shape or geometry of objects. Consequently, bridging the gap between object-level and pointlevel annotations remains a challenge.
To solve the above challenge, existing methods [8, 11,
35] conduct several explorations. Box2Mask [8] parameterizes bboxes and utilizes them as labels. However, due to
bbox overlap, some point clouds may exist within multiple
bboxes, introducing ambiguity in point-object assignments.
As illustrated in Figure 1(a), instance labels for point clouds
in non-overlapping areas are determined as they only belong
to one bbox. In contrast, overlapping areas are governed by
two different bboxes, resulting in indeterminate instance labels. Consequently, the point-wise predicted bboxes cannot
be reliably used for clustering. To better address the ambiguity in overlapping areas, WISGP [11] employs straightforward heuristics based on local structure modeling. Concretely, for each indeterminate point, WISGP selects the
most common label from its neighboring points as its label. On the other hand, Gapro [29] uses Gaussian Process
(GP) [35] to train individual overlapping samples, modeling global structure by ﬁtting the similarity relationships
between all points into a Gaussian distribution. Then Gapro
computes posterior probability to achieve binary classiﬁcation for overlapping areas.

20374

