This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Iterated Learning Improves Compositionality in Large Vision-Language Models
Chenhao Zheng2 , Jieyu Zhang1 , Aniruddha Kembhavi3 , Ranjay Krishna1,3
1
University of Washington, 2 University of Michigan, 3 Allen Institute for Artificial Intelligence
neymar@umich.edu, {jieyuz2,ranjay}@cs.washington.edu, anik@allenai.org

Abstract
A fundamental characteristic common to both human
vision and natural language is their compositional nature.
Yet, despite the performance gains contributed by large vision and language pretraining, recent investigations find
that most—if not all—our state-of-the-art vision-language
models struggle at compositionality. They are unable to distinguish between images of “a girl in white facing a man in
black” and “a girl in black facing a man in white”. Moreover, prior work suggests that compositionality doesn’t arise
with scale: larger model sizes or training data don’t help.
This paper develops a new iterated training algorithm that incentivizes compositionality. We draw on decades of cognitive
science research that identifies cultural transmission—the
need to teach a new generation—as a necessary inductive
prior that incentivizes humans to develop compositional languages. Specifically, we reframe vision-language contrastive
learning as the Lewis Signaling Game between a vision agent
and a language agent, and operationalize cultural transmission by iteratively resetting one of the agent’s weights
during training. After every iteration, this training paradigm
induces representations that become “easier to learn”, a
property of compositional languages: e.g. our model trained
on CC3M and CC12M improves standard CLIP by 4.7%,
4.0% respectfully in the SugarCrepe benchmark.

1. Introduction
Scholars across disciples herald compositionality as a fundamental presupposition characterizing both human perception and linguistic processing [12, 17]. Through compositional reasoning, humans can comprehend the photos they
take and describe those images by composing words together [2, 8, 26, 27]. For instance, compositionality allows
people to differentiate between a photo of “a gold colored
dog facing a person wearing black” and “a black colored
dog facing a person wearing gold”. Given its importance,
research in both computer vision and natural language processing has sought to develop models that can similarly
comprehend scenes and express them through compositional

language [20, 28, 34, 41].
Yet, a series of recent evaluation benchmarks conclude
that state-of-the-art vision-language models exhibit little to
no compositionality [24, 42, 50, 58, 66, 69]. In fact, in many
specific evaluation conditions, models perform almost close
to random chance. Even models such as CLIP [47], which
has become the backbone for many vision tasks, exhibit
little compositionality. More striking are the experiments
that suggest that compositionality doesn’t emerge with scale,
i.e. vision models do not become more compositional with
increasing model size or training data [24, 42]. Similar
experiments in natural language processing find that large
language models also struggle with compositionality [1, 16].
Meanwhile, Cognitive Scientists have spent the last two
decades studying the emergence of compositionality in human language. The results seem to indicate that the primary
inductive prior that leads to language compositionality is cultural transmission: a phenomenon where an older generation
transmits their language to a new generation [3, 5, 59, 61].
They hypothesize that this need to teach our offsprings our
language creates a natural preference towards languages that
are easier to learn. A compositional language, which necessitates learning only a limited number of symbols to express
infinite concepts, is therefore preferred to ones with unique
symbol-to-concept bindings.
To demonstrate this hypothesis, scientists study the language that emerged from the “Lewis Signaling Game”.
Lewis Signaling Game [37] is a theoretical framework where
two people communicate with one another to solve the “object reference” problem (Fig. 1(1a)). Their communication
channel is restricted to symbols, which do not represent
any known language, forcing participants to develop a new
shared language to communicate. They simulate cultural
transmission by replacing human participants across “generations”, and observe how new combinations of participants
modify their language (Fig. 1(1b)). They verify that over
multiple generations, the emergent language becomes more
compositional [10, 11, 21, 30, 38, 61].
In this paper, we operationalize cultural transmission as
an iterated learning (IL) algorithm for vision-language models. Consider the popular CLIP model; it is trained to learn

13785

