This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flexible Biometrics Recognition: Bridging the Multimodality Gap through
Attention, Alignment and Prompt Tuning
Leslie Ching Ow Tiong*,1
1
1

Samsung Electronics

leslie.tiong@samsung.com

2

Dick Sigmund*,2
AIDOT Inc.
2

3

Chen-Hui Chan3

Korea Institute of Science and Technology
3

dsigmund@aidot.ai

Abstract
Periocular and face are complementary biometrics for
identity management, albeit with inherent limitations, notably in scenarios involving occlusion due to sunglasses or
masks. In response to these challenges, we introduce Flexible Biometric Recognition (FBR), a novel framework designed to advance conventional face, periocular, and multimodal face-periocular biometrics across both intra- and
cross-modality recognition tasks. FBR strategically utilizes
the Multimodal Fusion Attention (MFA) and Multimodal
Prompt Tuning (MPT) mechanisms within the Vision Transformer architecture. MFA facilitates the fusion of modalities, ensuring cohesive alignment between facial and periocular embeddings while incorporating soft-biometrics to
enhance the model’s ability to discriminate between individuals. The fusion of three modalities is pivotal in exploring interrelationships between different modalities. Additionally, MPT serves as a unifying bridge, intertwining inputs and promoting cross-modality interactions while preserving their distinctive characteristics. The collaborative
synergy of MFA and MPT enhances the shared features of
the face and periocular, with a specific emphasis on the ocular region, yielding exceptional performance in both intraand cross-modality recognition tasks. Rigorous experimentation across four benchmark datasets validates the noteworthy performance of the FBR model. The source code is
available at https://github.com/MIS-DevWorks/FBR.

1. Introduction
Facial recognition has attained ubiquitous applications
across diverse domains today [18, 19, 35]. However, they
struggle with challenges arising from cosmetic changes,
plastic surgery, and particularly obstructions like face
masks. On the other hand, periocular recognition, which
focuses on the region around the eyes, has gained traction
* The authors have contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

Andrew Beng Jin Teoh†,4

chchan@kist.re.kr

4

Yonsei University

4

bjteoh@yonsei.ac.kr

as an alternative to face recognition [1, 23–25]. Despite the
significant progress, however, challenges remain, especially
with glasses or sunglasses, impacting the accuracy of periocular recognition.
The fusion of facial and periocular [15, 32, 37], holds
promise for enhancing recognition performance. However,
traditional multimodal biometrics present fresh challenges
in managing and storing templates of all biometric modalities, which can result in computational and storage overhead. Moreover, ensuring all modalities are available for
recognition is critical for seamless deployment. In response
to these challenges, conditional biometrics [11, 22], along
with cross-modality biometrics recognition [20, 33], offer
promising avenues to mitigate the constraints of unimodal
biometric systems, i.e., sole face or periocular recognition
as well as multimodal biometric systems. Conditional biometrics enhance a single modality by incorporating information from another, such as periocular recognition conditioned by the face or vice versa. On the other hand, crossmodality biometrics encompasses the task of matching biometric samples across distinct biometric modalities, such as
face vs. periocular matching.
This paper introduces Flexible Biometrics Recognition
(FBR), designed to support intra- and cross-modality biometric matching, as illustrated in Figure 1. The FBR
model is initially trained to align facial, periocular, and softbiometric attributes. The latter encompasses social or physical descriptive traits of individuals such as gender, age,
or ethnicity, which have proven to enhance the discriminative power of the embedding [6]. During deployment,
the trained FBR model serves as a feature extractor, acquiring facial or periocular embeddings based on the input
modality. In contrast to unimodal and multimodal biometric systems, FBR produces modality-invariant embeddings,
facilitating both intra- and cross-modality matching. Additionally, FBR can address scenarios where only facial or
periocular data is stored, enabling exclusive reliance on the
available modality during recognition.
The adaptability of FBR ensures robust performance and
operational reliability, even in incomplete or temporarily

267

