This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

POCE: Primal Policy Optimization with Conservative Estimation for
Multi-constraint Offline Reinforcement Learning
Jiayi Guan1† , Li Shen2† , Ao Zhou1 , Lusong Li2 ,Han Hu3 ,
Xiaodong He2 , Guang Chen1‡ , Changjun Jiang1
1

Tongji University, 2 JD Explore Academy, 3 Beijing Institute of Technology

Abstract
Multi-constraint offline reinforcement learning (RL)
promises to learn policies that satisfy both cumulative and
state-wise costs from offline datasets. This arrangement
provides an effective approach for the widespread application of RL in high-risk scenarios where both cumulative and state-wise costs need to be considered simultaneously. However, previously constrained offline RL algorithms are primarily designed to handle single-constraint
problems related to cumulative cost, which faces challenges
when addressing multi-constraint tasks that involve both
cumulative and state-wise costs. In this work, we propose a novel Primal policy Optimization with Conservative
Estimation algorithm (POCE) to address the problem of
multi-constraint offline RL. Concretely, we reframe the objective of multi-constraint offline RL by introducing the concept of Maximum Markov Decision Processes (MMDP).
Subsequently, we present a primal policy optimization algorithm to confront the multi-constraint problems, which
improves the stability and convergence speed of model
training. Furthermore, we propose a conditional Bellman operator to estimate cumulative and state-wise Qvalues, reducing the extrapolation error caused by out-ofdistribution (OOD) actions. Finally, extensive experiments
demonstrate that the POCE algorithm achieves competitive
performance across multiple experimental tasks, particularly outperforming baseline algorithms in terms of safety.
Our code is available at github.POCE.

1. Introduction
Reinforcement learning (RL) have achieved remarkable
achievements in the domains of policy games [4, 19, 42],
robotics [2, 17, 39, 50], and recommendation systems [5, 7].
However, safety concerns remain a primary challenge to the
† Equal Contribution;
‡ Corresponding author: guangchen@tongji.edu.cn.

real-world deployment of RL, particularly in scenarios with
high safety requirements [15, 21, 38, 53]. These scenarios
demand attention to both cumulative and state-wise safety
constraints. For example, in the context of autonomous
driving, the objective is not only to mitigate instances of
prolonged hazardous driving but also to prevent immediate
collisions [16, 33, 46, 58]. Multi-constraint offline RL is
a promising and potentially effective approach to address
the aforementioned issues. It learns policies that satisfy
both cumulative and state-wise safety constraints from precollected offline datasets.
Currently, several works leverage the framework of Constrained Markov Decision Processes (CMDP) to model and
address the problem of learning cost-constrained strategies
under offline dataset, achieving promising results in handling tasks with cumulative cost constraints [22, 30, 32, 44].
However, these approaches face challenges when dealing
with problems that involve constraints on both cumulative
and state-wise cost simultaneously [6, 13, 30]. Additionally,
for the aforementioned multi-constraint problems, methods such as the Lagrange multiplier and penalty function
method are commonly adopted [12, 24, 31, 36]. These
methods are sensitive to initial values, which leads to unstable model training. Moreover, they introduce additional
penalty coefficients or Lagrange multipliers, increasing the
cost of model hyperparameter tuning. On the other hand,
the extrapolation error caused by out-of-distribution (OOD)
actions in offline settings also significantly affects the performance of optimization algorithms [14, 29, 54]. Therefore, this work focuses on solving multi-constraint optimization problems involving cumulative and state-wise
costs in the offline setting.
To solve the aforementioned multi-constraint optimization problem in the offline setting, we propose a novel
Primal policy Optimization with Conservative Estimation
algorithm (POCE). Concretely, we introduce the Maximum
Markov Decision Process to represent the state-wise cost.
Based on this, we redefine a novel multi-constrained offline RL objective for tasks that involve both cumulative
and state-wise costs. Subsequently, we propose a pri-

26243

