This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Error Detection in Egocentric Procedural Task Videos
Shih-Po Lee1
1

Zijia Lu1
Zekun Zhang2
Minh Hoai2
Ehsan Elhamifar1
1
2
Northeastern University
Stony Brook University

{lee.shih, lu.zij, e.elhamifar}@northeastern.edu

Abstract
We present a new egocentric procedural error dataset
containing videos with various types of errors as well as
normal videos and propose a new framework for procedural
error detection using error-free training videos only. Our
framework consists of an action segmentation model and a
contrastive step prototype learning module to segment actions and learn useful features for error detection. Based
on the observation that interactions between hands and objects often inform action and error understanding, we propose to combine holistic frame features with relations features, which we learn by building a graph using active object detection followed by a Graph Convolutional Network.
To handle errors, unseen during training, we use our contrastive step prototype learning to learn multiple prototypes
for each step, capturing variations of error-free step executions. At inference time, we use feature-prototype similarities for error detection. By experiments on three datasets,
we show that our proposed framework outperforms state-ofthe-art video anomaly detection methods for error detection
and provides smooth action and error predictions.1

1. Introduction
We perform a wide range of procedural tasks in our personal life (e.g., cooking recipes, setting up devices, physical therapy routines) and professional life (e.g., medical
emergencies, mechanical repairs, assembling and operating instruments). The large number of daily tasks, the necessity of preparing the workforce for new tasks and environments and the growing population age calls for Wearable Intelligent Task Assistants (WITAs) that monitor and
guide users through familiar and unfamiliar tasks to improve the accuracy and speed of task learning/execution.
This has motivated exciting recent research on learning
from instructional and procedural task videos, mostly focusing on learning step segmentation [2, 5, 17, 27, 29,
35, 36, 42, 46, 55, 59, 61–64, 74, 75, 80], recognition
1 Code and data is available at https : / / github . com /
robert80203/EgoPER_official.

2

{zekzhang, minhhoai}@cs.stonybrook.edu

Erroneous

Normal

Spill out coffee grounds (S)

Pour water from kettle

Add oatmeal onto tortilla (A)

Fold tortilla

Drop tea bag (S)

Put tea bag in mug

Directly pour oat into bowl (M)

Measure 4 table spoon of oat

Figure 1. The normal and erroneous examples from the tasks of making
coffee, quesadilla, tea and oatmeal (top to bottom) in our dataset, showing
step Modification (M), Addition (A), and Slip (S).

[7, 9, 20, 21, 38, 40, 47, 72], planning [8, 10, 56, 66, 70, 82]
and progress prediction [14] models from training videos
that correspond to correct executions of tasks.
On the other hand, the following may sound familiar:
in the morning you were in rush to make coffee and sandwiches and forgot to put some ingredients in your sandwich,
or when you were assembling an IKEA furniture and forgot
to put the washer into the bolt and after a few steps realized it. Indeed, the chance of making errors during task
execution increases, when i) the complexity (e.g., duration,
number, difficulty) of steps or tasks increases, ii) we deal
with new tasks, iii) we are cognitively overloaded. Therefore, detecting errors during or after task executions and
providing corrections for them is a much needed capability in WITAs.

18655

