This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MULDE: Multiscale Log-Density Estimation via Denoising Score Matching for
Video Anomaly Detection
Jakub Micorek

Horst Possegger Dominik Narnhofer Horst Bischof
Graz University of Technology, Austria

Mateusz Koziński

{jakub.micorek, possegger, dominik.narnhofer, bischof, mateusz.kozinski}@icg.tugraz.at

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to video anomaly detection: we treat feature vectors extracted from videos as realizations of a random variable with a fixed distribution
and model this distribution with a neural network. This lets
us estimate the likelihood of test videos and detect video
anomalies by thresholding the likelihood estimates. We
train our video anomaly detector using a modification of denoising score matching, a method that injects training data
with noise to facilitate modeling its distribution. To eliminate hyperparameter selection, we model the distribution
of noisy video features across a range of noise levels and
introduce a regularizer that tends to align the models for
different levels of noise. At test time, we combine anomaly
indications at multiple noise scales with a Gaussian mixture model. Running our video anomaly detector induces
minimal delays as inference requires merely extracting the
features and forward-propagating them through a shallow
neural network and a Gaussian mixture model. Our experiments on five popular video anomaly detection benchmarks demonstrate state-of-the-art performance, both in the
object-centric and in the frame-centric setup.

1. Introduction
The goal of video anomaly detection (VAD) is to detect
events that deviate from normal patterns in videos. VAD has
numerous potential applications in healthcare, safety, and
traffic monitoring. It can be used to detect events like human falling down, workplace, or traffic accidents, and holds
the promise of dramatically reducing the time needed to respond to emergencies that can result from them. The main
challenge of anomaly detection stems from the fact that, unlike classes of actions in video action recognition, anomalies do not form a coherent group of patterns and typically
cannot be anticipated in advance. In consequence, in many
applications anomalous training data is not available, necessitating the so-called one-class classification approach,

in which the system is trained exclusively on normal data.
Traditional approaches to one-class video anomaly detection rely on training a deep network in auxiliary selfsupervised tasks, like auto-encoding the frame sequence [9–
12, 15, 29], predicting future frames [22, 28], inpainting spatio-temporal volumes [9], and solving jigsaw puzzles [2, 39]. The underlying assumption is that given a
video sufficiently different from those of the training set,
i.e. one containing an anomaly, the network should fail to
complete the self-supervised task. However, the connection
between data normality or abnormality and the performance
of the network remains unclear. Deep networks can generalize beyond their training set, and there is no guarantee that
anomalies make them fail to complete their task.
Our motivation is to lay more solid foundations for video
anomaly detection. To that end, we treat feature vectors
extracted from videos as realizations of a random variable
with a fixed distribution, and seek to approximate its probability density function with a neural network. Such approximation would enable a principled and intuitive approach to
detecting anomalies: since anomalous data is characterized
by a low likelihood under the statistical model of normal
data, it could be detected by thresholding the approximate
density function.
Training a neural network to directly approximate p(x),
the probability density function of the training data is very
challenging. However, Vincent [38] showed that injecting the data with zero-centered, iid Gaussian noise makes
it easier to model the distribution of the noisy data q(x̃).
For sufficiently low levels of noise, q preserves the shape
of p, which makes it a suitable basis for our anomaly indicator. Vincent’s contribution consisted in proposing denoising score matching, a method to train a neural network
to approximate −∇x̃ log q(x̃), the negative log-gradient of
the density function of noisy data, which became a core algorithm of a recent class of generative models [35]. We
modify this method to train a neural anomaly indicator that
approximates, up to a constant, the log-density, − log q(x̃),
well suited to indicating anomalies thanks to its one-to-one
relation to q(x̃). Our approach is illustrated in Figure 1.

18868

