This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EventDance: Unsupervised Source-free Cross-modal Adaptation for Event-based
Object Recognition

1

Xu Zheng1 Lin Wang1,2 *
AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ) 2 Dept. of CSE, HKUST
zhengxu128@gmail.com, linwang@ust.hk

Project Page: https://vlislab22.github.io/EventDance/

Abstract
In this paper, we make the first attempt at achieving
the cross-modal (i.e., image-to-events) adaptation for eventbased object recognition without accessing any labeled
source image data owning to privacy and commercial issues. Tackling this novel problem is non-trivial due to the
novelty of event cameras and the distinct modality gap between images and events. In particular, as only the source
model is available, a hurdle is how to extract the knowledge from the source model by only using the unlabeled
target event data while achieving knowledge transfer. To
this end, we propose a novel framework, dubbed EventDance for this unsupervised source-free cross-modal adaptation problem. Importantly, inspired by event-to-video reconstruction methods, we propose a reconstruction-based
modality bridging (RMB) module, which reconstructs intensity frames from events in a self-supervised manner. This
makes it possible to build up the surrogate images to extract the knowledge (i.e., labels) from the source model. We
then propose a multi-representation knowledge adaptation
(MKA) module that transfers the knowledge to target models learning events with multiple representation types for
fully exploring the spatiotemporal information of events.
The two modules connecting the source and target models are mutually updated so as to achieve the best performance. Experiments on three benchmark datasets with two
adaption settings show that EventDance is on par with prior
methods utilizing the source data.

1. Introduction
Event cameras, a.k.a., the silicon retina [47], are bioinspired novel sensors that perceive per-pixel intensity
changes asynchronously and produce event streams encoding the time, pixel position, and polarity (sign) of the
intensity changes [20, 21, 28]. Event cameras possess
* Corresponding author.

Event Modality

Event Streams

Image Modality

Reconstruction-based
Modality Bridging

Source
Images
Pretrain

Multi-representations

Target
Models
0.8
…

0.9
…

Source
Model

Multi-representation
Knowledge Adaptation

Extracted Knowledge
(Logits)
0.8
0.9
…
…

Figure 1. Illustration of the challenging task of the cross-modal
adaptation from image to event modalities. We address it by
introducing reconstruction-based modality bridging and multirepresentation knowledge adaptation modules.

distinct merits, e.g., high dynamic range and no motion
blur, making them more advantageous for challenging visual conditions, where the sensing quality degrades for the
frame-based cameras. As a result, event cameras have recently drawn much attention from the computer vision and
robotics community [4, 6, 38, 48, 55, 70, 78]. Although
events are sparse and mostly encode the edge information,
it has been shown that events alone are possible for learning
scene understanding tasks, e.g., object recognition [20], via
deep neural networks (DNNs). However, learning eventbased DNNs is often impeded by the lack of large-scale
precisely annotated datasets due to the asynchronous and
sparse properties of event cameras, making it hardly possible to apply now-straightforward supervised learning. For
these reasons, some research endeavors have been made to
explore the cross-modal adaptation to transfer knowledge
from the labeled image modality (i.e., source) to the unlabeled event modality (i.e., target) [40, 57, 68].
In this paper, we make the first attempt to achieve crossmodal (i.e., image-to-event) adaptation for event-based ob-

17448

