This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SocialCounterfactuals: Probing and Mitigating Intersectional Social Biases in
Vision-Language Models with Counterfactual Examples
Phillip Howard

Avinash Madasu
Tiep Le
Gustavo Lujan Moreno
Anahita Bhiwandiwalla
Vasudev Lal
Intel Labs

{phillip.r.howard, avinash.madasu, tiep.le, gustavo.lujan.moreno}@intel.com
{anahita.bhiwandiwalla, vasudev.lal}@intel.com

Abstract
While vision-language models (VLMs) have achieved remarkable performance improvements recently, there is growing evidence that these models also posses harmful biases
with respect to social attributes such as gender and race.
Prior studies have primarily focused on probing such bias
attributes individually while ignoring biases associated with
intersections between social attributes. This could be due
to the difficulty of collecting an exhaustive set of imagetext pairs for various combinations of social attributes. To
address this challenge, we employ text-to-image diffusion
models to produce counterfactual examples for probing intersectional social biases at scale. Our approach utilizes
Stable Diffusion with cross attention control to produce sets
of counterfactual image-text pairs that are highly similar
in their depiction of a subject (e.g., a given occupation)
while differing only in their depiction of intersectional social
attributes (e.g., race & gender). Through our over-generatethen-filter methodology, we produce SocialCounterfactuals,
a high-quality dataset containing 171k image-text pairs for
probing intersectional biases related to gender, race, and
physical characteristics. We conduct extensive experiments
to demonstrate the usefulness of our generated dataset for
probing and mitigating intersectional social biases in stateof-the-art VLMs.

1. Introduction
Counterfactual examples, which study the impact on a response variable following a change to a causal feature, have
proven valuable in natural language processing (NLP) for
probing model biases and improving robustness to spurious
correlation [16, 18, 26, 30, 54, 57, 60]. While counterfactual
examples for VLMs have been relatively unexplored, recent
work [33] has shown that text-to-image diffusion models

with cross attention control can effectively produce multimodal counterfactual examples for VLM training, data augmentation and evaluation. This suggests that synthetic counterfactual examples generated by diffusion models could be
an effective tool for probing and mitigating biases in VLMs.
Bias in pre-trained models can be viewed as spurious
correlations, which are often attributed to the co-occurrence
of non-causal (i.e., spurious) features with labels in datasets.
During pre-training, models learn to exploit such correlations
as shortcuts to achieving high in-domain performance on the
training dataset [19]. Consequently, models which learn to
rely on spurious correlations are more brittle and have worse
out-of-domain (OOD) generalization [47, 58].
Social biases are a particularly concerning type of spurious correlation learned by VLMs. Due to a lack of proportional representation for people of various races, genders,
and other social attributes in image-text datasets [5, 17, 63],
VLMs learn biased associations between these attributes
and various subjects (e.g., occupations). For example, given
a gender- and race-neutral query such as “A photo of an
attorney”, a VLM may retrieve a disproportionate number
of images of one particular race due to learned spurious
correlations between this specific occupation and race.
Prior studies on probing social biases in VLMs [22–
24, 28, 65] have primarily utilized real image-text pairs
collected from existing datasets by identifying the cooccurrence of certain attributes with a target subject. However, this approach is limited by the availability of existing
image-text pairs for various combinations of social attributes
and subject types. Consequently, these prior studies have
focused exclusively on investigating biases associated with a
single social attribute at a time while ignoring the potential
role of intersectional bias (e.g., particular race-gender combinations) [40], which could be attributed to the difficultly
of collecting an exhaustive set of image-text examples for
various combinations of social attributes. Additionally, the

11975

