This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sieve: Multimodal Dataset Pruning Using Image Captioning Models
Anas Mahmoud1,2 * Mostafa Elhoushi1 Amro Abbas† Yu Yang3
Newsha Ardalani1 Hugh Leather1 Ari S. Morcos4
1
FAIR at Meta 2 University of Toronto 3 UC Los Angeles 4 DatologyAI
Abstract
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are pretrained on
large, diverse, and noisy web-crawled datasets. This underscores the critical need for dataset pruning, as the quality of these datasets is strongly correlated with the performance of VLMs on downstream tasks. Using CLIPScore
from a pretrained model to only train models using highlyaligned samples is one of the most successful methods for
pruning. We argue that this approach suffers from multiple
limitations including: false positives and negatives due to
CLIP’s pretraining on noisy labels. We propose a pruning
signal, Sieve, that employs synthetic captions generated by
image-captioning models pretrained on small, diverse, and
well-aligned image-text pairs to evaluate the alignment of
noisy image-text pairs. To bridge the gap between the limited diversity of generated captions and the high diversity
of alternative text (alt-text), we estimate the semantic textual similarity in the embedding space of a language model
pretrained on unlabeled text corpus. Using DataComp, a
multimodal dataset filtering benchmark, when evaluating
on 38 downstream tasks, our pruning approach, surpasses
CLIPScore by 2.6% and 1.7% on medium and large scale
respectively. In addition, on retrieval tasks, Sieve leads to a
significant improvement of 2.7% and 4.5% on medium and
large scale respectively.

1. Introduction
Contrastive Language-Image Pre-training (CLIP) [32] models have shown great success in solving zero-shot image
classification and multimodal retrieval tasks. In addition,
many foundational Vision-Language Models (VLMs) use
pretrained CLIP encoders to condition image generation on
CLIP text embeddings [33] in retrieval augmented visionlanguage models [13, 42], and to align modalities including
audio, depth, and thermal with language through CLIP image embeddings [10]. Therefore, the quality of CLIP representations can influence the performance of many VLMs.
* Work done during internship at Meta
† Work done during an AI residency at Meta

To pretrain CLIP, billions of image-text pairs are collected using common crawl. The raw data is highly diverse but contains many noisy image-text pairs, including
low quality images, low quality alternative text (alt-text),
and misaligned image-text pairs. Pretraining CLIP models on noisy data can have adverse effects on the learned
representations, thus leading to poor performance on downstream tasks [1].
To address this challenge, researchers have developed
data pruning methods to remove low quality image-text
pairs. Heuristics that filter out image-text pairs based on image dimensions, aspect ratio, alt-text length, and complexity are commonly used [9, 36] to reduce noise, but can also
limit the diversity of the dataset [26]. Methods that use images or class names from datasets, like ImageNet, to sample
semantically similar image-text pairs can lead to higher accuracy on downstream tasks [40], but limit the diversity of
the selected samples as they sample image-text pairs close
to a specific dataset.
One of the most effective pruning methods, CLIPScore [11, 36], computes the cosine similarity between image and text embeddings using a pretrained CLIP model.
This score is then used to rank the alignment of image-text
pairs. However, as shown in Figure 1, using CLIPScore
can lead to false positives – samples that are poorly aligned
but have high CLIPScore (i.e., bad samples) due to spurious correlations learned by the pretrained CLIP model [41].
In addition, using CLIPScore can lead to false negatives –
samples that are aligned but have low CLIPScore (i.e., hard
samples) due to the poor discrimination between hard and
bad samples. Excluding hard samples and including bad
samples can negatively affect the generalization of CLIP
image and text encoders.
The goal of this work is to reduce both false negatives
and positives induced by CLIPScore ranking by relying on
an image-captioning model pretrained on small, diverse,
and well-aligned image-text pairs. As shown in Figure 1,
Sieve can reduce false positives or false negatives in different scenarios, such as samples where CLIPScore focuses on
geographic or chronological context of an image rather than
the content of an image. As depicted in Figure 2, we evalu-

22423

