This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Weak-to-Strong 3D Object Detection with X-Ray Distillation
Alexander Gambashidze* 1,2

Aleksandr Dadukin2

Maria Razzhivina2

Maxim Golyadkin1, 2

Ilya Makarov1,3

Abstract

This paper addresses the critical challenges of sparsity
and occlusion in LiDAR-based 3D object detection. Current
methods often rely on supplementary modules or specific
architectural designs, potentially limiting their applicability to new and evolving architectures. To our knowledge, we
are the first to propose a versatile technique that seamlessly
integrates into any existing framework for 3D Object Detection, marking the first instance of Weak-to-Strong generalization in 3D computer vision. We introduce a novel framework, X-Ray Distillation with Object-Complete Frames,
suitable for both supervised and semi-supervised settings,
that leverages the temporal aspect of point cloud sequences.
This method extracts crucial information from both previous
and subsequent LiDAR frames, creating Object-Complete
frames that represent objects from multiple viewpoints, thus
addressing occlusion and sparsity. Given the limitation of
not being able to generate Object-Complete frames during
online inference, we utilize Knowledge Distillation within
a Teacher-Student framework. This technique encourages
the strong Student model to emulate the behavior of the
weaker Teacher, which processes simple and informative
Object-Complete frames, effectively offering a comprehensive view of objects as if seen through X-ray vision. Our proposed methods surpass state-of-the-art in semi-supervised
learning by 1-1.5 mAP and enhance the performance of
five established supervised models by 1-2 mAP on standard autonomous driving datasets, even with default hyperparameters. Code for Object-Complete frames is available here: https://github.com/sakharok13/X-Ray-TeacherPatching-Tools.

Figure 1. 3D object detection directly from sparse LiDAR data
(top left) provides noisy predictions (bottom left). Adding object completion stage (top right) helps to train 3D object detection X- Ray Teacher, which is robust and can be distilled to baseline model. Red, Yellow and Blue colors of bounding boxes are
related to classical LiDAR-based object detection, Our model on
Object-Complete frames predictions and Ground Truth labels, respectively.

You’re just not thinking fourth dimensionally... the
bridge will exist.
Dr. Emmett Brown, Back to the Future

1. Introduction

* Corresponding author, email: alexandergambashidze@gmail.com
1 Artificial Intelligence Research Institute
2 HSE University
3 ISP RAS

3D object detection is a fundamental task in the field of
computer vision and autonomous systems, playing a key
role in the advancement of self-driving technology [1] and
contributing significantly to the robotics industry [38, 51].
Currently, LiDAR-based 3D object detection [6, 17, 36]
demonstrates superior performance compared to camera-

15055

