This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bilateral Event Mining and Complementary for Event Stream Super-Resolution
Zhilin Huang1,2 * Quanmin Liang2,3 * Yijie Yu1,2 Chujun Qin4
Xiawu Zheng2,5 Kai Huang3 Zikun Zhou2† Wenming Yang1,2†
1
Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University
4
China Southern Power Grid 5 Xiamen University
{zerinhwang03,chujun.qin}@pku.edu.cn, liangqm5@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, yangelwm@163.com
yyj23@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, huangk36@mail.sysu.edu.cn, {zhengxw01,zhouzk01}@pcl.ac.cn

𝒆𝑯𝑹
𝒕

Abstract
𝒏𝒕

Event Stream Super-Resolution (ESR) aims to address
the challenge of insufficient spatial resolution in event
streams, which holds great significance for the application
of event cameras in complex scenarios. Previous works for
ESR often process positive and negative events in a mixed
paradigm. This paradigm limits their ability to effectively
model the unique characteristics of each event and mutually refine each other by considering their correlations. In
this paper, we propose a bilateral event mining and complementary network (BMCNet) to fully leverage the potential
of each event and capture the shared information to complement each other simultaneously. Specifically, we resort
to a two-stream network to accomplish comprehensive mining of each type of events individually. To facilitate the exchange of information between two streams, we propose a
bilateral information exchange (BIE) module. This module is layer-wisely embedded between two streams, enabling
the effective propagation of hierarchical global information
while alleviating the impact of invalid information brought
by inherent characteristics of events. The experimental results demonstrate that our approach outperforms the previous state-of-the-art methods in ESR, achieving performance improvements of over 11% on both real and synthetic
datasets. Moreover, our method significantly enhances the
performance of event-based downstream tasks such as object recognition and video reconstruction. Our code is
available at https://github.com/Lqm26/BMCNet-ESR.

1. Introduction
Event cameras are a novel bio-inspired asynchronous sensor
[9, 23] with advantages such as high dynamic range, high
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

Mixed
Features

ESR

𝒑𝒕
(a) Previous methods

𝒏𝒕

𝒑𝒕

Negative
Event
Mining
Positive
Event
Mining

N Stream

𝒆𝑯𝑹
𝒕

Bilateral
Information
Exchange

P Stream

Information
Complementary

(b) Ours

Figure 1. Illustration of various approaches in event stream super
resolution for processing positive and negative events.

temporal resolution, and low power consumption [2, 9, 23].
It holds the potential to provide solutions for a wide range
of visually challenging scenarios and has already found extensive applications [1, 3, 16, 17, 22, 27, 28, 33, 35, 42, 44].
However, most existing event cameras still exhibit lower
spatial resolution (e.g., DAVIS346 with a resolution of
346\times 260 [33]) and are subject to sensor-induced noise.
Increasing the spatial resolution at the hardware level inevitably leads to event loss and increased pixel response latency [11, 19]. Therefore, there is a need to achieve superresolution and enhancement of event streams, enabling better adaptability to various complex scenes.
To address this issue, several methods have been proposed for Event Stream Super-Resolution (ESR). One approach involves preserving the spatiotemporal distribution
information of event streams, using non-uniform Poisson
processes or Spiking Neural Networks (SNNs) to simultaneously estimate the spatiotemporal distribution of event
streams during ESR [18, 19]. Alternatively, it is possi-

34

