This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BerfScene: Bev-conditioned Equivariant Radiance Fields
for Infinite 3D Scene Generation
Qihang Zhang1
1

Yinghao Xu2

CUHK

2

Stanford

Yujun Shen3

Bo Dai4

3

4

Ant Group

Abstract
Generating large-scale 3D scenes cannot simply apply
existing 3D object synthesis technique since 3D scenes usually hold complex spatial configurations and consist of a
number of objects at varying scales. We thus propose a
practical and efficient 3D representation that incorporates
an equivariant radiance field with the guidance of a bird’seye view (BEV) map. Concretely, objects of synthesized
3D scenes could be easily manipulated through steering the
corresponding BEV maps. Moreover, by adequately incorporating positional encoding and low-pass filters into the
generator, the representation becomes equivariant to the
given BEV map. Such equivariance allows us to produce
large-scale, even infinite-scale, 3D scenes via synthesizing
local scenes and then stitching them with smooth consistency. Extensive experiments on 3D scene datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach. Our project website is at: https://https://zqh0253.github.
io/BerfScene/.

1. Introduction
The advancement in implicit and explicit 3D representations has driven the rapid progress in high-quality 3D object generation [3, 12, 14, 33, 38, 42, 50, 58]. However,
directly applying object synthesis methods to 3D scene generation poses challenges due to inherent variations in spatial
scales and composited objects within 3D scenes. Considering that urban architects construct city scenes, they won’t
place building randomly but always starts from a detailed
map, serving as a foundational guide outlining the spatial
configurations of blocks and buildings. This highlights the
need for a suitable representation tailored for 3D scenes, capable of streamlining the scene generation process.
A well-structured scene representation must capture spatial relationships between objects and have the flexibility to
scale up, facilitating the generation of scenes on a large or
infinite scale. Previous approaches often relied on scene
† Corresponding authors

Bolei Zhou5†

Shanghai AI Lab

5

Ceyuan Yang4†

UCLA

(a) Inference on infinite scale (“BERFSCENE”)

(b) Inference on large scale driving scene

Figure 1. BerfScene focuses on unbounded 3D scene synthesis. Above: a CLEVR scene labeled ”BERFSCENE”. Below: a
driving scenario before and after executing a right turn.

graphs [6, 19, 39, 52] for representation, containing rich
object relations but facing limitations in processing due to
unstructured topology. Recent work DiscoScene [59] proposes representing scenes with a set of 3D bounding boxes.
However, despite offering a volumetric depiction of objects,
it introduces complexity in interpreting the entire scene and
faces scalability challenges.
To overcome this, we choose a 2D bird’s-eye-view
(BEV) map to describe the scene structure, providing a
practical and efficient way to represent and analyze spatial information, thereby simplifying the scene generation
process. Concretely, BEV map could specify the composition and scales of objects clearly. Generating a largescale scenes could be thus formulated as synthesizing local
scenes first and then composing them together. However,
composing the local blocks into a coherent global scene in
3D space always leads to the severe artifacts such as jittering and inconsistency, as BEV maps can be ambiguous to
fine-grained semantics i.e., primarily deliver a global layout
and locations of objects but lack insights into the detailed
visual appearance of the objects.
To avoid the ambiguity of BEV maps, recent attempts
like InfiniCity [28] and SceneDreamer [5] incorporate explicit 3D structures (e.g., voxels) as a hard constraint to
ensure the continuity of the composition process. How-

6839

