This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

View From Above: Orthogonal-View aware Cross-view Localization
Shan Wang1,2 Chuong Nguyen1 Jiawei Liu2 Yanhao Zhang2
Sundaram Muthu1 Fahira Afzal Maken1 Kaihao Zhang2 Hongdong Li2
1

Data61, CSIRO

2

Australian National University

Abstract
This paper presents a novel aerial-to-ground feature aggregation strategy, tailored for the task of cross-view imagebased geo-localization. Conventional vision-based methods
heavily rely on matching ground-view image features with
a pre-recorded image database, often through establishing
planar homography correspondences via a planar ground
assumption. As such, they tend to ignore features that are
off-ground and not suited for handling visual occlusions,
leading to unreliable localization in challenging scenarios. We propose a Top-to-Ground Aggregation (T2GA) module that capitalizes aerial orthographic views to aggregate
features down to the ground level, leveraging reliable offground information to improve feature alignment. Furthermore, we introduce a Cycle Domain Adaptation (CycDA)
loss that ensures feature extraction robustness across domain changes. Additionally, an Equidistant Re-projection
(ERP) loss is introduced to equalize the impact of all keypoints on orientation error, leading to a more extended distribution of keypoints which benefits orientation estimation.
On both KITTI and Ford Multi-AV datasets, our method
consistently achieves the lowest mean longitudinal and lateral translations across different settings and obtains the
smallest orientation error when the initial pose is less accurate, a more challenging setting. Further, it can complete
an entire route through continual vehicle pose estimation
with initial vehicle pose given only at the starting point. 1

1. Introduction
Visual-based cross-view localization aims to locate query
images taken from street-level cameras (referred to as
ground view) within a satellite or aerial view map. Platforms like the Google Map API [6] have made satellite images accessible, spurring the development of cross-view localization techniques. Notable studies [4, 7, 10, 15, 20, 25,
26, 30] have focused on using satellite images for this task.
Despite this, accurate localization remains challenging due
1 Code
is
available
Shan/ViewFromAbove.

at

https://github.com/ShanWang-

Corresponding
appearance

Geometry aligned using
ground plane homography

Ground View
Aerial View
Figure 1. Efficacy of T2GA. T2GA aggregates off-ground features (e.g., the streetlight within the green square) and addresses
occlusions (e.g., the tree within the red square). Unlike conventional methods that often overlook such elements, T2GA integrates
these features, thus improving appearance matching for groundlevel aligned pixels across views using ground plane homography.
Insets are magnified for clarity, with dotted outlines indicating appearance misalignment and solid outlines indicating appearance
alignment with the corresponding aerial view features.

to the significant viewpoint differences between ground and
aerial images [14, 31]. These viewpoint differences result
in a domain gap, adversely impacting feature alignment,
thereby compromising the overall accuracy of localization.
Recent research has explored two main approaches
to bridge the domain gap in image-based localization:
generative-based and geometry-alignment-based methods.
Generative-based methods, such as those utilizing GANs
[19] and diffusion models [29], reduce the domain gap by
transforming view styles from one view to another. However, the generated features for matching can lead to ambiguities in pose estimation. In contrast, geometry-alignmentbased methods, employing techniques like polar transformations [15, 20] or homography [14, 23, 24, 26], focus on
establishing correspondences for on-ground pixels. This
often results in the neglect of off-ground features, such
as streetlights, and difficulty in handling visual occlusions,
such as the obscuring of road details by treetops in aerial
views, both illustrated in Fig. 1. This neglect fails to leverage important geographic landmarks on the road and results
in a lack of robustness to issues like road mark degradation (e.g. fading and damaged paintings). To address these
limitations, we introduce the Top-to-Ground Aggregation
(T2GA) module. T2GA employs top-down feature aggre-

14843

