This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pixel-level Semantic Correspondence through Layout-aware Representation
Learning and Multi-scale Matching Integration
Yixuan Sun1,2,∗ , Zhangyue Yin3,∗ , Haibo Wang3 , Yan Wang1,2 , Xipeng Qiu3 ,
Weifeng Ge3,† and Wenqiang Zhang1,2,3,†
1
Academy for Engineering & Technology, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
2
Engineering Research Center of AI & Robotics, Ministry of Education, China
3
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
{wfge, wqzhang}@fudan.edu.cn

Source

Target

SCOT

CATs

ACTR

LPMFlow(ours)

Groundtruth

Figure 1. Visualization of dense correspondence for state-of-the-art methods namely SCOT [21], CATs [3], and ACTR [38] compared with
our LPMFlow. Thin-plate splines algorithm [1] is used for image warping with instructed by predicted key points.

Abstract
Establishing precise semantic correspondence across
object instances in different images is a fundamental and
challenging task in computer vision. In this task, difficulty
arises often due to three challenges: confusing regions with
similar appearance, inconsistent object scale, and indistinguishable nearby pixels. Recognizing these challenges,
our paper proposes a novel semantic matching pipeline
named LPMFlow toward extracting fine-grained semantics and geometry layouts for building pixel-level semantic correspondences. LPMFlow consists of three modules,
each addressing one of the aforementioned challenges. The
layout-aware representation learning module uniformly encodes source and target tokens to distinguish pixels or regions with similar appearances but different geometry semantics. The progressive feature superresolution module
outputs four sets of 4D correlation tensors to generate accurate semantic flow between objects in different scales. Fi∗: Contribution Equally †: Corresponding Authors

nally, the matching flow integration and refinement module
is exploited to fuse matching flow in different scales to give
the final flow predictions. The whole pipeline can be trained
end-to-end, with a balance of computational cost and correspondence details. Extensive experiments based on benchmarks such as SPair-71K, PF-PASCAL, and PF-WILLOW
have proved that the proposed method can well tackle the
three challenges and outperform the previous methods, especially in more stringent settings. Code is available at
https://github.com/YXSUNMADMAX/LPMFlow.

1. Introduction
Semantic matching methods aim to establish precise visual
correspondences between different objects of the same category [3, 32, 48], which needs a deep understanding of specific pixels, object parts, individual objects, and their spatial
layouts. As a fundamental task in computer vision, semantic matching has been applied in object recognition [17, 37],
co-segmentation [39], image editing [29, 30], 3D reconstruction [34], and etc. Different from other image under-

17047

