This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Driving into the Future: Multiview Visual Forecasting and Planning
with World Model for Autonomous Driving
Yuqi Wang1,2⇤ , Jiawei He1,2⇤ , Lue Fan2⇤ , Hongxin Li1,2⇤ , Yuntao Chen3B , Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,4B
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
2
CRIPAC, MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics (HKISI CAS) 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{wangyuqi2020,fanlue2019,lihongxin2021,zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn
{jwhe2024,chenyuntao08}@gmail.com

Project Page: https://drive-wm.github.io

Code: https://github.com/BraveGroup/Drive-WM

Time step T (real)

Option 1: Go to the right lane

Imagine with
diverse maneuvers

Option 1: Go to the right lane

Reward & Decision

Decision: Option 2
Imagine with
diverse maneuvers

Option 2: Go straight

Option 2: Go straight

Decision: Option 3
(safe to overtake)

Reward & Decision

Continue rollout …
Option 3: Go to the left lane

Option 3: Go to the left lane

Time step T + K (imagination)

Time step T + 2K (imagination)

Accepted Option

Figure 1. Multiview visual forecasting and planning by world model. At time step T , the world model imagines the multiple futures at
T + K, and finds it is safe to keep going straight at T . Then the model realizes that the ego car will be too close to the front car according
to the imagination of time step T + 2K, so it decides to change to the left lane for a safe overtaking.

Abstract
In autonomous driving, predicting future events in advance
and evaluating the foreseeable risks empowers autonomous
vehicles to better plan their actions, enhancing safety and
efficiency on the road. To this end, we propose Drive-WM,
the first driving world model compatible with existing
end-to-end planning models. Through a joint spatialtemporal modeling facilitated by view factorization, our
model generates high-fidelity multiview videos in driving

scenes. Building on its powerful generation ability, we
showcase the potential of applying the world model for
safe driving planning for the first time. Particularly, our
Drive-WM enables driving into multiple futures based on
distinct driving maneuvers, and determines the optimal
trajectory according to the image-based rewards. Evaluation on real-world driving datasets verifies that our method
could generate high-quality, consistent, and controllable
multiview videos, opening up possibilities for real-world
simulations and safe planning.

⇤ Equal contribution. B Corresponding author.

14749

