This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Generalizable Face Anti-spoofing via Hierarchical Prototype-guided
Distribution Refinement in Hyperbolic Space
Chengyang Hu1 *, Ke-Yue Zhang2 *, Taiping Yao2 , Shouhong Ding2†, Lizhuang Ma1,3†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University; 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent;
3
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Computer Software Evaluating and Testing.
{huchengyang, lzma}@sjtu.edu.cn, {zkyezhang, taipingyao, ericshding}@tencent.com

Abstract
Generalizable face anti-spoofing (FAS) approaches have
drawn growing attention due to their robustness for diverse
presentation attacks in unseen scenarios. Most previous
methods always utilize domain generalization (DG) frameworks via directly aligning diverse source samples into a
common feature space. However, these methods neglect
the hierarchical relations in FAS samples which may hinder
the generalization ability by direct alignment. To address
these issues, we propose a novel Hierarchical Prototypeguided Distribution Refinement (HPDR) framework to learn
embedding in hyperbolic space, which facilitates the hierarchical relation construction. We also collaborate with
prototype learning for hierarchical distribution refinement
in hyperbolic space. In detail, we propose the Hierarchical Prototype Learning to simultaneously guide domain
alignment and improve the discriminative ability via constraining the multi-level relations between prototypes and
instances in hyperbolic space. Moreover, we design a
Prototype-oriented Classifier, which further considers relations between the sample and prototypes to improve the
robustness of the final decision. Extensive experiments and
visualizations demonstrate the effectiveness of our method
against previous competitors.

1. Introduction
The significance of face anti-spoofing (FAS) lies in its role
of protecting face recognition systems from presentation attacks, like printed photos or replayed videos. In the initial
stages of FAS research, the detection of spoof patterns relies on hand-crafted features such as SIFT [42], LBP [3, 10],
and HOG [30, 56]. With the development of deep learning,
researchers turn to deep neural networks [1, 14, 25, 32, 41,
63, 64, 66] for FAS tasks. Though these methods have at* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Authors.

Figure 1. Previous methods map the samples into a compact feature space for generalization. While, we introduce multiple learnable prototypes in hyperbolic space to separately describe the distributions of real and spoof samples, which refines the feature
alignment with hierarchical structure and promotes discrimination.

tained remarkable performance in the intra-dataset setting,
the performance drops significantly when encountering unseen scenarios or attacks.
To improve the generalization, several methods introduce domain generalization techniques into FAS tasks,
e.g., domain adversarial learning [26, 36, 52], metalearning [33, 47, 64], feature disentangle [35, 60] and contrastive learning [53]. It is worth noting that all of these
DG-based FAS methods strive to learn a domain-invariant
representation within the Euclidean space, as depicted in the
Figure 1 (a). However, they often overlook the inherent hierarchical structure present in the FAS data. Such hierarchical structure of FAS data can be interpreted from different
perspectives, such as the attack form and domain information. Roughly establishing a hierarchical structure for attack
forms is by categorizing them into 2D and 3D attacks and
both of these categories can be further divided into more
fine-grained subcategories. As for domain information, the

1032

