This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MCPNet: An Interpretable Classifier via Multi-Level Concept Prototypes
∗

∗

Bor-Shiun Wang† Chien-Yi Wang ‡ Wei-Chen Chiu †
†
National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University ‡ NVIDIA Research
eddiewang.cs10@nycu.edu.tw, chienyiw@nvidia.com, walon@cs.nctu.edu.tw

MCPNet

PIP-Net

Fox

Scores :
22.4

Concept Prototype
#C (from Layer 3)

Concept Strength

e.g. White color

Concept Prototype
#D (from Layer 4)

Fox
Concept Strength

Scores :
14.5

Image MCP distribution

Bobcat

e.g. Bobcat

Bobcat

e.g. Dapple

e.g. Brown color

Concept Prototype
#B (from Layer 2)

Concept Strength

Concept Prototype
#A (from Layer 1)

Label : Bobcat

Figure 1. The “Bobcat” was correctly classified by our MCPNet but incorrectly classified as a “Fox” by PIP-Net [15]. On the right
side, we provide an illustration of using our proposed Multi-level Concept Prototype (MCP) distribution to classify and explain the input
image. In particular, our concept prototypes are extracted from multiple layers of the classification model (thus having low-level to highlevel concepts). In comparison with a recent state-of-the-art baseline, PIP-Net [15] shown on the left side which only adopts single-level
explanations (symbolized as colorful boxes on the bottom portion, they are usually extracted from the last model layer), our proposed
MCPNet provides more comprehensive explanations as well as better classification performance.

Abstract
Recent advancements in post-hoc and inherently interpretable methods have markedly enhanced the explanations of black box classifier models. These methods operate either through post-analysis or by integrating concept learning during model training. Although being effective in bridging the semantic gap between a model’s latent
space and human interpretation, these explanation methods
only partially reveal the model’s decision-making process.
The outcome is typically limited to high-level semantics derived from the last feature map. We argue that the explanations lacking insights into the decision processes at low
and mid-level features are neither fully faithful nor useful.
Addressing this gap, we introduce the Multi-Level Concept
Prototypes Classifier (MCPNet), an inherently interpretable
model. MCPNet autonomously learns meaningful concept
prototypes across multiple feature map levels using Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA) loss and an energy-based
weighted PCA mechanism, and it does so without reliance
on predefined concept labels. Further, we propose a novel

classifier paradigm that learns and aligns multi-level concept prototype distributions for classification purposes via
Class-aware Concept Distribution (CCD) loss. Our experiments reveal that our proposed MCPNet while being adaptable to various model architectures, offers comprehensive
multi-level explanations while maintaining classification
accuracy. Additionally, its concept distribution-based classification approach shows improved generalization capabilities in few-shot classification scenarios. Project page is
available1 .

1. Introduction
The rapid integration of deep learning across various domains has brought to the forefront a critical question: what
underlying mechanisms drive the decisions of these models? This query has led to the emergence of Explainable
Artificial Intelligence (XAI), a field dedicated to demystifying the operations of opaque ’black box’ models.
In XAI, numerous methods have been developed, addressing different aspects of model interpretability [4, 5, 7–
1 https://eddie221.github.io/MCPNet/

* Equal advising

10885

