This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning from One Continuous Video Stream
João Carreira1† , Michael King1† , Viorica Pătrăucean1† , Dilara Gokay1† , Cătălin Ionescu1† ,
Yi Yang† , Daniel Zoran† , Joseph Heyward† , Carl Doersch† , Yusuf Aytar† ,
Dima Damen†‡ , Andrew Zisserman†⌃
†

Google DeepMind, ‡ University of Bristol, ⌃ University of Oxford

Corresponding author: joaoluis@google.com, 1 core contributor

Abstract
We introduce a framework for online learning from a
single continuous video stream – the way people and animals learn, without mini-batches, data augmentation or
shuffling. This poses great challenges given the high correlation between consecutive video frames and there is very
little prior work on it. Our framework allows us to do
a first deep dive into the topic and includes a collection
of streams and tasks composed from two existing video
datasets, plus methodology for performance evaluation that
considers both adaptation and generalization. We employ
pixel-to-pixel modelling as a practical and flexible way to
switch between pre-training and single-stream evaluation
as well as between arbitrary tasks, without ever requiring
changes to models and always using the same pixel loss.
Equipped with this framework we obtained large singlestream learning gains from pre-training with a novel family
of future prediction tasks, found that momentum hurts, and
that the pace of weight updates matters. The combination
of these insights leads to matching the performance of IID
learning with batch size 1, when using the same architecture
and without costly replay buffers. An overview of the paper is available online at https://sites.google.
com/view/one-stream-video.

1. Introduction
Humans gather knowledge about themselves and the world
through a continuous stream of observations, from their
early days as infants. Some experiences are seen once in
a lifetime while others are daily repeats. With time, familiarity with environments, objects and experiences form a
base to our knowledge, and memory maintains the most important experiences from our ever-further past. Learning
successfully adapts to the current surroundings so we can
make better predictions over time, while leading to generalization to unseen environments. Despite the naturalness

of this approach of learning for humans, video understanding approaches have rarely attempted a similar regime.

Figure 1. Top: We introduce a framework for studying continuous
learning in a single video stream. This is a natural yet unstudied
problem, different from standard independent and identically distributed (IID) learning in video where batches contain clips from
random videos in a random order. Bottom: We propose pixelto-pixel models to evaluate our approach across prediction tasks
(prediction of future frames, depth, segmentation). We measure
both adaptation to the video stream – the model here updates its
weights (learns) continuously to improve prediction – as well as
generalization to out-of-stream clips – the model being adapted
on the first stream is now evaluated on a different held-out stream
without being allowed to adapt to it. We propose to maximize both
adaptation and generalization.

The most related fields are continual and lifelong learning, but these are still deeply fractured – no single problem
formulation or benchmark is widely accepted. They also
mostly focus on simplifications of the problem relative to

28751

