This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Construct to Associate: Cooperative Context Learning
for Domain Adaptive Point Cloud Segmentation
Guangrui Li
ReLER, AAII, University of Technology Sydney
guangrui.li@outlook.com

Abstract
This paper tackles the domain adaptation problem in
point cloud semantic segmentation, which performs adaptation from a fully labeled domain (source domain) to an
unlabeled target domain. Due to the unordered property
of point clouds, LiDAR scans typically show varying geometric structures across different regions, in terms of density, noises, etc, hence leading to increased dynamics on
context. However, such characteristics are not consistent
across domains due to the difference in sensors, environments, etc, thus hampering the effective scene comprehension across domains. To solve this, we propose Cooperative Context Learning that performs context modeling and
modulation from different aspects but in a cooperative manner. Specifically, we first devise context embeddings to discover and model contextual relationships with close neighbors in a learnable manner. Then with the context embeddings from two domains, we introduce a set of learnable
prototypes to attend and associate them under the attention paradigm. As a result, these prototypes naturally establish long-range dependency across regions and domains,
thereby encouraging the transfer of context knowledge and
easing the adaptation. Moreover, the attention in turn attunes and guides the local context modeling and urges them
to focus on the domain-invariant context knowledge, thus
promoting the adaptation in a cooperative manner. Experiments on representative benchmarks verify that our method
attains the new state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Point cloud semantic segmentation aims to classify
points in a LiDAR scan into the predefined semantic classes.
Recently, tremendous efforts [5, 14, 31–33, 48, 51, 58] have
been devoted to this task for its fundamental role in environmental perception, e.g., autonomous driving, virtual reality,
etc. Albeit the recent progresses, most current solutions still
assume an ideal environment with massive point-wise anno-

(a) Profile of a SynLiDAR scan

(b) Profile of a nuScenes scan

Range (m)

Range (m)

Profile
z-axis

LiDAR
Range

Range (m)

(c) LiDAR scanning process

(d) Accuracy along the range
Range (m)

Figure 1. (a)(b): Profiles of LiDAR scans from two datasets
that gather over 360◦ . (d): Accuracy of SynLiDAR→nuScenes.
Along the increasing range, two datasets exhibit apparent discrepancies in the scene geometry, e.g., density, the angle of beams,
thus leading to the context gap. Previous solutions mainly improve the adaptation at the regions with similar geometric structures (range < 20m) but become less effective at distant regions.
Instead, our method yields better results consistently with explicit
context modeling and modulation across domains.

tations accessible. However, such an assumption cannot be
always satisfied in real world as we cannot foresee and annotate all the scenes encountered, especially with the expensive annotation cost. Thus, a model may fail to cope with
novel scenes under the distribution shift induced by various
factors, e.g., sensor configurations, weather. To solve this,
domain adaptation [8, 24, 26, 30, 34, 37] is considered a feasible solution which seeks to adapt the model trained on one
labeled domain to a novel domain without annotation.
Domain adaptation for semantic segmentation has been
widely investigated on 2D images [4, 11, 13, 15, 22, 55],
while only a few attention [23, 35, 59] has been paid to the
3D scenario. A critical difference between 2D images and
point clouds lies in the organization of the scene, i.e., 2D
images are organized with rigid grids while point clouds
are in an unordered manner. Thus, LiDAR scans collected
from different sensors or environments typically show different characteristics on the scene geometry. As shown in

27917

