This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RGBD Objects in the Wild:
Scaling Real-World 3D Object Learning from RGB-D Videos

1

Hongchi Xia1 * Yang Fu2 * Sifei Liu3 Xiaolong Wang2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 UC San Diego 3 NVIDIA

Single object Video

Novel View Synthesis

Hand-object Video

Multi-object Video

Camera Pose Estimation

Surface Reconstruction

6D Pose Estimation

Self-Supervised
Training

Infer Object
6D Pose

Figure 1. WildRGB-D Dataset contains almost 8500 recorded objects and nearly 20000 RGBD videos in 46 common categories with
corresponding object masks and 3D point clouds.

Abstract
We introduce a new RGB-D object dataset captured in
the wild called WildRGB-D. Unlike most existing real-world
object-centric datasets which only come with RGB capturing, the direct capture of the depth channel allows better 3D annotations and broader downstream applications.
WildRGB-D comprises large-scale category-level RGB-D
object videos, which are taken using an iPhone to go
around the objects in 360 degrees. It contains around 8500
recorded objects and nearly 20000 RGB-D videos across
46 common object categories. These videos are taken with
diverse cluttered backgrounds with three setups to cover as
many real-world scenarios as possible: (i) a single object
in one video; (ii) multiple objects in one video; and (iii) an
* Equal contribution.

object with a static hand in one video. The dataset is annotated with object masks, real-world scale camera poses, and
reconstructed aggregated point clouds from RGBD videos.
We benchmark four tasks with WildRGB-D including novel
view synthesis, camera pose estimation, object 6d pose estimation, and object surface reconstruction. Our experiments
show that the large-scale capture of RGB-D objects provides a large potential to advance 3D object learning. Our
project page is https://wildrgbd.github.io/.

1. Introduction
The recent advancement of computer vision has been
largely relying on the scaling of training data [26, 53]. The
same success in data-driven approaches has been recently
adopted to 3D object modeling with new large 3D object-

22378

