This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting Non-Autoregressive Transformers for Efficient Image Synthesis
Zanlin Ni1∗ Yulin Wang1 * Renping Zhou1 Jiayi Guo1
Jinyi Hu1 Zhiyuan Liu1 Shiji Song1 Yuan Yao2† Gao Huang1†
1

Tsinghua University

2

National University of Singapore

Abstract
The field of image synthesis is currently flourishing due
to the advancements in diffusion models. While diffusion
models have been successful, their computational intensity has prompted the pursuit of more efficient alternatives.
As a representative work, non-autoregressive Transformers
(NATs) have been recognized for their rapid generation.
However, a major drawback of these models is their inferior performance compared to diffusion models. In this
paper, we aim to re-evaluate the full potential of NATs by
revisiting the design of their training and inference strategies. Specifically, we identify the complexities in properly
configuring these strategies and indicate the possible suboptimality in existing heuristic-driven designs. Recognizing
this, we propose to go beyond existing methods by directly
solving the optimal strategies in an automatic framework.
The resulting method, named AutoNAT, advances the performance boundaries of NATs notably, and is able to perform comparably with the latest diffusion models with a
significantly reduced inference cost. The effectiveness of
AutoNAT is comprehensively validated on four benchmark
datasets, i.e., ImageNet-256 & 512, MS-COCO, and CC3M.
Code and pre-trained models will be available at https:
//github.com/LeapLabTHU/ImprovedNAT.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the field of image synthesis has witnessed a
surge in popularity due to the success of highly capable diffusion models [9, 19, 36, 38, 45]. However, the iterative
generation process of diffusion models tends to be computationally intensive [10, 29, 30, 45, 49], which leads to
significant practical latency and energy consumption. As
a consequence, a number of research efforts have been put
into exploring more efficient alternatives.
Within this context, non-autoregressive Transformers
(NATs) [6, 7, 25, 27, 34] have emerged as a representative work. These models offer benefits akin to those of
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

Diffusion Models
Non-Autoregressive
Transformers

LDM†(CVPR’22)
DiT†(ICCV’23)
U-ViT†( CVPR’23)
MaskGIT‡ (CVPR’22)
TokenCritic‡ (ECCV’22)
MAGE‡ (CVPR’23)
AutoNAT-L‡
AutoNAT-S
AutoNAT-L

5.1× speedup

†: Augmented with

DPM-Solver (CVPR’22)
‡: Models without

classifier-free guidance

Figure 1. FID-50K vs. computational cost on ImageNet-256.
For fair comparisons, diffusion models are equipped with DPMSolver [29, 30] for efficient synthesis.

diffusion models, such as high scalability [7] and sample diversity [6], while being notably faster due to their
parallel decoding mechanism in Vector Quantized (VQ)
space [10, 46]. As depicted in Figure 2, NATs start generation from a fully masked canvas, and swiftly progress by
concurrently decoding multiple tokens at each step. Nevertheless, a major drawback of NATs is their inferior performance compared to diffusion models. For example,
MaskGIT [6], a popular NAT model, can synthesize an image on ImageNet [40] in only 8 steps, but the generation
quality measured in FID is only 6.18, which is far behind
latest diffusion models [1, 33] (approximately 2).
In this paper, we re-examine the performance limit of
NATs. Our findings demonstrate that the inferior generation quality compared to diffusion models may not be their
inherent limitation. Instead, it is largely caused by the suboptimal, heuristic-driven strategies in the training and generation process of NATs. To be specific, different from diffusion models, the parallel decoding mechanism in NATs
introduces intricate design challenges, posing questions like
1) how many tokens should be decoded at each step; 2)
which tokens should be decoded; and 3) how to sample
tokens from the VQ codebook? Configuring these aspects
appropriately necessitates a specialized "generation strategy" comprising multiple scheduling functions. Moreover,
a "training strategy" needs to be carefully designed to equip

7007

