This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Make Me a BNN: A Simple Strategy for Estimating
Bayesian Uncertainty from Pre-trained Models
Gianni Franchi,1, *, † Olivier Laurent,1, 2, * Maxence Leguéry,1 Andrei Bursuc,3
Andrea Pilzer4 & Angela Yao5
U2IS, ENSTA Paris, Institut Polytechnique de Paris,1 Université Paris-Saclay,2
valeo.ai,3 NVIDIA,4 National University of Singapore5
Test Time

99
Training dataset

Deep Ensembles

cat

98

AUPR (%)

ABNN

97

dog

Standard

96

LPBNN
apple

Laplace

95

5h

15h
BatchEnsemble

P(Y=cat)=0.9

Single model

94
10

15

20

25

30

P(Y=Cat)=0.9

P(Y=apple)=0.9
P(Y=dog)=0.9

ABNN Ensemble

35

FPR95 (%)

Figure 1. Benefits of ABNNs. (left) Trade-off between computational cost (training time) and performance (FPR95 score, lower the better)
for various uncertainty quantification techniques on CIFAR-10 with WideResNet-28x10 and ensembles of size 3. The circle area is proportional to the training time. (right) Benefits of using ABNN ensembling at test time. Notably, given an out-of-distribution sample, a simple
DNN may make high-confidence incorrect predictions, whereas ABNN produces uncertain decisions through its diverse predictions.

Abstract
1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are powerful tools for
various computer vision tasks, yet they often struggle with
reliable uncertainty quantification — a critical requirement
for real-world applications. Bayesian Neural Networks
(BNN) are equipped for uncertainty estimation but cannot scale to large DNNs where they are highly unstable to
train. To address this challenge, we introduce the Adaptable Bayesian Neural Network (ABNN), a simple and scalable strategy to seamlessly transform DNNs into BNNs in a
post-hoc manner with minimal computational and training
overheads. ABNN preserves the main predictive properties
of DNNs while enhancing their uncertainty quantification
abilities through simple BNN adaptation layers (attached
to normalization layers) and a few fine-tuning steps on pretrained models. We conduct extensive experiments across
multiple datasets for image classification and semantic segmentation tasks, and our results demonstrate that ABNN
achieves state-of-the-art performance without the computational budget typically associated with ensemble methods.
* equal contribution,

† gianni.franchi@ensta-paris.fr

Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have emerged as powerful tools with a profound impact on various perception
tasks, such as image classification [18, 50], object detection [32, 70], natural language processing [17, 69, 76],
etc. With this progress, there is growing excitement and
expectation about the potential applications of DNNs
across industries. To meet this end, there is a critical
need to address a fundamental challenge: improving DNN
reliability by quantifying the inherent uncertainty in their
predictions [36, 37, 83]. Deploying DNNs in real-world
applications, particularly in safety-critical domains such as
autonomous driving, medical diagnoses, industrial visual
inspection, etc., requires a comprehensive understanding of
their limitations and vulnerabilities beyond their raw predictive accuracy, often considered a main performance metric.
By quantifying the uncertainty within these models with
millions of parameters and non-trivial inner-working [1, 94]
and failure modes [33, 66] in front of the many different
long-tail scenarios [7, 56], we can make informed decisions
about when and how to rely on their predictions.

12194

