This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffusionGAN3D: Boosting Text-guided 3D Generation and Domain Adaptation
by Combining 3D GANs and Diffusion Priors
Biwen Lei, Kai Yu, Mengyang Feng, Miaomiao Cui, Xuansong Xie
Alibaba Group
{biwen.lbw, jinmao.yk, mengyang.fmy, miaomiao.cmm}@alibaba-inc.com,
xingtong.xxs@taobao.com
Text-to-Avatar

3D Domain Adaptation

Hulk

Batman
Girl in
white
dress

Real image

Pixar

Greek statue

Steven
Jobs

Joker
Obama

Local Editing

Sampled image

Pixar

Fox, Pixar style

Golden statue

Real image

Pink hair

Blue eyes

Figure 1. Some results of the proposed DiffusionGAN3D on different tasks.

Abstract
Text-guided domain adaptation and generation of 3Daware portraits find many applications in various fields.
However, due to the lack of training data and the challenges
in handling the high variety of geometry and appearance,
the existing methods for these tasks suffer from issues like
inflexibility, instability, and low fidelity. In this paper, we
propose a novel framework DiffusionGAN3D, which boosts
text-guided 3D domain adaptation and generation by combining 3D GANs and diffusion priors. Specifically, we integrate the pre-trained 3D generative models (e.g., EG3D)
and text-to-image diffusion models. The former provides a
strong foundation for stable and high-quality avatar generation from text. And the diffusion models in turn offer
powerful priors and guide the 3D generator finetuning with
informative direction to achieve flexible and efficient textguided domain adaptation. To enhance the diversity in domain adaptation and the generation capability in text-toavatar, we introduce the relative distance loss and casespecific learnable triplane respectively. Besides, we design
a progressive texture refinement module to improve the tex-

ture quality for both tasks above. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that the proposed framework achieves excellent results in both domain adaptation and text-to-avatar
tasks, outperforming existing methods in terms of generation quality and efficiency. The project homepage is at
https://younglbw.github.io/DiffusionGAN3D-homepage/.

1. Introduction
3D portrait generation and stylization find a vast range
of applications in many scenarios, such as games, advertisements, and film production. While extensive works
[4, 7, 9, 17] yield impressive results on realistic portrait generation, the performance on generating stylized, artistic, and
text-guided 3D avatars is still unsatisfying due to the lack
of 3D training data and the difficulties in modeling highly
variable geometry and texture.
Some works [2, 25, 26, 47, 51, 53, 56] perform transfer
learning on a pre-trained 3D GAN generator to achieve 3D
stylization, which relies on a large number of stylized images and strictly aligned camera poses for training. [2, 47]
leverage existing 2D-GAN trained on a specific domain to

10487

