This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Differentiable Display Photometric Stereo
Seokjun Choi†
(a)

Seungwoo Yoon† Giljoo Nam* Seungyong Lee†
†
* Meta Reality Labs
POSTECH
(c)

(b)

Seung-Hwan Baek†

(d)

Figure 1. We propose differentiable display photometric stereo, a method that facilitates (a) the learning of display patterns, enabling
high-quality reconstruction of surface normals using (b) a monitor and a camera. (c) Capturing a scene with the learned patterns allows for
estimating (d) high-quality surface normals.

Abstract
Photometric stereo leverages variations in illumination
conditions to reconstruct surface normals. Display photometric stereo, which employs a conventional monitor as an
illumination source, has the potential to overcome limitations often encountered in bulky and difficult-to-use conventional setups. In this paper, we present differentiable display photometric stereo (DDPS), addressing an often overlooked challenge in display photometric stereo: the design
of display patterns. Departing from using heuristic display
patterns, DDPS learns the display patterns that yield accurate normal reconstruction for a target system in an endto-end manner. To this end, we propose a differentiable
framework that couples basis-illumination image formation
with analytic photometric-stereo reconstruction. The differentiable framework facilitates the effective learning of
display patterns via auto-differentiation. Also, for training
supervision, we propose to use 3D printing for creating a
real-world training dataset, enabling accurate reconstruction on the target real-world setup. Finally, we exploit that
conventional LCD monitors emit polarized light, which allows for the optical separation of diffuse and specular reflections when combined with a polarization camera, leading to accurate normal reconstruction. Extensive evaluation of DDPS shows improved normal-reconstruction accuracy compared to heuristic patterns and demonstrates compelling properties such as robustness to pattern initialization, calibration errors, and simplifications in image formation and reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing high-quality surface normals is pivotal in
computer vision and graphics for 3D reconstruction [32,
40], relighting [36, 39], and inverse rendering [45, 52].
Among various techniques, photometric stereo [50] leverages the intensity variation of a scene point under varied
illumination conditions to reconstruct normals. Photometric stereo finds its application in various imaging systems
including light stages [29, 35, 49, 56], handheld-flash cameras [3, 10, 37, 52], and display-camera systems [1, 28, 46].
Display photometric stereo uses monitors and cameras as
a versatile and accessible system that can be conveniently
placed on a desk [1, 28, 46]. Producing diverse illumination conditions can be simply achieved by displaying multiple patterns using pixels on the display as programmable
point light sources. This convenient and intricate modulation of illumination conditions significantly enlarges the
design space of illumination patterns for display photometric stereo. Nevertheless, existing approaches often rely on
heuristic display patterns, resulting in sub-optimal reconstruction quality.
In this paper, to exploit the large design space of illumination patterns in display photometric stereo, we propose
differentiable display photometric stereo (DDPS). The key
idea is to learn display patterns that lead to improved reconstruction of surface normals for a target system in an endto-end manner. To this end, we introduce a differentiable
framework that combines basis-illumination image formation and an optimization-based photometric stereo method.
This enables effective pattern learning by directly optimiz-

11831

