This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WateRF: Robust Watermarks in Radiance Fields for Protection of Copyrights
Youngdong Jang1

Dong In Lee1
Feng Yang2

1

Korea University

MinHyuk Jang1
Sangpil Kim1 *
2

Jong Wook Kim1

Google Research

Abstract

Model training by Alice
Standard NeRF

The advances in the Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) research offer extensive applications in diverse domains, but
protecting their copyrights has not yet been researched in
depth. Recently, NeRF watermarking has been considered
one of the pivotal solutions for safely deploying NeRFbased 3D representations. However, existing methods are
designed to apply only to implicit or explicit NeRF representations. In this work, we introduce an innovative watermarking method that can be employed in both representations of NeRF. This is achieved by fine-tuning NeRF to
embed binary messages in the rendering process. In detail,
we propose utilizing the discrete wavelet transform in the
NeRF space for watermarking. Furthermore, we adopt a deferred back-propagation technique and introduce a combination with the patch-wise loss to improve rendering quality and bit accuracy with minimum trade-offs. We evaluate our method in three different aspects: capacity, invisibility, and robustness of the embedded watermarks in the
2D-rendered images. Our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance with faster training speed over the compared
state-of-the-art methods. Project page: https://kuailab.github.io/cvpr2024waterf/

1. Introduction
Digital watermarking plays a pivotal role in reinforcing the copyright of digital assets, e.g., text, image, audio, video, and 3D content. Digital assets are easily misused
without permission from the creators and owners of the digital assets. One way to protect the copyright is by encoding
invisible watermarks in the digital assets.
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [35] have emerged into
the spotlight in 3D content creation and modeling since
NeRF can represent 3D objects or scenes in a compact way.
With increasing interest in 3D content for the Metaverse,
virtual reality, and augmented reality, NeRF has become important in digital watermarking research.
A straightforward approach for protecting rendered 3D
* Corresponding author.

Watermarked NeRF
101100
Fine-tuning

Stolen Model & Rendering by Bob
Watermarked NeRF

Rendering

Novel Views

Claiming Copyright
Decoder

101100

Identification
Alice model

Decoder

101100

Identification
Alice model

Decoder

101100

Identification
Alice model

Figure 1. The NeRF model can be fine-tuned to embed the watermark into the images of the novel view. The figure above shows
the model owner Alice and her NeRF model is stolen by Bob. Alice can identify the copyright by using her watermark decoder. Our
method embeds the watermark into all of the rendered images.

images from the NeRF model is using the post-generation
watermarking method that embeds the watermark into the
2D rendered image from NeRF with existing watermarking methods. However, this method only protects copyright
for the rendered images but not the copyright of the NeRF
model. A fundamental solution to protecting the model and
rendered image is fine-tuning the NeRF model to encode
the watermark into the NeRF model itself. The watermark
will be encoded into the rendered image from the fine-tuned
NeRF every time during the rendering process.
NeRF has two primary representations: implicit and explicit representations. The implicit representation [1, 35, 37]
uses a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to represent a 3D scene
and the explicit representation [3, 10, 58] uses a traditional
3D structure, such as voxels. Prior methods [22, 30] were
limited to applying to only one type of NeRF representation.
However, in order to overcome this limitation, we explore a
new question: How can we embed the watermark into two
distinct NeRF representations(implicit and explicit)?
In this paper, we propose an innovative watermarking
method that can be applied to both types of NeRF representations. Our method integrates the watermarking process
into the rendering process without changing the model architecture. It adjusts the pre-trained NeRF model so that all

12087

