This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FocusMAE: Gallbladder Cancer Detection from Ultrasound Videos with
Focused Masked Autoencoders
Soumen Basu1 * †, Mayuna Gupta1 † , Chetan Madan1 , Pankaj Gupta2 , Chetan Arora1
1
2
IIT Delhi
PGIMER, Chandigarh

Abstract
In recent years, automated Gallbladder Cancer (GBC)
detection has gained the attention of researchers. Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) methodologies relying on ultrasound sonography (US) images exhibit limited generalization, emphasizing the need for transformative approaches.
We observe that individual US frames may lack sufficient
information to capture disease manifestation. This study
advocates for a paradigm shift towards video-based GBC
detection, leveraging the inherent advantages of spatiotemporal representations. Employing the Masked Autoencoder
(MAE) for representation learning, we address shortcomings in conventional image-based methods. We propose
a novel design called FocusMAE to systematically bias
the selection of masking tokens from high-information regions, fostering a more refined representation of malignancy. Additionally, we contribute the most extensive US
video dataset for GBC detection. We also note that, this
is the first study on US video-based GBC detection. We
validate the proposed methods on the curated dataset, and
report a new SOTA accuracy of 96.4% for the GBC detection problem, against an accuracy of 84% by current
Image-based SOTA – GBCNet and RadFormer, and 94.7%
by Video-based SOTA – AdaMAE. We further demonstrate
the generality of the proposed FocusMAE on a public CTbased Covid detection dataset, reporting an improvement
in accuracy by 3.3% over current baselines. Project page
with source code, trained models, and data is available at:
https://gbc-iitd.github.io/focusmae.

1. Introduction
Gallbladder Cancer (GBC). Lately, automated GBC detection has drawn an increased interest from the researchers
[5,6,10,31]. GBC is difficult to detect at an early stage [27],
and surgical resection becomes infeasible for most patients
as the disease gets detected at a late stage. As a result, the
* Soumen is currently affiliated to Samsung R&D Institute Bangalore
† Joint first authors

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) Masking strategy of FocusMAE in comparison to
existing random patch [14], frame [50], tube [45] masking. Our
approach selects more tokens from the semantically meaningful
regions with a small number of background tokens for masking.
(b) Inflating the masking probability of the tokens which spatially
lie within the object region (gray region) by π increases the accuracy. However, excessive masking of the object region degrades
performance. Blue line: accuracy of the original random masking.

disease shows bleak survival statistics. The 5-year survival
rate for patients with advanced GBC is only 5%, and the
mean survival time is six months [24, 40]. Hence, early detection of GBC is crucial for timely intervention and improving the survival rate [26].
Ultrasound (US) for GBC Detection. US has been the

11715

