This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LAFS: Landmark-based Facial Self-supervised Learning for Face Recognition
Zhonglin Sun, Chen Feng,* Ioannis Patras, Georgios Tzimiropoulos
Queen Mary University of London
London, UK
{zhonglin.sun, chen.feng, i.patras, g.tzimiropoulos}@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract

Identity Loss

CNN

In this work we focus on learning facial representations
that can be adapted to train effective face recognition models, particularly in the absence of labels. Firstly, compared with existing labelled face datasets, a vastly larger
magnitude of unlabeled faces exists in the real world. We
explore the learning strategy of these unlabeled facial images through self-supervised pretraining to transfer generalized face recognition performance. Moreover, motivated
by one recent finding, that is, the face saliency area is critical for face recognition, in contrast to utilizing random
cropped blocks of images for constructing augmentations in
pretraining, we utilize patches localized by extracted facial
landmarks. This enables our method - namely LAndmarkbased Facial Self-supervised learning (LAFS), to learn
key representation that is more critical for face recognition. We also incorporate two landmark-specific augmentations which introduce more diversity of landmark information to further regularize the learning. With learned
landmark-based facial representations, we further adapt
the representation for face recognition with regularization
mitigating variations in landmark positions. Our method
achieves significant improvement over the state-of-the-art
on multiple face recognition benchmarks, especially on
more challenging few-shot scenarios. The code is available
at https://github.com/szlbiubiubiu/LAFS CVPR2024.

1. Introduction
In recent years, face recognition has witnessed significant
advancements, owing to the emerging techniques such as
advanced loss functions [10, 16, 42, 50, 58, 61, 62] and
specialized network structures [7, 9, 17, 32, 33, 40, 55, 60,
64, 66, 70], and the large-scale annotated datasets such as
Webface42M [71] and MS1M [24]. However, most of the
works have overlooked the impact of initial parameters for
supervised training, noted as facial representation, which
* Corresponding Author.

ViT

Landmark Learning
CNN

Pretrained
fixed

Student
Pretrained
Finetune

Unlabelled
or
1-shot

CNN

Teacher

Contrastive
Learning

Train from
scratch

LAFS Pretraining

Identity Loss

CNN

ViT
Total
Loss

CNN
Landmark Loss

Supervised Finetuning

Figure 1. Illustration of our pretraining and finetuning pipeline for
face recognition. First, a landmark CNN is learnt using Part fViT
framework [55]. We adopt the landmark CNN to provide facial
landmarks for constructing our LAFS pretaining. In this framework, the ‘Teacher’ processes the entire set of provided landmarks,
while the ‘Student’ operates on subsets of these landmarks. Then,
we transfer the ‘Teacher’ for finetuning with an additional regularization that penalizes landmark predictions from huge variations.

is commonly proven to be effective. For example, transferring from a good pretrained model derived by either supervised or self-supervised pretraining can yield better results on tasks such as Face Reconstruction [4], Face Antispoofing [57] and ImageNet Classification [6, 65]. A recent empirical facial comparison research [4] further reveals
that self-supervised learning is able to bring much improvement compared to supervised learning, particularly, in datalimited scenarios. However, self-supervised learning with
ResNet yields suboptimal results compared to supervised
training under large-scale settings [4]. This observation
suggests that previous self-supervised pre-training methods
may not effectively scale from limited datasets to scenarios

1639

