This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Latent Modulated Function for Computational Optimal
Continuous Image Representation

1

Zongyao He1
Zhi Jin1,2, *
School of Intelligent Systems Engineering, Shenzhen Campus of Sun Yat-sen University
2
Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Fire Science and Technology
hezy28@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, jinzh26@mail.sysu.edu.cn

LIIF

Abstract
100,000

1. Introduction
Image data has long been stored and presented as discrete
2D arrays with fixed resolutions, while the visual world we
perceive is continuous and precise. As a result, there is a
* Corresponding author

0.1s

LTE

LM-LTE

CiaoSR

LM-CiaoSR
1,500

1s

1,450
750
700
550

10,000

MACs (G)

The recent work Local Implicit Image Function (LIIF)
and subsequent Implicit Neural Representation (INR) based
works have achieved remarkable success in Arbitrary-Scale
Super-Resolution (ASSR) by using MLP to decode LowResolution (LR) features. However, these continuous image representations typically implement decoding in HighResolution (HR) High-Dimensional (HD) space, leading to
a quadratic increase in computational cost and seriously
hindering the practical applications of ASSR. To tackle this
problem, we propose a novel Latent Modulated Function
(LMF), which decouples the HR-HD decoding process into
shared latent decoding in LR-HD space and independent
rendering in HR Low-Dimensional (LD) space, thereby realizing the first computational optimal paradigm of continuous image representation. Specifically, LMF utilizes an
HD MLP in latent space to generate latent modulations of
each LR feature vector. This enables a modulated LD MLP
in render space to quickly adapt to any input feature vector and perform rendering at arbitrary resolution. Furthermore, we leverage the positive correlation between modulation intensity and input image complexity to design a Controllable Multi-Scale Rendering (CMSR) algorithm, offering the flexibility to adjust the decoding efficiency based on
the rendering precision. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that converting existing INR-based ASSR methods to LMF
can reduce the computational cost by up to 99.9%, accelerate inference by up to 57×, and save up to 76% of parameters, while maintaining competitive performance. The code
is available at https://github.com/HeZongyao/LMF.

0.01s

LM-LIIF

1,000

500
400

100

350
300

10

250
200

1

1

360p
2

3

720p
4

5

1080p
6

7

2k
8

9

150
Params (K)

Upsample Scale

Figure 1. Efficiency comparisons (320 × 180 input) for ASSR.
LMF-based ASSR methods significantly reduce computational
cost (MACs), runtime (circle sizes), and parameters (colors).

growing demand for arbitrary scale image resizing in various real-world scenarios. For instance, users often require
continuous resizing of images during capture, viewing,
and editing. Recent developments in Single Image SuperResolution (SISR) [7, 9, 12, 16, 20, 21, 23–25, 36, 45–47]
have showcased significant advancements in reconstructing
High-Resolution (HR) images from Low-Resolution (LR)
counterparts. However, traditional interpolation methods
are still the preferred choice for handling real-world image
resizing. This is because SISR methods typically learn upsampling functions for a particular scale factor, requiring
training different models for different scales. In contrast,
Arbitrary-Scale Super-Resolution (ASSR) utilizes a single
model to handle arbitrary scales, thus presenting significant
potential in practical image-resizing applications.
Building on the success of Implicit Neural Representation (INR), Local Implicit Image Function (LIIF) [11] is
a recent ASSR approach that learns to continuously represent 2D images through an implicit function. LIIF encodes an image as latent codes and employs a decoding
MLP to predict pixel values based on coordinates and their
neighboring latent codes. The use of continuous coordinates enables LIIF and subsequent INR-based ASSR works

26026

