This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Wavelet-based Fourier Information Interaction with Frequency Diffusion
Adjustment for Underwater Image Restoration
Chen Zhao, Weiling Cai * , Chenyu Dong, Chengwei Hu
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing Normal University

Abstract
Underwater images are subject to intricate and diverse
degradation, inevitably affecting the effectiveness of underwater visual tasks. However, most approaches primarily operate in the raw pixel space of images, which
limits the exploration of the frequency characteristics of
underwater images, leading to an inadequate utilization
of deep models’ representational capabilities in producing high-quality images. In this paper, we introduce a
novel Underwater Image Enhancement (UIE) framework,
named WF-Diff, designed to fully leverage the characteristics of frequency domain information and diffusion models. WF-Diff consists of two detachable networks: Waveletbased Fourier information interaction network (WFI2-net)
and Frequency Residual Diffusion Adjustment Module (FRDAM). With our full exploration of the frequency domain information, WFI2-net aims to achieve preliminary enhancement of frequency information in the wavelet space. Our
proposed FRDAM can further refine the high- and lowfrequency information of the initial enhanced images, which
can be viewed as a plug-and-play universal module to adjust the detail of the underwater images. With the above
techniques, our algorithm can show SOTA performance on
real-world underwater image datasets, and achieves competitive performance in visual quality. The code is available
at https://github.com/zhihefang/WF-Diff.

* Corresponding Author. E-mail: caiwl@njnu.edu.cn

Swap Amplitude

DWT

IDWT
FFT

Underwater image
R

iFFT

Swap
FFT

iFFT

DWT

IDWT
Ground-truth
G

Figure 1. Our motivations. The amplitude and phase are produced
by Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) and the recombined images are
obtained by Inverse FFT (IFFT). We further explore the frequency
properties for underwater images in Wavelet space.
Table 1. Evaluation of using different frequency domain transformation strategies on the UIEBD [28]. S1 refers to swapping the
amplitude in original images, S2 refers to only swapping the amplitude of low-frequency sub-images in the wavelet space, and S3
refers to swapping the amplitude of low-frequency sub-images and
high-frequency sub-images in the wavelet space.

1. Introduction
Underwater image restoration is a practical but challenging
technology in the field of underwater vision, widely used
for tasks, such as underwater robotics[26] and underwater
object tracking[6]. Due to light refraction, absorption, and
scattering in underwater scenes, underwater images are usually severely distorted, with low contrast and blurriness [2].
Therefore, clear underwater images play a critical role in
fields that need to interact with the underwater environment.
The main goal of underwater image enhancement (UIE) is
to obtain high-quality images by removing scattering and
correcting color distortion in degraded images. UIE is crucial for vision-related underwater tasks.

Swap Amplitude

Swap Amplitude

Strategy

PSNR ↑

SSIM ↑

LPIPS↓

FID↓

S1
S2
S3

28.68
27.10
29.97

0.9027
0.8813
0.9343

0.0957
0.1023
0.0820

28.70
33.04
23.55

To address this problem, traditional UIE methods based
on the physical properties of the underwater images were
proposed [15, 17, 29–31]. These methods investigate the
physical mechanism of the degradation caused by color cast
or scattering and compensate for them to enhance the underwater images. However, these physics-based models with
limited representation capacity cannot address all the complex physical and optical factors underlying the underwater scenes, which leads to poor enhancement results under
highly complex and diverse underwater scenes. Recently,
some learning-based methods [7, 18, 28, 36] for UIE can
produce better results, since neural networks have powerful feature representation and nonlinear mapping capabili-

8281

