This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Prompt-Driven Dynamic Object-Centric Learning for Single Domain
Generalization

1

Deng Li1 , Aming Wu2 , Yaowei Wang3 , Yahong Han1 *
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
2
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

lideng@tju.edu.cn, amwu@xidian.edu.cn, wangyw@pcl.ac.cn, yahong@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
Single-domain generalization aims to learn a model from
single source domain data attaining generalized performance on other unseen target domains. Existing works
primarily focus on improving the generalization ability of
static networks. However, static networks are unable to dynamically adapt to the diverse variations in different image
scenes, leading to limited generalization capability. Different scenes exhibit varying levels of complexity, and the
complexity of images further varies significantly in crossdomain scenarios. In this paper, we propose a dynamic
object-centric perception network based on prompt learning, aiming to adapt to the variations in image complexity. Specifically, we propose an object-centric gating module based on prompt learning to focus attention on the
object-centric features guided by the various scene prompts.
Then, with the object-centric gating masks, the dynamic selective module dynamically selects highly correlated feature regions in both spatial and channel dimensions enabling the model to adaptively perceive object-centric relevant features, thereby enhancing the generalization capability. Extensive experiments were conducted on singledomain generalization tasks in image classification and object detection. The experimental results demonstrate that
our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods, which
validates the effectiveness and versatility of our proposed
method.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep learning visual models have achieved rapid
development [2, 17, 52]. These methods are based on the
assumption that the training and testing data share a similar
distribution. However, in practical applications, the training and testing data are often not drawn from the same dis* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Illustration of dynamic object-centric learning via
prompts for single domain generalization. Object-centric features
capture the essential information related to individual objects. Incorporating the given scene prompts to dynamically optimize the
extraction of object-centric features is beneficial for improving the
generalization performance of models.

tribution. Due to the domain shift [39], models often exhibit poor generalization performance when tested on outof-distribution datasets. To mitigate the impact of domain
shift, several approaches have been proposed, such as domain adaptation [31, 38, 46] and domain generalization
[3, 15, 30] methods. Domain adaptation methods typically
require the inclusion of unlabeled target domain images during the model training phase. Multiple domain generalization methods aim to mitigate the domain shift by combining
data from multiple training domains to some extent. However, both of these approaches have limitations due to the
expensive data acquisition and data privacy.
Single-domain generalization aims to train a model on a
single domain and generalize its performance to diverse unseen target domains [43]. This learning paradigm poses significant challenges due to the model being trained only on a
single source domain and the target domains being unavailable during the training process. Existing approaches for

17606

