This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SI-MIL: Taming Deep MIL for Self-Interpretability in Gigapixel Histopathology
Saarthak Kapse1 *, Pushpak Pati4 *, Srijan Das2 , Jingwei Zhang1 , Chao Chen1 , Maria Vakalopoulou3 ,
Joel Saltz1 , Dimitris Samaras1 , Rajarsi R. Gupta1 , Prateek Prasanna1
1

Stony Brook University, USA
2
UNC Charlotte, USA
3
CentraleSupélec, University of Paris-Saclay, France
4
Independent Researcher

Abstract
Introducing interpretability and reasoning into Multiple
Instance Learning (MIL) methods for Whole Slide Image
(WSI) analysis is challenging, given the complexity of gigapixel slides. Traditionally, MIL interpretability is limited
to identifying salient regions deemed pertinent for downstream tasks, offering little insight to the end-user (pathologist) regarding the rationale behind these selections. To
address this, we propose Self-Interpretable MIL (SI-MIL),
a method intrinsically designed for interpretability from
the very outset. SI-MIL employs a deep MIL framework
to guide an interpretable branch grounded on handcrafted
pathological features, facilitating linear predictions. Beyond identifying salient regions, SI-MIL uniquely provides
feature-level interpretations rooted in pathological insights
for WSIs. Notably, SI-MIL, with its linear prediction constraints, challenges the prevalent myth of an inevitable
trade-off between model interpretability and performance,
demonstrating competitive results compared to state-of-theart methods on WSI-level prediction tasks across three cancer types. In addition, we thoroughly benchmark the localand global-interpretability of SI-MIL in terms of statistical
analysis, a domain expert study, and desiderata of interpretability, namely, user-friendliness and faithfulness.

1. Introduction
In the last decade, advancements in deep learning techniques, especially Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) algorithms [21, 36, 56], have dramatically revolutionized computational pathology, which has transitioned from analyzing local regions-of-interest [39] to gigapixel whole slide
images (WSIs). A standard MIL workflow takes in feature representations of patches from a WSI, embedded via a
* These authors contributed equally to this paper.
Code and Dataset is available at: github.com/bmi-imaginelab/SI-MIL

Patch

Deep feature extractor

Nuclei map

Morphometric and
Spatial descriptors

Conventional MIL
Deep features

Handcrafted
features

SI-MIL

Handcrafted feature-level rationale
Tumor
cellularity
Infiltration
Necrosis
-ve

0
class contribution

+ve

Figure 1. Unlike conventional MIL , SI-MIL co-learns from
deep and handcrafted features (referred to as PathExpert features).
While both MILs offer patch-level interpretability, only ours provides PathExpert feature-level rationale for WSI predictions. The
attention maps in SI-MIL are grounded on geometrically and
physically-interpretable descriptors.

deep neural network, and aggregates them to define a slidelevel representation adept for a downstream task. While
these deep neural network-reliant workflows have resulted
in high performance, they often lack pathologist-friendly interpretability and reasoning in their predictions [52], which
is crucial for building trust in routine clinical workflows and
defining reliability and accountability of AI algorithms [7,
18, 54], particularly in clinical contexts.
In computational pathology, efforts to achieve WSI-level
interpretability have predominantly focused on two directions: (1) identifying salient regions in a WSI, and (2)
employing post-hoc techniques to elucidate the underlying
patterns in salient regions. The first approach, employed
by traditional MIL, includes techniques such as visualization of attention maps [21, 36, 56, 57, 67, 68] and posthoc gradient-based saliency [47, 70], which highlight image patches that influence the model prediction. These techniques, though useful, may not offer a complete understanding of the model’s decisions and can result in visualizations

11226

