This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Validating Privacy-Preserving Face Recognition under a Minimum Assumption
Hui Zhang, Xingbo Dong, YenLung Lai, Ying Zhou, Xiaoyan Zhang, Xingguo Lv, Zhe Jin†, Xuejun Li
Anhui Provincial Key Laboratory of Secure Artificial Intelligence, Anhui University, China
huizhang@stu.ahu.edu.cn, jinzhe@ahu.edu.cn

Abstract
The widespread use of cloud-based face recognition
technology raises privacy concerns, as unauthorized access to face images can expose personal information or be
exploited for fraudulent purposes. In response, privacypreserving face recognition (PPFR) schemes have emerged
to hide visual information and thwart unauthorized access. However, the validation methods employed by these
schemes often rely on unrealistic assumptions, leaving
doubts about their true effectiveness in safeguarding facial
privacy. In this paper, we introduce a new approach to privacy validation called Minimum Assumption Privacy Protection Validation (Map2 V). This is the first exploration of
formulating a privacy validation method utilizing deep image priors and zeroth-order gradient estimation, with the
potential to serve as a general framework for PPFR evaluation. Building upon Map2 V, we comprehensively validate the privacy-preserving capability of PPFRs through
a combination of human and machine vision. The experiment results and analysis demonstrate the effectiveness
and generalizability of the proposed Map2 V, showcasing
its superiority over native privacy validation methods from
PPFR works of literature. Additionally, this work exposes
privacy vulnerabilities in evaluated state-of-the-art PPFR
schemes, laying the foundation for the subsequent effective
proposal of countermeasures. The source code is available
at https://github.com/Beauty9882/MAP2V.

1. Introduction
A cloud-based face recognition (FR) system usually comprises the client and server sides. The client devices capture
facial images, which are then transmitted to a cloud server
[38, 41]. The server employs machine learning algorithms
to analyze facial features, matching them against stored
data. Results are sent back to clients, enabling seamless and
efficient identity verification and access control [29, 37]. As
FR technology becomes increasingly prevalent, the need to
† Corresponding author.

safeguard the privacy of sensitive facial images has become
a critical concern. This is primarily due to the fact that face
is typically considered private by the client, who is hesitant
to share the raw image with external entities, including the
server [10, 32, 44].
Recently, various privacy-preserving face recognition (PPFR) schemes have been constructed using deep
learning-based techniques to address the aforementioned
challenges [6, 28, 41, 46, 47]. Despite the growth of PPFR
techniques and the sound security they demonstrated, there
is still a lack of a proper framework capable of comprehensively validating their model capacity to safeguard against
privacy inference [14, 34]. The existing privacy validation
methods [11, 22, 23] typically focus on reconstructing face
images from user data stored on the server. These methods
often rely on numerous assumptions and can be collectively
termed as the 2k2c framework, granting adversaries the following advantages:
1. Knowledge to the PPFR system, be it within a black-box
or white-box settings.
2. Knowledge to the protected user data collectible from
the server or database within a PPFR system.
3. Capabilities to query the server indefinitely, aiming to
obtain input-output pairs for network training.
4. Capabilities to independently train a face reconstruction network (e.g., using autoencoders) and reverseengineer the face from partial information obtained from
the server.
The aforementioned 2k2c framework is indeed a less realistic attacking environment for the potential adversary. To
elaborate, granting the adversary the capability to collect
protected user data from the server or database effectively
provides the attacker access to the PPFR system with minimal (or even zero) effort. On the other hand, allowing the
adversary to query the server indefinitely suggests that no
PPFR system can withstand such a brute-force approach
without relying on computationally bounded assumptions.
Therefore, we refined 2k2c assumptions into a more nuanced 1k1c framework, relaxing the adversary’s capability
to only require:
1. Knowledge of the PPFR system but under a black-box

12205

