This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unmixing before Fusion: A Generalized Paradigm for Multi-Source-based
Hyperspectral Image Synthesis
Yang Yu∗ , Erting Pan*, Xinya Wang, Yuheng Wu, Xiaoguang Mei†, Jiayi Ma
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{yuyang1995,panerting,wangxinya,yuhengwu}@whu.edu.cn, {meixiaoguang,jyma2010}@gmail.com

Abstract
In the realm of AI, data serves as a pivotal resource.
Real-world hyperspectral images (HSIs), bearing wide
spectral characteristics, are particularly valuable. However, the acquisition of HSIs is always costly and timeintensive, resulting in a severe data-thirsty issue in HSI research and applications. Current solutions have not been
able to generate a sufficient volume of diverse and reliable
synthetic HSIs. To this end, our study formulates a novel,
generalized paradigm for HSI synthesis, i.e., unmixing before fusion, that initiates with unmixing across multi-source
data and follows by fusion-based synthesis. By integrating
unmixing, this work maps unpaired HSI and RGB data to
a low-dimensional abundance space, greatly alleviating the
difficulty of generating high-dimensional samples. Moreover, incorporating abundances inferred from unpaired
RGB images into generative models allows for cost-effective
supplementation of various realistic spatial distributions in
abundance synthesis. Our proposed paradigm can be instrumental with a series of deep generative models, filling
a significant gap in the field and enabling the generation of
vast high-quality HSI samples for large-scale downstream
tasks. Extension experiments on downstream tasks demonstrate the effectiveness of synthesized HSIs. The code is
available at HSI-Synthesis.github.io.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral image (HSI), with its high-resolution spectral information, holds great potential to revolutionize myriad research fields [8, 34, 38]. However, a confluence
of factors including prohibitive collection costs, limited
sensor availability, intricate data management, and environmental constraints have conspired to render HSI data
scarce [11, 27, 49]. This scarcity of HSI data, coupled with
the complexity and time-intensive nature of HSI acquisi* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

BRDF

HSI

RGB

RGB

HSI

+

(a) Physicalmodeling

(b) Affinetransformation

(c) Spectral
super-resolution

(d) The proposed paradigm

Figure 1. Comparisons of existing HSI synthesis techniques.
(a) Physical modeling-based methods. (b) Affine transformationbased methods. (c) Spectral reconstruction-based methods. (d)
The proposed paradigm (multi-source-based).

tion and pre-processing, is a significant impediment to the
construction of comprehensive HSI datasets and the overall
advancement of AI in HSI [15, 42].
In light of the burgeoning demand for high-quality data,
the advent of synthetic or artificially generated data is a welcome innovation [35, 47]. It offers a viable solution to the
chronic data shortage, and the domain of HSI synthesis has
seen an influx of research interest [14]. Existing studies can
be broadly categorized into three groups:
1. Physical modeling-based HSI synthesis [12, 17, 21] (refer to Fig. 1 (a)) mainly focus on mimicking physical
phenomena, such as the Bidirectional Reflectance Distribution Function (BRDF) or the Gaussian Mixture Model
(GMM). Despite its meticulous manual design, it often
produces unreliable HSIs due to too ideal assumptions.
2. Affine transformation-based HSI synthesis [16, 36] (refer to Fig. 1 (b)) involves enriching data through a series
of affine transformations, including rotation, scaling, and
shearing. It serves to augment the quantity of training
samples, albeit without enriching their diversity.
3. Spectral super-resolution-based HSI synthesis [1, 4] (refer to Fig. 1 (c)) attempts to expand the spectral dimension from multi-spectral or RGB images. Regrettably,
they are hard to accurately reconstruct the spectral signatures and are unable to generate new samples.
While these techniques have their merits, they also grapple

9297

