This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-guided Explorable Image Super-resolution
Kanchana Vaishnavi Gandikota*
Paramanand Chandramouli*
Institute for Vision and Graphics, University of Siegen

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce the problem of zero-shot textguided exploration of the solutions to open-domain image
super-resolution. Our goal is to allow users to explore diverse, semantically accurate reconstructions that preserve
data consistency with the low-resolution inputs for different
large downsampling factors without explicitly training for
these specific degradations. We propose two approaches for
zero-shot text-guided super-resolution - i) modifying the generative process of text-to-image (T2I ) diffusion models to
promote consistency with low-resolution inputs, and ii) incorporating language guidance into zero-shot diffusion-based
restoration methods. We show that the proposed approaches
result in diverse solutions that match the semantic meaning
provided by the text prompt while preserving data consistency with the degraded inputs. We evaluate the proposed
baselines for the task of extreme super-resolution and demonstrate advantages in terms of restoration quality, diversity,
and explorability of solutions.

1. Introduction
The goal of image super-resolution is to recover a highquality image, given a low-resolution (LR) observation y,
  \mathbf {y} = \mathbf {A}\mathbf {x} + \mathbf {n}, \label {eq:measurement} 

(1)

where A, x, and n represent the down-sampling operator,
ground truth image, and measurement noise respectively. Image super-resolution is highly ill-posed, especially at large
super-resolution factors with many valid solutions satisfying the data consistency accurately. While most of the recent state-of-the-art supervised deep networks for superresolution [6, 31, 80] recover only a single image from this
solution space, there are also methods utilizing conditional
or unconditional generative models [2, 5, 38, 42, 46, 81],
which allow sampling multiple solutions. A few of these
works also allow exploring the solution space, using graphical user inputs [2] or semantic maps [5]. Yet, even these
* indicates the authors contributed equally.
Code available at:https://github.com/KVGandikota/TextguidedSR

methods are tailored to images of specific classes such as
faces, or trained for specific super-resolution factors. On the
other hand, natural language provides a simpler and more intuitive means of conveying semantic concepts. For instance,
it is easier to provide detailed descriptions or convey concepts such as age, gender, emotion, and race through text
rather than graphical inputs alone. Therefore, a method that
guides image super-resolution through text can greatly aid
the exploration of semantically meaningful solutions.
In this paper, we propose for the first time zero-shot opendomain image super-resolution using simple and intuitive
text prompts. Our goal is to explore via text prompts, diverse and semantically accurate reconstructions that preserve data consistency with the low-resolution inputs for
different large downsampling factors without explicitly training for these specific degradations. Towards this goal, we
exploit recent advances in text-to-image (T2I ) generative
models [64, 66, 68], contrastive language image pretraining (CLIP) [61], and unsupervised zero-shot approaches
to image recovery using diffusion-based generative models
[12, 74, 81]. We explore two paradigms for zero-shot textguided super-resolution. In the first approach, we adapt recent diffusion-based zero-shot super-resolution approaches
to T2I models by appropriately modifying the generative
process. We consider recent state-of-the-art text-to-image
diffusion models, open-sourced versions of DALL-e2 [64],
and Imagen [68], and adapt these models for zero-shot superresolution using different zero-shot approaches for diffusionbased image recovery [12, 74, 81]. As these T2I models
comprise of a cascade of diffusion models at different resolutions, we modify the zero-shot approaches accordingly to
deal with multi-stage generation. In the second approach, we
modify an existing diffusion-based zero-shot restoration approach to incorporate additional language guidance through
CLIP. We focus on extreme image super-resolution with
large upscale factors, as this problem is severely ill-posed,
and allows exploration of a larger solution space.
Fig. 1 illustrates the benefits of text guidance in extreme super-resolution. Existing zero-shot methods such
as [12, 77] cannot recover realistic details when the ground
truth has complex content as seen in the super-resolution results of [12] on challenging input. On the other hand, the use

25900

