This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SceneFun3D:
Fine-Grained Functionality and Affordance Understanding in 3D Scenes
Alexandros Delitzas1

Ayça Takmaz1

Federico Tombari2,3

Marc Pollefeys1,4
1

ETH Zurich

2

Google

Robert Sumner1

Francis Engelmann1,2
3

TU Munich

4

Microsoft

scenefun3d.github.io
High-resolution laser scan

Functional interactive
element annotations
P

Motion
annotations

Natural language
task descriptions

hook_pull

"Open the fridge"

tip_push

"Turn on the
ceiling light"

rotate

"Change the
room's
temperature using
the radiator's
thermostat"

Figure 1. The SceneFun3D dataset. We introduce the first large-scale 3D dataset with fine-grained functional interaction annotations
in real-world indoor spaces. SceneFun3D contains more than 14.8k annotations of functional interactive elements in 710 high-fidelity
3D scenes accompanied by 9 affordance categories. Additionally, it provides motion annotations that describe how to interact with the
functional elements and diverse natural language descriptions of tasks that involve manipulating them in the scene context.

Abstract
Existing 3D scene understanding methods are heavily focused on 3D semantic and instance segmentation. However, identifying objects and their parts only constitutes an
intermediate step towards a more fine-grained goal, which
is effectively interacting with the functional interactive elements (e.g., handles, knobs, buttons) in the scene to accomplish diverse tasks. To this end, we introduce SceneFun3D,
a large-scale dataset with more than 14.8k highly accurate interaction annotations for 710 high-resolution realworld 3D indoor scenes. We accompany the annotations
with motion parameter information, describing how to interact with these elements, and a diverse set of natural language descriptions of tasks that involve manipulating them
in the scene context. To showcase the value of our dataset,
we introduce three novel tasks, namely functionality segmentation, task-driven affordance grounding and 3D motion estimation, and adapt existing state-of-the-art methods

to tackle them. Our experiments show that solving these
tasks in real 3D scenes remains challenging despite recent
progress in closed-set and open-set 3D scene understanding
methods.

1. Introduction
Datasets of 3D indoor environments have been extensively
used for computer vision, robotics, embodied AI and mixed
reality [5, 7, 11]. To perceive 3D environments, 3D instance
segmentation has served as a fundamental task to provide
object-level knowledge to agents enabling scene interaction.
Going a step further, a line of work [46, 49] has studied the
task of part-object segmentation focusing on the lower-level
object parts, e.g., the drawers of a cabinet. However, these
two tasks serve only as a proxy since in the real-world setting, agents need to successfully detect and interact with the
functional interactive elements (e.g., knobs, handles, buttons) of the objects in the scene. Detecting these elements

14531

