This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

X-MIC: Cross-Modal Instance Conditioning
for Egocentric Action Generalization
Anna Kukleva1,2⇤

Fadime Sener1
Edoardo Remelli1
Bugra Tekin1
Eric Sauser1
2
1
Bernt Schiele
Shugao Ma
1
2
Meta Reality Labs; Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
{annakukleva, famesener}@meta.com

Abstract

(ZS CLIP) ‘’Image of a < . . .>’’?
painting

Lately, there has been growing interest in adapting
vision-language models (VLMs) to image and third-person
video classification due to their success in zero-shot recognition. However, the adaptation of these models to egocentric videos has been largely unexplored. To address this
gap, we propose a simple yet effective cross-modal adaptation framework, which we call X-MIC. Using a video
adapter, our pipeline learns to align frozen text embeddings to each egocentric video directly in the shared embedding space. Our novel adapter architecture retains and
improves generalization of the pre-trained VLMs by disentangling learnable temporal modeling and frozen visual encoder. This results in an enhanced alignment of text embeddings to each egocentric video, leading to a significant
improvement in cross-dataset generalization. We evaluate
our approach on the Epic-Kitchens, Ego4D, and EGTEA
datasets for fine-grained cross-dataset action generalization, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method.1

1 https://github.com/annusha/xmic
*work is done during internship at Meta

Text
Encoder

brush

painting
brush

GT label:
hold brush

‘’Image of a < . . .>’’?
brush

ting

pain

painting
brush

br

+

GT label:
hold brush

us

h

+

Text
Encoder

(X-MIC)

Visual
Encoder

Egocentric action recognition has recently become a popular research topic due to the rising interest in augmented
reality and robotics. Recently, two large-scale egocentric datasets Epic-Kitchens [6] and Ego4D [10], capturing
the daily activities of users have been introduced. While
there is a growing interest in studying action recognition
on egocentric datasets, evaluations primarily occur within
the same dataset; lacking cross-dataset evaluations that is
crucial for real-world deployment of recognition models.
Testing models on different datasets presents several challenges, such as encountering unfamiliar environments, different users, and previously unseen objects and their corresponding actions, all of which can significantly impact per-

Visual
Encoder

1. Introduction

ting

pain

X-MIC
adapter

Figure 1. Egocentric video classification with VL models.
Top: Standard zero-shot CLIP. As the dominant object in the scene
is painting, the model predicts class “painting” while the object of
interest is “brush”. Bottom: CLIP model with our X-MIC adaptation directly in the shared VL embedding. X-MIC vectors adapt
focus of the CLIP model to the hand area, guiding text modality to
capture egocentric domain-specific information.

formance. Recently, vision-language models [13, 27, 39]
such as CLIP [27] have demonstrated remarkable performance across diverse third-persons datasets like Kinetics600 [16] and ImageNet [7], showcasing their ability to generalize effectively and achieving zero-shot performance of
59.8% and 76.2%, respectively. However, their zero-shot
performance drops significantly when applied to egocentric
datasets like Epic-Kitchens, with noun and verb recognition
reaching only 8.8% and 5.9%, respectively; highlighting the
domain gap between third-person and egocentric data.
CLIP’s zero-shot generalization to new datasets lever-

26364

