This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NECA: Neural Customizable Human Avatar
Junjin Xiao1

Qing Zhang1,3∗

Zhan Xu2

1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China

3

Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
xiaojj37@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
zhaxu@adobe.com

Input video

Normal

Wei-Shi Zheng1,3

Albedo

Shadow

Illumination

2

Adobe Research

zhangq93@mail.sysu.edu.cn
wszheng@ieee.org

(a) Reposing

(b) Reshadowing

(d) Relighting

(e) Retexturing

(c) Reshaping

(f) Retexturing + Reshaping

Figure 1. Neural customizable human avatar. Our method takes as input monocular or sparse multi-view videos and outputs disentangled
human representations, including normal, albedo, shadow, and illumination. Such disentanglement enables control of the learned human
avatar with arbitrary poses/viewpoints and various customization options such as adjusting shape, shadow, lighting and texture.

Abstract
Human avatar has become a novel type of 3D asset with
various applications. Ideally, a human avatar should be fully
customizable to accommodate different settings and environments. In this work, we introduce NECA, an approach
capable of learning versatile human representation from
monocular or sparse-view videos, enabling granular customization across aspects such as pose, shadow, shape, lighting and texture. The core of our approach is to represent
humans in complementary dual spaces and predict disentangled neural fields of geometry, albedo, shadow, as well as an
external lighting, from which we are able to derive realistic
rendering with high-frequency details via volumetric rendering. Extensive experiments demonstrate the advantage of our
method over the state-of-the-art methods in photorealistic
rendering, as well as various editing tasks such as novel pose
synthesis and relighting. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/iSEE-Laboratory/NECA.
∗ Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
There is widespread demand for human avatars in many
emerging applications such as the metaverse, telepresence,
and 3D games. Among them, a basic common requirement
for human avatars is that they should be fully editable to
allow easy customization across aspects like pose, shape,
lighting, texture, and even shadow. While there are numerous works on neural human avatar modelling, as illustrated
in Tab. 1, they are mostly tailored for either animation or
relighting purposes, failing to offer full customization capabilities for avatars thus being limited in overall practicality.
In this work, we present NECA, a novel framework that allows learning fully customizable neural human avatars with
photorealistic rendering under any novel pose, viewpoint
and lighting, as well as the ability to edit shape, texture, and
shadow. To this end, we propose to learn human representation in both Canonical space and the surface space consisting
of UV features and local tangent coordinates, so as to capture
high-frequency dynamic variations and the shared characteristics across poses with geometry priors for harvesting

20091

