This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Correlation Structures for Vision Transformers
Manjin Kim1
1

POSTECH

Paul Hongsuck Seo2 * Cordelia Schmid3
2

Korea University

3

Minsu Cho1*

Google Research

http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/StructViT/

Abstract
We introduce a new attention mechanism, dubbed structural self-attention (StructSA), that leverages rich correlation patterns naturally emerging in key-query interactions
of attention. StructSA generates attention maps by recognizing space-time structures of key-query correlations via
convolution and uses them to dynamically aggregate local contexts of value features. This effectively leverages
rich structural patterns in images and videos such as scene
layouts, object motion, and inter-object relations. Using
StructSA as a main building block, we develop the structural
vision transformer (StructViT) and evaluate its effectiveness on both image and video classification tasks, achieving state-of-the-art results on ImageNet-1K, Kinetics-400,
Something-Something V1 & V2, Diving-48, and FineGym.

1. Introduction
How visual elements interact with each other in space and
time is a crucial cue for visual understanding, e.g., recognizing actions in a video or analyzing scene layout patterns
in an image. In computer vision, such relational patterns are
effectively captured by the structure of correlations or similarities across visual elements in different positions [3, 57];
a correlation structure of an image reveals spatial layouts
of similar patterns [30, 33] and that of a video provides bidirectional motion likelihoods [32, 36]. The ability to recognize those structural patterns may allow to better perform
visual reasoning and generalize against challenging appearance variations and domain shifts [21, 65].
In this work, we introduce a novel self-attention mechanism, named structural self-attention (StructSA), that effectively leverages diverse structural patterns for visual representation learning. While the standard self-attention mechanism uses raw query-key correlations individually and ignores their geometric structures, the proposed StructSA recognizes diverse structural patterns from the correlations between the query and local chunks of keys via convolu* Co-corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Structural Self-Attention. Given an input video and
a query indicated by the red box in (a), the query-key correlation
maps in (b) clearly reveal the structures of spatial layout and motion with respect to the query. The proposed attention mechanism
in (c) is designed to leverage these rich structural patterns for computing attention scores in the self-attention process.

tion and uses them to dynamically aggregate local contexts of value features, effectively capturing rich structural
patterns such as scene layouts, object motion, and interobject relations in images and video. As illustrated in
Fig. 1 and detailed in Sec. 3, this is mainly achieved by empowering the standard self-attention mechanism with longrange convolutional interactions and dynamic contextual
feature aggregation. To investigate the effect of StructSA,
we also provide an in-depth analysis on the relationship
to recent self-attention variants with convolutional projection [18, 41, 42, 70, 72], showing their potential and limitation in leveraging structural patterns.
To validate the effect of StructSA, we develop the structural vision transformer that adopts it as a main building

18941

