Conv

This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Clustering based Visual Representation Learning

...

(b)

Attn./Mixer Layer

1

2

1

...

1*

Guikun Chen , Xia Li , Yi Yang , Wenguan Wang
1

ReLER, CCAI, Zhejiang University 2 ETH Zürich

https://github.com/guikunchen/FEC/

We investigate a fundamental aspect of machine vision:
the measurement of features, by revisiting clustering, one of
the most classic approaches in machine learning and data
analysis. Existing visual feature extractors, including ConvNets, ViTs, and MLPs, represent an image as rectangular
regions. Though prevalent, such a grid-style paradigm is
built upon engineering practice and lacks explicit modeling of data distribution. In this work, we propose feature
extraction with clustering (FEC), a conceptually elegant yet
surprisingly ad-hoc interpretable neural clustering framework, which views feature extraction as a process of selecting representatives from data and thus automatically
captures the underlying data distribution. Given an image, FEC alternates between grouping pixels into individual
clusters to abstract representatives and updating the deep
features of pixels with current representatives. Such an iterative working mechanism is implemented in the form of
several neural layers and the final representatives can be
used for downstream tasks. The cluster assignments across
layers, which can be viewed and inspected by humans, make
the forward process of FEC fully transparent and empower
it with promising ad-hoc interpretability. Extensive experiments on various visual recognition models and tasks verify the effectiveness, generality, and interpretability of FEC.
We expect this work will provoke a rethink of the current de
facto grid-style paradigm.

1. Introduction
The measurement of features, which explores how to extract abstract, meaningful features from high-dimensional
image data, is a topic of enduring interest in machine vision throughout its history [1–3]. This pursuit, initially
dominated by manually engineered descriptors [4–9], has
evolved under the influence of deep learning paradigms,
transitioning from convolutional landscapes [10, 11] to the
frontiers of attention-driven mechanisms [12, 13] and MLP1 Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang.

(a)

Conv

...

...

Attention Layer

Mixer Layer

...

...

Patch Embedding
(b)
Conv

...

Patch Embedding
(c)

...

(d)

Clu.
Clustering

Abstract

Figure 1. How to represent an image in a low-dimensional space
and what could explain it? (abc) Existing visual backbones rely
on the computational modeling of rigid grids. (d) Derived from
a neural clustering view, FEC reformulates the procedures of feature extraction as clustering, thereby representing the image with
its representatives. Our approach possesses promising ad-hoc interpretability and demonstrates the emergence of segmentation despite being trained only on the classification task.

based approaches [14, 15]. Convolutional networks (ConvNets, Fig. 1a) treat an image as rectangular regions and execute in a sliding window manner. Attention-based methods
(Fig. 1b) usually divide an image into several non-overlap
patches and use an additional [CLS] token to represent the
whole image. MLP-based backbones (Fig. 1c) also follow
the grid-style paradigm while extracting features without
convolution or attention operations.
Upon observing the array of visual backbones shown in
Fig. 1, the following questions naturally arise: ❶ What is the
relation between them? and more critically, ❷ If these neural networks indeed implicitly capture some intrinsic properties of image data, might there exist a more transparent
and interpretable method to measure the visual features?
The pursuit of the question ❶ uncovers a persistent adherence to a grid-centric view in the realm of image data

5714

