This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DocRes: A Generalist Model Toward Unifying Document Image
Restoration Tasks
Jiaxin Zhang1,2 , Dezhi Peng1 , Chongyu Liu1 , Peirong Zhang1 , Lianwen Jin1,2, *
1

2

South China University of Technology
INTSIG-SCUT Joint Lab on Document Analysis and Recognition

Abstract
Document image restoration is a crucial aspect of Document AI systems, as the quality of document images significantly influences the overall performance. Prevailing
methods address distinct restoration tasks independently,
leading to intricate systems and the incapability to harness
the potential synergies of multi-task learning. To overcome
this challenge, we propose DocRes, a generalist model
that unifies five document image restoration tasks including dewarping, deshadowing, appearance enhancement,
deblurring, and binarization. To instruct DocRes to perform various restoration tasks, we propose a novel visual
prompt approach called Dynamic Task-Specific Prompt
(DTSPrompt). The DTSPrompt for different tasks comprises distinct prior features, which are additional characteristics extracted from the input image. Beyond its role
as a cue for task-specific execution, DTSPrompt can also
serve as supplementary information to enhance the model’s
performance. Moreover, DTSPrompt is more flexible than
prior visual prompt approaches as it can be seamlessly applied and adapted to inputs with high and variable resolutions. Experimental results demonstrate that DocRes
achieves competitive or superior performance compared to
existing state-of-the-art task-specific models. This underscores the potential of DocRes across a broader spectrum of
document image restoration tasks. The source code is publicly available at https://github.com/ZZZHANGjx/DocRes.

1. Introduction
Photographed or scanned document images frequently manifest various forms of degradation, encompassing geometric
distortion, shadows, bleed-through, stains, and more. These
degradations pose substantial challenges for existing document analysis and recognition systems, and also significantly compromise the visual appeal and legibility of docu* Corresponding author

DocRes

Dewarping

Deshadowing

Appearance
enhancement

Deblurring

Binarization

Figure 1. DocRes is a generalist model that unifies five document
image restoration tasks, including tasks of dewarping, deshadowing, appearance enhancement, deblurring, and binarization.

ments, as underscored in recent studies [5, 9, 23, 59, 70].
The restoration of document images, addressing objectives like flattening documents, shadow removal, clean
appearance restoration, deblurring, or text segmentation,
holds both academic and practical significance. Existing approaches [5, 9, 33, 59, 62] typically treat these restoration
tasks separately, relying on models specifically designed for
each task. While effective in achieving commendable performance, this paradigm results in a system that requires
the design of multiple models and extensive maintenance.
Moreover, it fails to leverage the potential synergies of
multi-task learning.
To tackle this problem, motivated by recent pioneering
works [3, 24, 30, 38, 57, 58] that unify various vision tasks,
we seek to explore a generalist model for document image
restoration. As illustrated in Fig. 1, our proposed DocRes
seeks to unify five document image restoration tasks: dewarping, deshadowing, appearance enhancement, deblurring, and binarization. To empower such a generalist model
to perform specific tasks and generate desired outputs, it
is often crucial to convey instructional information to the
model. Existing visual generalist models accomplish this
by drawing inspiration from advancements in Natural Language Processing (NLP) and leveraging prompt learning

15654

