This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LL3DA: Visual Interactive Instruction Tuning for
Omni-3D Understanding, Reasoning, and Planning
Sijin Chen1 Xin Chen2,∗ Chi Zhang2 Mingsheng Li1 Gang YU2
Hao Fei3 Hongyuan Zhu4 Jiayuan Fan1 Tao Chen1,†
1

4

2
3
Fudan University
Tencent PCG
National University of Singapore
2
Institute for Infocomm Research (I R) & Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR, Singapore

https://github.com/Open3DA/LL3DA
∗

project lead

†

corresponding author

3D Dense Caption

3D Dialogue
Can you please move the picture
on the wall?

What is this object? [Click]
The couch is located
at <obj>229, 142, 30,
38, 63, 53</obj>.

I have arrived at the picture on
the wall near the couch. What would
you like me to do with it?

This is a light brown couch, it is
situated between two gray ottomans.
It is under a big painting. The
painting is gray, yellow and brown.

Can you move it to the other
wall, near the table?

Picture
Armchair

Plant

Plant

3D QA

Couch

What is behind the ottoman, that
is next to the love seat?

Scene Description
Describe this scene.

Trash Can

Armchair
Couch

What is behind the ottoman, that
is next to the love seat? [Click]

Sure! I have moved the picture to the
other wall near the table. Is there
anything else you need me to do?
y

ottoman

Table is located behind ottoman
that is next to love seat

The room contains various couches
and armchairs, providing comfortable
seating options. Additionally, there
are plants placed in different areas
of the room, adding a touch of
greenery. Lastly, a picture is hung
on one of the walls.

Figure 1. We propose LL3DA, a Large Language 3D Assistant that demonstrates mighty instruction-following capacities in understanding, reasoning, and planning within complex 3D environments. LL3DA takes both the textual instructions and potential visual
interactions into consideration to help remove ambiguities when addressing various tasks in diverse and complex 3D scenes.

Abstract
Recent progress in Large Multimodal Models (LMM)
has opened up great possibilities for various applications in
the ﬁeld of human-machine interactions. However, developing LMMs that can comprehend, reason, and plan in complex and diverse 3D environments remains a challenging
topic, especially considering the demand for understanding
permutation-invariant point cloud representations of the 3D
scene. Existing works seek help from multi-view images by
projecting 2D features to 3D space, which inevitably leads
to huge computational overhead and performance degradation. In this paper, we present LL3DA, a Large Language
3D Assistant that takes point cloud as the direct input and
responds to both text instructions and visual interactions.
The additional visual interaction enables LMMs to better

comprehend human interactions with the 3D environment
and further remove the ambiguities within plain texts. Experiments show that LL3DA achieves remarkable results
and surpasses various 3D vision-language models on both
3D Dense Captioning and 3D Question Answering.

1. Introduction
The recent surge in Large Language Model (LLM) families [14, 31, 46, 52, 63] opens up great opportunities for
addressing various machine learning tasks in a generalized
way [30, 32, 40, 60]. During this LLM carnival, researchers
are also seeking generalized LLM solutions for various vision language tasks [37, 50, 62]. Among these, LLM-based
3D scene understanding is a valuable topic that would beneﬁt the development of autonomous driving [9, 23] and em-

26428

