This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The More You See in 2D, the More You Perceive in 3D
Xinyang Han*
UC Berkeley

Zelin Gao*
Zhejiang University

Angjoo Kanazawa
UC Berkeley

hanxinyang66@gmail.com

jamesgzl@zju.edu.cn

kanazawa@berkeley.edu

Shubham Goel†
Avataar

Yossi Gandelsman†
UC Berkeley

shubhamgoel@avataar.ai

yossi gandelsman@berkeley.com

Input Images

Humans can infer 3D structure from 2D images of an
object based on past experience and improve their 3D understanding as they see more images. Inspired by this behavior, we introduce SAP3D, a system for 3D reconstruction
and novel view synthesis from an arbitrary number of unposed images. Given a few unposed images of an object,
we adapt a pre-trained view-conditioned diffusion model
together with the camera poses of the images via test-time
fine-tuning. The adapted diffusion model and the obtained
camera poses are then utilized as instance-specific priors
for 3D reconstruction and novel view synthesis. We show
that as the number of input images increases, the performance of our approach improves, bridging the gap between
optimization-based prior-less 3D reconstruction methods
and single-image-to-3D diffusion-based methods. We demonstrate our system on real images as well as standard synthetic
benchmarks. Our ablation studies confirm that this adaption
behavior is key for more accurate 3D understanding.1

1. Introduction
Imagine you are shopping online and see a picture of the
bunny in Figure 1 you want to buy. You can build a rough
mental 3D model of the object based on the first image alone
following your understanding of what bunnies look like,
but you can only guess the geometry and appearance of the
unseen parts. When you see more images, you implicitly
estimate the camera viewpoints and consolidate information
from all the views to build a better 3D understanding of
the object. To accomplish this task you combine 2D priors
coming from your vast previous visual experience with the
actual observations you see, to understand the 3D object. As
you see more examples, your 3D understanding improves.
* Equal contribution. † Equal contribution.
1 Project page: https://sap3d.github.io/

Increasing Number of Views

Abstract

3D Shape and Texture

+

+

Figure 1. 3D from one or more unposed views. Our system
reconstructs the 3D shape and texture of an object with a variable
number of real input images. The first, second, and third rows show
reconstructions from 1, 3, and 5 input images. The quality of 3D
shape and texture improves with more views.

In this paper, we present a system that follows the same
principles - it handles a variable number of images, incorporates learned priors from large-scale 2D image data, and
improves as it sees more captures of the object. Specifically,
starting from an arbitrary number of input images without
camera poses, we use a pre-trained generative image model,
adapt it to the object of interest, and consolidate the information, enabling consistent 3D reconstruction and novel view
synthesis (NVS). Therefore, we call our system See-AdaptPerceive, or SAP3D in short.
To reconstruct real-world 3D objects from only a few images (e.g. 3 photos), our system relies on priors from models
that are pre-trained on large-scale datasets. We incorporate
a generative model that was trained on a large-scale image

20912

