This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffSal: Joint Audio and Video Learning for Diffusion Saliency Prediction
Junwen Xiong1,2 , Peng Zhang1,2∗ , Tao You1 ,* Chuanyue Li1 , Wei Huang3 , Yufei Zha1,2
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
Ningbo Institute of Northwestern Polytechnical University
3
Nanchang University

Abstract
Audio-visual saliency prediction can draw support from
diverse modality complements, but further performance enhancement is still challenged by customized architectures
as well as task-specific loss functions. In recent studies,
denoising diffusion models have shown more promising in
unifying task frameworks owing to their inherent ability of
generalization. Following this motivation, a novel Diffusion
architecture for generalized audio-visual Saliency prediction (DiffSal) is proposed in this work, which formulates
the prediction problem as a conditional generative task of
the saliency map by utilizing input audio and video as the
conditions. Based on the spatio-temporal audio-visual features, an extra network Saliency-UNet is designed to perform multi-modal attention modulation for progressive refinement of the ground-truth saliency map from the noisy
map. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed
DiffSal can achieve excellent performance across six challenging audio-visual benchmarks, with an average relative improvement of 6.3% over the previous state-of-theart results by six metrics. The project url is https:
//junwenxiong.github.io/DiffSal.

1. Introduction
With the functionality of visual and auditory sensory systems, human beings can quickly focus on the most interesting areas during their daily activities. Such a comprehensive
capability of visual attention in multi-modal scenarios has
been explored by numerous researchers and referred to as
an audio-visual saliency prediction (AVSP) task. Based on
the related techniques, many valuable practical applications
have come into utility ranging from video summarization
[29] and compression [65] to virtual reality [15] and augmented reality [46].
Significant efforts have been dedicated to advancing
studies by concentrating on elevating the quality of multimodal interaction and refining the generalizability of model
structures in this domain. Among the prevalent AVSP
* Corresponding author.

Audio
Encoder
Localization
and Fusion
Video
Encoder

⋯

Estimation

𝑲𝑳 𝑫𝒊𝒗
or

𝑪𝑬 + 𝑪𝑪 + 𝑵𝑺𝑺

(a) Localization-based Audio-Visual Saliency Prediction
Audio
Encoder

Fusion
Video
Encoder

Video
Decoder

Multi-Scale Short Connections

𝑲𝑳 𝑫𝒊𝒗 + 𝑪𝑪 + 𝑺𝑰𝑴
or
𝑲𝑳 𝑫𝒊𝒗
or
𝑲𝑳 𝑫𝒊𝒗 + 𝑪𝑪 + 𝑵𝑺𝑺

(b) 3D Convolution-based Audio-Visual Saliency Prediction
Audio
Encoder
Noisy
maps

Video
Encoder

Conditional diffusion
model

𝑴𝑺𝑬

(c) Diffusion-based Audio-Visual Saliency Prediction

Figure 1. Comparison of conventional audio-visual saliency prediction paradigms and our proposed diffusion-based approach.
Both the localization-based and 3D convolution-based methods
use tailored network structures and sophisticated loss functions to
predict saliency areas. Differently, our diffusion-based approach
is a generalized audio-visual saliency prediction framework using
simple MSE objective function.

approaches, as depicted in Figure 1(a), localization-based
methods [38, 39, 50] have gained a lot of attention. These
methods typically consider the sounding objects as saliency
targets in the scene and transform the saliency prediction
task into a spatial sound source localization problem. Even
though the semantic interactions between audio and visual
modalities have been considered in these methods, their focus on a generalized network structure is still limited and
inevitably results in constrained performance.
In contrast, recent 3D convolution-based methods [10,
30, 58, 61] exhibit superior performance in predicting
audio-visual saliency maps, as illustrated in Figure 1(b).
However, these methods require customized architectures
with built-in inductive biases tailored for saliency prediction tasks. For instance, Jain et al. [30] and Xiong et al.

27273

