This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAT: Exploiting Inter-Class Dynamics for Domain Adaptive Object Detection

1

Mikhail Kennerley1,2 , Jian-Gang Wang2 , Bharadwaj Veeravalli1 , and Robby T. Tan3,1
National University of Singapore, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR
3
ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services

mikhailk@u.nus.edu, jgwang@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, elebv@nus.edu.sg, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Domain adaptive object detection aims to adapt detection models to domains where annotated data is unavailable. Existing methods have been proposed to address
the domain gap using the semi-supervised student-teacher
framework. However, a fundamental issue arises from the
class imbalance in the labelled training set, which can result in inaccurate pseudo-labels. The relationship between
classes, especially where one class is a majority and the
other minority, has a large impact on class bias. We propose Class-Aware Teacher (CAT) to address the class bias
issue in the domain adaptation setting. In our work, we approximate the class relationships with our Inter-Class Relation module (ICRm) and exploit it to reduce the bias within
the model. In this way, we are able to apply augmentations to highly related classes, both inter- and intra-domain,
to boost the performance of minority classes while having
minimal impact on majority classes. We further reduce the
bias by implementing a class-relation weight to our classification loss. Experiments conducted on various datasets
and ablation studies show that our method is able to address the class bias in the domain adaptation setting. On
the Cityscapes → Foggy Cityscapes dataset, we attained a
52.5 mAP, a substantial improvement over the 51.2 mAP
achieved by the state-of-the-art method. 1

1. Introduction
Domain adaptive object detection (DAOD) has been proposed as a solution for object detection in domains where
no annotated data is available. This need is due to the
increasing demands of data tied with annotation being
both cost-prohibitive and potentially inaccurate in challenging domains. DAOD has been progressing with the
introduction of adversarial learning [5, 33, 43, 48], style
1 www.github.com/mecarill/cat

Figure 1. Performance of Class-Aware Teacher (CAT). AT [29]
(top left), with Inter-Class Loss, ICL, (top-right), with Class Relation Augmentation, CRA, (bottom-left), and CAT (bottom-right).
CAT is able to address misclassification and false positives, blue
and red boxes, respectively, in minority classes such as ’train’. The
combination of ICL and CRA further boosts performance by reducing the number of false positives shown as pink boxes.

transfer [50, 51], and notably, student-teacher frameworks
[1, 8, 16, 24, 26, 29, 37, 49]. Yet, these methods ignore
the critical issue of class imbalance, which is a problem in
many real-life scenarios, such as autonomous driving. For
instance, in the Cityscapes dataset [7], the ’car’ class dominates the dataset with 26,963 instances while classes such
as ’train’ contain only 168 instances.
Previous work to mitigate class imbalance in DAOD has
applied class-specific discriminators [48] to align classes
in distinct domains. Additionally, class weights has been
proposed to boost minority categories while aligning domain features [3]. Recently, many DAOD methods employ
the student-teacher framework, leading to improved performance. Despite their effectiveness, these student-teacher
methods suffer from the class imbalance problem, resulting
in poor performance for minority classes.
In the student-teacher framework, class-specific thresholding, which provides more lenient thresholds for minor-

16541

