This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AZ-NAS: Assembling Zero-Cost Proxies for Network Architecture Search
Junghyup Lee1
1

Yonsei University

2

Bumsub Ham1,2∗

Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)

https://cvlab.yonsei.ac.kr/projects/AZNAS

1. Introduction
Representative neural network architectures, including
ResNets [23], MobileNets [24, 50], and Vision Transformers [17, 39], have been developed by experts through tedious trial-and-error processes, making it hard to design
new architectures for various configurations. To overcome this problem, network architecture search (NAS) has
emerged as a promising paradigm, capable of automatically
seeking top-performing architectures under specified constraints. Recently, training-free NAS [1, 10, 35, 36, 41]
has gained significant attention primarily due to its remarkable efficiency. It reduces computational and time costs of
∗ Corresponding author.

45
Test accuracy

Training-free network architecture search (NAS) aims to
discover high-performing networks with zero-cost proxies,
capturing network characteristics related to the final performance. However, network rankings estimated by previous training-free NAS methods have shown weak correlations with the performance. To address this issue, we propose AZ-NAS, a novel approach that leverages the ensemble
of various zero-cost proxies to enhance the correlation between a predicted ranking of networks and the ground truth
substantially in terms of the performance. To achieve this,
we introduce four novel zero-cost proxies that are complementary to each other, analyzing distinct traits of architectures in the views of expressivity, progressivity, trainability,
and complexity. The proxy scores can be obtained simultaneously within a single forward and backward pass, making
an overall NAS process highly efficient. In order to integrate
the rankings predicted by our proxies effectively, we introduce a non-linear ranking aggregation method that highlights the networks highly-ranked consistently across all the
proxies. Experimental results conclusively demonstrate the
efficacy and efficiency of AZ-NAS, outperforming state-ofthe-art methods on standard benchmarks, all while maintaining a reasonable runtime cost.

Upper bound
NASWOT

40 ZenNAS

TE-NAS

ZiCo

103
AZ-NAS
(Ours)

Synflow

102

35
30 Grasp
25

Runtime [ms/arch]

Abstract

Snip

GradNorm
0.3
0.4

101
0.5
Kendall's

0.6

0.7

Figure 1.
Comparison of training-free NAS methods on
ImageNet16-120 of NAS-Bench-201 [15]. We compare correlation coefficients (Kendall’s τ ) between predicted rankings of networks and the ground truth in the x-axis, and test accuracies for the
selected networks in the y-axis. The runtime costs are visualized
by the circle size and color. By assembling the proposed zero-cost
proxies, AZ-NAS achieves the best consistency between predicted
rankings of the networks and the ground truth efficiently, which
helps to find the network with the highest accuracy.

a NAS process drastically in comparison to earlier methods using an iterative training [3, 49] or training parametershared networks [6, 38, 47, 66].
The training-free NAS methods predict the ranking of
candidate networks in terms of performance via zero-cost
proxies designed by empirical insights or theoretical evidences. These proxies analyze activations or gradients to
capture e.g., an ability to dissect an input space into linear regions [10, 41], saliency of weights/channels [1, 34,
56, 58], or training dynamics [10, 52]. However, they are
often less practical than the training-based NAS methods
mainly due to the weak correlations with the final performance of networks. For example, recent studies [35, 44]
point out that the simple proxies based on the number of
parameters (#Params) or floating-point operations (FLOPs)
often provide better or competitive ranking consistency
w.r.t the final performance of networks on the NAS benchmark [15], compared to many training-free NAS methods [1, 10, 34, 36, 41, 56, 58]. This limitation might arise
from the fact that the current training-free NAS methods

5893

