This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RCooper: A Real-world Large-scale Dataset for
Roadside Cooperative Perception
Ruiyang Hao1,† , Siqi Fan1,† , Yingru Dai1,2 , Zhenlin Zhang3 , Chenxi Li3 , Yuntian Wang3 ,
Haibao Yu1,4 , Wenxian Yang1 , Jirui Yuan1 , Zaiqing Nie1,∗
1
Institute for AI Industry Research (AIR), Tsinghua University
2
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
3
China Automotive Innovation Corporation 4 The University of Hong Kong

Abstract
The value of roadside perception, which could extend the
boundaries of autonomous driving and traffic management,
has gradually become more prominent and acknowledged
in recent years. However, existing roadside perception approaches only focus on the single-infrastructure sensor system, which cannot realize a comprehensive understanding
of a traffic area because of the limited sensing range and
blind spots. Orienting high-quality roadside perception,
we need Roadside Cooperative Perception (RCooper) to
achieve practical area-coverage roadside perception for restricted traffic areas. Rcooper has its own domain-specific
challenges, but further exploration is hindered due to the
lack of datasets. We hence release the first real-world,
large-scale RCooper dataset to bloom the research on practical roadside cooperative perception, including detection
and tracking. The manually annotated dataset comprises
50k images and 30k point clouds, including two representative traffic scenes (i.e., intersection and corridor). The
constructed benchmarks prove the effectiveness of roadside
cooperation perception and demonstrate the direction of
further research. Codes and dataset can be accessed at:
https://github.com/AIR-THU/DAIR-RCooper.

1. Introduction
With the development of the Internet of Things (IoT),
5G, and artificial intelligence technologies, the value of
roadside perception has gradually become more prominent,
which has drawn broad attention in recent years [13, 42–
46]. Roadside perception is of great significance to both autonomous driving and traffic management. For autonomous
driving, roadside sensor systems provide intelligent vehicles with complementary on-road messages beyond the on∗ Corresponding author. † indicates equal contribution. Work done at
AIR. For any questions, please email dair@air.tsinghua.edu.cn.

Figure 1. Roadside Cooperative Perception (RCooper) is expected to achieve practical area-coverage roadside perception for
restricted traffic areas, which would further promote both the autonomous driving and traffic management. The complex roadside
system is boiled down to two typical roadside settings, i.e., (a)
intersection RCooper scenes and (b) corridor RCooper scenes.

board perspective, assisting vehicles to have a more comprehensive and clear understanding of surrounding environments, thereby trending to better and safer driving of L5
autonomous [18]. As for intelligent transportation systems,
the downstream traffic management task, e.g., traffic flow
control, traffic participants monitoring, and illegal activities
monitoring, can be further improved with more comprehensive understanding by roadside perception [50]. Therefore,
orienting high-quality autonomous driving and traffic management, how to achieve practical area-coverage roadside
perception for a restricted traffic area is a significant task.
Previous roadside perception [13, 21, 42–44, 53] mainly
concentrates on the perception from an independent roadside view due to the accessible dataset [45, 46]. However, they can not realize a comprehensive understanding
of a traffic area. Single-infrastructure roadside perception
is constrained by the installation perspective, leading to
the limited sensing range and blind spots, which can be
handled via cross-infrastructure cooperation. Observation
from various views can extend the sensing range, reduce
blind spots, and further enhance the understanding of the
same instance. Towards practical applications, Roadside

22347

