This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AEROBLADE: Training-Free Detection of Latent Diffusion Images Using
Autoencoder Reconstruction Error
Jonas Ricker

Denis Lukovnikov
Asja Fischer
Ruhr University Bochum

{jonas.ricker, denis.lukovnikov, asja.fischer}@rub.de

Abstract
With recent text-to-image models, anyone can generate
deceptively realistic images with arbitrary contents, fueling the growing threat of visual disinformation. A key enabler for generating high-resolution images with low computational cost has been the development of latent diffusion models (LDMs). In contrast to conventional diffusion models, LDMs perform the denoising process in the
low-dimensional latent space of a pre-trained autoencoder
(AE) instead of the high-dimensional image space. Despite
their relevance, the forensic analysis of LDMs is still in its
infancy. In this work we propose AEROBLADE, a novel
detection method which exploits an inherent component of
LDMs: the AE used to transform images between image and
latent space. We find that generated images can be more accurately reconstructed by the AE than real images, allowing
for a simple detection approach based on the reconstruction error. Most importantly, our method is easy to implement and does not require any training, yet nearly matches
the performance of detectors that rely on extensive training.
We empirically demonstrate that AEROBLADE is effective
against state-of-the-art LDMs, including Stable Diffusion
and Midjourney. Beyond detection, our approach allows
for the qualitative analysis of images, which can be leveraged for identifying inpainted regions. We release our code
and data at https://github.com/jonasricker/aeroblade.

1. Introduction
The emergence of powerful and easy-to-use text-to-image
models, like Stable Diffusion [3] and Midjourney [18],
marked a turning point in the history of generative AI.
While generating high-quality images previously required
technological expertise and significant computational resources, hyperrealistic scenes with arbitrary contents are
now only a few keystrokes away. These models open up
countless creative possibilities, but may also have harmful consequences, like generated pictures winning art con-

tests [36] or fake photos of the Pope going viral [48]. While
the ability to generate realistic images from prompts carries
the inherent danger of malicious acts, the greater risk lies in
the growing erosion of trust in legitimate sources due to the
flood of synthetic media [49]. Developing effective and efficient detection methods is therefore of utmost importance.
Scaling the generation process to high resolutions while
keeping the computational cost low was mainly made possible by so-called latent diffusion models (LDMs) [34]. Despite their ubiquity, LDMs have not yet been sufficiently
studied from the perspective of forensics. Whereas standard diffusion models (DMs) operate directly in the image
space, LDMs use the low-resolution latent space of a pretrained autoencoder (AE). The model first generates a small
latent representation, which is then transformed to a highresolution image by the AE’s decoder.
In this work, we demonstrate that this property allows
for a simple yet highly effective approach for detecting images generated by LDMs. Our proposed method, AEROBLADE (autoencoder reconstruction-based latent diffusion
detection), distinguishes real and generated images by computing their AE reconstruction error, which is the distance
between the original image and its reconstruction obtained
by passing it through the AE’s encoder and decoder (see
Sec. 4). While generated images can be accurately reconstructed, real images exhibit deficiencies, especially in complex regions (see Fig. 1). By computing the reconstruction
error for the AEs of multiple LDMs, our method is effective
against a wide range of models and can be easily extended
to new ones. We find that this simple approach is able to reliably detect generated images, achieving a mean average
precision (AP) of 0.992 on various state-of-the-art models
including Stable Diffusion [3], Kandinsky [32], and Midjourney [18] (see Sec. 5.2). Notably, our method does not
require any training, yet performs almost as well as extensively trained classifiers (see Sec. 5.3). In contrast to most
existing detectors, which usually output only a score denoting how likely it is an image is generated, AEROBLADE
additionally provides rich qualitative information, giving insights into how well certain regions can be reconstructed.

9130

