This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Latent Coding for Ultra-Low Bitrate Image Compression
Jiahao Li 2
Bin Li2
Houqiang Li1
Yan Lu2
Zhaoyang Jia1 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia
jzy ustc@mail.ustc.edu.cn, lihq@ustc.edu.cn, {li.jiahao, libin, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Most existing image compression approaches perform
transform coding in the pixel space to reduce its spatial redundancy. However, they encounter difficulties in achieving both high-realism and high-fidelity at low bitrate, as the
pixel-space distortion may not align with human perception.
To address this issue, we introduce a Generative Latent
Coding (GLC) architecture, which performs transform coding in the latent space of a generative vector-quantized
variational auto-encoder (VQ-VAE), instead of in the pixel
space. The generative latent space is characterized by
greater sparsity, richer semantic and better alignment with
human perception, rendering it advantageous for achieving
high-realism and high-fidelity compression. Additionally,
we introduce a categorical hyper module to reduce the bit
cost of hyper-information, and a code-prediction-based supervision to enhance the semantic consistency. Experiments
demonstrate that our GLC maintains high visual quality
with less than 0.04 bpp on natural images and less than
0.01 bpp on facial images. On the CLIC2020 test set, we
achieve the same FID as MS-ILLM with 45% fewer bits.
Furthermore, the powerful generative latent space enables
various applications built on our GLC pipeline, such as image restoration and style transfer.

1. Introduction
Amid the ongoing surge of digital visual data, the importance of achieving high-efficiency image compression becomes increasingly paramount. From the traditional compression standards [54, 55] to the emerging learned image compression models [4, 5, 11, 20, 41, 45], most compression algorithms follow the pixel-space transform coding [4, 19] paradigm. Specifically, they convert pixels
into compact representations through a transform module,
which eliminates the redundancy to reduce the bit cost in
the subsequent entropy coding process.
However, we observe a common inherent limitation in
* This work was done when Zhaoyang Jia was an intern at Microsoft
Research Asia.

Compression

Original
Image

Space Mapping

Latent-Space
Compressed Results

Pixel-Space
Compressed Results

Nearest Space
of Code 𝒊

SNR=20.3

DISTS = 0.20

Code 𝒊 + 𝟏

DISTS = 0.09
SNR=21.8
Code 𝒊 + 𝟐

Pixel Space
Pixel Space
Compression

Lower

Human Perception Space
Original Image

Texture Realism?
Semantic Consistency?

Generative Latent Space
Latent Space
Compression

Higher

Figure 1. Generative latent space of VQ-VAE exhibits better alignment with human perception than pixel space for ultra-low bitrate compression. Under comparable distortion levels (measured
by signal-to-noise ratio, SNR), latent-space compression produces
reconstructions with superior perceptual quality (measured by
DISTS [15]) than pixel-space generative codec MS-ILLM [46],
as the compressed latents remain in the same latent code space.

these methods: the pixel-space distortion is not always consistent with the human perception, especially at low bitrate.
In practice, human observers prioritize the semantic consistency and the texture realism of an image, but this information is difficult to be adequately exploited solely by a pixelspace transform module. As shown in the left of Figure 1,
pixel-space generative image codec MS-ILLM [46] struggles to guarantee visual quality at low bitrate, even after it
incorporates perceptual supervision [29] and adversarial supervision [18] within the pixel space.
Based on such observation, a natural problem arises:
how can we compress images in a way that aligns with human perception? To address this challenge, we introduce a
Generative Latent Coding (GLC) paradigm. In GLC, we
first encode images into a generative latent space that aligns
with human perception, and subsequently perform transform coding in this latent space, instead of in pixel space.
To concretize this concept, we adopt a generative vectorquantized variational auto-encoder (VQ-VAE) [17, 53] to

26088

