This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adapt Before Comparison: A New Perspective on Cross-Domain Few-Shot
Segmentation
Jonas Herzog
Zhejiang University
jherzog@zju.edu.cn

Abstract

Train-time: (Meta-)learn

Test-time: Infer
M̂

1. Introduction
With a successful Cross Domain Few Shot Segmentation
(CD-FSS) algorithm, segmentation could be deployed on
any task, regardless of the type of objects to segment and
its environment. This paper studies CD-FSS, a task that
has emerged recently motivated by the failure of few-shot
segmentation (FSS) when test images are fundamentally
different from training images.
In general, both tasks aim to segment novel classes in a
test (query) image based on a few labeled (support) images.
Given this severe knowledge limitation about the novel class,
FSS utilizes a base dataset that can provide a larger number
of tasks for training. Since train tasks only provide information about base classes, not the novel classes that will

compare Q↔S
BB

Segmentation
Network

M̂

Q

BB
S

source
tasks

Segmentation
Network

target
task
trained

Previous
Ours

Test-time: Adapt

Q

no source tasks
no source training

BB
S

compare Q↔S

frozen |

compare Q↔S

Head

Few-shot segmentation performance declines substantially when facing images from a domain different than the
training domain, effectively limiting real-world use cases. To
alleviate this, recently cross-domain few-shot segmentation
(CD-FSS) has emerged. Works that address this task mainly
attempted to learn segmentation on a source domain in a
manner that generalizes across domains. Surprisingly, we
can outperform these approaches while eliminating the training stage and removing their main segmentation network.
We show test-time task-adaption is the key for successful
CD-FSS instead. Task-adaption is achieved by appending
small networks to the feature pyramid of a conventionally
classification-pretrained backbone. To avoid overfitting to
the few labeled samples in supervised fine-tuning, consistency across augmented views of input images serves as
guidance while learning the parameters of the attached
layers. Despite our self-restriction not to use any images
other than the few labeled samples at test time, we achieve
new state-of-the-art performance in CD-FSS, evidencing the
need to rethink approaches for the task. Code is available at
https://github.com/Vision-Kek/ABCDFSS.

M̂

target
task

Figure 1. Top: Few Shot Segmentation across domains has been
addressed by training a deep network on segmentation tasks from
a source domain. We demonstrate that its efforts to achieve generalizability during this stage are largely unsuccessful. Bottom: In
the proposed approach, we entirely forgo such training. Instead,
backbone-attached layers (green) adapt features to the target task
at test-time.

appear at test-time, it is considered crucial that the model
can generalize from base to novel classes.
This becomes substantially more challenging when train
and test tasks originate from different domains. Recent approaches for FSS across domains [2, 4, 20, 30, 44] focus on
this generalization problem and extend FSS with modules
designed to enhance knowledge transfer to unseen target
domains. Their learning paradigm and procedure is closely
aligned with conventional FSS, not requiring recent popular
large models [16]. A single source domain such as PASCAL VOC 2012 [8] supplies source tasks. Learning from the
source is either conducted by emulating tasks with episodic
meta-learning [4, 20, 30, 44] or by standard supervised learning [2]. A segmentation network is learned on top of a frozen
[4, 20] or trainable [44] backbone. Finally, the model is
tested on tasks from the target domain. The typical architecture and strategy for this is illustrated in Figure 1. Such
approaches rely on similarity-based comparison of query

23605

