This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Systematic comparison of semi-supervised and self-supervised learning
for medical image classification
Zhe Huang* Ruijie Jiang* Shuchin Aeron Michael C. Hughes
Tufts University, School of Engineering
{Zhe.Huang, Ruijie.Jiang, Shuchin.Aeron, Michael.Hughes}@tufts.edu

Abstract
In typical medical image classification problems, labeled
data is scarce while unlabeled data is more available. Semisupervised learning and self-supervised learning are two
different research directions that can improve accuracy by
learning from extra unlabeled data. Recent methods from
both directions have reported significant gains on traditional benchmarks. Yet past benchmarks do not focus on
medical tasks and rarely compare self- and semi- methods
together on an equal footing. Furthermore, past benchmarks often handle hyperparameter tuning suboptimally.
First, they may not tune hyperparameters at all, leading
to underfitting. Second, when tuning does occur, it often
unrealistically uses a labeled validation set that is much
larger than the training set. Therefore currently published
rankings might not always corroborate with their practical utility This study contributes a systematic evaluation of
self- and semi- methods with a unified experimental protocol intended to guide a practitioner with scarce overall
labeled data and a limited compute budget. We answer
two key questions: Can hyperparameter tuning be effective
with realistic-sized validation sets? If so, when all methods are tuned well, which self- or semi-supervised methods achieve the best accuracy? Our study compares 13
representative semi- and self-supervised methods to strong
labeled-set-only baselines on 4 medical datasets. From
20000+ GPU hours of computation, we provide valuable
best practices to resource-constrained practitioners: hyperparameter tuning is effective, and the semi-supervised
method known as MixMatch delivers the most reliable gains
across 4 datasets.

1. INTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks can deliver exceptional performance
on classification tasks when trained with vast labeled
* Authors Zhe Huang and Ruijie Jiang contributed equally to this work.

Code: github.com/tufts-ml/SSL-vs-SSL-benchmark [MIT license].

datasets. However, in medical imaging applications assembling a large dataset with appropriate label can be prohibitively costly due to manual effort required by a human
expert. In contrast, images alone, without labels, are often readily available in health records databases. In recent
years, significant research has focused on developing methods that leverage both the large unlabeled set and a small
labeled set to enhance image classifier training, aiming to
surpass models trained solely on labeled data.
Two ways of leveraging unlabeled data are particularly popular: semi-supervised and self-supervised learning, both often abbreviated as SSL. Recent efforts in semisupervised learning [74, 88] usually train deep classifiers
jointly [5, 69] using an objective with two loss terms,
one favoring labeled-set accuracy and the other favoring
label-consistency or label-smoothness. Alternatively, selfsupervised methods [65] take a two-stage approach, first
training deep representations on the unlabeled set, then finetuning a classifier on the labeled set. Exemplars are numerous [10, 17, 19, 20, 37]. Despite the remarkable progress
reported in each direction, these two paradigms have been
largely developed independently [21]. A direct comparison of the two paradigms has been notably absent. A
practitioner building a medical image classifier from limited labeled data may ask, “Which recent semi- or selfsupervised methods are likely to be most effective?”
Performance can be quite sensitive to hyperparameters
for both semi-SL [69, 71] and self-SL [75]. We argue that
any careful comparison must consider tuning hyperparameters of all methods in a fair fashion. However, recent work
has not handled this well. First, as reviewed in Table 1, recent benchmarks for both semi- and self- paradigms often
omit any tuning of hyperparameters (see the Fungi semiSL experiments of Su et al. [71] or Ericsson et al. [27]’s
self-SL benchmark). This practice of using off-the-shelf defaults likely leads to under-performing given a new task, and
may impact some methods more than others. An even bigger issue with prevailing semi-SL practice was originally
raised by Oliver et al. [62]: many published papers perform hyperparameter tuning on a labeled validation set that

22282

