This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffuScene: Denoising Diffusion Models for Generative Indoor Scene Synthesis
Jiapeng Tang1
1

Yinyu Nie1

Lev Markhasin2

Angela Dai1

Justus Thies3

Matthias Nießner1

Technical University of Munich 2 Sony Semiconductor Solutions Europe
3
Technical University of Darmstadt
https://tangjiapeng.github.io/projects/DiffuScene

Complete

Re-arrange

Text-to-scene
“The room has a dining table and
two dining chairs. The second dining
chair is to the right of the first dining
chair. There is a pendant lamp above
the dining table. ”

Figure 1. We present DiffuScene, a diffusion model for diverse and realistic indoor scene synthesis. It facilitates various downstream
applications: scene completion from partial scenes (left); scene arrangements of given objects (middle); and scene generation from a text
prompt describing partial scene configurations. (right).

Abstract
We present DiffuScene for indoor 3D scene synthesis
based on a novel scene configuration denoising diffusion
model. It generates 3D instance properties stored in an
unordered object set and retrieves the most similar geometry for each object configuration, which is characterized as
a concatenation of different attributes, including location,
size, orientation, semantics, and geometry features. We introduce a diffusion network to synthesize a collection of 3D
indoor objects by denoising a set of unordered object attributes. Unordered parametrization simplifies and eases
the joint distribution approximation. The shape feature diffusion facilitates natural object placements, including symmetries. Our method enables many downstream applications, including scene completion, scene arrangement, and
text-conditioned scene synthesis. Experiments on the 3DFRONT dataset show that our method can synthesize more

physically plausible and diverse indoor scenes than stateof-the-art methods. Extensive ablation studies verify the effectiveness of our design choice in scene diffusion models.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing 3D indoor scenes that are realistic, semantically meaningful, and diverse is a long-standing problem
in computer graphics. It can significantly reduce costs in
game development, CGI for films, and virtual reality. Furthermore, scene synthesis has practical applications in virtual interior design, enabling virtual rearrangement based
on existing furniture or textual descriptions. It also serves
as a fundamental component in data-driven approaches for
3D scene understanding and reconstruction, necessitating
large-scale 3D datasets with ground-truth labels.
Traditional scene modeling and synthesis formulate this
as an optimization problem. With pre-defined scene prior
constraints defined by room design rules such as layout

20507

