This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DeMatch: Deep Decomposition of Motion Field for
Two-View Correspondence Learning
Shihua Zhang, Zizhuo Li, Yuan Gao, Jiayi Ma*
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
suhzhang001@gmail.com, zizhuo li@whu.edu.cn, {ethan.y.gao, jyma2010}@gmail.com

Abstract
Two-view correspondence learning has recently focused
on considering the coherence and smoothness of the motion
field between an image pair. Dominant schemes include
controlling the complexity of the field function with regularization or smoothing the field with local filters, but the
former suffers from heavy computational burden, and the
latter fails to accommodate discontinuities in the case of
large scene disparities. In this paper, inspired by Fourier
expansion, we propose a novel network called DeMatch,
which decomposes the motion field to retain its main “lowfrequency” and smooth part. This achieves implicit regularization with lower computational cost and generates piecewise smoothness naturally. Specifically, we first decompose the rough motion field that is contaminated by false
matches into several different sub-fields, which are highly
smooth and contain the main energy of the original field.
Then, with these smooth sub-fields, we recover a cleaner
motion field from which correct motion vectors are subsequently derived. We also design a special masked decomposition strategy to further mitigate the negative influence
of false matches. All the mentioned processes are finally
implemented in a discrete and learnable manner, avoiding the difficulty of calculating real dense fields. Extensive experiments reveal that DeMatch outperforms stateof-the-art methods in multiple tasks and shows promising
low computational usage and piecewise smoothness property. The code and trained models are publicly available at
https://github.com/SuhZhang/DeMatch.

1. Introduction
Finding two-view correspondences that indicate the same
scene points from different perspectives is a fundamental
problem in computer vision [21]. The geometry relationship between two-view images is estimated after establishing sparse correspondences, serving as a critical prerequi* Corresponding author

Decompose

…

Recover

Figure 1. Deep decomposition framework. Lines colored blue are
inliers, red are outliers, green are corrected outliers, except for the
motion clusters with different colors. The solid lines indicate the
workflow of DeMatch, dashed lines correspond to the changes of
the motion field, bidirectional arrows represent the conversions between sparse motion vectors and the dense motion field. F means
the original rough motion field, F k means the k-th sub-field, and
Fe means the recovered cleaner motion field.

site for many problems such as panoramic stitching [4],
structure from motion [30], and simultaneous location and
mapping [23]. A typical matching pipeline starts with identifying keypoints and constructing local descriptions, this
allows the generation of a putative match set by assessing
the similarity of descriptions [22]. While SIFT [18] is one
of the most widely used handcrafted descriptors, learningbased ones have been investigated [7, 24, 34]. However,
due to the limited discriminative ability of descriptors, numerous false matches (outliers) are found in the putative set
because of wide variations in viewpoint or excessive repetitive patterns. Thus outlier rejection is applied to determine
the true matches (inliers), which is the focus of this paper.
Outlier rejection that builds reliable two-view correspondences has been studied at an early age. Most of the classical methods try seeking deformation consistency, i.e. motion field consensus and smoothness, to identify inliers.
Some of them apply global consensus directly [9, 19],

20278

