This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Looking 3D: Anomaly Detection with 2D-3D Alignment
Ankan Bhunia Changjian Li Hakan Bilen
University of Edinburgh
https://groups.inf.ed.ac.uk/vico/research/Looking3D

Abstract

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) [9, 26], identifying instances that
are irregular or significantly deviate from the normality, is
an actively studied problem in several fields. In standard
vision AD benchmarks, ‘irregularities’ are typically caused
by either high-level (or semantic) variations such as presence of objects from unseen categories [1, 5, 8], defects
such as scratches, dents on objects [4], low-level variations
in color, shape, size [10], or pixel-level noise [16]. The
standard approach has been to learn representations along
with classifiers that are robust to the variations within the
regular set of instances, and, at the same time, sensitive to
the ones causing irregularities. However, this paradigm performs poorly when the irregularities are arbitrary and conditional to the context and/or individual characteristics of the
instance which may not be known in prior or observed. For
instance, in an object category such as ‘chair’ that contains
visually very diverse instances with huge intra-class variation, having three legs may imply a missing leg and hence
an anomaly for a chair instance, while regularity for another

Query
Image

{“normal”, “anomaly”}

Anomaly
Detection

Automatic anomaly detection based on visual cues holds
practical significance in various domains, such as manufacturing and product quality assessment. This paper introduces a new conditional anomaly detection problem, which
involves identifying anomalies in a query image by comparing it to a reference shape. To address this challenge,
we have created a large dataset, BrokenChairs-180K, consisting of around 180K images, with diverse anomalies,
geometries, and textures paired with 8,143 reference 3D
shapes. To tackle this task, we have proposed a novel
transformer-based approach that explicitly learns the correspondence between the query image and reference 3D shape
via feature alignment and leverages a customized attention
mechanism for anomaly detection. Our approach has been
rigorously evaluated through comprehensive experiments,
serving as a benchmark for future research in this domain.

Reference
3D Shape

Classify
Localize

Figure 1. We propose a new conditional AD task that aims to
identify and localize anomalies in a query image by comparing it
to a reference shape. The anomalous region is shown in a yellow bounding box. For instance, the right leg of the blue sofa is
rectangular unlike the cylindrical one in its reference shape.

instance. The AD here depends on whether the chair instance was originally designed to have three legs.
Motivated by the intuition above, this paper introduces
a novel conditional AD task, along with a new benchmark
and an effective solution, that aims to identify and localize
anomalies from a photo of an object instance (i.e., the query
image), in relation to a reference 3D model (see Fig. 1). The
3D model provides the reference shape for the regular object instance, and hence a clear definition of regularity for
the query image. This setting is motivated by real-world applications in inspection and quality control, where an object
instance is manufactured based on a reference 3D model,
which can then be used to identify anomalies (e.g., production faults, damages) from a photo of the instance.
The proposed task goes beyond the single image analysis in standard AD benchmarks and requires the detection
of subtle anomalies in shape by comparing two modalities,
an image with its reference 3D model, which is challenging
for three reasons. First, we would like our model to detect anomalies in previously unseen object instances from
image-shape pairs at test time. Generalizing to unseen instances demands learning rich representations encoding a
diverse set of 3D shapes and appearances while enabling
accurate localization of anomalies. Second, the reference
3D model contains only shape but not texture information
to simulate a realistic scenario where the 3D model can be
used to produce instances with different materials, colors,
and textures. The resulting domain gap between two modalities requires learning representations that are invariant to
such appearance changes and sensitive to variations in ge-

17263

