This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OpenBias: Open-set Bias Detection in Text-to-Image Generative Models
Moreno D’Incà1 , Elia Peruzzo1 , Massimiliano Mancini1 , Dejia Xu2 , Vidit Goel3,4 ,
Xingqian Xu3,4 , Zhangyang Wang2,4 , Humphrey Shi3,4† , Nicu Sebe1†
1

University of Trento, 2 UT Austin, 3 SHI Labs @ Georgia Tech & UIUC, 4 Picsart AI Research (PAIR)
https://github.com/Picsart-AI-Research/OpenBias

Abstract

Closed-set
Pre-defined biases

Text-to-image generative models are becoming increasingly popular and accessible to the general public. As
these models see large-scale deployments, it is necessary
to deeply investigate their safety and fairness to not disseminate and perpetuate any kind of biases. However, existing works focus on detecting closed sets of biases defined a
priori, limiting the studies to well-known concepts. In this
paper, we tackle the challenge of open-set bias detection
in text-to-image generative models presenting OpenBias, a
new pipeline that identifies and quantifies the severity of biases agnostically, without access to any precompiled set.
OpenBias has three stages. In the first phase, we leverage
a Large Language Model (LLM) to propose biases given a
set of captions. Secondly, the target generative model produces images using the same set of captions. Lastly, a Vision
Question Answering model recognizes the presence and extent of the previously proposed biases. We study the behavior of Stable Diffusion 1.5, 2, and XL emphasizing new
biases, never investigated before. Via quantitative experiments, we demonstrate that OpenBias agrees with current
closed-set bias detection methods and human judgement.

1. Introduction
Text-to-Image (T2I) generation has become increasingly
popular, thanks to its intuitive conditioning and the high
quality and fidelity of the generated content [39, 41, 43, 44,
46]. Several works extended the base T2I model, unlocking
additional use cases, including personalization [16, 45], image editing [7, 14, 18, 21], and various forms of conditioning [2, 24, 63]. This rapid progress urges to investigate other
key aspects beyond image quality improvements, such as
their fairness and potential bias perpetration [11, 15, 62]. It
is widely acknowledged that deep learning models learn the
underlying biases present in their training sets [3, 20, 64],
and generative models are no exception [11, 15, 36, 62].
†

Corresponding authors.

"A person using
a laptop"

Bias specific
Classifier

OpenBias (ours)
Bias proposals

"A person using
a laptop"

Male

Open-set biases
Gender
...
Laptop brand

Bias assessment
Male
...
Apple

Figure 1. OpenBias discovers biases in T2I models within an
open-set scenario. In contrast to previous works [15, 29, 62], our
pipeline does not require a predefined list of biases but proposes a
set of novel domain-specific biases.

Ethical topics such as fairness and biases have seen many
definitions and frameworks [55]; defining them comprehensively poses a challenge, as interpretations vary and are subjective to the individual user. Following previous works
[15, 60], a model is considered unbiased regarding a specific concept if, given a context t that is agnostic to class
distinctions, the possible classes c ∈ C exhibit a uniform
distribution. In practice, for a T2I model, this reflects to the
tendency of the generator to produce content of a certain
class c (e.g. “man”), given a textual prompt t that does not
specify the intended class (e.g. “A picture of a doctor”).
Several works studied bias mitigation in pre-trained
models, by introducing training-related methods [25, 37,
47, 57] or using data augmentation techniques [1, 12]. Nevertheless, a notable limitation of these approaches is their
dependence on a predefined set of biases, such as gender, age, and race [11, 15], as well as specific face attributes [62]. While these represent perhaps the most sensitive biases, we argue that there could be biases that remain
undiscovered and unstudied. Considering the example in

12225

