This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Don’t drop your samples! Coherence-aware training benefits Conditional diffusion
Nicolas Dufour1,2 , Victor Besnier3 , Vicky Kalogeiton2 , David Picard1
1 LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France

Baseline

2 LIX, CNRS, École Polytechnique, IP Paris

Weighted

Filtered

3 Valeo.ai, Prague

CAD (Ours)

Prompt: A vibrant, multicolored furry wolf with neon highlights playing an electric guitar on stage; trending on artstation

Prompt: A shanty version of Tokyo, new rustic style, bold colors with all colors palette, video game, genshin, tribe, fantasy, overwatch
Figure 1. Images generated with a RIN model trained with different handling of the misalignment between the image and its associated text
at training. Compared to doing nothing (baseline), removing misaligned samples (filtering) or weighting the loss accordingly (weighted), our
Coherence-Award Diffusion training (CAD) generates more visually pleasing images while better adhering to the prompt’s subject.

Abstract
Conditional diffusion models are powerful generative models
that can leverage various types of conditional information,
such as class labels, segmentation masks, or text captions.
However, in many real-world scenarios, conditional information may be noisy or unreliable due to human annotation
errors or weak alignment. In this paper, we propose the
Coherence-Aware Diffusion (CAD), a novel method that integrates coherence in conditional information into diffusion
models, allowing them to learn from noisy annotations without discarding data. We assume that each data point has
an associated coherence score that reflects the quality of
the conditional information. We then condition the diffusion

model on both the conditional information and the coherence
score. In this way, the model learns to ignore or discount the
conditioning when the coherence is low. We show that CAD
is theoretically sound and empirically effective on various
conditional generation tasks. Moreover, we show that leveraging coherence generates realistic and diverse samples that
respect conditional information better than models trained
on cleaned datasets where samples with low coherence have
been discarded. Code and weights here.

1. Introduction
Conditional Diffusion models excel in image generation
while affording greater user control over the generation pro-

6264

