This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Stable Neighbor Denoising for Source-free Domain Adaptive Segmentation
Dong Zhao1 , Shuang Wang1 B , Qi Zang1 , Licheng Jiao1 , Nicu Sebe2 , Zhun Zhong3,4 B
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University, Shaanxi, China
2
Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, University of Trento, Italy
3
School of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, China
4
School of Computer Science, University of Nottingham, NG8 1BB Nottingham, UK

Abstract
We study source-free unsupervised domain adaptation
(SFUDA) for semantic segmentation, which aims to adapt a
source-trained model to the target domain without accessing the source data. Many works have been proposed to address this challenging problem, among which uncertaintybased self-training is a predominant approach. However,
without comprehensive denoising mechanisms, they still
largely fall into biased estimates when dealing with different domains and confirmation bias. In this paper, we observe that pseudo-label noise is mainly contained in unstable samples in which the predictions of most pixels undergo
significant variations during self-training. Inspired by this,
we propose a novel mechanism to denoise unstable samples with stable ones. Specifically, we introduce the Stable Neighbor Denoising (SND) approach, which effectively
discovers highly correlated stable and unstable samples by
nearest neighbor retrieval and guides the reliable optimization of unstable samples by bi-level learning. Moreover, we
compensate for the stable set by object-level object paste,
which can further eliminate the bias caused by less learned
classes. Our SND enjoys two advantages. First, SND does
not require a specific segmentor structure, endowing its universality. Second, SND simultaneously addresses the issues
of class, domain, and confirmation biases during adaptation, ensuring its effectiveness. Extensive experiments show
that SND consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods
in various SFUDA semantic segmentation settings. In addition, SND can be easily integrated with other approaches,
obtaining further improvements. The source code is available at https://github.com/DZhaoXd/SND.
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China No. 62271377, the Key Research and Development Program of Shannxi Program No. 2021ZDLGY0106 and No.
2022ZDLGY0112, the National Key R&D Program of China under Grant
2021ZD0110400 and 2021ZD0110404 the Key Scientific Technological
Innovation Research Project by Ministry of Education, the Joint Funds of
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U22B2054).
B Co-corresponding author.

Generic Structure

Class debiasing

Domain debiasing

probability
Encoder

filter
Pseudo-label

Classifier

category frequency

(a). Threshold strategy

Encoder

prototype Vote
Pseudo-label
Classifier 1
.
.

Classifier N

(c). Multi-classifier discrepancy

Data

Encoder

Confirmation debiasing

Vote
Classifier Pseudo-label

Data Perturb
Model Perturb

(b). Data/model Perturbation Consistency

Inner-optimize
Encoder

Initial pseudo-label

Classifier
outer-optimize

Pseudo-label

Stable Neighbor set

(d). Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of advantages of different uncertain estimation strategies in self-training method for SFUDA.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [47] transfers
knowledge of the labeled-rich source domains to the unlabeled target domains, providing an effective solution for semantic segmentation towards lower annotation burden [20]
and strong generalization in an open environment [50, 71].
However, the access requirements of source domain data
make it impossible to handle scenarios involving privacy,
property rights protection, and confidentiality [15]. Thus,
this work focuses on a more practical task in semantic
segmentation, source-free unsupervised domain adaptation
(SFUDA) [38, 75], which aims to adapt a source-trained
model to a target domain without accessing the source data.
Currently, self-training is the mainstream technology
to address the SFUDA problem in semantic segmentation, which strives to adapt the model with high-quality
pseudo-labels produced by uncertain estimation functions,
e.g., probability thresholding [1, 21–23, 35, 73, 85], perturbation consistency [15,29,76], or discrepancy classifier voting [5, 29, 56, 65, 82, 89]. Generally, a strong cross-domain
self-training method should comprehensively consider the
following aspects. ❶ Generic structure: It does not require

23416

