This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fourier Priors-Guided Diffusion for Zero-Shot Joint Low-Light
Enhancement and Deblurring
Xiaoqian Lv1 , Shengping Zhang∗,1,2 , Chenyang Wang1 , Yichen Zheng3 ,
Bineng Zhong4 , Chongyi Li5,6 , Liqiang Nie1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 4 Guangxi Normal University
5
NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian 6 VCIP, CS, Nankai University
{xiaoqian.lv, c.wang}@stu.hit.edu.cn, s.zhang@hit.edu.cn,
{yichenzheng02, nieliqiang}@gmail.com, bnzhong@gxnu.edu.cn, lichongyi@nankai.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing joint low-light enhancement and deblurring
methods learn pixel-wise mappings from paired synthetic
data, which results in limited generalization in real-world
scenes. While some studies explore the rich generative
prior of pre-trained diffusion models, they typically rely on
the assumed degradation process and cannot handle unknown real-world degradations well. To address these problems, we propose a novel zero-shot framework, FourierDiff,
which embeds Fourier priors into a pre-trained diffusion
model to harmoniously handle the joint degradation of luminance and structures. FourierDiff is appealing in its relaxed requirements on paired training data and degradation assumptions. The key zero-shot insight is motivated
by image characteristics in the Fourier domain: most luminance information concentrates on amplitudes while structure and content information are closely related to phases.
Based on this observation, we decompose the sampled results of the reverse diffusion process in the Fourier domain
and take advantage of the amplitude of the generative prior
to align the enhanced brightness with the distribution of
natural images. To yield a sharp and content-consistent
enhanced result, we further design a spatial-frequency alternating optimization strategy to progressively refine the
phase of the input. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
superior effectiveness of the proposed method, especially
in real-world scenes. The code is available at https:
//github.com/aipixel/FourierDiff.

1. Introduction
In night photography, long exposure is commonly used to
capture more light, which inevitably causes motion blurs
∗ Corresponding author.

Input

Ours
Ours

(a) Input

(b) GDP

(c) GRL

(d) GDP→GRL

(e) LEDNet

(f) Ours

Figure 1. Visual comparisons of the state-of-the-art diffusionbased low-light enhancement method GDP [17], deblurring
吕晓倩
2023.09
method GRL [33], and joint low-light enhancement and deblurring method LEDNet [77] on a low-light blurry image. Existing
methods (b)-(e) fail to cope with the real-world night blurry image.
In contrast, the proposed FourierDiff (f) yields a visually pleasing
result with more natural brightness and sharper textures. Moreover, our method does not require paired training data.

due to camera shake and object motion. Even under long
exposure settings, images taken in low-light conditions still
suffer from limited visibility, low contrast, and distorted
color. Therefore, both low light and motion blur naturally co-exist in images captured in low-light environments,
which not only affects the visual quality but also limits
the performance of high-level tasks such as object detection [14, 34] and action recognition [9, 10].
With the recent advances in deep learning, numerous
low-light enhancement [3, 19, 30, 39] and deblurring [11,
26, 33, 71] methods have been proposed. Although these
methods cope well with their specific task individually, they
are still far from satisfactory in handling the joint degra-

25378

课题汇报

