This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Relational Matching for Weakly Semi-Supervised Oriented Object Detection
Wenhao Wu1 , Hau-San Wong1∗, Si Wu2 , and Tianyou Zhang2
1
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
wenhaowu5-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk, cswusi@scut.edu.cn,
cszhangtianyou@mail.scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Oriented object detection has witnessed significant
progress in recent years. However, the impressive performance of oriented object detectors is at the huge cost of
labor-intensive annotations, and deteriorates once the annotated data becomes limited. Semi-supervised learning, in
which sufficient unannotated data are utilized to enhance the
base detector, is a promising method to address the annotation deficiency problem. Motivated by weakly supervised
learning, we introduce annotation-efficient point annotations for unannotated images and propose a weakly semisupervised method for oriented object detection to balance
the detection performance and annotation cost. Specifically,
we propose a Rotation-Modulated Relational Graph Matching method to match relations of proposals centered on annotated points between the teacher and student models to
alleviate the ambiguity of point annotations in depicting the
oriented object. In addition, we further propose a Relational Rank Distribution Matching method to align the rank
distribution on classification and regression between different models. Finally, to handle the difficult annotated points
that both models are confused about, we introduce weakly
supervised learning to impose positive signals for difficult
point-induced clusters to the base model, and focus the base
model on the occupancy between the predictions and annotated points. We perform extensive experiments on challenging datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed weakly semi-supervised method in leveraging pointannotated data for significant performance improvement.

1. Introduction
Oriented object detection, which aims at locating objects
with the orientation property and identifying the corresponding categories, has achieved significant progress with
the advance of deep learning and generic object detection.
∗ Corresponding author.

(a) Challenges related to point annotations.

(b) Relational matching to align the relations of proposals centered around
the annotated points between different models under augmented views.

Figure 1. Due to the ambiguity of the point annotations, the direct
prediction consistency on annotated points is unsatisfactory. Our
proposed relational matching method focuses the base model on the
spatial and semantic information centered on the annotated points,
thus alleviating the ambiguity of the point annotations in depicting
the oriented objects.

However, the impressive performance of well-designed oriented object detectors depends on the availability of massive
annotated data, which is costly in terms of both time and human resources. To alleviate the annotation burden, weakly
supervised learning [5, 10, 11, 17], in which box annotations
are replaced by image-level or point-level annotations, and
semi-supervised learning [19, 23, 29], in which only limited images from the whole training dataset are annotated,
have been separately studied in the field of generic object
detection and oriented object detection. However, the problems of ambiguous supervision in weakly supervised learning and limited full supervision in semi-supervised learning
result in unsatisfactory performance compared to their fullysupervised counterparts. To balance the annotation burden and detection performance, we resort to weakly semi-

27800

