This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bayes’ Rays: Uncertainty Quantification for Neural Radiance Fields
Lily Goli1 Cody Reading2 Silvia Sellán1 Alec Jacobson1,4 Andrea Tagliasacchi1,2,3
University of Toronto1 Simon Fraser University2 Google DeepMind3 Adobe Research4

Figure 1. We introduce Bayes’ Rays, a post-hoc algorithm to estimate the spatial uncertainty of any pre-trained NeRF of any arbitrary
architecture. Our method requires no additional training and can be used to clean up NeRF artifacts caused by occluded or incomplete data.

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have shown promise in
applications like view synthesis and depth estimation, but
learning from multiview images faces inherent uncertainties. Current methods to quantify them are either heuristic
or computationally demanding. We introduce Bayes′ Rays,
a post-hoc framework to evaluate uncertainty in any pretrained NeRF without modifying the training process. Our
method establishes a volumetric uncertainty field using spatial perturbations and a Bayesian Laplace approximation.
We derive our algorithm statistically and show its superior
performance in key metrics and applications. More results
available at: https://bayesrays.github.io

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) are a class of learned volumetric implicit scene representations that have exploded
in popularity due to their success in applications like novel
view synthesis and depth estimation. The process of learning
a NeRF from a discrete set of multiview images is plagued
with uncertainty: even in perfect experimental conditions,
occlusions and missing views will limit the epistemic knowledge that the model can acquire about the scene.
Studying the epistemic uncertainty in NeRF is fundamental for tasks like outlier detection [23] and next-best-view

planning [32] that expand NeRF’s performance and application domain to critical areas like autonomous driving [12].
However, quantifying the uncertainty contained in a NeRF
model is a relatively new area of study, with existing methods proposing either heuristic proxies without theoretical
guarantees [16, 58] or probabilistic techniques that require
costly computational power [47] and/or elaborate changes
to the conventional NeRF training pipeline [1, 42].
We draw inspiration from triangulation problems in classic photogrammetry [45], where uncertainty is often modeled through distributions of feature point positions in image
space that are then projected onto 3D (see Figure 2). Intuitively, this distribution measures how much a feature’s
position can be perturbed while maintaining multi-view consistency. We apply a similar intuition to NeRF, identifying
Traditional
photogrammetry

Our NeRF
uncertainty

Figure 2. Inspired by uncertainty quantification in classic photogrammetry (left), we find epistemic uncertainty in NeRF (right).

20061

