This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learned representation-guided diffusion models for large-image generation
Alexandros Graikos* Srikar Yellapragada* Minh-Quan Le
Saarthak Kapse Prateek Prasanna Joel Saltz Dimitris Samaras
Stony Brook University

To synthesize high-fidelity samples, diffusion models typically require auxiliary data to guide the generation process. However, it is impractical to procure the painstaking patch-level annotation effort required in specialized domains like histopathology and satellite imagery; it is often performed by domain experts and involves hundreds
of millions of patches. Modern-day self-supervised learning (SSL) representations encode rich semantic and visual
information. In this paper, we posit that such representations are expressive enough to act as proxies to finegrained human labels. We introduce a novel approach that
trains diffusion models conditioned on embeddings from
SSL. Our diffusion models successfully project these features back to high-quality histopathology and remote sensing images. In addition, we construct larger images by assembling spatially consistent patches inferred from SSL embeddings, preserving long-range dependencies. Augmenting real data by generating variations of real images improves downstream classifier accuracy for patch-level and
larger, image-scale classification tasks. Our models are effective even on datasets not encountered during training,
demonstrating their robustness and generalizability. Generating images from learned embeddings is agnostic to the
source of the embeddings. The SSL embeddings used to generate a large image can either be extracted from a reference
image, or sampled from an auxiliary model conditioned on
any related modality (e.g. class labels, text, genomic data).
As proof of concept, we introduce the text-to-large image
synthesis paradigm where we successfully synthesize large
pathology and satellite images out of text descriptions. 1

1. Introduction
Diffusion models produce high-quality and diverse samples
across a spectrum of generative tasks [8, 24]. This leap
forward has been enabled by the simultaneous curation of
large-scale multi-modal datasets [40] and the development
* Equal contribution. Correspondence to agraikos@cs.stonybrook.edu
1 Code is available at this link

Synthetic

Real

Abstract

SSL embeddings

Self-supervised
feature extractor

Representation-guided
diffusion model

Figure 1. We propose using SSL features to condition diffusion
models. This allows us to construct large images by assembling
consistent patches inferred from a spatial arrangement of SSL embeddings. The generated image retains the semantics of the embeddings used as a condition, maintaining the forested and open
areas from the reference. Best viewed zoomed-in.

of efficient conditioning mechanisms [35, 37]. The key to
unlocking the models’ capabilities is to integrate auxiliary
information during training and inference [8, 15, 28].
Large-scale human-annotated datasets are mostly limited to image-caption pairs, collected from easily accessible online repositories and labeled by non-expert annotators. However, in domains such as digital histopathology
and remote sensing, where gigapixel scale images provide
vast amounts of unlabeled data, annotation proves challenging. Moreover, the process requires expert knowledge and
is more difficult at a finer scale, i.e., captioning large crops
of the gigapixel image is simpler than captioning smaller
patches. Based on our estimates (see supplemental), annotating the entire TCGA-BRCA dataset with captions would
take ≈40,000 hours of pathologist’s time. Replicating the
impressive results of diffusion models in these domains has
been limited by the scarcity of fine-grained per-image conditioning, vital for high-quality image synthesis [29].
Modern-day self-supervised learning (SSL) representations [5] encode rich semantic and visual information. Features from trained self-supervised models serve as compact
image representations and are widely used to perform discriminative downstream tasks successfully [6, 11, 45], proving that these compressed representations indeed encode

8532

