This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SAM-6D: Segment Anything Model Meets Zero-Shot 6D Object Pose Estimation
Lihua Liu3∗
Dekun Lu3
Kui Jia2†
1
DexForce Co. Ltd., Shenzhen
2
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
3
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou
Jiehong Lin1,2 *

https://github.com/JiehongLin/SAM-6D

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)
Figure 1. We present SAM-6D for zero-shot 6D object pose estimation. SAM-6D takes an RGB image (a) and a depth map (b) of a
cluttered scene as inputs, and performs instance segmentation (d) and pose estimation (e) for novel objects (c). We present the qualitative
results of SAM-6D on the seven core datasets of the BOP benchmark [54], including YCB-V, LM-O, HB, T-LESS, IC-BIN, ITODD and
TUD-L, arranged from left to right. Best view in the electronic version.

Abstract
Zero-shot 6D object pose estimation involves the detection of novel objects with their 6D poses in cluttered scenes,
presenting significant challenges for model generalizability. Fortunately, the recent Segment Anything Model (SAM)
has showcased remarkable zero-shot transfer performance,
which provides a promising solution to tackle this task. Motivated by this, we introduce SAM-6D, a novel framework
designed to realize the task through two steps, including in* Equal contribution. † Corresponding author <kuijia@gmail.com>.

stance segmentation and pose estimation. Given the target objects, SAM-6D employs two dedicated sub-networks,
namely Instance Segmentation Model (ISM) and Pose Estimation Model (PEM), to perform these steps on cluttered
RGB-D images. ISM takes SAM as an advanced starting point to generate all possible object proposals and selectively preserves valid ones through meticulously crafted
object matching scores in terms of semantics, appearance
and geometry. By treating pose estimation as a partial-topartial point matching problem, PEM performs a two-stage
point matching process featuring a novel design of background tokens to construct dense 3D-3D correspondence,

27906

