This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Global and Hierarchical Geometry Consistency Priors
for Few-shot NeRFs in Indoor Scenes

1

Xiaotian Sun1 Qingshan Xu2 Xinjie Yang1 Yu Zang1 * Cheng Wang1
Fujian Key Laboratory of Sensing and Computing for Smart Cities, Xiamen University
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University

Abstract
It is challenging for Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) in
the few-shot setting to reconstruct high-quality novel views
and depth maps in 360◦ outward-facing indoor scenes. The
captured sparse views for these scenes usually contain large
viewpoint variations. This greatly reduces the potential
consistency between views, leading NeRFs to degrade a lot
in these scenarios. Existing methods usually leverage pretrained depth prediction models to improve NeRFs. However, these methods cannot guarantee geometry consistency
due to the inherent geometry ambiguity in the pretrained
models, thus limiting NeRFs’ performance. In this work, we
present P2 NeRF to capture global and hierarchical geometry consistency priors from pretrained models, thus facilitating few-shot NeRFs in 360◦ outward-facing indoor scenes.
On the one hand, we propose a matching-based geometry
warm-up strategy to provide global geometry consistency
priors for NeRFs. This effectively avoids the overfitting of
early training with sparse inputs. On the other hand, we
propose a group depth ranking loss and ray weight mask
regularization based on the monocular depth estimation
model. This provides hierarchical geometry consistency
priors for NeRFs. As a result, our approach can fully leverage the geometry consistency priors from pretrained models and help few-shot NeRFs achieve state-of-the-art performance on two challenging indoor datasets. Our code is
released at https://github.com/XT5un/P2NeRF.

1. Introduction
As an advanced implicit scene representation, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) are widely popular for many tasks,
such as novel view synthesis [1, 2, 6, 17–19, 30], 3D reconstruction [12, 21, 34, 37, 39], and 3D generation [8, 27, 40].
It models continuous color and geometry fields of a 3D
scene through a neural network to realize a compact 3D
* Corresponding author.

Ground Truth

Ours

SparseNeRF [13]

(a) Comparison with methods using general monocular depth

Ground Truth

Ours

SCADE [33]

(b) Comparison with methods using absolute depth from other domains

Figure 1. Rendering results in 360◦ outward-facing indoor scenes.
In challenging indoor scenes, using general monocular depth cannot meet the global geometry of the scene. And methods using indomain geometric clues have poor generalization on other scenes.

scene representation. In general, NeRF-like methods can
achieve photo-realistic rendering results with a sufficient
amount of training views. However, for sparse views captured in 360◦ outward-facing indoor scenes, it usually contain large viewpoint variations. This greatly reduces the
potential consistency between views, leading the vanilla
NeRFs to degrade a lot or even fail. Therefore, it is challenge for few-shot NeRFs to reconstruct high-quality novel
views and depth maps in these scenarios.
Recently, geometric constraints have been demonstrated
to be one key factor to improve few-shot NeRFs [10, 13,
20, 24]. Some methods [20, 28] impose regularization constraints by mining the geometric properties of the training

20530

