This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LAENeRF: Local Appearance Editing for Neural Radiance Fields
Lukas Radl1

Michael Steiner1

Andreas Kurz1

Markus Steinberger1,2

{lukas.radl, michael.steiner, andreas.kurz, steinberger}@icg.tugraz.at
1

Graz University of Technology

2

Huawei Technologies, Austria

Figure 1. We propose LAENeRF, a method for Local Appearance Editing of Neural Radiance Fields. LAENeRF enables appearance edits
of arbitrary content in 3D scenes while minimizing background artefacts. For a specified selection, we learn a mapping from estimated ray
termination to output colors via a palette-based formulation, which may be supervised by a style loss. In this way, we elegantly combine
photorealistic recoloring and non-photorealistic stylization of arbitrary content represented by a radiance field in an interactive framework.

Abstract
Due to the omnipresence of Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs), the interest towards editable implicit 3D representations has surged over the last years. However, editing implicit or hybrid representations as used for NeRFs is
difficult due to the entanglement of appearance and geometry encoded in the model parameters. Despite these challenges, recent research has shown first promising steps towards photorealistic and non-photorealistic appearance edits. The main open issues of related work include limited interactivity, a lack of support for local edits and large memory requirements, rendering them less useful in practice. We
address these limitations with LAENeRF, a unified framework for photorealistic and non-photorealistic appearance
editing of NeRFs. To tackle local editing, we leverage a
voxel grid as starting point for region selection. We learn
a mapping from expected ray terminations to final output
color, which can optionally be supervised by a style loss,
resulting in a framework which can perform photorealistic
and non-photorealistic appearance editing of selected regions. Relying on a single point per ray for our mapping,
we limit memory requirements and enable fast optimization.
To guarantee interactivity, we compose the output color us-

ing a set of learned, modifiable base colors, composed with
additive layer mixing.selection. Compared to concurrent
work, LAENeRF enables recoloring and stylization while
keeping processing time low. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that our approach surpasses baseline methods both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis has been completely revolutionized
by Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [27]. NeRFs enable
high-fidelity reconstruction of a 3D scene from a set of input images and their camera poses, building on differentiable volume rendering. Recent methods have successfully
applied NeRFs to dynamic scenes [33, 51, 52], large-scale
scene reconstruction [4, 21, 37] and varying lighting conditions [6, 25]. Local appearance editing of these learned
3D scene representations remains relatively underexplored.
The implicit representation used in NeRFs in the form of a
Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) is the main challenge, causing non-local effects when a single parameter is modified.
Distilled feature fields [19] and per-image 2D masks [22]
have been suggested to facilitate local edits for NeRFs.
However, both of these methods frequently introduce arte-

4969

