This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PAPR in Motion: Seamless Point-level 3D Scene Interpolation
Shichong Peng, Yanshu Zhang, Ke Li
APEX Lab
School of Computing Science
Simon Fraser University
{shichong peng,yanshu zhang,keli}@sfu.ca

Abstract
We propose the problem of point-level 3D scene interpolation, which aims to simultaneously reconstruct a 3D
scene in two states from multiple views, synthesize smooth
point-level interpolations between them, and render the
scene from novel viewpoints, all without any supervision between the states. The primary challenge is on achieving a
smooth transition between states that may involve significant and non-rigid changes. To address these challenges,
we introduce “PAPR in Motion”, a novel approach that
builds upon the recent Proximity Attention Point Rendering
(PAPR) technique, which can deform a point cloud to match
a significantly different shape and render a visually coherent scene even after non-rigid deformations. Our approach
is specifically designed to maintain the temporal consistency of the geometric structure by introducing various regularization techniques for PAPR. The result is a method
that can effectively bridge large scene changes and produce
visually coherent and temporally smooth interpolations in
both geometry and appearance. Evaluation across diverse
motion types demonstrates that “PAPR in Motion” outperforms the leading neural renderer for dynamic scenes. For
more results and code, please visit our project website at
https://niopeng.github.io/PAPR-in-Motion/ .

1. Introduction
In computer vision and graphics, it is commonly desired to
visualize how a scene might evolve smoothly from a state to
a very different state. If this can be done, it could open the
way to many possibilities. For instance, in animation and
filmmaking, the ability to create lifelike animations from
just two observed states could greatly simplify production
processes and reduce the time and effort required compared
to traditional frame-by-frame animation.
To tackle this problem, we introduce a novel task, pointlevel 3D scene interpolation. Given observations of a 3D
scene at only two states from multiple views, our objec-

tive is to synthesize a smooth and plausible interpolation
between scene points at the different states, so that the scene
can be rendered from novel views at any intermediate state,
as shown in Figure 1. No observation of any intermediate state is assumed. Our task differs from traditional static
scene reconstruction [15, 16, 25, 41, 44, 49], which does
not handle scene changes, and also from novel view synthesis of dynamic 3D scenes [23, 28–30], which assumes the
observation of the scene at all times as it changes.
Our task carries unique challenges beyond those of novel
view synthesis on static or dynamic scenes. Because intermediate states are not observed, the scene geometry can
change substantially between the observed states. The geometry changes can be highly complex and involve different local deformations that may be non-rigid. Additionally,
these geometry changes can lead to appearance changes, for
example in the cast shadows and specular reflections.
To tackle this task, we need to be able to represent the
large geometry changes between the states accurately. We
can view such changes as motion. Different representations
of motion are suitable for capturing different types of scene
changes. Eulerian motion representations record changes at
fixed scene locations, while Lagrangian motion representations track specific points through space and time. Unlike
Eulerian representations, which estimate changes independently at different time steps, Lagrangian representations
jointly estimate changes for the same point tracked across
time. As a result, Lagrangian representations can model
long-range dynamics more accurately. Since there may be
substantial geometry changes between the observed states
in our task, we opt for modelling scene changes with the
Lagrangian approach. To enable this, we leverage recent
advances in point-based neural renderers, which are wellsuited to representing Lagrangian motion through the pointbased scene representations they learn. At a high level, our
method involves first training a model on the scene’s initial
state and then finetuning it to reconstruct the scene in its final state. The intermediate iterations of this finetuning process effectively create interpolations between the two states.

21007

