This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mip-Splatting: Alias-free 3D Gaussian Splatting
Zehao Yu1,2
1

Anpei Chen†,1,2

Binbin Huang3

Torsten Sattler4

Andreas Geiger1,2

2
3
University of Tübingen
Tübingen AI Center
ShanghaiTech University
4
Czech Technical University in Prague

https://niujinshuchong.github.io/mip-splatting
(a) Faithful Representation

(b) Degenerate Representation

3D Object

3D Gaussian

Faithful
Rendering

2D Gaussian

Image Plane
(Screen Space)

Faithful
Rendering

Dilated
2D Gaussian

5 Pixels
Camera Center

(c) Zoom-out of (a)

(d) Zoom-in of (b)

Erosion
(Brake cable
too thin)
Dilation
(Spokes too thick due to
screen space dilation)

Brightening

Decreased
Focal length

Increased
Focal length

High frequency
artifacts due to
degenerate (thin)
3D Gaussians

Figure 1. 3D Gaussian Splatting [18] renders images by representing 3D Objects as 3D Gaussians which are projected onto the image
plane followed by 2D Dilation in screen space as shown in (a). Its intrinsic shrinkage bias leads to degenerate 3D Gaussians that exceed
the sampling limit as illustrated by the δ function in (b) while rendering similarly in 2D due to the dilation operation. However, when
changing the sampling rate (via the focal length or camera distance), we observe strong dilation effects (c) and high frequency artifacts (d).

Abstract
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting has demonstrated impressive novel view synthesis results, reaching high fidelity
and efficiency. However, strong artifacts can be observed
when changing the sampling rate, e.g., by changing focal
length or camera distance. We find that the source for this
phenomenon can be attributed to the lack of 3D frequency
constraints and the usage of a 2D dilation filter. To address this problem, we introduce a 3D smoothing filter to
constrains the size of the 3D Gaussian primitives based
on the maximal sampling frequency induced by the input
views. It eliminates high-frequency artifacts when zooming
in. Moreover, replacing 2D dilation with a 2D Mip filter,
which simulates a 2D box filter, effectively mitigates aliasing and dilation issues. Our evaluation, including scenarios
such a training on single-scale images and testing on multiple scales, validates the effectiveness of our approach.
† Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Novel View Synthesis (NVS) plays a critical role in computer graphics and computer vision, with various applications including virtual reality, cinematography, robotics,
and more. A particularly significant advancement in this
field is the Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [28], introduced
by Mildenhall et al. in 2020. NeRF utilizes a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to represent geometry and viewdependent appearance effectively, demonstrating remarkable novel view rendering quality. Recently, 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [18] has gained attention as an appealing
alternative to both MLP [28] and feature grid-based representations [4, 11, 24, 32, 46]. 3DGS stands out for its impressive novel view synthesis results, while achieving realtime rendering at high resolutions. This effectiveness and
efficiency, coupled with the potential integration into the
standard rasterization pipeline of GPUs represents a significant step towards practical usage of NVS methods.
Specifically, 3DGS represents complex scenes as a set

19447

