This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-criteria Token Fusion with One-step-ahead Attention
for Efficient Vision Transformers
Sanghyeok Lee*

Joonmyung Choi* Hyunwoo J. Kim†

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Korea University
{cat0626, pizard, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Vision Transformer (ViT) has emerged as a prominent
backbone for computer vision. For more efficient ViTs, recent works lessen the quadratic cost of the self-attention
layer by pruning or fusing the redundant tokens. However, these works faced the speed-accuracy trade-off caused
by the loss of information. Here, we argue that token fusion needs to consider diverse relations between tokens
to minimize information loss. In this paper, we propose
a Multi-criteria Token Fusion (MCTF), that gradually fuses
the tokens based on multi-criteria (i.e., similarity, informativeness, and size of fused tokens). Further, we utilize the
one-step-ahead attention, which is the improved approach
to capture the informativeness of the tokens. By training
the model equipped with MCTF using a token reduction
consistency, we achieve the best speed-accuracy trade-off
in the image classification (ImageNet1K). Experimental results prove that MCTF consistently surpasses the previous
reduction methods with and without training. Specifically,
DeiT-T and DeiT-S with MCTF reduce FLOPs by about
44% while improving the performance (+0.5%, and +0.3%)
over the base model, respectively. We also demonstrate
the applicability of MCTF in various Vision Transformers
(e.g., T2T-ViT, LV-ViT), achieving at least 31% speedup
without performance degradation. Code is available at
https://github.com/mlvlab/MCTF.

1. Introduction
Vision Transformer [11] (ViT) has been proposed to tackle
the vision tasks with self-attention, originally developed for
natural language processing tasks. With the advent of ViT,
Transformers are the prevalent architectures for a wide range
of vision tasks, e.g., classification [11, 20, 28, 29, 31], object
detection [5, 31, 41], segmentation [20, 27, 33], etc. ViTs,
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

built only with self-attention and MLP, provide great flexibility and impressive performance compared to conventional
approaches, e.g., convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
However, despite these advantages, the quadratic computational complexity of self-attention with respect to the number
of tokens is the major bottleneck for Transformers. This limitation becomes more substantial with the growing interest
in large-scale foundation models such as CLIP [25]. To
this end, several works [3, 16, 30, 34] have proposed efficient self-attention mechanisms including local self-attention
within predefined windows [1, 9, 20].
More recently, there has been increasing interest in tokenreduction methods for optimizing ViTs without altering their
architecture. Earlier works [12, 23, 24, 26, 37] primarily
focused on pruning the uninformative tokens to reduce the
number of tokens. Another line of works [4, 17, 18, 21, 22]
attempted to fuse the tokens instead of discarding them
to minimize the information loss. However, performance
degradation is still commonly observed in most token fusion
methods. We notice that the token fusion methods usually
consider only one criterion, such as the similarity or informativeness of tokens, leading to suboptimal token matching.
For instance, similarity-based token fusion is prone to combine the foreground tokens, whereas informativeness-based
fusion often merges substantially dissimilar tokens, resulting in collapsed representations. Furthermore, if too many
tokens are fused into one token, then information loss is
inevitable.
To address the problems, we introduce Multi-Criteria Token
Fusion (MCTF) that optimizes vision transformers by fusing
tokens based on multi-criteria. Unlike previous works that
consider a single criterion for token fusion, MCTF measures
the relationship between the tokens with multi-criteria as
follows; (1) similarity to fuse the redundant tokens, (2) informativeness to reduce the uninformative tokens, (3) the size of
the tokens to prevent the large-sized tokens that boost the loss
of information. Also, to tackle the inconsistency between attention maps of consecutive layers, we adopt one-step-ahead
attention, which explicitly estimates the informativeness of

15741

