This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ADA-Track: End-to-End Multi-Camera 3D Multi-Object Tracking with
Alternating Detection and Association
Shuxiao Ding1,2 , Lukas Schneider1 , Marius Cordts1 , Juergen Gall2,3
1
Mercedes-Benz AG, Sindelfingen, 2 University of Bonn
3
Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence
{shuxiao.ding,lukas.schneider,marius.cordts}@mercedes-benz.com,
gall@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Many query-based approaches for 3D Multi-Object
Tracking (MOT) adopt the tracking-by-attention paradigm,
utilizing track queries for identity-consistent detection
and object queries for identity-agnostic track spawning.
Tracking-by-attention, however, entangles detection and
tracking queries in one embedding for both the detection
and tracking task, which is sub-optimal. Other approaches
resemble the tracking-by-detection paradigm, detecting objects using decoupled track and detection queries followed
by a subsequent association. These methods, however, do
not leverage synergies between the detection and association task. Combining the strengths of both paradigms, we
introduce ADA-Track, a novel end-to-end framework for 3D
MOT from multi-view cameras. We introduce a learnable
data association module based on edge-augmented crossattention, leveraging appearance and geometric features.
Furthermore, we integrate this association module into the
decoder layer of a DETR-based 3D detector, enabling simultaneous DETR-like query-to-image cross-attention for
detection and query-to-query cross-attention for data association. By stacking these decoder layers, queries are
refined for the detection and association task alternately,
effectively harnessing the task dependencies. We evaluate
our method on the nuScenes dataset and demonstrate the
advantage of our approach compared to the two previous
paradigms. Code is available at https://github.
com/dsx0511/ADA-Track.

Transformer
Decoder

Multi-frame
image features

Tracked objects
update

Track Queries

(a) Tracking-by-attention (TBA).
Detection Queries

Transformer
Decoder

Data
Association

Transformer
Decoder
Multi-frame
image features

update
Track Queries

Tracked objects

(b) Tracking-by-detection (TBD).
Decoder Layers

Data Association
Cross-attention
Multi-frame
image features

Self-attention

Tracked objects
update

Detection Queries

Track Queries

(c) Our proposed paradigm.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Paradigm comparison of query-based end-to-end MOT.
Our proposed paradigm (1c) leverages the advantages of the coupled architecture of tracking-by-attention (1a) and the decoupled
task-specific queries of tracking-by-detection (1b).

Accurate and consistent 3D Multi-Object Tracking (MOT)
is critical for ensuring the reliability and safety of autonomous driving. Recently, vision-centric perception
solely relying on multi-view cameras has garnered significant attention in the autonomous driving community, thanks
to lower cost of sensors and the advancements of transform-

ers for computer vision. Within this domain, two predominant approaches have emerged: one transforms multi-view
features into an intermediate dense Bird’s-Eye View (BEV)
representation [23, 26, 31, 35, 64], while the other leverages
object queries [8] that directly interact with the multi-view
images [42, 51, 58, 61, 66] to construct an object-centric

15184

