This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Geometry-aware Deformable Gaussian Splatting for Dynamic View Synthesis
Zhicheng Lu1 ,* Xiang Guo1 ,* Le Hui1†, Tianrui Chen1,2 ,
Min Yang2 , Xiao Tang2 , Feng Zhu2 , Yuchao Dai1†
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University 2 Samsung R&D Institute
{zhichenglu, guoxiang, cherryxchen}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn
{daiyuchao, huile}@nwpu.edu.cn

{min16.yang, xiao1.tang, f15.zhu}@samsung.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a 3D geometry-aware deformable Gaussian Splatting method for dynamic view synthesis. Existing neural radiance fields (NeRF) based solutions learn the deformation in an implicit manner, which
cannot incorporate 3D scene geometry. Therefore, the
learned deformation is not necessarily geometrically coherent, which results in unsatisfactory dynamic view synthesis and 3D dynamic reconstruction. Recently, 3D Gaussian
Splatting provides a new representation of the 3D scene,
building upon which the 3D geometry could be exploited
in learning the complex 3D deformation. Specifically, the
scenes are represented as a collection of 3D Gaussian,
where each 3D Gaussian is optimized to move and rotate
over time to model the deformation. To enforce the 3D scene
geometry constraint during deformation, we explicitly extract 3D geometry features and integrate them in learning
the 3D deformation. In this way, our solution achieves 3D
geometry-aware deformation modeling, which enables improved dynamic view synthesis and 3D dynamic reconstruction. Extensive experimental results on both synthetic and
real datasets prove the superiority of our solution, which
achieves new state-of-the-art performance. The project is
available at https://npucvr.github.io/GaGS/.

1. Introduction
Dynamic View Synthesis (DVS) aims at rendering novel
photorealistic views at arbitrary viewpoints and any input
time step given a monocular video of a dynamic scene,
which has broad applications in virtual reality and augmented reality. Recently, empowered with effective representations such as neural radiance fields (NeRF) [30] and
Gaussian Splatting [21], novel view synthesis for static
scenes has been greatly advanced. However, this success
* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding authors.

𝒇 = 𝜆(p)

Gaussian

𝜆: Interpolation Operation
p
S=2
S=1

𝒇 = γ(p)
γ: Positional Encoding

a)
Weak

𝒇 = 𝜔(p)
𝒇 = [𝜆! p , 𝜆" p ,…]

𝜔: Sparse Convolution

b)

c)

Geometric Information of 𝒇

Strong

Figure 1. Geometric information exploited by different methods. a) Early dynamic NeRF methods such as DNeRF[37] directly
encode the coordinate p of the sample point as input feature for deformation network. b) Interpolation is used to fuse features from
neighbouring grids and mulitscale interpolation enhances the local
geometry information [11, 16, 27, 53]. c) We propose to voxelize a
set of Gaussian distributions and use a sparse convolution network
to extract geometry-aware features for deformation learning.

cannot be extended to its dynamic counterpart directly. This
is mainly due to the difficulty in modeling and representing
the scene deformation. Due to the inherent motion/shape
ambiguity in monocular dynamic 3D representation, dynamic scene modeling and synthesis are more challenging,
especially for monocular video with limited observations.
In addressing the above challenges, one common strategy is to represent the dynamic scenes as a combination of
a static canonical field and a deformation model [11, 16, 17,
27, 33, 34, 37, 51, 53], whereas the bottleneck lies in representing the diverse and complex real-world 3D deformation.
To represent geometrically consistent 3D deformation, the
local geometric/structural information is critical, since the
deformations of the objects in the real world are highly correlated to their 3D structures. Furthermore, the motions of
the object points are deeply coupled with the motions of
their neighboring points. Thus, how to incorporate the local
geometric information to learn locally smooth and consistent 3D deformations becomes the research focus in DVS.

8900

