This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Spatial Features from Audio-Visual Correspondence
in Egocentric Videos
Sagnik Majumder1,2
1
UT Austin

2

Ziad Al-Halah3
Kristen Grauman1,2
3
FAIR, Meta
University of Utah

Abstract
We propose a self-supervised method for learning representations based on spatial audio-visual correspondences
in egocentric videos. Our method uses a masked autoencoding framework to synthesize masked binaural audio
through the synergy of audio and vision, thereby learning useful spatial relationships between the two modalities.
We use our pretrained features to tackle two downstream
video tasks requiring spatial understanding in social scenarios: active speaker detection and spatial audio denoising.
Through extensive experiments, we show that our features
are generic enough to improve over multiple state-of-theart baselines on both tasks on two challenging egocentric
video datasets that offer binaural audio, EgoCom and EasyCom. Project: http://vision.cs.utexas.edu/
projects/ego_av_corr.

1. Introduction
Egocentric videos provide a first-person view of how we
perceive and interact with our surroundings in daily life,
and they are pushing a new frontier in multi-modal learning [9, 25, 31, 62]. A key aspect of ego-video is that it can
provide a rich stream of first-person spatial audio1 alongside
visual frames when the audio is captured with multiple microphones [11, 49]. The coupling of such audio and vision
provides strong spatial information about the sound sources
(e.g. where the sound sources are, if they are in motion or
not) in the context of the surrounding physical space (e.g.
how big or small the room is, if there is a large wall nearby),
as well as the camera wearer’s attention in the scene revealed
by how they move their head.
Such spatial cues are especially important for social settings of multiple people talking to each other, where it is
valuable to be able to 1) focus on the voice(s) of interest
from among various competing sounds and 2) understand
where people are directing their speech activity, for better
1 Throughout we use the term spatial audio to refer to binaural audio, as
perceived by two human ears. In contrast, single-channel monaural audio
lacks spatial information.

Left

Right

Binaural Audio
Masking

AV Spatial
Correspondence
Encoder

Binaural Audio
Inpainting

Transfer
speaking

Active Speaker Detection

Spatial Audio Denoising

Figure 1. Given an egocentric video and binaural audio, we aim to
learn spatial correspondences between vision and audio by solving
the pretext task of inpainting segments of the binaural audio. The
features benefit downstream social tasks where spatial localization
is important: active speaker detection and audio denoising.

comprehension and communication. In this way, future AR
applications in conversational settings could allow a hearingimpaired person to determine who is speaking in order to
redirect their attention, or enhance the received audio to
make it more intelligible for any listener.
We argue that this creates the need for human-centric
spatially-grounded understanding of audio-visual events.
Can we learn representations from video that capture audiovisual events in the context of the persistent physical space
of the environment and the human speakers in it? Such representations would be useful for answering questions like
“who is speaking right now?" and “what would the voices
sound like without the audio noise (distractor sounds)?"
While the former requires inferring the source location for
a voice in the scene, the latter requires understanding how
the perceived audio is a function of the source locations, the
listener, and the surrounding environment.
Despite the significance of these problems, today’s models for audio-visual learning are not human-centric and
they lack spatial grounding. On the one hand, current
audio-visual representation learning methods exclusively
tackle exocentric (third-person) video with monaural audio
[2, 23, 24, 29, 34, 50, 52]. That domain sidesteps challenges

27058

