This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Embracing Unimodal Aleatoric Uncertainty for Robust Multimodal Fusion
Zixian Gao1 ,* Xun Jiang1 ,* Xing Xu1,2†, Fumin Shen1 , Yujie Li3 , Heng Tao Shen1,2
1
Center for Future Media & School of Computer Science and Engineering,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China
2
College of Electronic and Information Engineering, Tongji University, China
3
Kyushu Institute of Technology, Japan

Abstract
As a fundamental problem in multimodal learning, multimodal fusion aims to compensate for the inherent limitations of a single modality. One challenge of multimodal
fusion is that the unimodal data in their unique embedding
space mostly contains potential noise, which leads to corrupted cross-modal interactions. However, in this paper,
we show that the potential noise in unimodal data could be
well quantified and further employed to enhance more stable unimodal embeddings via contrastive learning. Specifically, we propose a novel generic and robust multimodal
fusion strategy, termed Embracing Aleatoric Uncertainty
(EAU), which is simple and can be applied to kinds of
modalities. It consists of two key steps: (1) the Stable
Unimodal Feature Augmentation (SUFA) that learns a stable unimodal representation by incorporating the aleatoric
uncertainty into self-supervised contrastive learning. (2)
Robust Multimodal Feature Integration (RMFI) leveraging
an information-theoretic strategy to learn a robust compact joint representation. We evaluate our proposed EAU
method on five multimodal datasets, where the video, RGB
image, text, audio, and depth image are involved. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the EAU method is more noiseresistant than existing multimodal fusion strategies and establishes new state-of-the-art on several benchmarks.

1. Introduction
By exploring the complementary information from different modalities, multimodal learning has achieved impressive success in kinds of artificial intelligence applications,
such as multimodal image classification in Internet applications [1–5] and sentiment analysis in intelligent robotics
[6–9]. It has been widely proved that fusing information
from different modalities appropriately is helpful to gain
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

RT @5SOfSImagines:
You shout at fans#Bu
… #sevda #bitmez
This vibrant #infinity #love #sad
Even a packed
#helpless
¡ñ¡ñ
Sentiment: Ayoung
man
light hearted Edinburgh to Glasgow
#instagram
years, but
Positive
momentIt‘s
onbeen
set five
evening train is fun…
I’m
more
than
overjoyed
with our actor.
to wish you …
Images
Texts @__Dave24
looks so elated ?

(a) Uncertainties from fuzzy semantics in multimodal data

Sentiment:
Positive

A light hearted
moment on set
with our actor.
#Bu #sevda #bitmez
#infinity #love #sad
#helpless ¡ñ¡ñ
#instagram

(b) Multivariate Gaussian distributional representations for fuzzy semantics

Figure 1. An illustration of the aleatoric uncertainty in multimodal
datasets and the distributional representations: (a) As the semantics are ambiguous, the multimodal data are prone to introducing
noisy data. (b) We adopt a multivariate Gaussian distribution to
represent the fuzzy semantics in a noisy latent space.

better performance. Dedicated to this, multimodal fusion
has become an emerging challenge in multimodal learning,
which integrates different modalities into a unified representation with powerful neural networks.
Nevertheless, with the studies developing, researchers
have recognized that the multimodal data in different modal
forms may be unreliable due to the unique noise in their
own modal space. Recently, several works [5, 10–13] show
that previous multimodal fusion methods have overlooked
the unreliable quality of multimodal data. Specifically, the
widely adopted fusion strategies may fail on noisy multimodal data because the cross-modal interactions may obtain limited influence by the uncertainty in data. Here we
illustrate typical noise in multimodal data in Fig. 1. Due
to the semantics of “Positive” being fuzzy and the labels
being judged by humans subjectively, the given image-text
pairs are all recognized as positive in sentiment analysis,
even though there is obvious noise in both image and text

26876

