This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRFiller: Completing Scenes via Generative 3D Inpainting
Ethan Weber1,2 Aleksander Holynski1,2 Varun Jampani1 Saurabh Saxena1
Noah Snavely1 Abhishek Kar1 Angjoo Kanazawa2
1
2
Google Research
UC Berkeley
Completing 3D Scans

Variety of Inpaints
NeRF
iller

NeRFiller

r
Fille
NeR

iller
RF
Ne

3D Scene or Object

Incomplete Regions

Inpainted NeRF

Reference 2D Inpaint

Inpainted NeRF

Figure 1. NeRFiller. We propose a generative 3D inpainting approach for scene or object completion. Given a 3D capture with incomplete
regions (left), our approach completes scenes such as the incomplete teddy bear scan (top left) and deletes unwanted occluders such as the
pillow and the price tag (bottom left). We can also control the completions using a reference inpainted exemplar (right) to guide the process.

Abstract
We propose NeRFiller, an approach that completes missing portions of a 3D capture via generative 3D inpainting
using off-the-shelf 2D visual generative models. Often parts
of a captured 3D scene or object are missing due to mesh
reconstruction failures or a lack of observations (e.g., contact regions, such as the bottom of objects, or hard-to-reach
areas). We approach this challenging 3D inpainting problem
by leveraging a 2D inpainting diffusion model. We identify
a surprising behavior of these models, where they generate
more 3D consistent inpaints when images form a 2×2 grid,
and show how to generalize this behavior to more than four
images. We then present an iterative framework to distill
these inpainted regions into a single consistent 3D scene. In
contrast to related works, we focus on completing scenes
rather than deleting foreground objects, and our approach
does not require tight 2D object masks or text. We compare
our approach to relevant baselines adapted to our setting
on a variety of scenes, where NeRFiller creates the most
3D consistent and plausible scene completions. Our project
page is at https://ethanweber.me/nerfiller.

1. Introduction
Consider the 3D scanned teddy bear and cat in Figure 1.
In many 3D captures such as these, parts of the scene may
not be as one desires: there may be unobserved regions
such as the bottom of the bear and behind the cat, or there
may be unwanted parts such as the price tag on the cat ear.
Additionally, one may want to modify a feature, or generate
a variety of alternative models, e.g., a bear with bunny ears
or a santa cat. All of these tasks require the ability to edit
and inpaint content in a 3D-aware and multi-view consistent
manner. This is a challenge, since 2D generative inpainting
models will not by default generate 3D consistent images.
Our goal is to take a step in this direction and present a
method that can create new content via scene completion
conditioned on a set of multi-view images.
Specifically, we present a 3D scene completion framework called NeRFiller, which given a scene and specified
parts of the scene to inpaint, returns a 3D scene that is completed in a multi-view consistent manner. Our approach not
only completes missing regions (Figure 1, center), but can
also generate multiple variations of the missing regions (Figure 1, right). Furthermore, our approach does not require

20731

