This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unbiased Estimator for Distorted Conics in Camera Calibration
Chaehyeon Song, Jaeho Shin, Myung-Hwan Jeon, Jongwoo Lim, Ayoung Kim
Seoul National University
{chaehyeon, leah100, myunghwan.jeon, jongwoo.lim, ayoungk}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In the literature, points and conics have been major features for camera geometric calibration. Although conics
are more informative features than points, the loss of the
conic property under distortion has critically limited the
utility of conic features in camera calibration. Many existing approaches addressed conic-based calibration by ignoring distortion or introducing 3D spherical targets to circumvent this limitation. In this paper, we present a novel
formulation for conic-based calibration using moments.
Our derivation is based on the mathematical finding that the
first moment can be estimated without bias even under distortion. This allows us to track moment changes during projection and distortion, ensuring the preservation of the first
moment of the distorted conic. With an unbiased estimator, the circular patterns can be accurately detected at the
sub-pixel level and can now be fully exploited for an entire
calibration pipeline, resulting in significantly improved calibration. The entire code is readily available from https:
//github.com/ChaehyeonSong/discocal.

1. Introduction
Camera calibration is essential in 3D computer vision and
vision-based perception. Significantly, the processes of
understanding the geometry from images rely on accurate camera calibration, including 3D dense reconstruction [17, 18], visual simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) [12, 19, 22], and depth estimation [9]. This fundamental problem has been tackled in various ways [4, 5,
14, 26, 27] and the most calibration methods exploit planar
targets covered with particular patterns such as grid structure of squares [25, 28] or circles [10, 13]. This planar
target-based approach requires precise measurements with
an unbiased projection model of control points (i.e., corner of the square or centroid of the circle) to achieve accurate calibration results. Much literature has studied the
distinct advantages and disadvantages of the two patterns.
The checkerboard pattern ensures precise (unbiased) estimation in projective transformation and distortion, yet it is
limited to pixel-level detection accuracy. On the other hand,

Target

Center

Image

estimator
Point based: biased

bias

Ours: unbiased estimator

Original circle in target

Centroid

Projected circle in image
(Distorted ellipse)

Figure 1. Centroid estimation in distorted Images. This figure illustrates the effects of camera projection and lens distortion
on circular targets within an image. Due to these distortions, circles lose their conic properties and deform into distorted ellipses,
making center point tracking challenging. (Red) failure of conventional control point estimation methods, as indicated by an incorrectly tracked center point. (Green) the proposed unbiased estimator accurately identifies the center point of the transformed ellipse,
as derived from closed-form calculations.

the circular pattern [11] excels in achieving sub-pixel level
detection accuracy, while the biased projection model has
led to poor calibration results. Compensating the perspective bias using the conic feature is not sufficient, and the
more dominant factor is the nonlinear lens distortion [16].
It degrades the geometric properties of the cone, making it
difficult to estimate the centroid of the projected circle as
described in Fig. 1.
In this paper, we push the envelope on the circular pattern by proposing an unbiased estimator in a closed-form
solution to handle the distortion bias. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first analytic solution describing projected conic features under radial polynomial distortion. Inspired by the fact that moment representation is possible to
describe the general distribution transformation under any
polynomial mapping, we proved that the characteristics of
the distorted conic, such as the centroid, could be expressed
as a linear combination of nth moments of the undistorted
conic. Our work is not only limited to distortion models for
1373

