This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SVGDreamer: Text Guided SVG Generation with Diffusion Model
Ximing Xing, Haitao Zhou, Chuang Wang, Jing Zhang
Beihang University
{ximingxing, zhouhaitao, chuangwang, zhang jing}@buaa.edu.cn

Dong Xu
The University of Hong Kong

Qian Yu*
Beihang University

dongxu@cs.hku.hk

qianyu@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, text-guided scalable vector graphics (SVGs)
synthesis has shown promise in domains such as iconography and sketch. However, existing text-to-SVG generation methods lack editability and struggle with visual
quality and result diversity. To address these limitations,
we propose a novel text-guided vector graphics synthesis
method called SVGDreamer. SVGDreamer incorporates
a semantic-driven image vectorization (SIVE) process that
enables the decomposition of synthesis into foreground objects and background, thereby enhancing editability. Specifically, the SIVE process introduces attention-based primitive control and an attention-mask loss function for effective control and manipulation of individual elements. Additionally, we propose a Vectorized Particle-based Score
Distillation (VPSD) approach to address issues of shape
over-smoothing, color over-saturation, limited diversity,
and slow convergence of the existing text-to-SVG generation methods by modeling SVGs as distributions of control points and colors. Furthermore, VPSD leverages a reward model to re-weight vector particles, which improves
aesthetic appeal and accelerates convergence. Extensive
experiments are conducted to validate the effectiveness of
SVGDreamer, demonstrating its superiority over baseline
methods in terms of editability, visual quality, and diversity. Project page: https://ximinng.github.io/SVGDreamerproject/

1. Introduction
Scalable Vector Graphics (SVGs) represent visual concepts
using geometric primitives such as Bézier curves, polygons,
and lines. Due to their inherent nature, SVGs are highly
suitable for visual design applications, such as posters and
* Corresponding author

logos. Secondly, compared to raster images, vector images
can maintain compact file sizes, making them more efficient
for storage and transmission purposes. More importantly,
vector images offer greater editability, allowing designers to
easily select, modify, and compose elements. This attribute
is particularly crucial in the design process, as it allows for
seamless adjustments and creative exploration.
In recent years, there has been a growing interest in
general vector graphics generation. Various optimizationbased methods [4, 12, 19, 28, 34, 40, 41, 48] have been
proposed, building upon the differentiable rasterizer DiffVG [14]. These methods, such as CLIPDraw [4] and
VectorFusion [12], differ primarily in their approach to
supervision. Some works [4, 19, 28, 34, 40, 41] combine the CLIP model [23] with DiffVG [14], using CLIP
as a source of supervision. More recently, the significantly progress achieved by Text-to-Image (T2I) diffusion models [20, 24, 26, 27, 37] has inspired the task of
text-to-vector-graphics. Both VectorFusion [12] and DiffSketcher [48] attempted to utilize T2I diffusion models for
supervision. These models make use of the high-quality
raster images generated by T2I models as targets to optimize the parameters of vector images. Additionally, the priors embedded within T2I models can be distilled and applied in this task. Consequently, models that use T2I for
supervision generally perform better than those using the
CLIP model.
Despite their impressive performance, existing T2Ibased methods have certain limitations. Firstly, the vector
images generated by these methods lack editability. Unlike the conventional approach of creating vector graphics,
where individual elements are added one by one, T2I-based
methods do not distinguish between different components
during synthesis. As a result, the objects become entangled, making it challenging to edit or modify a single object independently. Secondly, there is still a large room
for improvement in visual quality and diversity of the re-

4546

