This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Vision Check-up for Language Models
Pratyusha Sharma* 1 Tamar Rott Shaham* 1 Manel Baradad1 Stephanie Fu† 2
Adrián Rodrı́guez-Muñoz1 Shivam Duggal1 Phillip Isola1 Antonio Torralba1
1
MIT CSAIL 2 UC Berkeley

Abstract
What does learning to model relationships between
strings teach Large Language Models (LLMs) about the visual world? We systematically evaluate LLMs’ abilities to
generate and recognize an assortment of visual concepts of
increasing complexity and then demonstrate how a preliminary visual representation learning system can be trained
using models of text. As language models lack the ability to
consume or output visual information as pixels, we use code
to represent images in our study. Although LLM-generated
images do not look like natural images, results on image
generation and the ability of models to correct these generated images indicate that precise modeling of strings can
teach language models about numerous aspects of the visual world. Furthermore, experiments on self-supervised
visual representation learning, utilizing images generated
with text models, highlight the potential to train vision models capable of making semantic assessments of natural images using just LLMs.

1. Introduction
What does it mean to understand the visual concept of e.g. a
“frog”? Is it sufficient to know the color of its skin, the number of feet it has, the location of its eyes, details about how
it looks when it hops? While a subset of this information
about the appearance of a frog can be acquired from text,
it is widely believed that to understand the concept visually,
one would need to observe an image of a frog or, better still,
observe it from different perspectives and in various realworld scenes. However, to what extent can we learn about
the visual “meaning” of different concepts from text1 ?
Despite operating on textual data, language model representations have been shown to contain information about
named perceptual concepts like shape and color [9, 22, 36]
* Indicates equal contribution.
† Work done while at MIT CSAIL.

Project page: https://vision-checkup.github.io/
1 While the question of what can be learned about the visual world from

natural language alone is interesting, in our case, “text” represents the
space of all strings on the internet, including natural language and code.

and have been found to be linearly translatable to representations learned by vision models [27, 37]. These experiments demonstrate that independently, vision and language
models represent aspects of the world similarly. While investigating model representations for a pre-selected set of
attributes can inform us about information encoded by the
model, it limits studying a fixed set of attributes at once and
requires access to the model’s internal parameters. Instead,
as seen in Fig. 1, we ask:
1. What do language models know about the visual world?
2. Can we train a vision system for natural images using a
text-only model?
To answer these questions, we evaluate what information
about the visual world off-the-shelf language models contain by testing their ability to render (draw) and recognize
(see) real-world visual concepts. This allows us to measure
their ability to model arbitrary properties, both individually
and concurrently, without training a classifier for a rigid set
of features one at a time. Although LLMs are limited in
their ability to generate images using pixels, examples presented by [8] suggest that models like GPT-4 can generate code capable of rendering objects like a unicorn. We
take this further by measuring LLMs abilities to generate visual concepts of increasing complexity via a textual prompt
→ code → image procedure. Figure 2 shows examples of
complex scenes generated by LLMs. We find that LLMs
are surprisingly good at generating intricate visual scenes
composed of multiple objects, effectively modeling spatial
relations between them. However, there are aspects of the
visual world that LLMs fail to capture, including objects’
properties like their textures, precise shapes, as well as surface contact with other objects in the image.
Next, we evaluate the ability of LLMs to recognize (see)
perceptual concepts (Fig. 1 Part I (b)). We do this by collecting human drawings represented as code and asking LLMs
what they depict. The code describes the ordered sequence
of shapes, their locations, and colors. We find that unlike humans, where creation is hard and verification is easy,
models struggle to interpret/recognize code describing detailed scenes that they themselves can effectively generate.
Further, we demonstrate that the visual generation competence of a language model can be improved using text-

14410

