This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FineParser: A Fine-grained Spatio-temporal Action Parser for Human-centric
Action Quality Assessment

1

Jinglin Xu1 Sibo Yin2 Guohao Zhao2 Zishuo Wang2 Yuxin Peng2 *
School of Intelligence Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology Beijing
2
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
xujinglinlove@gmail.com; 2000012982@stu.pku.edu.cn; ssee7235@gmail.com;
1900013093@pku.edu.cn; pengyuxin@pku.edu.cn

Forward

1 Twist

2.5 Somersaults Pike

Entry

Score: 72.0

Exemplar

FineParser

Query

Score:?

Query video: 5253B (Action Type), 3.2 (Difficulty Degree), 75.2 (Action Score)

Figure 1. An overview of fine-grained spatial-temporal action parser (FineParser). It enhances human-centric foreground action representations by exploiting fine-grained semantic consistency and spatial-temporal correlation between video frames, improving the AQA
performance. Green, red, yellow, and blue dashed lines represent the fine-grained alignment of target actions between query and exemplar
videos in time and space within the same semantics.

Abstract
Existing action quality assessment (AQA) methods
mainly learn deep representations at the video level for
scoring diverse actions. Due to the lack of a fine-grained
understanding of actions in videos, they harshly suffer
from low credibility and interpretability, thus insufficient
for stringent applications, such as Olympic diving events.
We argue that a fine-grained understanding of actions requires the model to perceive and parse actions in both time
and space, which is also the key to the credibility and interpretability of the AQA technique. Based on this insight, we
propose a new fine-grained spatial-temporal action parser
named FineParser. It learns human-centric foreground action representations by focusing on target action regions
within each frame and exploiting their fine-grained alignments in time and space to minimize the impact of invalid backgrounds during the assessment. In addition, we
* Corresponding author.

construct fine-grained annotations of human-centric foreground action masks for the FineDiving dataset, called
FineDiving-HM. With refined annotations on diverse target
action procedures, FineDiving-HM can promote the development of real-world AQA systems. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of FineParser,
which outperforms state-of-the-art methods while supporting more tasks of fine-grained action understanding. Data
and code are available at https://github.com/
PKU-ICST-MIPL/FineParser_CVPR2024.

1. Introduction
Video understanding is a crucial technique in computer
vision that aims to analyze objects, actions, or events in
videos automatically. It is essential for many real-world applications, e.g., human-computer interaction [9, 12, 21, 33],
medical rehabilitation [11, 32], and sports analysis [6, 15,
30, 36]. Notably, a clear and accurate understanding of
actions in videos provides critical and extensive technique

14628

