This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Coarse to Fine-Grained Open-Set Recognition

Granularity

“animals”

Phylum
Class
“birds”

Open-set recognition (OSR) methods aim to identify
whether or not a test example belongs to a category observed during training. Depending on how visually similar a test example is to the training categories, the OSR
task can be easy or extremely challenging. However,
the vast majority of previous work has studied OSR in
the presence of large, coarse-grained semantic shifts. In
contrast, many real-world problems are inherently finegrained, which means that test examples may be highly
visually similar to the training categories. Motivated by
this observation, we investigate three aspects of OSR: label
granularity, similarity between the open- and closed-sets,
and the role of hierarchical supervision during training. To
study these dimensions, we curate new open-set splits of a
large fine-grained visual categorization dataset. Our analysis results in several interesting findings, including: (i)
the best OSR method to use is heavily dependent on the
degree of semantic shift present, and (ii) hierarchical representation learning can improve coarse-grained OSR, but
has little effect on fine-grained OSR performance. To further enhance fine-grained OSR performance, we propose a
hierarchy-adversarial learning method to discourage hierarchical structure in the representation space, which results
in a perhaps counter-intuitive behaviour, and a relative improvement in fine-grained OSR of up to 2% in AUROC and
7% in AUPR over standard training. Code and data are
available: langnico.github.io/fine-grained-osr.

1. Introduction
The goal of open-set recognition (OSR) is to distinguish
familiar or closed-set categories that were seen during
training from novel or open-set categories that were not
seen [45]. In other words, OSR focuses on detecting semantic shifts between the training and test categories.1 However, not all semantic shifts are equal. Different open-set
1 In this work, we use the taxonomic distance between categories in
a label hierarchy to quantify semantic dissimilarity. We assume that this
distance correlates with visual dissimilarity between the categories.

Order
Family
Genus
Species

closed-set

1-hop

2-hop

3-hop

4-hop

5-hop

6-hop

fine

Domain
Kingdom

Abstract

coarse

Nico Lang1
Vésteinn Snæbjarnarson1
Elijah Cole2
Oisin Mac Aodha3
Christian Igel1
Serge Belongie1
1
2
3
University of Copenhagen
Altos Labs
University of Edinburgh

7-hop

high

Semantic similarity

low

“easy”
“easy”
“hard”

Zero-shot
Transfer learning
Open-set recognition

“hard”
“hard”
“easy”

Hierarchy-supportive
representation space

Hierarchy-adversarial
representation space

Figure 1. Granularity and semantic similarity are understudied confounders in open-set recognition (OSR). Given a taxonomic label hierarchy, we curate open-set splits with increasing
semantic shifts (i.e., hops) to show that careful attention to these
factors is instrumental in answering questions such as: What is the
best OSR scoring method? Do hierarchical representations improve OSR?

categories will have different degrees of visual similarity
to the familiar closed-set categories. Recently, Vaze et al.
[53] showed that OSR is harder for categories exhibiting
smaller semantic shifts relative to the training categories.
Intuitively, novel categories that are highly similar to the
training categories tend to be confused with familiar ones
with high confidence. We refer to this phenomenon as the
“familiarity trap”. Note that this is the opposite of what we
expect to see in zero-shot classification [42] and transferlearning [12], where smaller semantic shifts make the problem easier, not harder (see illustration in Figure 1). The vast
majority of the OSR literature has focused on investigating
coarse open-set splits [53] while the impact of finer-grained
splits is underexplored.
Unlike traditional (coarse-grained) OSR, fine-grained
OSR reflects realistic category discovery challenges in fine-

17804

