This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyleCineGAN: Landscape Cinemagraph Generation
using a Pre-trained StyleGAN
Jongwoo Choi

Kwanggyoon Seo
Amirsaman Ashtari
Visual Media Lab, KAIST

Junyong Noh

{jeolpyeoni0,skg1023,a.s.ashtari,junyongnoh}@kaist.ac.kr

Figure 1. Given a landscape image, StyleCineGAN generates a seamless cinemagraph at 1024×1024 resolution. This figure contains
video clips, thus consider viewing it using Adobe Reader. The same results are also included in the supplementary video.

Abstract
We propose a method that can generate cinemagraphs
automatically from a still landscape image using a pretrained StyleGAN. Inspired by the success of recent unconditional video generation, we leverage a powerful pretrained image generator to synthesize high-quality cinemagraphs. Unlike previous approaches that mainly utilize the
latent space of a pre-trained StyleGAN, our approach utilizes its deep feature space for both GAN inversion and cinemagraph generation. Specifically, we propose multi-scale
deep feature warping (MSDFW), which warps the intermediate features of a pre-trained StyleGAN at different resolutions. By using MSDFW, the generated cinemagraphs are
of high resolution and exhibit plausible looping animation.
We demonstrate the superiority of our method through user
studies and quantitative comparisons with state-of-the-art
cinemagraph generation methods and a video generation
method that uses a pre-trained StyleGAN.

1. Introduction
Cinemagraph is a unique form of media that combines a still
image and video. While most of the scene remains still,
subtle and repeated movements in only a small region effectively highlight a particular object or an important event
that occurred at the time of capture. Because this mixture

of still and moving elements in one scene creates an interesting eye-catching effect, cinemagraphs have recently attracted increasing attention in social media.
Despite the growing popularity of cinemagraph, its creation heavily relies on a manual process. To create a motion
in part of the input image, one typically utilizes an image
manipulation tool to stretch, scale, rotate, or shift the part of
the image in a physically plausible and aesthetically pleasing way. This process is often time-consuming and requires
a high level of skill in the use of image editing tools. Therefore, creating a cinemagraph has generally been considered
to be a personal project of professionals so far.
To allow ordinary users to create a cinemagraph with a
single image, automatic methods have been proposed. One
line of research uses a reference video as guidance [14, 25,
33]. These methods are capable of producing realistic motions in the target scene similar to a reference video. Recent methods obviate the need for a reference video, by
training deep generative models [4, 6, 9, 15, 17–19, 23].
These methods decompose the task into two processes of
learning motion and spatial information individually from
separate datasets. The decomposition effectively reduces
the complexity of simultaneously learning both temporal and spatial information, and improves the perceptual
quality of the generated videos. However, these models

7872

