This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Content Bias in Fréchet Video Distance
Songwei Ge1

2
3
University of Maryland, College Park
Carnegie Mellon University
Adobe Research
https://content-debiased-fvd.github.io/

x-t slice

Videos

1

Aniruddha Mahapatra2,3
Gaurav Parmar2
Jun-Yan Zhu2
Jia-Bin Huang1

x

x
t

x
t

(a) Reference Videos

t

(b) Medium Spatial & No Temporal
Corruption
FVD=317.10

(c) Small Spatial & Severe Temporal
Corruption
FVD=310.52

Figure 1. FVD is biased towards per-frame quality than temporal consistency. FVD [72], a commonly used video generation evaluation
metric, should ideally capture both spatial and temporal aspects. However, our experiments reveal a strong bias toward individual frame
quality. (b) First, we apply mild spatial distortions through local warping, which results in an FVD score of 317.10. (c) Next, we induce
slightly less spatial corruptions but severe temporal inconsistencies by altering each frame differently. These changes create artifacts that are
noticeable to humans and evident in the spatiotemporal x-t slice, as seen in the bottom row, but surprisingly lead to a lower FVD score
of 310.52. This discrepancy highlights the metric’s bias towards individual frame quality. We encourage readers to view the videos with
Acrobat Reader or visit our website to observe the inconsistencies.

Abstract
Fréchet Video Distance (FVD), a prominent metric for
evaluating video generation models, is known to conflict
with human perception occasionally. In this paper, we aim
to explore the extent of FVD’s bias toward per-frame quality over temporal realism and identify its sources. We first
quantify the FVD’s sensitivity to the temporal axis by decoupling the frame and motion quality and find that the FVD
increases only slightly with large temporal corruption. We
then analyze the generated videos and show that via careful
sampling from a large set of generated videos that do not
contain motions, one can drastically decrease FVD without
improving the temporal quality. Both studies suggest FVD’s
bias towards the quality of individual frames. We further observe that the bias can be attributed to the features extracted
from a supervised video classifier trained on the content-

biased dataset. We show that FVD with features extracted
from the recent large-scale self-supervised video models is
less biased toward image quality. Finally, we revisit a few
real-world examples to validate our hypothesis.

1. Introduction
Video generation [5, 9, 12, 21, 22, 30, 62] has recently accomplished unprecedented advances driven by the scalable
models [29, 65] and growing training data [4, 57]. With
rapid progress, it is increasingly crucial to evaluate the model
performance accurately. Despite the fruitful literature on assessing video quality [40, 58, 63, 81] and designing image
generation evaluation metrics [28, 38, 47, 48, 55], automatically evaluating the quality and diversity of the generated
videos, has received less attention [33, 44]. In this paper,
we focus on analyzing the bias of Fréchet Video Distance

7277

