This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shallow-Deep Collaborative Learning for Unsupervised Visible-Infrared
Person Re-Identification
Bin Yang Jun Chen* Mang Ye *
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
School of Computer Science, Hubei Luojia Laboratory, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
https://github.com/yangbincv/SDCL

Abstract

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims at matching the same
person image captured by non-overlapping cameras. In recent times, ReID has garnered significant attention from
the computer vision research community, owing to its pivotal role in the context of intelligent video surveillance applications [2, 18, 19, 23, 25, 28–30, 39, 41, 44, 46, 57,
* Corresponding Author.

(b)
Clustering
Visible Patch
Embedding

Unsupervised visible-infrared person re-identification
(US-VI-ReID) centers on learning a cross-modality retrieval model without labels, reducing the reliance on expensive cross-modality manual annotation. Previous USVI-ReID works gravitate toward learning cross-modality
information with the deep features extracted from the ultimate layer. Nevertheless, interfered by the multiple discrepancies, solely relying on deep features is insufficient
for accurately learning modality-invariant features, resulting in negative optimization. The shallow feature from the
shallow layers contains nuanced detail information, which
is critical for effective cross-modality learning but is disregarded regrettably by the existing methods. To address
the above issues, we design a Shallow-Deep Collaborative
Learning (SDCL) framework based on the transformer with
shallow-deep contrastive learning, incorporating Collaborative Neighbor Learning (CNL) and Collaborative Ranking Association (CRA) module. Specifically, CNL unveils
the intrinsic homogeneous and heterogeneous collaboration
which are harnessed for neighbor alignment, enhancing the
robustness in a dynamic manner. Furthermore, CRA associates the cross-modality labels with the ranking association between shallow and deep features, furnishing valuable
supervision for cross-modality learning. Extensive experiments validate the superiority of our method, even outperforming certain supervised counterparts.

(a)
Cross-modality
Label Association

Feature Learning

Only
Deep Feature

Negative
Optimization
Interference
Inter-modality
Discrepancy

Multiple
Discrepancies

Ground Truth
Cross-modality Label Pairs

Collaborative Association
Deep
Shallow
Label Association Label Association

Intra-modality
Variation

Deep
Features

+
Shallow
Feature Learning

Counteracting
Multiple
Discrepancies

Deep
Feature Learning

Collaborative Learning
Shallow
Features

Negative
Optimization

Figure 1. Illustration of the motivation. Previous advanced works
for US-VI-ReID mainly focus on learning features and associating cross-modality labels with deep features. However, interfered
by the multiple discrepancies, solely relying on deep features is
insufficient for accurately learning modality-invariant features, resulting in negative optimization, as shown in (a). In this paper, we
incorporate shallow and deep features with collaborative learning
and label association to remedy these problems, as shown in (b).

59, 62, 63]. The rank-1 accuracy has exhibited encouraging outcomes in supervised person ReID. Notably, these
person images are typically acquired by visible cameras
within well-illuminated environments. However, it is crucial to recognize that visible cameras often fail to capture sufficient information of individuals in low-light settings, consequently constraining the practicality of singlemodality ReID in the context of night-time surveillance
[1, 7, 15, 21, 40, 42, 45, 53, 61].
In contrast, recently deployed cameras possess the
capability to seamlessly transition into far/near-infrared
mode during nighttime operations [50, 55]. Various techniques [12, 20, 22, 27, 34, 47, 52, 54–58, 62] have been
proposed for visible-infrared person re-identification (VIReID), resulting in commendable accuracy levels. Notably,
these achievements are facilitated by extensive humanlabeled cross-modality datasets. However, annotating
cross-modality datasets demands more resources compared
to the annotation of single-modality ReID datasets. This

16870

