This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Friendly Sharpness-Aware Minimization
Tao Li1
Pan Zhou2
Zhengbao He1
Xinwen Cheng1
Xiaolin Huang1
1
Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Singapore Management University, Singapore
{li.tao,lstefanie,xinwencheng,xiaolinhuang}@sjtu.edu.cn

panzhou@smu.edu.sg

Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) has been instrumental in improving deep neural network training by minimizing both training loss and loss sharpness. Despite the
practical success, the mechanisms behind SAM’s generalization enhancements remain elusive, limiting its progress
in deep learning optimization. In this work, we investigate
SAM’s core components for generalization improvement
and introduce “Friendly-SAM” (F-SAM) to further enhance
SAM’s generalization. Our investigation reveals the key
role of batch-specific stochastic gradient noise within the
adversarial perturbation, i.e., the current minibatch gradient, which significantly influences SAM’s generalization
performance. By decomposing the adversarial perturbation in SAM into full gradient and stochastic gradient noise
components, we discover that relying solely on the full gradient component degrades generalization while excluding it
leads to improved performance. The possible reason lies
in the full gradient component’s increase in sharpness loss
for the entire dataset, creating inconsistencies with the subsequent sharpness minimization step solely on the current
minibatch data. Inspired by these insights, F-SAM aims to
mitigate the negative effects of the full gradient component.
It removes the full gradient estimated by an exponentially
moving average (EMA) of historical stochastic gradients,
and then leverages stochastic gradient noise for improved
generalization. Moreover, we provide theoretical validation for the EMA approximation and prove the convergence
of F-SAM on non-convex problems. Extensive experiments
demonstrate the superior generalization performance and
robustness of F-SAM over vanilla SAM. Code is available
at https://github.com/nblt/F-SAM .

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
performance in various vision and language processing
tasks [1–3]. A critical factor contributing to their success
is the choice of optimization algorithms [4–9], designed to

Test accuracy (%)

Abstract
82

ResNet-18 on CIFAR-100

81

80.88

81.21

80
79
78.02

78
77

SAM

SAM-full SAM-noise

Figure 1. Investigation on SAM’s adversarial perturbation direction. We decompose the minibatch gradient ∇B L(w) into two
components: the full gradient component and the remaining batchspecific stochastic gradient noise. Solely using the full gradient
component leads to a dramatic generalization degradation, while
only using the noise component enhances the generalization.

efficiently optimize DNN model parameters. To achieve
better performance, it is often desirable for an optimizer
to converge to flat minima, characterized by uniformly low
loss values, as opposed to sharp minima with abrupt loss
changes, as the former typically results in better generalization [10–13]. However, the complex landscape of overparameterized DNNs, featuring numerous sharp minima,
presents challenges for optimizers in real applications.
To address this challenge, Sharpness-Aware Minimization (SAM) [14] is proposed to simultaneously minimize
the training loss and the loss sharpness, enabling it to
identify flat minima associated with improved generalization performance. For each training iteration, given the
minibatch training loss LB (w) parameterized by w, SAM
achieves this by adversarially computing a adversarial perturbation ϵs to maximize the training loss LB (w + ϵs ). It
then minimizes the loss of this perturbed objective via one
updating step of a base optimizer, such as SGD [4]. In
practice, to efficiently compute ϵs , SAM takes a linear approximation of the loss objective, and employs the minibatch gradient ∇LB (w) as the accent direction for searching ϵs = ρ · norm(∇LB (w)), where norm(x) = x/∥x∥2
and ρ > 0 is a radius. This approach enables SAM to seek
models situated in neighborhoods characterized by consis-

5631

