This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Watermark-embedded Adversarial Examples for
Copyright Protection against Diffusion Models
Peifei Zhu, Tsubasa Takahashi, Hirokatsu Kataoka
LY Corporation
{peifei.zhu, tsubasa.takahashi, jpz4219, }@lycorp.co.jp

Abstract

No protection
DMs

Diffusion Models (DMs) have shown remarkable capabilities in various image-generation tasks. However, there
are growing concerns that DMs could be used to imitate
unauthorized creations and thus raise copyright issues. To
address this issue, we propose a novel framework that embeds personal watermarks in the generation of adversarial
examples. Such examples can force DMs to generate images with visible watermarks and prevent DMs from imitating unauthorized images. We construct a generator based
on conditional adversarial networks and design three losses
(adversarial loss, GAN loss, and perturbation loss) to generate adversarial examples that have subtle perturbation
but can effectively attack DMs to prevent copyright violations. Training a generator for a personal watermark by
our method only requires 5-10 samples within 2-3 minutes,
and once the generator is trained, it can generate adversarial examples with that watermark significantly fast (0.2s
per image). We conduct extensive experiments in various
conditional image-generation scenarios. Compared to existing methods that generate images with chaotic textures,
our method adds visible watermarks on the generated images, which is a more straightforward way to indicate copyright violations. We also observe that our adversarial examples exhibit good transferability across unknown generative
models. Therefore, this work provides a simple yet powerful
way to protect copyright from DM-based imitation.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models (DMs) [19, 42, 46] have garnered significant attention in both the computer vision industry and
academia. Compared to previous generative models such as
generative adversarial networks (GANs) [15, 23, 32], DMs
have demonstrated a remarkable ability to generate realistic images with higher resolution and diversity. Despite the
positive aspects of DMs, there are public concerns about potential copyright violations when unauthorized images are

Img-to-img Textual inversion

Original

Previous method
DMs

DMs

Opt
Original

Adversarial

Img-to-img Textual inversion

Ours
DMs
Watermark

Original

G

Adversarial

Img-to-img Textual inversion

Figure 1. Copyright issues of DMs and adversarial example-based
methods for copyright protection. Without protection, DMs can
easily imitate original images under different image generation
scenarios. A previous method (AdvDM [28]) generates adversarial examples by optimization against DMs to prevent DMs from
extracting the feature of the original images, resulting in the generation of chaotic images. Our method goes one step further to
build a generator that embeds personal watermarks into the generation of adversarial images. Such examples force DMs to generate
images with visible watermarks for tracing copyright. Our method
is fast, simple yet powerful in protecting copyrights against DMs.

used to train DMs or to generate new creations by DMs
[55]. For example, an entity could use copyrighted paintings shared on the Internet to generate images with a similar style and appearance, potentially earning illegal revenue.
Therefore, it is necessary to develop techniques to prevent
the imitation of unauthorized creations by DMs.
Several previous works have been proposed to address
these concerns. Watermarking [2, 33] is a common solution that embeds an invisible message into the image, which
can then be extracted to identify the existence of copyright.

24420

