This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NetTrack: Tracking Highly Dynamic Objects with a Net
Guangze Zheng1,2 Shijie Lin1,2 Haobo Zuo1,2 Changhong Fu 3 Jia Pan1,2 *
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Centre for Transformative Garment Production 3 Tongji University
{guangze, lsj2048, haobozuo}@connect.hku.hk, changhongfu@tongji.edu.cn, jpan@cs.hku.hk
https://george-zhuang.github.io/nettrack

a

c

b
Coarse-grained object cues

Valley
Swamp
Steppe
Snowfield

Deformation!

Failure

Deformation!

Coarse-grained

Track with a Box (traditional)

Fine-grained object cues

Open-world prompt: "Osprey (Unknown) + fish (Known)"

Internal
relationships
Fine-grained

Robust
Track with a Net (ours)

Snow
mountain

Fast motion!

Deformation!

Referring prompt : "A large bird with brown head,
wings, and white tail is predating"

Figure 1. a The visualization of the proposed NetTrack is similar to a Net. Object dynamicity distorts the internal relationships of
the object, presenting challenges for traditional coarse-grained tracking methods that rely solely on bounding boxes. While NetTrack
introduces fine-grained Nets that are robust to dynamicity. b Qualitative results of NetTrack tracking highly dynamic objects under openworld tracking and referring expression comprehension settings. Dynamicity like deformation and fast motion results in drastic changes in
the coarse-grained representation, while the fine-grained Nets can contract robustly. The dashed boxes represent the object position from
the previous time step. c We propose a challenging benchmark named BFT, dedicated to evaluating highly dynamic object tracking with
abundant scenarios shown in the external circular and diverse species shown in the central word cloud.

Abstract
The complex dynamicity of open-world objects presents
non-negligible challenges for multi-object tracking (MOT),
often manifested as severe deformations, fast motion, and
occlusions. Most methods that solely depend on coarsegrained object cues, such as boxes and the overall appearance of the object, are susceptible to degradation due to
distorted internal relationships of dynamic objects. To address this problem, this work proposes NetTrack, an efficient, generic, and affordable tracking framework to introduce fine-grained learning that is robust to dynamicity.
Specifically, NetTrack constructs a dynamicity-aware association with a fine-grained Net, leveraging point-level visual cues. Correspondingly, a fine-grained sampler and
matching method have been incorporated. Furthermore,
NetTrack learns object-text correspondence for fine-grained
∗ Corresponding author.

localization. To evaluate MOT in extremely dynamic openworld scenarios, a bird flock tracking (BFT) dataset is
constructed, which exhibits high dynamicity with diverse
species and open-world scenarios. Comprehensive evaluation on BFT validates the effectiveness of fine-grained
learning on object dynamicity, and thorough transfer experiments on challenging open-world benchmarks, i.e., TAO,
TAO-OW, AnimalTrack, and GMOT-40, validate the strong
generalization ability of NetTrack even without finetuning.

1. Introduction
Multiple object tracking (MOT) [7, 23, 34, 42, 45] aims to
maintain continuous visual perception of objects of interest in videos and the real world. Traditional MOT methods often assume objects as coarse-grained entities because
in classical MOT tasks [9, 61, 67], the dynamicity of specific object categories [10] and scenes is not significant, and

19145

