This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Picture is Worth More Than 77 Text Tokens:
Evaluating CLIP-Style Models on Dense Captions
Jack Urbanek*†
1

Florian Bordes1,2,3†
Pietro Astolfi1
Mary Williamson1
1,3,4,5
Adriana Romero-Soriano

FAIR, Meta 2 Mila 3 Universite de Montreal, 4 McGill University

Abstract
Curation methods for massive vision-language datasets
trade off between dataset size and quality. However, even
the highest quality of available curated captions are far too
short to capture the rich visual detail in an image. To show
the value of dense and highly-aligned image-text pairs,
we collect the Densely Captioned Images (DCI) dataset,
containing 7805 natural images human-annotated with
mask-aligned descriptions averaging above 1000 words
each. With precise and reliable captions associated with
specific parts of an image, we can evaluate vision-language
models’ (VLMs) understanding of image content with a
novel task that matches each caption with its corresponding
subcrop. As current models are often limited to 77 text
tokens, we also introduce a summarized version (sDCI) in
which each caption length is limited. We show that modern
techniques that make progress on standard benchmarks do
not correspond with significant improvement on our sDCI
based benchmark. Lastly, we finetune CLIP using sDCI and
show significant improvements over the baseline despite a
small training set. By releasing the first human annotated
dense image captioning dataset, we hope to enable the
development of new benchmarks or fine-tuning recipes for
the next generation of VLMs to come.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art vision-language models (VLMs) are often
trained on large scale datasets such as LAION-400M [28],
YFCC100M [34], or other undisclosed datasets crawled
from the web. These datasets are formed by collecting images from the web and using alt-text (or other local text on
the webpage) to create loose image-text pairs. These can
then be filtered down trading off on quantity for quality [26,
30]. Still, recent work has demonstrated that throwing these
*
†

Work done while at Meta
Equal contribution

5

Vasu Sharma1

Canada CIFAR AI chair

loose captions out entirely in favor of generated captions,
with enhanced quality and density, can produce improved
results [10]. Other works [1, 20, 21, 38] have demonstrated
that it is possible to get CLIP-level performance using a
vastly reduced compute, often by throwing away portions of
the data resulting in more balance between image and text
modalities. However, those approaches rely on automatic
pipelines which do not generate reliable and long captions
that can capture rich visual details in an image. From this it
appears no existing dataset has high-quality image descriptions that are tightly-coupled enough with the image to train
for or evaluate a deep alignment between the two domains.
In the absence of high quality captions to evaluate VLMs, benchmarks such as ARO [42] and VLChecklist [45] often complement image-caption pairs with
hard negatives that are generated by slightly altering the
initial (positive) description. Progress on these benchmarks
has been rooted in training VLMs with negatives of similar
construction to the tests [42] rendering the methodologies
ineffective on datasets such as Winoground [35]. Recent
works [22] have called the evaluation capacity of many
of these benchmarks into question, given how effective
language-prior-based methods perform. More specifically,
given the unlikeliness of the hard negative captions in these
benchmarks, a good text encoder can achieve close to 100%
accuracy without looking at the images. Moreover, Bordes
et al. [3] have shown that most improvements observed on
ARO or VL-Checklist do not translate on simple synthetic
benchmarks for which the negative caption is as likely as
the positive one. Since the use of VLMs is significantly
increasing, it is crucial to make sure that we have a diverse
suite of reliable benchmarks to asses their abilities.
In this paper, we introduce the Densely Captioned
Images dataset, a collection of 7805 images with dense and
mask-aligned descriptions averaging above 1000 words
each. One such example is provided in Figure 1, displaying
just a subset of the collected text paired with their aligned
masks. We demonstrate how to leverage this dataset to
evaluate VLMs in two ways after summarizing captions

26700

