This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Dynamic Tetrahedra for High-Quality Talking Head Synthesis
Ruobing Zheng2 Bonan Li1 Congying Han1 * Tianqi Li2
Tiande Guo1 Jingdong Chen2 Ziwen Liu1 Ming Yang2

Zicheng Zhang1
Meng Wang2
1

University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

Abstract
Recent works in implicit representations, such as Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF), have advanced the generation of realistic and animatable head avatars from video
sequences. These implicit methods are still confronted by
visual artifacts and jitters, since the lack of explicit geometric constraints poses a fundamental challenge in accurately
modeling complex facial deformations. In this paper, we introduce Dynamic Tetrahedra (DynTet), a novel hybrid representation that encodes explicit dynamic meshes by neural networks to ensure geometric consistency across various motions and viewpoints. DynTet is parameterized by
the coordinate-based networks which learn signed distance,
deformation, and material texture, anchoring the training
data into a predefined tetrahedra grid. Leveraging Marching Tetrahedra, DynTet efficiently decodes textured meshes
with a consistent topology, enabling fast rendering through
a differentiable rasterizer and supervision via a pixel loss.
To enhance training efficiency, we incorporate classical
3D Morphable Models to facilitate geometry learning and
define a canonical space for simplifying texture learning.
These advantages are readily achievable owing to the effective geometric representation employed in DynTet. Compared with prior works, DynTet demonstrates significant
improvements in fidelity, lip synchronization, and real-time
performance according to various metrics. Beyond producing stable and visually appealing synthesis videos, our
method also outputs the dynamic meshes which is promising
to enable many emerging applications. Code is available at
https://github.com/zhangzc21/DynTet.

1. Introduction
Talking head synthesis is a long-standing task with a wide
range of applications, such as digital humans, metaverse
and filmmaking. The set up of this task can be roughly
categorized to two lines: 1) learning from a large-scale
dataset to drive arbitrary portrait images by the motion sig* Corresponding author

2

Ant Group

nal [7, 40, 41, 50, 62, 70, 77, 78]; and 2) building a personalized animatable head model from a several-minute video
of a specific person [23, 31, 37, 53, 60, 61, 64, 67, 74].
We concentrate on the latter one, since it generally delivers
high-quality synthesis results with intricate details and 3D
naturalness, suitable for professional scenarios.
Building such an exquisite talking head avatar from
video data poses challenges in faithful appearance, motion control, as well as low running cost. One line of
methods [14, 19, 20, 28, 30, 61, 67] explicitly rely on 3D
Morphable Models (3DMM) [3] to reconstruct and animate human faces by estimating the person-specific parameters. While these methods allow for efficient rendering and dynamic deformation, the fixed face topology
makes them often fall short in generating characteristic details, e.g., hairstyle, glasses, and inner mouth. Recently,
neural implicit representations, especially Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) [43], provide a new way to realize faithful
generation. Some seminal work [16, 23, 37, 53, 64] learn a
direct mapping from the control signal to the talking head,
meanwhile the efficient neural representations like voxel
grid [15, 34, 57] and hash encoding [44] have been introduced to improve training and inference speed.
Despite the expressive capabilities, these implicit methods still need to improve many subtle issues in realism, e.g.,
head jitters, motionless mouths, and occasional artifacts.
Researchers have discussed these issues from various aspects, e.g., introducing a canonical space for easier appearance learning [1, 49], developing compact models for more
efficient training [31, 60], and using expressive driving conditions for better control [64, 65], against the naive baseline of NeRF. Essentially, the implicit definition for 3D objects complicates the analytical alternation of the underlying object geometry, leading to ineffective disentanglement
of static appearance and motion from dynamic data, as opposed to the explicit meshes and vertex displacements for
3DMM. In viewing of this, it is appealing to incorporate the
expressivity of implicit methods with an effective geometric
control to take advantage of both lines of works.
We introduce Dynamic Tetrahedra (DynTet), a novel hybrid approach that encodes dynamic meshes within neural

5209

