This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OED: Towards One-stage End-to-End Dynamic Scene Graph Generation
Guan Wang1 Zhimin Li2 Qingchao Chen3 Yang Liu1 *
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Tencent Inc. 3 National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University
w.g@stu.pku.edu.cn

zhiminli.cn@outlook.com

Abstract
Dynamic Scene Graph Generation (DSGG) focuses on
identifying visual relationships within the spatial-temporal
domain of videos. Conventional approaches often employ
multi-stage pipelines, which typically consist of object detection, temporal association, and multi-relation classification. However, these methods exhibit inherent limitations
due to the separation of multiple stages, and independent
optimization of these sub-problems may yield sub-optimal
solutions. To remedy these limitations, we propose a onestage end-to-end framework, termed OED, which streamlines the DSGG pipeline. This framework reformulates
the task as a set prediction problem and leverages pairwise features to represent each subject-object pair within
the scene graph. Moreover, another challenge of DSGG
is capturing temporal dependencies, we introduce a Progressively Refined Module (PRM) for aggregating temporal context without the constraints of additional trackers
or handcrafted trajectories, enabling end-to-end optimization of the network. Extensive experiments conducted on
the Action Genome benchmark demonstrate the effectiveness of our design. The code and models are available at
https://github.com/guanw-pku/OED.

1. Introduction
Scene Graph Generation (SGG) has emerged as a crucial
component in advancing human-centric scene understanding, garnering significant research attention in recent years.
The SGG research has been extensively employed in various high-level tasks, such as Visual Question Answering [3, 12, 18, 20], Visual Commonsense Reasoning [31]
and Image Generation [7]. Dynamic scene graph generation (DSGG) further extends SGG with additional temporal
dimension and then becomes more challenging, which aims
at understanding more informative spatial-temporal cues.
The primary objective of DSGG is to provide a sequence
* Corresponding author

{qingchao.chen, yangliu}@pku.edu.cn

Target frame

Target frame

Multi-stage(a)
SpatialTemporal
Context
Aggregation
&
Predicate
Classification

Detection
Tracking

Direct
Scene Graph
Generation

Target frame

Spatial-Temporal Context Aggregation

One-stage(b)

Figure 1. Comparison between existing multi-stage paradigm and
proposed one-stage end-to-end framework. (a) Multi-stage methods, typically detect object instances by individual object detector
and may associate objects between frames to aggregate temporal
context based on detection results, followed by predicate classification for all candidate subject and object pairs, where tracking
maybe lost. (b) Our one-stage end-to-end method, directly generates dynamic scene graph for given video sequence, without individual consideration for object instance detection and tracking.
The missing spatial context and predicate temporal dependency
could be supplemented with spatial context of reference frames.

of comprehensive and structural representation of scenes by
taking video sequence as input and detecting subject and
object as nodes, as well as identifying the multi-relations
between them as edges in graphs. Existing studies [8, 14]
present promising results in DSGG by decoupling this task
into multiple stages: instance detection, temporal association, and multi-relation classification, as illustrated in
Fig. 1(a). Specifically, subject and object detection results
are obtained using an object detector. Subsequently, a temporal module, such as a tracker, establishes temporal links
between instances in adjacent frames and aggregates temporal features on pair-wise combined subject-object proposals
within the temporal sequence. The final stage entails performing multi-relation classification utilizing pair-wise features. Notably, prior to multi-relation classification, multistage methods requires the enumeration of instance or tracklet pairs. However, enumerative constructing all candidate

27938

