This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LiveHPS: LiDAR-based Scene-level Human Pose and Shape Estimation
in Free Environment
Yiming Ren1 , Xiao Han1 , Chengfeng Zhao1 , Jingya Wang1 , Lan Xu1 , Jingyi Yu1 , Yuexin Ma1, *
1
ShanghaiTech University
{renym2022,mayuexin}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Figure 1. We propose a novel single-LiDAR-based approach for 3D HPS in large-scale scenarios, which is not limited
to fixed studios, light conditions, and wearable devices. Our method predicts full human SMPL parameters(pose, shape,
translation) from consecutive LiDAR point clouds and performs well for challenging poses and occlusion situations.

Abstract
For human-centric large-scale scenes, fine-grained modeling for 3D human global pose and shape is significant
for scene understanding and can benefit many real-world
applications. In this paper, we present LiveHPS, a novel
single-LiDAR-based approach for scene-level Human Pose
and Shape estimation without any limitation of light conditions and wearable devices. In particular, we design a distillation mechanism to mitigate the distribution-varying effect of LiDAR point clouds and exploit the temporal-spatial
geometric and dynamic information existing in consecutive frames to solve the occlusion and noise disturbance.
LiveHPS, with its efficient configuration and high-quality
output, is well-suited for real-world applications. Moreover, we propose a huge human motion dataset, named
FreeMotion, which is collected in various scenarios with
diverse human poses, shapes and translations. It consists
of multi-modal and multi-view acquisition data from calibrated and synchronized LiDARs, cameras, and IMUs. Extensive experiments on our new dataset and other public
* Corresponding
author.
This work was supported by
NSFC (No.62206173), Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai
(No.22dz1201900), Shanghai Sailing Program (No.22YF1428700),
MoE Key Laboratory of Intelligent Perception and Human-Machine
Collaboration (ShanghaiTech University), Shanghai Frontiers Science
Center of Human-centered Artificial Intelligence (ShangHAI).

datasets demonstrate the SOTA performance and robustness
of our approach.

1. Introduction
Human pose and shape estimation (HPS) is aimed at reconstructing 3D digital representations of human bodies, such
as SMPL [32], using data captured by sensors. It is significant for two primary applications: one in motion capture
for the entertainment industry, including film, augmented
reality, virtual reality, mixed reality, etc.; and the other in
behavior understanding for the robotics industry, covering
domains like social robotics, assistive robotics, autonomous
driving, human-robot interaction, and beyond.
While optical-based methods [15, 16, 26, 28, 41] have
seen significant advancements in recent years, their efficacy
is limited due to the camera sensor’s inherent sensitivity to
variations in lighting conditions, rendering them impractical for use in uncontrolled environments. In contrast, inertial methods [37, 55, 60, 61] utilize body-mounted inertial measurement units (IMUs) to derive 3D poses, which
is independent of lighting and occlusions. However, these
methods necessitate the use of wearable devices, struggle
with drift issues over time, and fail to capture human body
shapes and precise global translations.
LiDAR is a commonly used perception sensor for robots
and autonomous vehicles [9, 33, 65, 66] due to its accu-

1281

