This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Entropy Optimization for Open-Set Test-Time Adaptation
Zhengqing Gao1,2 Xu-Yao Zhang1,2 * Cheng-Lin Liu1,2
1
MAIS, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
gaozhengqing2021@ia.ac.cn {xyz, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

100

Test-time adaptation (TTA) aims at adapting a model
pre-trained on the labeled source domain to the unlabeled
target domain. Existing methods usually focus on improving TTA performance under covariate shifts, while neglecting semantic shifts. In this paper, we delve into a realistic open-set TTA setting where the target domain may
contain samples from unknown classes. Many state-ofthe-art closed-set TTA methods perform poorly when applied to open-set scenarios, which can be attributed to
the inaccurate estimation of data distribution and model
confidence. To address these issues, we propose a simple but effective framework called unified entropy optimization (UniEnt), which is capable of simultaneously adapting to covariate-shifted in-distribution (csID) data and detecting covariate-shifted out-of-distribution (csOOD) data.
Specifically, UniEnt first mines pseudo-csID and pseudocsOOD samples from test data, followed by entropy minimization on the pseudo-csID data and entropy maximization on the pseudo-csOOD data. Furthermore, we introduce
UniEnt+ to alleviate the noise caused by hard data partition leveraging sample-level confidence. Extensive experiments on CIFAR benchmarks and Tiny-ImageNet-C show
the superiority of our framework. The code is available at
https://github.com/gaozhengqing/UniEnt.

90

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success
in recent years when the training and test data are drawn
i.i.d. from the same distribution. However, in many realworld applications, this strict assumption is difficult to hold.
Models deployed in practice can encounter different types
of distribution shifts. On the one hand, the model needs
to be able to address semantic shifts, i.e., identify samples from unknown classes, which has given rise to problems such as out-of-distribution (OOD) detection [15, 16,
* Corresponding author.

AUROC (%)

Abstract

Closed-Set TTA
Open-Set TTA
+ UniEnt (Ours)
+ UniEnt+ (Ours)

80
70
60
50

Source BN Adapt CoTTA

TENT

EATA

OSTTA

Figure 1. Existing TTA methods exhibit performance degradation
with unknown classes included, while our methods can improve
them significantly. We compare BN Adapt [33], CoTTA [46],
TENT [44], EATA [35], and OSTTA [27].

19, 32, 56] and open-set recognition [4, 5, 21, 43]. On
the other hand, the model needs to be robust to covariate
shifts and have good generalization performance to different styles and domains. Many efforts have been devoted
to reduce the performance gap of DNNs under covariate
shifts, such as domain generalization [45, 47, 58, 59] and
domain adaptation [11, 50]. Among various studies addressing covariate shifts, test-time adaptation (TTA) has recently received increasing attention because its practicality:
neither source domain data nor target domain labels are required [27, 28, 33, 35, 44, 46].
Nevertheless, most of the existing TTA methods [33, 35,
44, 46] focus only on solving the covariate shift and ignoring the semantic shift. We believe that this is impractical since we cannot guarantee the test samples contain
only the classes seen in the training phase. Many recent
works [27, 28] have realized this and made some initial
attempts. Figure 2 illustrates the differences between the
traditional closed-set TTA and the novel open-set TTA set-

23975

