This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discovering and Mitigating Visual Biases through Keyword Explanation
Sangwoo Mo∗ 2 Minkyu Kim3 Kyungmin Lee1 Jaeho Lee4
1
KAIST 2 University of Michigan 3 KRAFTON 4 POSTECH

Younghyun Kim* 1

younghyun.kim@kaist.ac.kr

Addressing biases in computer vision models is crucial
for real-world AI deployments. However, mitigating visual
biases is challenging due to their unexplainable nature, often
identified indirectly through visualization or sample statistics, which necessitates additional human supervision for
interpretation. To tackle this issue, we propose the Biasto-Text (B2T) framework, which interprets visual biases as
keywords. Specifically, we extract common keywords from
the captions of mispredicted images to identify potential
biases in the model. We then validate these keywords by
measuring their similarity to the mispredicted images using
a vision-language scoring model. The keyword explanation
form of visual bias offers several advantages, such as a clear
group naming for bias discovery and a natural extension
for debiasing using these group names. Our experiments
demonstrate that B2T can identify known biases, such as
gender bias in CelebA, background bias in Waterbirds, and
distribution shifts in ImageNet-R/C. Additionally, B2T uncovers novel biases in larger datasets, such as Dollar Street
and ImageNet. For example, we discovered a contextual bias
between “bee” and “flower” in ImageNet. We also highlight
various applications of B2T keywords, including debiased
training, CLIP prompting, and model comparison.1

1. Introduction
Biased datasets can induce failures in image classifiers, potentially harming model performance and raising fairness
concerns [76]. These model failures may manifest as spurious correlations, where specific groups contribute to model
errors [71], or as distribution shifts, where the test distribution differs from the training distribution [63]. For instance,
in a face dataset, if blond images are predominantly associated with women, the image classifier may misclassify blond
faces as women, resulting in fairness issues [6]. Moreover,
this bias can impact model performance when evaluated in
different scenarios, such as a gender-balanced dataset of
* Equal Contribution
1 Code: https://github.com/alinlab/b2t

swmo@umich.edu

Class: ant

Abstract

Jinwoo Shin1

B2T keyword

“flower”
“a yellow flower
with a black head.”
“pink flowers
in the garden.”

Pred.: ant

Pred.: bee

Captions from mispredicted images

Figure 1. Concept. Our Bias-to-Text (B2T) framework reveals
visual biases of image classifiers in a keyword explanation form.
For example, B2T identified novel biases in ImageNet [14]. Specifically, the keyword ”flower” implies that the classifier associates
“ant” images with “flower” as “bees,” indicating contextual bias.

blonds [21]. Therefore, extensive efforts have been devoted
to recognizing and addressing biases in models [9, 48].
Previous research has attempted to identify visual biases
by analyzing problematic samples [44, 55, 74] or problematic attributes [29, 72, 73]. However, these methods define
biases indirectly, often relying on visualization or sample
groups with specific statistics, and they require human supervision to express them in an explainable form. To address
this issue, recent research aimed at interpreting biases using vision-language models [59]. Nonetheless, these studies
have limitations in discovering and mitigating novel biases.
Some studies [17, 30] retrieve the closest word from a predefined vocabulary, limiting their discovery to known biases.
Others analyze neurons [27] or images synthesized by generative models [80] to comprehend biases. However, they
focus on generating detailed captions explaining activated
neurons or failure examples, which can help understand individual cases but hard to utilize for debiasing.
Instead, our main idea is to explain visual biases as keywords by aggregating common traits from the language descriptions2 of problematic images. Figure 1 illustrates our
concept, with the keyword “flower” capturing the distinctive
attributes of “ant” class images mispredicted as “bee.” This
keyword form offers several advantages, providing a natural name for each bias group and easily incorporating with
debiasing techniques using these group names.
2We used a pre-trained captioning model, but other language descriptions
like hard prompt optimization [79] can also be applied.

11082

