This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Remove Wrinkled Transparent Film with Polarized Prior
Jiaqi Tang1,2,3 Ruizheng Wu4 Xiaogang Xu5,6 Sixing Hu4 Ying-Cong Chen1,2,3 *
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 3 HKUST(GZ) – SmartMore Joint Lab
4
SmartMore Corporation 5 The Chinese University of Hong Kong 6 Zhejiang University
jtang092@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, {ruizheng.wu, david.hu}@smartmore.com
xiaogangxu00@gmail.com, yingcongchen@ust.hk

Abstract

？
In this paper, we study a new problem, Film Removal
(FR), which attempts to remove the interference of wrinkled transparent films and reconstruct the original information under films for industrial recognition systems. We first
physically model the imaging of industrial materials covered by the film. Considering the specular highlight from
the film can be effectively recorded by the polarized camera, we build a practical dataset with polarization information containing paired data with and without transparent
film. We aim to remove interference from the film (specular highlights and other degradations) with an end-to-end
framework. To locate the specular highlight, we use an angle estimation network to optimize the polarization angle
with the minimized specular highlight. The image with minimized specular highlight is set as a prior for supporting
the reconstruction network. Based on the prior and the
polarized images, the reconstruction network can decouple all degradations from the film. Extensive experiments
show that our framework achieves SOTA performance in
both image reconstruction and industrial downstream tasks.
Our code will be released at https://github.com/
jqtangust/FilmRemoval.

1. Introduction
Various deep-learning-based recognition models have
been employed in the industrial environment, e.g., defect
detection [28], code recognition [25], etc. However, the
model failures would sometimes happen due to the insufficient robustness [40] towards different perturbations [8, 10,
24, 32, 39]. The wrinkled transparent film is one of them,
which is usually covered or packaged on industrial materials or products for protection. Its interference could cause
the failure of varying downstream tasks, e.g., text OCR and
* Corresponding author.

？
Unclear

Images with Wrinkled Transparent Film

✔

✔
Clear

Images without Wrinkled Transparent Film

Figure 1. The Red box presents a challenge in industrial recognition systems, where the product information is often hidden beneath the wrinkled transparent film. The Green box is the image
we expect to generate, with the film layer removed. Removing the
wrinkled film makes the information on industrial material clearer.

QR code recognition, in Fig. 1. Regarding the wide usage
of such films in industrial scenarios, it is worth opening the
research direction to remove these films from images.
For the first time, we address a novel problem of wrinkled transparent Film Removal (FR), which aims to remove
the transparent film and reveal the hidden information, benefiting the robustness of the industrial downstream models.
Although some solutions have attempted to remove surface highlight [6, 31, 34], they have not accurately modeled
the imaging of the wrinkled transparent film. Except for
the highlight, they cannot remove the effects of other various degradations from the film, e.g., light transmittance and
material texture. Therefore, they cannot remove the transparent film thoroughly.
In this paper, we explicitly model the imaging of wrinkled transparent film into two parts: the specular highlight
Ih from the film, and the diffuse reflection Imd from the materials under the film, as shown in Fig. 2. The diffuse reflection can be influenced by the properties of the film. Thus,
it is divided into the original component (Im ) and various

24987

