This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bootstrapping Chest CT Image Understanding by Distilling Knowledge from
X-ray Expert Models
Weiwei Cao1,2,3 Jianpeng Zhang1,5,6 * Yingda Xia1 Tony C. W. Mok1,6 Zi Li1,6
Xianghua Ye4 Le Lu1 Jian Zheng2,3⇤ Yuxing Tang1 Ling Zhang1
1

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 2 University of Science and Technology of China, China
Suzhou Institute of Biomedical Engineering and Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
4
The First Affiliated Hospital of College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, China
5
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China 6 Hupan Lab, 310023, Hangzhou, China
3

jianpeng.zhang0@gmail.com

Abstract
Radiologists highly desire fully automated versatile AI
for medical imaging interpretation. However, the lack of extensively annotated large-scale multi-disease datasets has
hindered the achievement of this goal. In this paper, we
explore the feasibility of leveraging language as a naturally high-quality supervision for chest CT imaging. In light
of the limited availability of image-report pairs, we bootstrap the understanding of 3D chest CT images by distilling chest-related diagnostic knowledge from an extensively
pre-trained 2D X-ray expert model. Specifically, we propose a language-guided retrieval method to match each 3D
CT image with its semantically closest 2D X-ray image, and
perform pair-wise and semantic relation knowledge distillation. Subsequently, we use contrastive learning to align
images and reports within the same patient while distinguishing them from the other patients. However, the challenge arises when patients have similar semantic diagnoses,
such as healthy patients, potentially confusing if treated as
negatives. We introduce a robust contrastive learning that
identifies and corrects these false negatives. We train our
model with over 12K pairs of chest CT images and radiology reports. Extensive experiments across multiple scenarios, including zero-shot learning, report generation, and
fine-tuning processes, demonstrate the model’s feasibility in
interpreting chest CT images.

1. Introduction
Understanding medical images is crucial for precise clinical
diagnosis, with doctors routinely engaging in multi-disease
* Correspondence to Jianpeng Zhang and Jian Zheng. The work was
done during Weiwei Cao’s internship at DAMO Academy.

Model

Single-disease

Multi-disease

+

Supervision

Functionality

Ours

Nodule
Emphysema
Inflammation
Calcification
…

Nodule
Emphysema
Inflammation
Calcification
…

Nodule
Emphysema
Inflammation
Calcification
…

Figure 1. Models tailored for specific diseases demand doctors
to annotate each image. Creating a multi-disease model involves
more time and effort for comprehensive data annotation. In contrast, our model learns to diagnose various diseases from both images and reports, eliminating the need for additional annotations.

detection and diagnosis in imaging scans. Deep learning
models require extensive datasets with fully annotated diseases for comprehensive training [19, 24, 28]. In practice,
the prevailing approach to developing a diagnostic model
typically concentrates on a specific disease, as illustrated in
Figure 1. This workflow results in models with limited usage, failing to be applied to other diseases. To augment the
capability for a new disease, a significant additional effort
is needed for data collection, annotation, and model training, which is not scalable, as there might be hundreds of
diseases and tasks. Therefore, there is a strong anticipation
for a new model development paradigm beyond the current
labor-intensive annotation and task-specific training. Imaging diagnostic reports, the core output of radiologists’ intellectual work, inherently offer disease-level labels. The
challenge lies in effectively leveraging this text data to enhance medical image understanding.
Recent advances in vision-language pretraining (VLP)
have yielded valuable insights [2, 11, 20, 22, 27]. Contrastive learning, a powerful technique in VLP, effectively
bridges the image and text modalities. This method unifies
1
11238

