This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CoGS Ô: Controllable Gaussian Splatting
Heng Yu1
1

Joel Julin1

Zoltán Á. Milacski1

Koichiro Niinuma2

Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University

{hengyu, jjulin, zmilacsk}@andrew.cmu.edu

2

László A. Jeni1

Fujitsu Research of America

kniinuma@fujitsu.com

laszlojeni@cmu.edu

https://cogs2024.github.io

(a) Dynamic 3D Gaussians

(b) 2D-to-3D Mask Projection

(c) Attribute Control

Figure 1. From a set of monocular images capturing a moving scene, a dynamic 3D representation is learned using time-varying Gaussians
(a). Then the articulated parts (depicted with the trajectories of the motion) are identified using masking (b). This allows for learning
a fine-scale, per-Gaussian level of control (c). The approach is capable of synthesizing novel configurations not present in the original
sequence, for example, independently opening the hood, trunk, and doors of the toy car.

Abstract
Capturing and re-animating the 3D structure of articulated objects present significant barriers. On one hand,
methods requiring extensively calibrated multi-view setups
are prohibitively complex and resource-intensive, limiting
their practical applicability. On the other hand, while
single-camera Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) offer a
more streamlined approach, they have excessive training
and rendering costs. 3D Gaussian Splatting would be a
suitable alternative but for two reasons. Firstly, existing
methods for 3D dynamic Gaussians require synchronized
multi-view cameras, and secondly, the lack of controllability
in dynamic scenarios. We present CoGS, a method for Controllable Gaussian Splatting, that enables the direct manipulation of scene elements, offering real-time control of
dynamic scenes without the prerequisite of pre-computing
control signals. We evaluated CoGS using both synthetic
and real-world datasets that include dynamic objects that
differ in degree of difficulty. In our evaluations, CoGS consistently outperformed existing dynamic and controllable
neural representations in terms of visual fidelity.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in machine vision have significantly
enhanced our ability to interpret and reconstruct 3D structures from 2D observations. This progress is largely due

to the development of coordinate networks, such as Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [24] and its variants [2, 23, 25, 39],
which have revolutionized high-fidelity novel-view synthesis and scene representation. NeRFs, however, primarily focus on static scenes and their implicit representation poses
challenges in direct scene manipulation. Addressing dynamic scenes involves additional complexities, as seen in
various extensions [9, 29, 32, 35], which often require intricate mechanisms to adapt to scene deformations.
In contrast to the implicit nature of NeRFs, our work centers on Gaussian Splatting (GS), a method characterized by
its explicit representation. Building on this concept of 3D
GS, which employs 3D Gaussians for scene modeling, we
extend this approach to dynamic and controllable scenarios.
The explicit nature of GS [14] not only facilitates more efficient rendering compared to the computationally intensive
ray-casting and numerical integration of NeRFs but also significantly simplifies the manipulation of scene elements, offering direct control over the Gaussians.
We propose a novel framework that adapts GS for dynamic environments captured by a monocular camera, integrating control mechanisms that allow for intuitive and
straightforward manipulation of scene elements. This development addresses the limitations of NeRFs in terms of
computational complexity and challenges in scene manipulation due to their implicit representation. By leveraging the
explicit 3D Gaussian representations and combining them
with advanced control techniques, our method opens new
avenues for real-time, high-fidelity scene rendering and ma-

21624

