This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

L OTUS: Evasive and Resilient Backdoor Attacks through Sub-Partitioning
Siyuan Cheng, Guanhong Tao, Yingqi Liu† , Guangyu Shen, Shengwei An,
Shiwei Feng, Xiangzhe Xu, Kaiyuan Zhang, Shiqing Ma‡ , Xiangyu Zhang
Purdue University, † Microsoft, ‡ University of Massachusetts at Amherst
{cheng535, taog, shen447, an93, feng292, xu1415, zhan4057, xyzhang}@cs.purdue.edu
†

yingqiliu@microsoft.com, ‡ shiqingma@umass.edu

Abstract
Backdoor attack poses a significant security threat to
Deep Learning applications. Existing attacks are often not
evasive to established backdoor detection techniques. This
susceptibility primarily stems from the fact that these attacks
typically leverage a universal trigger pattern or transformation function, such that the trigger can cause misclassification for any input. In response to this, recent papers
have introduced attacks using sample-specific invisible triggers crafted through special transformation functions. While
these approaches manage to evade detection to some extent,
they reveal vulnerability to existing backdoor mitigation
techniques. To address and enhance both evasiveness and
resilience, we introduce a novel backdoor attack L OTUS.
Specifically, it leverages a secret function to separate samples in the victim class into a set of partitions and applies
unique triggers to different partitions. Furthermore, L OTUS
incorporates an effective trigger focusing mechanism, ensuring only the trigger corresponding to the partition can
induce the backdoor behavior. Extensive experimental results show that L OTUS can achieve high attack success rate
across 4 datasets and 7 model structures, and effectively
evading 13 backdoor detection and mitigation techniques.
The code is available at https://github.com/Megum1/LOTUS.

1. Introduction
Backdoor attack is a prominent security threat to Deep Learning applications, evidenced by the large body of existing
attacks [5, 19, 37, 51, 64] and defense techniques [20, 32,
35, 67, 72]. It injects malicious behaviors to a model such
that the model operates normally on clean samples but misclassifies inputs that are stamped with a specific trigger. A
typical way of injecting such malicious behaviors is through
data poisoning [1, 19, 39]. This approach introduces a small
set of trigger-stamped images paired with the target label

into the training data. Attackers may also manipulate the
training procedure [10, 45, 46], and tamper with the model’s
internal mechanisms [37, 41].
The majority of existing attacks rely on a uniform pattern [5, 19, 39, 64] or a transformation function [6, 51] as
the trigger. The uniform trigger tends to be effective on any
input, which can be detected by existing techniques. For
instance, trigger inversion methods [20, 38, 67, 68] aim to
reverse engineer a small trigger that can induce the target prediction on a set of inputs. According to the results reported
in the literature [20, 61, 67], for a number of attacks, it is
feasible to invert a pattern that closely resembles the groundtruth trigger and has a substantially high attack success rate
(ASR), hence detecting backdoored models.
Recent studies introduce sample-specific invisible attacks [10, 33, 45, 46] that encourage the model to emphasize
the correlation between the trigger and the input sample.
Although these attacks effectively evade certain detection
methods [20, 67], they are not resilient to backdoor mitigation techniques [32, 35, 72]. For instance, a straightforward
approach such as fine-tuning the backdoored model using
only 5% of the training data can significantly reduce ASR.
This is due to the fact that imperceptible trigger patterns are
not persistent during the retraining process. Moreover, the
sample-specific characteristic of these attacks make them
less robust to backdoor mitigation methods.
In this paper, we introduce an innovative attack that not
only evades backdoor detection approaches but also exhibits
resilience against backdoor mitigation techniques. It is a
label-specific attack, aiming to misclassify the samples of
a victim class to a target class. For the victim-class samples, we divide them into sub-partitions and use a unique
trigger for each partition. With such an attack design, existing defense such as trigger inversion is unlikely to find a
uniform trigger. This is because the available set of samples
used by trigger inversion is likely from different partitions,
which makes the detection fail. In addition, we develop a
novel trigger focusing technique to ensure that a partition
can only be attacked by its designated trigger, not by any

24798

