This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MVHumanNet: A Large-scale Dataset of Multi-view Daily
Dressing Human Captures
Zhangyang Xiong1,2# Chenghong Li1,2# Kenkun Liu2# Hongjie Liao2 Jianqiao Hu2
Junyi Zhu2 Shuliang Ning1,2 Lingteng Qiu2 Chongjie Wang2 Shijie Wang2
Shuguang Cui2,1 Xiaoguang Han2,1∗
#

equal contribution
1

FNii, CUHKSZ

∗

corresponding author
2

SSE, CUHKSZ

Figure 1. We introduce MVHumanNet, a large-scale dataset of multi-view human images with unprecedented scale in human subjects,
daily outfits, motion sequences and frames. Top left and right: Examples of multi-view poses featuring different human identities with
various daily dressing in our dataset. Top middle: Our multi-view capture system includes 48 cameras of 12MP resolution. Bottom:
Comprehensive visualization of all 9000 outfits in our MVHumanNet. Refer to GAP-LAB-CUHK-SZ/MVHumanNet.

Abstract
In this era, the success of large language models and
text-to-image models can be attributed to the driving force
of large-scale datasets. However, in the realm of 3D vision, while remarkable progress has been made with models trained on large-scale synthetic and real-captured object data like Objaverse and MVImgNet, a similar level of
progress has not been observed in the domain of humancentric tasks partially due to the lack of a large-scale human dataset. Existing datasets of high-fidelity 3D human capture continue to be mid-sized due to the significant challenges in acquiring large-scale high-quality 3D
human data. To bridge this gap, we present MVHumanNet, a dataset that comprises multi-view human action sequences of 4,500 human identities. The primary focus of
our work is on collecting human data that features a large
number of diverse identities and everyday clothing using a

multi-view human capture system, which facilitates easily
scalable data collection. Our dataset contains 9,000 daily
outfits, 60,000 motion sequences and 645 million frames
with extensive annotations, including human masks, camera parameters, 2D and 3D keypoints, SMPL/SMPLX parameters, and corresponding textual descriptions. To explore the potential of MVHumanNet in various 2D and 3D
visual tasks, we conducted pilot studies on view-consistent
action recognition, human NeRF reconstruction, text-driven
view-unconstrained human image generation, as well as
2D view-unconstrained human image and 3D avatar generation. Extensive experiments demonstrate the performance improvements and effective applications enabled by
the scale provided by MVHumanNet. As the current largestscale 3D human dataset, we hope that the release of MVHumanNet data with annotations will foster further innova-

19801

