This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Manga Whisperer: Automatically Generating Transcriptions for Comics
Ragav Sachdeva

Andrew Zisserman

Visual Geometry Group, Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

Read this way

I can also do
other things such
as text-tospeaker
association,

4

1

3
Hi! I’m Magi,
an AI model.

and sorting texts
in their reading
order. But it’s too
much to display in
a teaser figure.
Here I’ve
detected panels,
text blocks and
characters. I’ve
also clustered
the characters
for you. You’re
welcome!

5
<1>: As many people want a hunters license as there
are stars in the sky.
<1>: You think there're enough examiners with enough
time to judge 'em all? Not hardly!
<1>: That's why there are people like me, who not only
"drive the bus," but also screen the applicants.
<1>: The other passengers are all drop- outs, and have
been reported as such to the committee.
<1>: If any of them reach the site of the exam by
different routes, they'll be turned away.
<1>: Whether you three qualify is my call, too. Best you
keep that in mind.
<1>: Now, about my question...
<2>: I'm...
<2>: ...the last of the Kurta clan.
<1>: !!

At the end of it all,
you will end up with a
transcript like this,
which you can read or
listen to!!

… and do all
sorts of
cool stuff.

2

I can take
an image,
like this
one…

Figure 1. Given a manga page, our model is able to: (a) detect panels, text blocks and character boxes; (b) cluster character boxes by their identity; (c)
associate texts to their speaker; and (d) generate a dialogue transcription in the correct reading order. Here we show the predicted panels (in green), text
blocks (in red) and characters (in blue) on a page from Hunter × Hunter by Yoshihiro Togashi. The predicted character identity associations are shown by
lines joining the character box centres. For visual clarity, we do not explicitly show the text to speaker associations but provide the generated transcript.

Abstract
In the past few decades, Japanese comics, commonly referred to as Manga, have transcended both cultural and
linguistic boundaries to become a true worldwide sensation. Yet, the inherent reliance on visual cues and illustration within manga renders it largely inaccessible to individuals with visual impairments. In this work, we seek to
address this substantial barrier, with the aim of ensuring
that manga can be appreciated and actively engaged by everyone. Specifically, we tackle the problem of diarisation
i.e. generating a transcription of who said what and when,
in a fully automatic way.

To this end, we make the following contributions: (1)
we present a unified model, Magi, that is able to (a) detect
panels, text boxes and character boxes, (b) cluster characters by identity (without knowing the number of clusters apriori), and (c) associate dialogues to their speakers; (2) we propose a novel approach that is able to sort
the detected text boxes in their reading order and generate a dialogue transcript; (3) we annotate an evaluation
benchmark for this task using publicly available [English]
manga pages. The code, evaluation datasets and the pretrained model can be found at: https://github.
com/ragavsachdeva/magi.

12967

