This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MemoNav: Working Memory Model for Visual Navigation
Hongxin Li1,2

Zeyu Wang1,2 Xu Yang1,2 Yuran Yang5 Shuqi Mei5 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,2,3,4B
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
2
State Key Laboratory of Multimodal Artificial Intelligence Systems, CASIA
3
Center for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI, CAS
4
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 5 Tencent Maps, Tencent
Code: https://github.com/ZJULiHongxin/MemoNav

Abstract
Image-goal navigation is a challenging task that requires
an agent to navigate to a goal indicated by an image in unfamiliar environments. Existing methods utilizing diverse
scene memories suffer from inefficient exploration since
they use all historical observations for decision-making
without considering the goal-relevant fraction. To address this limitation, we present MemoNav, a novel memory model for image-goal navigation, which utilizes a working memory-inspired pipeline to improve navigation performance. Specifically, we employ three types of navigation
memory. The node features on a map are stored in the shortterm memory (STM), as these features are dynamically updated. A forgetting module then retains the informative
STM fraction to increase efficiency. We also introduce longterm memory (LTM) to learn global scene representations
by progressively aggregating STM features. Subsequently, a
graph attention module encodes the retained STM and the
LTM to generate working memory (WM) which contains the
scene features essential for efficient navigation. The synergy among these three memory types boosts navigation
performance by enabling the agent to learn and leverage
goal-relevant scene features within a topological map. Our
evaluation on multi-goal tasks demonstrates that MemoNav
significantly outperforms previous methods across all difficulty levels in both Gibson and Matterport3D scenes. Qualitative results further illustrate that MemoNav plans more
efficient routes.

1. Introduction
Image-goal navigation (ImageNav) is an attractive embodied AI task where an agent is guided toward a destination
indicated by an image within unfamiliar environments. This
task has garnered significant attention recently, owing to its
promising applications in enabling robots to navigate open-

Figure 1. A brief example of MemoNav. MemoNav calculates
attention scores for each node on the topological map and then excludes the nodes with low scores (the black nodes in the figure)
during decision-making. This design helps our agent focus more
on goal-relevant scene features, boosting multi-goal visual navigation performance.

world scenarios.
Central to ImageNav is scene memory, which serves as
a repository of crucial historical information for decisionmaking in unseen environments [34]. During navigation,
this memory typically stores both scene features and the
agent’s navigation history [23], thereby enhancing navigation by mitigating the challenges of partial observability [29]. In literature, various memory mechanisms have
been introduced for ImageNav, which can be classified into
three categories according to memory structure: (a) metric
map-based methods [10, 13] that reconstruct local top-down
maps and aggregate them into a global map, (b) stacked
memory-based methods [18, 28, 30] that stack the past observations chronologically, and (c) topological map-based
methods [5, 11, 22, 23, 34] that store sparse landmark features in graph nodes. Notably, topological map-based meth-

17913

