This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ChatPose: Chatting about 3D Human Pose
Yao Feng1,2,3 Jing Lin3,4 Sai Kumar Dwivedi1 Yu Sun3 Priyanka Patel1 Michael J. Black1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems - Tübingen 2 ETH Zürich
3
Meshcapade 4 Tsinghua University

LLM
SMPL
Projection Layer

Can you describe the person’s pose in the
middle? Please respond with SMPL pose.

| want to build strength in my arms and core, also
improve my sense of balance, please recommend an
advanced yoga pose.
Sure, the pose of Plank Pose Is a great option for you. It
engages the core, arms, and legs, and requires good balance.
It is a beginner pose, but it can be made more advanced by
holding the pose for a longer period of time or adding
variations such as lifting one arm or leg off the ground.
I don't like this, recommend a more advanced one.
Sure, the pose of Handstand is an advanced pose that
engages the arms, core, and legs. It requires a good sense
of balance and strength in the arms and core to support
the body in a handstand position. It is a pose that requires
practice and skill, but it can be very rewarding for those
looking to build strength and balance.
Can you give SMPL pose of this one?
The SMPL POSE is <POSE>.

SMPL
Model

Sure, it’s <POSE>.
Is there a person with green shirt? If so,
please describe this person.
Yes, there is a person with green shirt in the image. This person is
sitting in a chair.
Please give the SMPL pose of this person.
The SMPL pose of this person is <POSE>.
What might his body pose be when he finishes getting his hair cut?
It is difficult to predict the exact SMPL pose of the man after
getting his hair cut without seeing the final result. However, it is
likely that the man would adopt a more relaxed pose, such as
<POSE>, once the hair cutting process is complete and he is
comfortable enough to move freely.

Figure 1. We introduce ChatPose, a multimodel LLM designed for chatting about human pose that produces 3D human poses (SMPL pose
parameters) upon user request. ChatPose features a specialized SMPL projection layer trained to convert language embeddings into 3D
human pose parameters. Our demonstration includes conversations both without (left) and with (right) an image input. Upon detection of
a pose token, the token is used to estimate the SMPL pose parameters and subsequently generate the corresponding 3D body mesh.

Abstract
We introduce ChatPose, a framework employing Large
Language Models (LLMs) to understand and reason about
3D human poses from images or textual descriptions. Our
work is motivated by the human ability to intuitively understand postures from a single image or a brief description, a
process that intertwines image interpretation, world knowledge, and an understanding of body language. Traditional
human pose estimation and generation methods often operate in isolation, lacking semantic understanding and reasoning abilities. ChatPose addresses these limitations by
embedding SMPL poses as distinct signal tokens within a

multimodal LLM, enabling the direct generation of 3D body
poses from both textual and visual inputs. Leveraging the
powerful capabilities of multimodal LLMs, ChatPose unifies classical 3D human pose and generation tasks while
offering user interactions. Additionally, ChatPose empowers LLMs to apply their extensive world knowledge in reasoning about human poses, leading to two advanced tasks:
speculative pose generation and reasoning about pose estimation. These tasks involve reasoning about humans to
generate 3D poses from subtle text queries, possibly accompanied by images. We establish benchmarks for these
tasks, moving beyond traditional 3D pose generation and
estimation methods. Our results show that ChatPose out-

2093

