This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RAM-Avatar: Real-time Photo-Realistic Avatar from Monocular Videos with
Full-body Control
Xiang Deng1 , Zerong Zheng2 , Yuxiang Zhang1 , Jingxiang Sun1 , Chao Xu2 ,
Xiaodong Yang3 , Lizhen Wang1 , Yebin Liu1*
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University 2 NNKosmos Technology 3 Li Auto

Figure 1. We present RAM-Avatar, a real-time photo-realistic human avatar learning method based on monocular videos, which not only
achieves high-fidelity rendering with full-body control including the face and hands but also supports real-time animation.

Abstract
This paper focuses on advancing the applicability of human avatar learning methods by proposing RAM-Avatar,
which learns a Real-time, photo-realistic Avatar that supports full-body control from Monocular videos. To achieve
this goal, RAM-Avatar leverages two statistical templates
responsible for modeling the facial expression and hand
gesture variations, while a sparsely computed dual attention module is introduced upon another body template to
facilitate high-fidelity texture rendering for the torsos and
limbs. Building on this foundation, we deploy a lightweight
yet powerful StyleUnet along with a temporal-aware discriminator to achieve real-time realistic rendering. To enable robust animation for out-of-distribution poses, we propose a Motion Distribution Align module to compensate for
the discrepancies between the training and testing motion
distribution. Results and extensive experiments conducted
* Corresponding author

in various experimental settings demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method, and a real-time live system is
proposed to further push research into applications. The
training and testing code will be released for research purposes.

1. Introduction
The automatic learning of animatable, high-quality human
avatars from videos holds significant value in diverse applications, including movie production, human-computer interaction, and immersive telepresence. Intuitively, an ideal
human avatar modeling method should exhibit: 1) the ability to support real-time, high-resolution, photo-realistic animation with minimal data capture effort; 2) the capability
to model not only the torsos and limbs but also achieve finegrained control of the face and hands.
The ambition to achieve this goal has led to an in-

1996

