This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From SAM to CAMs: Exploring Segment Anything Model
for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Hyeokjun Kweon
KAIST

Kuk-Jin Yoon
KAIST

0327june@kaist.ac.kr

kjyoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) aims
to learn the concept of segmentation using image-level class
labels. Recent WSSS works have shown promising results
by using the Segment Anything Model (SAM), a foundation
model for segmentation, during the inference phase. However, we observe that these methods can still be vulnerable to the noise of class activation maps (CAMs) serving
as initial seeds. As a remedy, this paper introduces FromSAM-to-CAMs (S2C), a novel WSSS framework that directly transfers the knowledge of SAM to the classifier during the training process, enhancing the quality of CAMs itself. S2C comprises SAM-segment Contrasting (SSC) and a
CAM-based prompting module (CPM), which exploit SAM
at the feature and logit levels, respectively. SSC performs
prototype-based contrasting using SAM’s automatic segmentation results. It constrains each feature to be close
to the prototype of its segment and distant from prototypes
of the others. Meanwhile, CPM extracts prompts from
the CAM of each class and uses them to generate classspecific segmentation masks through SAM. The masks are
aggregated into unified self-supervision based on the confidence score, designed to consider the reliability of both
SAM and CAMs. S2C achieves a new state-of-the-art performance across all benchmarks, outperforming existing
studies by significant margins. The code is available at
https://github.com/sangrockEG/S2C.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a computer vision task, aiming
to partition an image into semantically meaningful segments. Over the past decade, learning-based methods have
achieved remarkable progress; however, they often rely on
a fully supervised approach, demanding labor-intensive and
costly pixel-level annotations.
As a remedy, Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) has emerged, harnessing weak yet inexpensive

Figure 1. (A): From top to bottom, the RGB image, ground truth
(GT), and the segmentation result of SAM. (B)-(D): The top and
bottom rows represent the results from vanilla CAMs and the proposed method, respectively. For (D), we apply the SAM-based
post-processing method of [9]. Despite SAM’s segmentation capability, the initial errors present in CAMs often cannot be rectified and may worsen in some cases. In contrast, the proposed S2C
framework effectively harnesses SAM during the training phase,
leading to a substantial improvement in the quality of CAMs.

labels. Notably, the approach using image-level class labels [1–3, 5, 8, 14, 17, 26, 29, 34, 43, 45, 51, 52, 59, 60, 64,
65, 68, 71] have gained most attention due to their practicality. The conventional works have utilized Class Activation
Maps (CAMs) [70], which identify the regions crucial for
a classifier’s decision-making. While CAMs offer a coarse
localization of relevant objects, they usually exhibit a bias
towards the most discriminative regions, resulting in incomplete activation. Furthermore, due to the lack of pixel-wise
supervision, the CAMs usually have imprecise boundaries.
The field of WSSS has endeavored to overcome these
challenges, incorporating additional information sources
such as off-the-shelf saliency prediction modules [19–21,
28, 49, 53], background-only external data [31], or visionlanguage models [37, 57, 61]. Leveraging publicly available
resources, these works have achieved meaningful improvements while preserving the cost-effectiveness of WSSS.
In line with this philosophy, this paper explores the utilization of another potent information source: the SegmentAnything Model (SAM) [22], a recently introduced foundational model for promptable segmentation. Note that our focus is not merely on using SAM but on how to use it effec-

19499

