This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing 3D Fidelity of Text-to-3D using Cross-View Correspondences
Seungwook Kim1,2

Kejie Li2
1

Baseline

Xueqing Deng2

Yichun Shi2
2

POSTECH, South Korea

Peng Wang2

ByteDance, USA

Baseline

CorrespondentDream (ours)

Minsu Cho1

CorrespondentDream (ours)

“A chimpanzee with a big grin”

“A capybara wearing a top hat, low poly”

“A cute steampunk elephant”

“A DSLR photo of a covered wagon”

“A boy in mohawk hairstyle, head only, 4K, HD, raw”

“Wall-E, cute, render, super detailed, best quality, 4K, HD”

Figure 1. Comparison between the baseline (MVDream [27]) and CorrespondentDream (ours). Our method substantially alleviates
the 3D geometric infidelity issue in zero-shot text-to-3D generation methods. Best viewed on electronics, zoom in for clearer visualization.

Abstract
Leveraging multi-view diffusion models as priors for 3D
optimization have alleviated the problem of 3D consistency,
e.g., the Janus face problem or the content drift problem,
in zero-shot text-to-3D models. However, the 3D geometric fidelity of the output remains an unresolved issue; albeit
the rendered 2D views are realistic, the underlying geometry may contain errors such as unreasonable concavities.
In this work, we propose CorrespondentDream, an effective method to leverage annotation-free, cross-view correspondences yielded from the diffusion U-Net to provide additional 3D prior to the NeRF optimization process. We find
that these correspondences are strongly consistent with human perception, and by adopting it in our loss design, we
are able to produce NeRF models with geometries that are
more coherent with common sense, e.g., more smoothed object surface, yielding higher 3D fidelity. We demonstrate
the efficacy of our approach through various comparative
qualitative results and a solid user study.

1. Introduction
Text-to-3D generation holds wide applicability in areas
such as virtual reality and 3D content generation [25],
which are of integral importance in the fields of gaming and
media. In recent studies, leveraging 2D diffusion models
as priors to optimize 3D representations, e.g., NeRF [23]
or NeuS [33], via Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) has
shown to yield promising results and generalizability for
zero-shot text-to-3D generation [18, 25].
It was subsequently observed that using a single-view 2D
diffusion model as prior suffers from the lack of multi-view
knowledge and 3D awareness, frequently resulting in issues
including the Janus face problem or content drift [9, 27].
This problem was largely alleviated by leveraging a multiview diffusion model [27] as the prior instead, which generates multiple view-consistent 2D images instead of a single
2D image to improve the multi-view consistency of the 3D
output. However, even with the integration of multi-view
diffusion models, the disparity in dimensionality between
the 2D priors and the final 3D representation makes it insufficient to ensure the 3D geometric fidelity of the output

10649

