This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Multi-modal Models are Good Class-Incremental Learners
Xusheng Cao1 , Haori Lu1 , Linlan Huang1 , Xialei Liu2,1 ,* Ming-Ming Cheng2,1
1
2
VCIP, CS, Nankai University
NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
{caoxusheng, luhaori, huanglinlan}@mail.nankai.edu.cn, {xialei, cmm}@nankai.edu.cn

In class-incremental learning (CIL) scenarios, the phenomenon of catastrophic forgetting caused by the classifier’s bias towards the current task has long posed a significant challenge. It is mainly caused by the characteristic of
discriminative models. With the growing popularity of the
generative multi-modal models, we would explore replacing
discriminative models with generative ones for CIL. However, transitioning from discriminative to generative models requires addressing two key challenges. The primary
challenge lies in transferring the generated textual information into the classification of distinct categories. Additionally, it requires formulating the task of CIL within
a generative framework. To this end, we propose a novel
generative multi-modal model (GMM) framework for classincremental learning. Our approach directly generates labels for images using an adapted generative model. After
obtaining the detailed text, we use a text encoder to extract text features and employ feature matching to determine the most similar label as the classification prediction. In the conventional CIL settings, we achieve significantly better results in long-sequence task scenarios. Under the Few-shot CIL setting, we have improved by at least
14% accuracy over all the current state-of-the-art methods
with significantly less forgetting. Our code is available at
https://github.com/DoubleClass/GMM .

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks [19, 33, 56] have made remarkable strides in numerous applications, primarily owing to
the vast amounts of data and computational resources at
their disposal. Nonetheless, these accomplishments are predominantly contingent on having access to all the required
data simultaneously for training on various tasks. In cases
where data is acquired incrementally, these networks often encounter the challenge of catastrophic forgetting [43].
Hence, the capacity to seamlessly incorporate new knowl* Corresposing author.

a) Discriminative models
Feature
extractor

pre-logits
C1:t-1

Classifier

Ct

Softmax

Abstract

need expansion

risk of bias!

dog cat bird

b) Generation models

What is this photo?
This
is
a
bird

GMM

generation

This
is
a
bird
<eos>

This is a dog
Text
Similarity

This is a bird
This is a cat

prediction
classification

Figure 1. Illustration of conventional discriminative models for
class-incremental learning (CIL) and our generative multi-modal
models (GMM) for CIL. Discriminative models pose potential risk
of classifier bias toward current task with network expasion. Our
GMM framework consists generation and classification phases.
And It is adapted to CIL based on the similarity of generated text
and the true category names.

edge while retaining previously acquired knowledge is a
highly desirable attribute for future artificial intelligence
systems. Continual learning [45, 67, 77, 84] is a subject of
study aimed at advancing the evolution of neural networks
toward this goal.
Numerous studies have delved into continual learning,
categorizing their approaches into three main groups [14]:
rehearsal-based, architecture-based, and regularizationbased methods. Additionally, hybrid methods are gaining
popularity as they combine insights from different perspectives. Within this research landscape, three primary scenarios [66] have received extensive attention, with classincremental learning (CIL) [41] being one of the most demanding settings. In our work, we concentrate on CIL,
wherein each task comprises a distinct set of classes, and
the primary challenge is to enable the network to recognize
new classes without forgetting knowledge of previously encountered ones.
The majority of existing research on class-incremental

28706

