This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Molecular Data Programming: Towards Molecule Pseudo-labeling with
Systematic Weak Supervision
Xin Juan1 , Kaixiong Zhou2 , Ninghao Liu3 , Tianlong Chen4 , Xin Wang1,∗
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Jilin University, China
2
Institute for Medical Engineering & Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
3
School of Computing, University of Georgia, USA
4
CSAIL, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, USA
junxin22@mails.jlu.edu.cn, kz34@mit.edu,
ninghao.liu@uga.edu, tianlong@mit.edu,
xinwang@jlu.edu.cn

Abstract
The premise for the great advancement of molecular machine learning is dependent on a considerable amount of
labeled data. In many real-world scenarios, the labeled
molecules are limited in quantity or laborious to derive. Recent pseudo-labeling methods are usually designed based
on a single domain knowledge, thereby failing to understand the comprehensive molecular configurations and limiting their adaptability to generalize across diverse biochemical context. To this end, we introduce an innovative
paradigm for dealing with the molecule pseudo-labeling,
named as Molecular Data Programming (MDP). In particular, we adopt systematic supervision sources via crafting multiple graph labeling functions, which covers various
molecular structural knowledge of graph kernels, molecular fingerprints, and topological features. Each of them
creates an uncertain and biased labels for the unlabeled
molecules. To address the decision conflicts among the diverse pseudo-labels, we design a label synchronizer to differentiably model confidences and correlations between the
labeling functions, which yields probabilistic molecular labels to adapt for specific applications. These probabilistic molecular labels are used to train a molecular classifier
for improving its generalization capability. On eight benchmark datasets, we empirically demonstrate the effectiveness
of MDP on the weakly supervised molecule classification
tasks, achieving an average improvement of 9.5%. The code
is in: https://github.com/xinjuan1/MDP/.

1. Introduction
Molecular machine learning has achieved remarkable
success in chemical and biological applications, e.g., chem-

ical property prediction [6, 22, 48, 51] and quantum chemistry calculations [25, 26, 34, 61], due to its generalization
capability to differentiably learn molecule features and estimate the interested properties. The development processes
have been catalyzed by the release of large labeled training datasets [23]. Unfortunately, manually collecting and
labeling a sufficient amount of training data is often timeconsuming and labor-intensive. This problem is exacerbated for molecular labeling from scientific domains, which
rely on expensive wet-lab measurements or graph structure
computations.
To enable the molecular machine learning with limited
amount of labeled data, weakly supervised learning based
on pseudo-label paradigm augments the training dataset
with noisy sources without access to ground truth. These
methods which can be roughly classified into two groups,
i.e., self-training and graph kernel methods. The former [28, 56] repeats the process of training model on the
available labeled data and yielding confident pseudo-labels
to create a larger dataset. On the other hand, the later defines
similarity measures for every pairwise graphs using kernel
functions, including random-walk, Weisfeiler-Lehman, and
graphlet kernels [11, 42, 43], where the similarity matrix
among labeled and unlabeled molecules is leverage to infer pseudo-labels. However, while the self-training method
is prone to over-confident predictions especially if the initial
model is not accurate enough, the graph kernel algorithm is
sensitive to the choice of an appropriate kernel function and
cannot generalize well across different datasets.
To address the labeling overfitting and enhance geneneralization, data programming is proposed to unify multiple weak supervision sources and provide a more flexible
and expressive pseudo-labeling [4, 49]. In particular, users
define domain heuristics/rules in the form of labeling func-

*Corresponding author

308

