This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DrivingGaussian: Composite Gaussian Splatting for Surrounding
Dynamic Autonomous Driving Scenes
Xiaoyu Zhou1 Zhiwei Lin1 Xiaojun Shan1 Yongtao Wang1 *
Deqing Sun2 † Ming-Hsuan Yang2,3 †
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
Google Research 3 University of California, Merced
GT RGB

EmerNeRF

3DGS

Ours

Back Left

Front Left

Front

Front Right

Back Right

Back

Figure 1. DrivingGaussian achieves photorealistic reconstruction and rendering performance for surrounding dynamic autonomous driving scenes. Naive approaches [17, 53] either produce unpleasant artifacts and blurring in the large-scale background or struggle with
reconstructing dynamic objects and detailed scene geometry. DrivingGaussian first introduces Composite Gaussian Splatting to efficiently
represent static backgrounds and multiple dynamic objects in complex surrounding driving scenes. DrivingGaussian enables the highquality synthesis of surrounding views across multi-camera and facilitates long-term dynamic scene reconstruction.

Abstract
We present DrivingGaussian, an efficient and effective
framework for surrounding dynamic autonomous driving
scenes. For complex scenes with moving objects, we first
sequentially and progressively model the static background
of the entire scene with incremental static 3D Gaussians.
We then leverage a composite dynamic Gaussian graph to
handle multiple moving objects, individually reconstruct-

ing each object and restoring their accurate positions
and occlusion relationships within the scene. We further
use a LiDAR prior for Gaussian Splatting to reconstruct
scenes with greater details and maintain panoramic consistency. DrivingGaussian outperforms existing methods
in dynamic driving scene reconstruction and enables photorealistic surround-view synthesis with high-fidelity and
multi-camera consistency. Our project page is at: https:
//github.com/VDIGPKU/DrivingGaussian.

* Corresponding author.
† Equal contribution.

21634

