This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

360DVD: Controllable Panorama Video Generation with
360-Degree Video Diffusion Model
Qian Wang1,2 , Weiqi Li1 , Chong Mou1,2 , Xinhua Cheng1,2 , Jian Zhang1,2 B
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School-Rabbitpre AIGC Joint Research Laboratory
{qianwang,liweiqi,eechongm,chengxinhua}@stu.pku.edu.cn, zhangjian.sz@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Panorama video recently attracts more interest in both
study and application, courtesy of its immersive experience.
Due to the expensive cost of capturing 360◦ panoramic
videos, generating desirable panorama videos by prompts
is urgently required. Lately, the emerging text-to-video
(T2V) diffusion methods demonstrate notable effectiveness
in standard video generation. However, due to the significant gap in content and motion patterns between panoramic
and standard videos, these methods encounter challenges in
yielding satisfactory 360◦ panoramic videos. In this paper,
we propose a pipeline named 360-Degree Video Diffusion
model (360DVD) for generating 360◦ panoramic videos
based on the given prompts and motion conditions. Specifically, we introduce a lightweight 360-Adapter accompanied
by 360 Enhancement Techniques to transform pre-trained
T2V models for panorama video generation. We further
propose a new panorama dataset named WEB360 consisting of panoramic video-text pairs for training 360DVD,
addressing the absence of captioned panoramic video
datasets. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority and effectiveness of 360DVD for panorama video generation. Our project page is at https://akaneqwq.
github.io/360DVD/.

1. Introduction
With the recent advancements in VR technology, 360degree panoramic videos have been gaining increasing popularity. This video format which offers audiences an immersive experience, is helpful for various applications, including entertainment, education, and communication. To
capture details of the entire scene, 360◦ videos are typically
recorded using an array of high-resolution fisheye cameras
that yields a 360◦ × 180◦ field-of-view (FoV) [1], which
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62372016. (B Corresponding author: Jian Zhang)

is quite costly in both time and resources. Therefore, the
generation of 360◦ panoramic videos is urgently required
for border applications, while panoramic video generation
receives little attention in studies to date.
Thanks to the emerging theory and training strategies,
text-to-image (T2I) diffusion models [26, 27, 31, 32, 35]
demonstrate remarkable image generation capacity from
prompts given by users, and such impressive achievement in
image generation is further extended to text-to-video (T2V)
generation. Various T2V diffusion models [3, 16, 37, 46,
52, 60] are recently proposed with adopting space-time separable architectures, wherein spatial operations are inherited from the pre-trained T2I models to reduce the complexity of constructing space-time models from scratch. Among
these, AnimateDiff [16] enables the capability to generate animated images for various personalized T2I models,
which alleviates the requirement for model-specific tuning
and achieves compelling content consistency over time.
Although T2V methods on standard videos are widely
studied, there is no method proposed for panorama video
generation. One potential approach is to leverage existing
powerful T2V models, e.g., AnimateDiff to directly generate the equirectangular projection (ERP) of panoramic
videos. Since ERP is a commonly adopted format for
storing and transmitting panoramic videos, each frame is
treated by ERP as a rectangular image with an aspect ratio of 1:2, which aligns well with the output format of existing standard T2V models. However, due to the significant differences between panoramic videos and standard
videos, existing methods suffer challenges in directly producing satisfactory 360◦ panoramic videos. Concretely, the
main challenges include three aspects: (1) The content distribution of ERPs differs from standard videos. ERPs require a wider FoV, reaching 360◦ × 180◦ . (2) The motion
patterns of ERPs are different from standard videos, with
movements often following curves rather than straight lines.
(3) The left and right ends of ERPs should exhibit continuity
since they correspond to the same meridian on the Earth.
Therefore, we propose a specifically designed method

6913

