This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Discovering Syntactic Interaction Clues for Human-Object Interaction Detection
Jinguo Luo1† Weihong Ren1, 2 * Weibo Jiang1† Xi’ai Chen2, 3 Qiang Wang4 Zhi Han2, 3 Honghai Liu1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 4 Shenyang University
2
State Key Laboratory of Robotics, Shenyang Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institutes for Robotics and Intelligent Manufacturing, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{23s153135, jiangweibo}@stu.hit.edu.cn, {renweihong, honghai.liu}@hit.edu.cn
{chenxiai, wangqiang, hanzhi}@sia.cn

Abstract
Recently, Vision-Language Model (VLM) has greatly advanced the Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection. The
existing VLM-based HOI detectors typically adopt a handcrafted template (e.g., a photo of a person [action] a/an
[object]) to acquire text knowledge through the VLM text
encoder. However, such approaches, only encoding the
action-specific text prompts in vocabulary level, may suffer
from learning ambiguity without exploring the fine-grained
clues from the perspective of interaction context. In this
paper, we propose a novel method to discover Syntactic
Interaction Clues for HOI detection (SICHOI) by using
VLM. Specifically, we first investigate what are the essential elements for an interaction context, and then establish
a syntactic interaction bank from three levels: spatial relationship, action-oriented posture and situational condition.
Further, to align visual features with the syntactic interaction bank, we adopt a multi-view extractor to jointly aggregate visual features from instance, interaction, and image
levels accordingly. In addition, we also introduce a dual
cross-attention decoder to perform context propagation between text knowledge and visual features, thereby enhancing the HOI detection. Experimental results demonstrate
that our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance on HICO-DET and V-COCO.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection aims to localize
humans and objects from a given image, and also predicts
the semantic relationships between them. A HOI instance
can be represented as a triplet <human, action, object>. In
recent years, HOI detection has attracted enormous attention, due to its significant role in a wide range of high-level
* Corresponding author.
† Both authors contributed equally to this work.

Figure 1. Comparison between previous VLM-based HOI detectors and our SICHOI. (a) Previous VLM-based methods adopt a
handcrafted template to acquire action-specific knowledge in vocabulary level. (b) Our SICHOI model establishes a syntactic
bank from three levels: spatial relationship, action-oriented posture and situational condition, which can provide informative and
clear clues to distinguish different interactions.

computer vision tasks, such as video analysis [8], human
action recognition [37] and image retrieval [50].
The existing HOI detection methods can be roughly divided into one-stage and two-stage methods. The early onestage ones try to perform object detection and interaction
classification simultaneously, and then introduce additional
auxiliary priors, e.g., interaction points [29, 49] and union
boxes [20] to group HOI pairs. The recent transformerbased methods [43, 65, 69] directly predict HOI triplets
without explicitly modelling human-object context, but
may suffer from insufficient exchange between contextual
clues [39]. Contrarily, the two-stage methods [11, 14, 61]
first perform object detection and then explicitly infer the
semantic relationships between each pair of human and object. They usually adopt off-the-shelf object detectors, e.g.,
DERT [3] to obtain object detections, and pay more atten-

28212

