This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Permutation Equivariance of Transformers and Its Applications
Hengyuan Xu† , Liyao Xiang* † , Hangyu Ye† , Dixi Yao‡ , Pengzhi Chu† and Baochun Li‡
†

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
‡
University of Toronto

Abstract
Revolutionizing the field of deep learning, Transformerbased models have achieved remarkable performance in
many tasks. Recent research has recognized these models are robust to shuffling but are limited to inter-token
permutation in the forward propagation. In this work,
we propose our definition of permutation equivariance, a
broader concept covering both inter- and intra- token permutation in the forward and backward propagation of neural networks. We rigorously proved that such permutation equivariance property can be satisfied on most vanilla
Transformer-based models with almost no adaptation. We
examine the property over a range of state-of-the-art models including ViT, Bert, GPT, and others, with experimental validations. Further, as a proof-of-concept, we explore
how real-world applications including privacy-enhancing
split learning, and model authorization, could exploit the
permutation equivariance property, which implicates wider,
intriguing application scenarios. The code is available at
https://github.com/Doby-Xu/ST

1. Introduction
Originating as a tool in natural language processing, Transformer now has permeated various fields such as computer
vision, multi-modal tasks, etc. Transformer model, introduced in [32], has revolutionized the way of approaching
sequence-based tasks, and further demonstrates versatility
and power in a diverse set of tasks with the development of
Bert[6], GPT [3, 27], ViT [8], etc. Meanwhile, its intriguing property is discovered, e.g., the outputs being robust
or invariant to token shuffling [17, 26]. However, previous
works either show the property through empirical observation [26], or by modifying the original model structure [17],
typically for input-order-independent tasks.
* Corresponding author: xiangliyao08@sjtu.edu.cn. The research was
supported in part by National Science and Technology Major Project
2021ZD0112801, NSF China (62272306, 62032020, 62136006).

The shuffling invariance property of Transformer is
widely recognized but not clearly understood by the community. ViT shows superior permutation robustness compared to CNN in patch shuffling where the spatial information is totally disrupted [26], indicating that self-attention
is invariant to patch ordering. Similarly, [17] proposes Set
Transformer, satisfying permutation equi-/in-variance —
the output of the model should not change under any permutation of the elements in the input set. Their model inherits
the network architectures proposed by [36] where each input element is first independently fed into a feed-forward
neural network and then aggregated by a pooling operation.
As we found, the previous notion of permutation equi/in-variance is quite limited. In this work, we propose our
definition of permutation equivariance — meaning that the
model trained over any inter- or intra-token permutation
is equivalent to the model trained over normal inputs, in
contrast to the inter-token permutation in previous works.
Our definition essentially pushes one step forward in twofolds: first, the former definition works at a coarser granularity, i.e., tokens are exchanged and permuted while ours
incorporates both inter- and intra-token shuffling. Second,
our proposed property is stricter in the sense that, it not
only requires output equivariance under input permutation
in forward propagation (forwarding equivariance) but also
demands model weights to be equivalently trained in the
backward propagation (backprop equi-/in-variance). We
show such backprop equi-/in-variance is closely related to
forwarding equivariance by modeling the permutation as
row/column shuffling in matrices.
Our findings inspire many potential applications in realworld scenarios. We present a simple, yet effective privacyenhancing technique for feature offloading, based on the
permutation equivariance property. An honest-but-curious
cloud merely provides computational service while being
blind to the training data, inference data, and the trained
model. We show that our method remarkably improves
the data utility-privacy tradeoff which is intensively investigated in privacy-preserving split learning [15, 28, 33].

5987

