This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AV2AV: Direct Audio-Visual Speech to Audio-Visual Speech Translation
with Unified Audio-Visual Speech Representation
Jeongsoo Choi∗
Se Jin Park∗
Minsu Kim∗
Yong Man Ro†
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea
{jeongsoo.choi, jinny960812, ms.k, ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

“Eu gostaria de ajudar você”

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel direct Audio-Visual Speech
to Audio-Visual Speech Translation (AV2AV) framework,
where the input and output of the system are multimodal
(i.e., audio and visual speech). With the proposed AV2AV,
two key advantages can be brought: 1) We can perform
real-like conversations with individuals worldwide in a
virtual meeting by utilizing our own primary languages.
In contrast to Speech-to-Speech Translation (A2A), which
solely translates between audio modalities, the proposed
AV2AV directly translates between audio-visual speech.
This capability enhances the dialogue experience by
presenting synchronized lip movements along with the
translated speech. 2) We can improve the robustness of
the spoken language translation system. By employing the
complementary information of audio-visual speech, the
system can effectively translate spoken language even in
the presence of acoustic noise, showcasing robust performance. To mitigate the problem of the absence of a parallel
AV2AV translation dataset, we propose to train our spoken
language translation system with the audio-only dataset of
A2A. This is done by learning unified audio-visual speech
representations through self-supervised learning in advance to train the translation system. Moreover, we propose
an AV-Renderer that can generate raw audio and video in
parallel. It is designed with zero-shot speaker modeling,
thus the speaker in source audio-visual speech can be
maintained at the target translated audio-visual speech.
The effectiveness of AV2AV is evaluated with extensive experiments in a many-to-many language translation setting.
Demo page is available on choijeongsoo.github.io/av2av.
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded
by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. NRF-2022R1A2C2005529), Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation
(IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No.2022-0-00124,
Development of Artificial Intelligence Technology for Self-Improving
Competency-Aware Learning Capabilities), and BK21 FOUR (Connected
AI Education & Research Program for Industry and Society Innovation,
KAIST EE, No. 4120200113769).

“I would like to help you”
En

Pt
…

AV Speech Unit
Fr

“J'aimerais t'aider”

Multilingual
AV2AV
Translation

“Ich würde dir gerne helfen”

“Mi piacerebbe aiutarti”

De

It

…

AV Speech Unit
Es

“Me gustaría ayudarte”

Figure 1. Conceptual illustration of the proposed multilingual Audio-Visual Speech to Audio-Visual Speech Translation
(AV2AV) framework. The system can directly translate between
multilingual AV speech without requiring any text. Note that
the proposed AV2AV can generate both audio speech and visual
speech in listener-oriented (i.e., translated) languages.

1. Introduction
In our increasingly interconnected world, where communication transcends linguistic boundaries, Neural Machine
Translation (NMT) [1–6] has played a critical role in breaking down barriers in multilingual interaction. Despite their
strong performances, NMT systems exhibit limitations in
seamless application to virtual conferences or face-to-face
interactions. This is due to their reliance on human intervention for text input or speech recognition, as these systems
primarily operate with text modalities. Speech-to-Speech
Translation (A2A1 ) [7–11] can mitigate this problem by directly translating spoken languages into the target language
at the audio level. With the growth of A2A technologies
[12], it is anticipated that individuals can effortlessly communicate with one another using their primary languages,
irrespective of their nationalities. However, there still exists
one unsolved problem in the aspects of multimedia, the discrepancy between the translated speech and the visual stim1 Throughout this paper, we employ abbreviations for input and output
modalities, using A for Audio, V for Visual, and T for Text.

27325

