This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SNED: Superposition Network Architecture Search for Efficient Video Diffusion
Model
Zhengang Li1,2 , Yan Kang2 , Yuchen Liu2 , Difan Liu2 , Tobias Hinz3 , Feng Liu2 , Yanzhi Wang1
1
Northeastern University, 2 Adobe Research, 3 Adobe
1
{li.zhen, yanz.wang}@northeastern.edu, 2,3 {yankang, yuliu, diliu, thinz, fengl}@adobe.com

Abstract
While AI-generated content has garnered significant attention, achieving photo-realistic video synthesis remains a
formidable challenge. Despite the promising advances in
diffusion models for video generation quality, the complex
model architecture and substantial computational demands
for both training and inference create a significant gap between these models and real-world applications. This paper presents SNED, a superposition network architecture
search method for efficient video diffusion model. Our
method employs a supernet training paradigm that targets
various model cost and resolution options using a weightsharing method. Moreover, we propose the supernet training sampling warm-up for fast training optimization. To
showcase the flexibility of our method, we conduct experiments involving both pixel-space and latent-space video diffusion models. The results demonstrate that our framework
consistently produces comparable results across different
model options with high efficiency. According to the experiment for the pixel-space video diffusion model, we can
achieve consistent video generation results simultaneously
across 64×64 to 256×256 resolutions with a large range of
model sizes from 640M to 1.6B number of parameters for
pixel-space video diffusion models.

1. Introduction
Generative modeling for video synthesis has made tremendous progress based on approaches, including GANs [21,
22, 24, 28, 30, 34, 40], autoregressive models [6, 37],
VAEs [9, 35], and normalizing flows [15]. Among them,
GANs have demonstrated remarkable success by extending
the image-based generation to video generation with dedicated temporal designs. However, GANs encounter challenges such as mode collapse and training instability, making it difficult to scale them up for handling complex and
diverse video distributions.
To overcome this challenge, diffusion models [3, 11, 26]

have been studied, which establish a weighted variational
bound for optimization by connecting Langevin dynamics [25] and denoising score matching [27]. Following
this, approaches such as VDM [10], MCVD [33], Imagen
Video [12], and LVDM [10] extended diffusion models to
video generation, surpassing GANs in both sample quality
and distribution coverage due to their stable training and
scalability [3]. However, this success comes hand in hand
with significant challenges posed by enormous model sizes
and computational demands associated with diffusion models. These challenges manifest themselves in both the inference and training aspects.
Sampling from diffusion models is expensive as their immense number of parameters, heavy reliance on attention
mechanisms, and need for several model evaluations result
in substantial memory consumption. Even with advanced
GPUs, tackling high-resolution video generation becomes a
formidable burden due to this memory constraint. Some
research efforts, such as Imagen Video [12], introduce a
model chain to enhance video generation quality gradually.
However, this approach further escalates the total model parameters and memory consumption. Beyond this, the extensive computational load leads to a significantly longer inference latency, amplifying the deployment cost and user waiting time. These barriers have presented substantial impediments to the commercialization of diffusion models, particularly in the context of video diffusion models.
Furthermore, when it comes to the training of diffusion
models, challenges emerge from three key facets. Firstly,
due to the substantial model parameter count and computational overhead, training costs soar, often requiring an entire
month or even longer to train large-scale diffusion models on large datasets from scratch. This protracted training duration poses a challenge to the improvement of diffusion models. Moreover, given that diffusion models are
still relatively nascent, our prior knowledge regarding their
structural design remains limited. Consequently, model design heavily relies on trial and error, incurring additional
expenses in terms of both time and resources. Lastly, because the objectives of these models vary widely, which has

8661

