This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ESCAPE: Encoding Super-keypoints for Category-Agnostic Pose Estimation
Chen Li2
Gim Hee Lee2
Khoi Duc Nguyen1 *
1
2
University of Wisconsin-Madison
National University of Singapore
khoi.nguyen@wisc.edu

lichen@u.nus.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the task of category-agnostic
pose estimation (CAPE), which aims to predict poses for
objects of any category with few annotated samples. Previous works either rely on local matching between features
of support and query samples or require support keypoint
identifier. The former is prone to overfitting due to its sensitivity to sparse samples, while the latter is impractical
for the open-world nature of the task. To overcome these
limitations, we propose ESCAPE - a Bayesian framework
that learns a prior over the features of keypoints. The prior
can be expressed as a mixture of super-keypoints, each being a high-level abstract keypoint that captures the statistics of semantically related keypoints from different categories. We estimate the super-keypoints from base categories and use them in adaptation to novel categories.
The adaptation to an unseen category involves two steps:
first, we match each novel keypoint to a related superkeypoint; and second, we transfer the knowledge encoded
in the matched super-keypoints to the novel keypoints. For
the first step, we propose a learnable matching network to
capture the relationship between the novel keypoints and the
super-keypoints, resulting in a more reliable matching. ESCAPE mitigates overfitting by directly transferring learned
knowledge to novel categories while it does not use keypoint identifiers. We achieve state-of-the-art performance
on the standard MP-100 benchmark. Our code is available
at https://github.com/khoiucd/escape-tgt.

1. Introduction
2D pose estimation aims to locate the semantic keypoints
of an object of interest from an input image. This task is
crucial for many visual understanding tasks, such as understanding human/animal behavior or interpreting the surrounding environment in autonomous driving. Existing
works focus on detecting keypoints of only one specific
* Work done as an intern at NUS.

gimhee.lee@comp.nus.edu.sg

antelope

deer

base categories

zebra

horse

novel category
left knee

Figure 1. We encode super-keypoint ‘left knee’ from the ‘left
knee’ of base animals and use the super-keypoint in adaptation
to the left knee of novel animal.

(super-)category, such as human, animal, or vehicle. They
are inefficient in the sense that they need to train a separate
model for each application. Moreover, annotating a large
number of samples for some categories, e.g., rare species, is
too expensive, if not impossible, and thus hinders the usefulness of the deep learning approach. A unified model that
can quickly adapt to keypoints of unseen categories is desirable. Addressing this, Xu et al. [42] propose the task of
category-agnostic pose estimation (CAPE) in which a unified model is trained to detect the poses of objects from any
category with limited supervision.
Previous works attempts to compute keypoint prototypes
from support and query samples and use them to locate keypoint positions on the query image via a matching step. Xu
et al. [42] introduce POMNet, a transformer-based network,
to capture the interactions between support and query images into the keypoint prototypes. POMNet is prone to overfitting since the keypoint prototypes heavily rely on very
few, typically one or five, support samples. Recently, Shi et
al. [31] propose a two-stage framework, called CapeFormer,
to further calibrate the matching results. Although effective, CapeFormer uses support keypoint identifier to alleviate the ambiguity of keypoints with similar appearances.
The keypoint identifier requires additional effort to consistently annotate the keypoints of different categories. This
might prohibit their application in scenarios where keypoint
identifiers are not available.
In this work, we aim to improve the representation capacity of the keypoint prototypes by leveraging the knowl-

23491

