This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VMC: Video Motion Customization using Temporal Attention Adaption for
Text-to-Video Diffusion Models
Jong Chul Ye1,2
Geon Yeong Park2 *
Hyeonho Jeong1 *
2
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, Bio and Brain Engineering
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)
* Indicates co-first authors
{hyeonho.jeong, pky3436, jong.ye}@kaist.ac.kr
1

Figure 1. Using only a single video portraying any type of motion, our Video Motion Customization framework allows for generating a
wide variety of videos characterized by the same motion but in entirely distinct contexts and better spatial/temporal resolution. 8-frame
input videos are translated to 29-frame videos in different contexts while closely following the target motion. The visualized frames for the
first video are at indexes 1, 9, and 17. A comprehensive view of these motions in the form of videos can be explored at our project page.

Abstract
Text-to-video diffusion models have advanced video generation significantly. However, customizing these models to
generate videos with tailored motions presents a substantial challenge. In specific, they encounter hurdles in (a) accurately reproducing motion from a target video, and (b)
creating diverse visual variations. For example, straightforward extensions of static image customization methods

to video often lead to intricate entanglements of appearance and motion data. To tackle this, here we present the
Video Motion Customization (VMC) framework, a novel
one-shot tuning approach crafted to adapt temporal attention layers within video diffusion models. Our approach
introduces a novel motion distillation objective using residual vectors between consecutive noisy latent frames as
a motion reference. The diffusion process then preserve
low-frequency motion trajectories while mitigating high-

9212

