This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LiDAR-Net: A Real-scanned 3D Point Cloud Dataset for Indoor Scenes
Yanwen Guo1 ,* Yuanqi Li1 , Dayong Ren1 , Xiaohong Zhang1 , Jiawei Li1 , Liang Pu1 , Changfeng Ma1 ,
Xiaoyu Zhan1 , Jie Guo1 , Mingqiang Wei2 , Yan Zhang1 , Piaopiao Yu2 , Shuangyu Yang1 , Donghao Ji1 ,
Huisheng Ye1 , Hao Sun1 , Yansong Liu1 , Yinuo Chen1 , Jiaqi Zhu1 , Hongyu Liu1
1
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China
{ywguo,guojie,zhangyannju}@nju.edu.cn, rdyedu@gmail.com
{yuanqili, xiaohongzhang, lijiawei, puliang, changfengma}@smail.nju.edu.cn
{zhanxy, shuangyuyang, donghaoji, huishengye, hao.sun, yansongliu}@smail.nju.edu.cn
{mqwei, yupiaopiao}@nuaa.edu.cn, {yinuochen, jiaqizhu, hongyu liu}@smail.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present LiDAR-Net, a new real-scanned
indoor point cloud dataset, containing nearly 3.6 billion
precisely point-level annotated points, covering an expansive area of 30,000m2 . It encompasses three prevalent daily environments, including learning scenes, working scenes,
and living scenes. LiDAR-Net is characterized by its nonuniform point distribution, e.g., scanning holes and scanning lines. Additionally, it meticulously records and annotates scanning anomalies, including reflection noise and
ghost. These anomalies stem from specular reflections on
glass or metal, as well as distortions due to moving persons. LiDAR-Net’s realistic representation of non-uniform
distribution and anomalies significantly enhances the training of deep learning models, leading to improved generalization in practical applications. We thoroughly evaluate
the performance of state-of-the-art algorithms on LiDARNet and provide a detailed analysis of the results. Crucially, our research identifies several fundamental challenges
in understanding indoor point clouds, contributing essential insights to future explorations in this field. Our dataset
can be found online: http://lidar-net.njumeta.com.

1. Introduction
Owing to its reliability and accuracy, Light Detection And
Ranging (LiDAR) technology becomes increasingly popular, finding broad applications in autonomous vehicles for
perception and localization [23, 26, 54] as well as expanding its applications in consumer electronics [3, 34, 37]. Introduced in 2020, the LiDAR scanner on the iPhone has en* Corresponding author.

Ghosts

Scanning holes

Scanning lines

Figure 1. LiDAR-Net comprises 3.6 billion real-scanned points,
each annotated with semantic and instance labels. Points of
LiDAR-Net have real-scanned characteristics including scanning
holes, scanning lines, and anomalies such as ghosts (indicated by
red points) caused by moving persons. These characteristics significantly enhance the ability of trained deep models to generalize
to real-world applications.

abled a multitude of innovative applications in virtual reality (VR) and 3D measurements. Deep learning has achieved
remarkable success in computer vision, particularly in analyzing and understanding 3D scenes [35, 36, 49, 56].
Datasets undoubtedly have played a critical role in this
process, since training a deep models usually requires extensive annotated datasets, especially for supervised learning [2, 8, 11, 19, 42, 53]. In the domain of 3D computer vision for indoor scenes, the most widely recognized datasets
in the academic community are S3DIS [2], ScanNet [11],
and the recent ScanNet++ [53], etc. S3DIS and ScanNet
have been used to train models for various 3D scene understanding tasks, such as 3D object detection, along with
semantic and instance segmentation. S3DIS and ScanNet
collect RGB-D images, and then reconstruct and annotate
textured meshes. ScanNet++ relies on a scanner to capture point clouds, however, the provided annotations are attached to the Poisson reconstruction instead of raw points.

21989

