This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RegionGPT: Towards Region Understanding Vision Language Model
Qiushan Guo1 , Shalini De Mello2† , Hongxu Yin2† , Wonmin Byeon2 , Ka Chun Cheung2 ,
Yizhou Yu1 , Ping Luo1 , Sifei Liu2
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 NVIDIA

Figure 1. We introduce RegionGPT that enables complex region-level captioning, reasoning, classification, and expression comprehension capabilities
for the multimodal large language model. Users can input regions of interest of any shape, utilizing ⟨region⟩ as a placeholder within the instruction at any
position. Such placeholders are subsequently replaced with semantic region-level embeddings that are fed into the language decoder. Best viewed in color.

Abstract
Vision language models (VLMs) have experienced rapid advancements through the integration of large language models (LLMs) with image-text pairs, yet they struggle with detailed regional visual understanding due to limited spatial
awareness of the vision encoder, and the use of coarsegrained training data that lacks detailed, region-specific
captions. To address this, we introduce RegionGPT (short
as RGPT), a novel framework designed for complex regionlevel captioning and understanding. RGPT enhances the
spatial awareness of regional representation with simple yet
effective modifications to existing visual encoders in VLMs.
We further improve performance on tasks requiring a specific output scope by integrating task-guided instruction
prompts during both training and inference phases, while
maintaining the model’s versatility for general-purpose
tasks. Additionally, we develop an automated region caption data generation pipeline, enriching the training set
with detailed region-level captions. We demonstrate that
a universal RGPT model can be effectively applied and significantly enhancing performance across a range of regionlevel tasks, including but not limited to complex region descriptions, reasoning, object classification, and referring
* Qiushan Guo was an intern at NVIDIA during the project. † equal
contribution.

expressions comprehension. Code will be released at the
project page.

1. Introduction
Vision Language Models (VLMs) have marked a notable
convergence between visual and linguistic domains in artificial intelligence. With the emergence of Multimodal Large
Language Models (MLLMs) [1, 2, 14, 25, 28, 29, 59], there
has been a notable enhancement in the field’s ability to interpret images and streamline interactions between humans
and VLMs. However, despite their effectiveness in understanding entire images, these models still struggle with analyzing specific regions in detail. On the other hand, finegrained understanding is vital for advanced vision tasks, including the analysis of object attributes and the interpretation of inter-object relations.
Addressing region-level complex understanding in
VLMs demands the alignment of spatial information and
semantics. To acheive this, existing works [9, 28, 35, 59]
learn inputting regions of interest in textual form, e.g.
[x1 ,y1 ,x2 ,y2 ], which share the same model structure as that
used for image-level tasks. However, this relies heavily
on the language decoder to interpret the position, inadvertently overlooking the prior positional information provided
by the visual encoder. Such an oversight can lead to a gap
in effectively integrating visual cues with linguistic context,

13796

