This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Clockwork Diffusion: Efficient Generation With Model-Step Distillation
Amirhossein Habibian*
Amir Ghodrati*
Noor Fathima*
Guillaume Sautiere
Risheek Garrepalli
Fatih Porikli
Jens Petersen
Qualcomm AI Research†
{ahabibia, ghodrati, noor, gsautie, rgarrepa, fporikli, jpeterse}@qti.qualcomm.com

SD UNet

1. Introduction
Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DPM), or Diffusion Models for short, have become one of the most popular approaches for text-to-image generation[33, 35]. Compared
to Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), they allow for
diverse synthesized outputs and high perceptual quality [5],
while offering a relatively stable training paradigm [11] and
high controllability.
One of the main drawbacks of diffusion models is that
they are comparatively slow, involving repeated operation
of computationally expensive UNet models [34]. As a re* Equal contribution
† Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,

Inc

Distilled Efficient UNet

454 ms

341 ms

24.9%

330 ms

213 ms

35.5%

240 ms

154 ms

35.8%

With Clockwork

This work aims to improve the efficiency of text-to-image
diffusion models. While diffusion models use computationally expensive UNet-based denoising operations in every generation step, we identify that not all operations
are equally relevant for the final output quality. In particular, we observe that UNet layers operating on highres feature maps are relatively sensitive to small perturbations. In contrast, low-res feature maps influence the
semantic layout of the final image and can often be perturbed with no noticeable change in the output. Based
on this observation, we propose Clockwork Diffusion, a
method that periodically reuses computation from preceding denoising steps to approximate low-res feature maps
at one or more subsequent steps. For multiple baselines, and for both text-to-image generation and image
editing, we demonstrate that Clockwork leads to comparable or improved perceptual scores with drastically reduced computational complexity. As an example, for Stable Diffusion v1.5 with 8 DPM++ steps we save 32% of
FLOPs with negligible FID and CLIP change. We release code at https://github.com/QualcommAI-research/clockwork-diffusion

Efficient UNet

Baseline

Abstract

Figure 1. Time savings with Clockwork, for different baselines.
All pairs have roughly constant FID (computed on MS-COCO
2017 5K validation set), using 8 sampling steps (DPM++). Clockwork can be applied on top of standard models as well as heavily
optimized ones. Timings computed on NVIDIA® RTX® 3080 at
batch size 1 (for distilled model) or 2 (for classifier-free guidance).
Prompt: “the bust of a man’s head is next to a vase of flowers”.

sult, a lot of current research focuses on improving their efficiency, mainly through two different mechanisms. First,
some works seek to reduce the overall number of sampling steps, either by introducing more advanced samplers
[25, 26, 42] or by performing so-called step distillation
[28, 36]. Second, some works reduce the required computation per step e.g., through classifier-free guidance distillation [12, 28], architecture search [20], or with model
distillation [16].
Our work can be viewed as a combination of these two axes.
We begin with the observation that lower-resolution representations within diffusion UNets (i.e. those further from
input and output) are not only influencing the semantic layout more than smaller details [4, 40, 47], they are also more
resilient to perturbations and thus more amenable to distillation into a smaller model. Hence, we propose to perform model distillation on the lower-resolution parts of the

8352

