This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video ReCap: Recursive Captioning of Hour-Long Videos
Md Mohaiminul Islam1 Ngan Ho1 Xitong Yang2 Tushar Nagarajan2
Lorenzo Torresani2 Gedas Bertasius1
1
2
UNC Chapel Hill
Meta AI
https://sites.google.com/view/vidrecap

Abstract
Most video captioning models are designed to process
short video clips of few seconds and output text describing
low-level visual concepts (e.g., objects, scenes, atomic actions). However, most real-world videos last for minutes or
hours and have a complex hierarchical structure spanning
different temporal granularities. We propose Video ReCap,
a recursive video captioning model that can process video
inputs of dramatically different lengths (from 1 second to 2
hours) and output video captions at multiple hierarchy levels. The recursive video-language architecture exploits the
synergy between different video hierarchies and can process hour-long videos efficiently. We utilize a curriculum
learning training scheme to learn the hierarchical structure of videos, starting from clip-level captions describing
atomic actions, then focusing on segment-level descriptions,
and concluding with generating summaries for hour-long
videos. Furthermore, we introduce Ego4D-HCap dataset
by augmenting Ego4D with 8,267 manually collected longrange video summaries. Our recursive model can flexibly
generate captions at different hierarchy levels while also
being useful for other complex video understanding tasks,
such as VideoQA on EgoSchema. Data, code, and models are publicly available at https://sites.google.
com/view/vidrecap.

1. Introduction
Many videos in the real world exhibit a hierarchical information structure that spans human behaviors at different
temporal granularities (i.e., atomic actions, intermediate activity steps, long-term goals, etc.). However, most modern
video captioning models ignore hierarchical video structure
and are specifically tailored for short video inputs, typically
limited to 5-15 seconds [3, 13, 20, 32, 35, 36, 40, 43, 47,
48, 54, 60]. These short-range captioning methods capture
atomic actions and low-level visual details, such as objects
and scenes. Moreover, these models are often prohibitively
resource-intensive when applied to longer videos, making
them ill-suited for understanding human activities occurring

over long periods (e.g., several hours) [26, 43, 48, 60].
In this paper, we investigate a hierarchical video captioning task requiring generating captions at multiple hierarchy
levels given a long video input (e.g., several minutes to several hours). Studies in psychology [8, 10, 15] and social
cognitive theories [4] have shown the inherent hierarchical
structures of human behavior, consisting of atomic actions
at the lowest level, intermediate steps in the middle and
overall goals/intents at the highest level of the hierarchy. Inspired by these prior studies, we also assume three levels of
hierarchies for our video captioning task. At the most granular level, video captions describe individual frames or short
video clips of several seconds, focusing on low-level visual
elements such as objects, scenes, and atomic actions. As we
move up the hierarchy, the short-term captions coalesce into
medium-length video segment descriptions spanning activities extending beyond brief moments, such as the intermediate steps within broader activities (e.g., a single step in
a cooking recipe) or short segments or sequences within a
more extended storyline (e.g., a several minute-long scene
within a movie). Lastly, the top level of the hierarchy encapsulates the long-term human goals in the video, intricate
relationships between events and characters, and the overarching purpose behind the video, which can be captured via
long-range video summaries (See Figure 1).
The task of hierarchical video captioning poses several
technical challenges. Firstly, it necessitates models capable
of handling vastly different input lengths, ranging from a
few seconds to several hours. This contrasts with most existing methods, designed for fixed video durations of up to a
few minutes. Secondly, long-range videos are highly redundant, requiring the model to aggregate only essential information while discarding unimportant visual cues. Thirdly,
another critical challenge is comprehending the hierarchical
structure in long videos and leveraging the synergy between
distinct hierarchies.
To address these technical challenges, we propose Video
ReCap, a model capable of processing videos of dramatically different lengths where input time spans may differ by
up to three orders of magnitude (from a handful of seconds

18198

