This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Inverse Rendering of Glossy Objects via
the Neural Plenoptic Function and Radiance Fields
Haoyuan Wang1 , Wenbo Hu2† , Lei Zhu1 , Rynson W.H. Lau1†
1
City University of Hong Kong 2 Tencent AI Lab
† Joint corresponding authors

1.0

0
Input image

NeRO

Ours

NeRO

Ours

Figure 1. Inverse rendering results of the cutting-edge method, NeRO [10], and ours from calibrated multi-view images of a glossy object.
Geometries are shown as a rendered mesh in the second and third images, and materials (metalness & roughness) are shown as a color map
in the fourth and fifth images. We can see that our results not only have smoother and more accurate geometry but also present a more
reasonable material (since the material of this object should be uniform).

Abstract
Inverse rendering aims at recovering both geometry and
materials of objects. It provides a more compatible reconstruction for conventional rendering engines, compared
with the neural radiance fields (NeRFs). On the other
hand, existing NeRF-based inverse rendering methods cannot handle glossy objects with local light interactions well,
as they typically oversimplify the illumination as a 2D environmental map, which assumes infinite lights only. Observing the superiority of NeRFs in recovering radiance fields,
we propose a novel 5D Neural Plenoptic Function (NeP)
based on NeRFs and ray tracing, such that more accurate
lighting-object interactions can be formulated via the rendering equation. We also design a material-aware cone
sampling strategy to efficiently integrate lights inside the
BRDF lobes with the help of pre-filtered radiance fields.
Our method has two stages: the geometry of the target object and the pre-filtered environmental radiance fields are
reconstructed in the first stage, and materials of the target
object are estimated in the second stage with the proposed
NeP and material-aware cone sampling strategy. Extensive experiments on the proposed real-world and synthetic
datasets demonstrate that our method can reconstruct highfidelity geometry/materials of challenging glossy objects
with complex lighting interactions from nearby objects.
Project webpage: https://whyy.site/paper/nep

1. Introduction
Although Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [1–5, 8, 16–
18, 21, 23, 27, 32] have achieved remarkable progress in
photo-realistic reconstruction, it is still a challenge to integrate NeRFs into conventional rendering engines since
NeRFs represent the object and illumination in an entangled manner. Disentangling the representation into geometry, materials, and environmental lighting, i.e. inverse rendering, is crucial for the applicability in game production
and extended reality.
Recent works have explored geometry reconstruction [9,
11, 20, 26, 28, 30, 31] and further extended to the materials estimation [7, 10, 19, 23, 33], e.g., albedo, roughness,
and metalness. However, they typically represent the illumination as 2D environmental maps [7, 10, 19], which oversimplifies the complicated real-world lighting distribution
to infinite lights only. In many practical scenarios where the
target object is surrounded by other objects, a considerable
amount of light actually comes from the radiance of those
nearby objects. Neglecting these common scenarios results
in inferior reconstruction of both geometry and materials,
especially for glossy objects, such as the improper results
of NeRO [10] in Fig. 1.
In this paper, we propose a Neural Plenoptic Function (NeP) to represent the global illumination as a 5D function, fp (x, d), which describes the color of each light ob-

19999

