This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIP as RNN: Segment Countless Visual Concepts without Training Endeavor
Shuyang Sun1,2 *
1

Runjia Li1 * Philip Torr1
Xiuye Gu2†
2
University of Oxford
Google Research

Siyang Li2†

{kevinsun, runjia, phst}@robots.ox.ac.uk {siyang, xiuyegu}google.com

https://torrvision.com/clip_as_rnn/

Figure 1. We propose CLIP as RNN (CaR) to segment concepts in a vast vocabulary, including fictional characters, landmarks, brands,
everyday objects, and referring expressions. This figure shows our qualitative results. More visualizations are included in the supplementary
material. Best viewed in color and with zoom-in.

Abstract
Existing open-vocabulary image segmentation methods require a fine-tuning step on mask labels and/or image-text
datasets. Mask labels are labor-intensive, which limits
the number of categories in segmentation datasets. Consequently, the vocabulary capacity of pre-trained VLMs is
severely reduced after fine-tuning. However, without finetuning, VLMs trained under weak image-text supervision
tend to make suboptimal mask predictions. To alleviate
these issues, we introduce a novel recurrent framework
that progressively filters out irrelevant texts and enhances
mask quality without training efforts. The recurrent unit
is a two-stage segmenter built upon a frozen VLM. Thus,
our model retains the VLM’s broad vocabulary space and
equips it with segmentation ability. Experiments show that
our method outperforms not only the training-free counterparts, but also those fine-tuned with millions of data samples, and sets the new state-of-the-art records for both zeroshot semantic and referring segmentation. Concretely, we
improve the current record by 28.8, 16.0, and 6.9 mIoU on
Pascal VOC, COCO Object, and Pascal Context.
* The first two authors contribute equally to this work. The majority of
this work was done during Shuyang’s internship at Google Research.
† Equal advising.

1. Introduction
Natural language serves as a bridge to connect visual elements with human-communicable ideas by transforming
colors, shapes, and objects etc. into descriptive language.
On the other hand, human can use natural language to easily instruct computers and robotics to perform their desired
tasks. Built upon the revolutionary vision-language model
trained on Internet-scale image-text pairs, e.g., CLIP [49],
a variaty of studies [10, 35, 39, 42, 50, 54, 66, 74, 82] have
explored using pre-trained VLMs for open-vocabulary image segmentation — to segment any concepts in the image
described by arbitrary text queries.
Among these advances, several works [35, 40, 74] have
integrated pre-trained VLMs with segmenters fine-tuned on
bounding boxes and masks. While these methods exhibit
superior performances on segmentation benchmarks with
common categories, their ability to handle a broader vocabulary is hampered by the small category lists in the segmentation datasets used for fine-tuning. As depicted in Figure 2,
even though all three methods incorporate CLIP [49], those
relying on fine-tuning with mask annotations [35, 40] fail to
recognize the concepts like Pepsi and Coca Cola.
Since box and mask annotations are expensive, another
line of works [10, 39, 42, 50, 51, 66] seek to fine-tune the
VLM and/or auxiliary segmentation modules with image-

13171

