This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Few-shot Learner Parameterization by Diffusion Time-steps
Zhongqi Yue1,3 ,
1

Pan Zhou2,3 ,

Richang Hong4 ,

Nanyang Technological University,
4

2

Singapore Management University,

Hefei University of Technology,

zhongqi.yue@ntu.edu.sg,

Hanwang Zhang5,1 ,
5

1. Introduction
Multi-modal foundation models, e.g., CLIP [26], have recently demonstrated remarkable zero-shot performance in
general visual classification tasks [3, 25]. They define a
task by a suitable text prompt for each class (e.g., “a photo
of an aircraft” for the class “aircraft”), and use the model
to classify an image by selecting the class prompt with
the highest “image-prompt” similarity. However, the zeroshot paradigm encounters limitations when one cannot find
a proper prompt to accurately describe the class of interest. This is particularly true for niche and fine-grained categories whose names may not encapsulate the subtle visual features recognizable by the model (e.g., “707-320 air-

hongrc.hfut@gmail.com,

qianrusun@smu.edu.sg

B: 737-300

A: 707-320

FGVCAircraft

Acc.
80

Train (4-shot)

Abstract

Ours

70

Tip-Adapter

60

50

40

Test

Even when using large multi-modal foundation models,
few-shot learning is still challenging—if there is no proper
inductive bias, it is nearly impossible to keep the nuanced
class attributes while removing the visually prominent attributes that spuriously correlate with class labels. To this
end, we find an inductive bias that the time-steps of a Diffusion Model (DM) can isolate the nuanced class attributes,
i.e., as the forward diffusion adds noise to an image at
each time-step, nuanced attributes are usually lost at an
earlier time-step than the spurious attributes that are visually prominent. Building on this, we propose Time-step
Few-shot (TiF) learner. We train class-specific low-rank
adapters for a text-conditioned DM to make up for the lost
attributes, such that images can be accurately reconstructed
from their noisy ones given a prompt. Hence, at a small
time-step, the adapter and prompt are essentially a parameterization of only the nuanced class attributes. For a test image, we can use the parameterization to only extract the nuanced class attributes for classification. TiF learner significantly outperforms OpenCLIP and its adapters on a variety of fine-grained and customized few-shot learning tasks.
Codes are in https://github.com/yue-zhongqi/tif .

Sea AI Lab,

Skywork AI

panzhou@smu.edu.sg,

hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg,

3

Qianru Sun2

30

(a)

+6%

Zero-Shot CLIP

+24%

Shots 1 2

Zero-Shot DM
4

8

(b)

16

Figure 1. (a) GradCAM [34] of Tip-Adapter [44] on a 4-shot learning task from FGVCAircraft [22], where it is biased to the spurious
background. (b) Comparison of few-shot learning performance.
Our DM-based method significantly outperforms zero-shot OpenCLIP [14] (ViT-H/14 trained on LAION-2B [33]) and its adapter.

craft”), or for customized categories where it is impractical
to fully describe their specification through text alone (e.g.,
a specific person). For these situations, a few-shot training
set is necessary to define the classification on demand.
The most common approach is to train an auxiliary feature adapter attached after the CLIP visual encoder [8, 44]
or text encoder [47, 48]. The objective is to align the
adapted image feature with its prompt embedding only from
the same class. However, it is well-known that such discriminative training on few-shot examples is biased to spurious correlations [41], which hinders generalization at test
time. For example, in Figure 1, consider a scenario where
aircraft A and B is defined by a subtle class attribute, e.g.,
window, but a visually prominent attribute happens to spuriously correlate with the class labels in the few-shot training set, i.e., A appearing with background sky and B with
ground. The model will erroneously consider both window
and background attributes for inaccurate prediction, e.g.,
predicting B with sky as A. Frustratingly, it is impossible to
isolate the nuanced class attributes from visually prominent
yet spurious ones without an explicit inductive bias (e.g.,
prior knowledge that “windows” is a class attribute) [5, 21].
To address the challenge, we turn our attention to gener-

23263

