This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain Prompt Learning with Quaternion Networks
Qinglong Cao1,2 , Zhengqin Xu1 , Yuntian Chen2 *, Chao Ma1 *, and Xiaokang Yang1
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China
{caoql2022, fate311}@sjtu.edu.cn, ychen@eitech.edu.cn, {chaoma, xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Prompt learning has emerged as a potent and resourceefficient technique in large Vision-Language Models
(VLMs). However, its application in adapting VLMs to specialized domains like remote sensing and medical imaging,
termed domain prompt learning, remains relatively unexplored. Although large-scale domain-specific foundation
models offer a potential solution, their focus on a singular vision level presents challenges in prompting both vision and language modalities. To address this limitation, we
propose leveraging domain-specific knowledge from these
foundation models to transfer the robust recognition abilities of VLMs from generalized to specialized domains, employing quaternion networks. Our method entails utilizing
domain-specific vision features from domain-specific foundation models to guide the transformation of generalized
contextual embeddings from the language branch into a
specialized space within quaternion networks. Furthermore, we introduce a hierarchical approach that derives
vision prompt features by analyzing intermodal relationships between hierarchical language prompt features and
domain-specific vision features. Through this mechanism,
quaternion networks can effectively explore intermodal relationships in specific domains, facilitating domain-specific
vision-language contrastive learning. Extensive experiments conducted on domain-specific datasets demonstrate
that our proposed method achieves new state-of-the-art results in prompt learning. Codes are available at https:
//github.com/caoql98/DPLQ.

1. Introduction
Supervised learning using large-scale training samples has
shown remarkable success in various visual understanding
tasks [2, 12, 30, 36, 37, 44]. However, conventional supervised learning often requires a significant amount of data.
To address this issue, large-scale Vision-Language Models
* Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Performance comparison of the novel class generalization. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on various
remote sensing image datasets in terms of harmonic mean.

(VLMs) [15, 28, 32] have recently emerged, making prompt
learning a more popular and efficient paradigm for various
vision tasks. Prompt learning [3, 22, 29, 38, 46, 48] focuses
on adapting VLMs effectively for downstream tasks with
limited training data.
Current VLMs have achieved remarkable progress
in contrastive learning with extensive image-text pairs.
Among these models, Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) [28] is widely recognized for its exceptional
zero-shot generalization capabilities. However, the reliance
on fixed prompts challenges the adaptability of CLIP to
downstream tasks. CoOp [48] introduces context optimization by using learnable context vectors as language prompts
to address this limitation, which enhances the adaptability
of CLIP for visual recognition tasks. However, challenges
related to class shifting remain. Thus, CoCoOp [47] further introduces input-conditional prompts for the language
branch to refine the alignment of both vision and language
branches. MaPLe [17] goes further by introducing a multimodal prompt learning approach. MaPLe fine-tunes vision
and language branches concurrently, leading to more harmonious alignment and improved performance.

26637

