This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Modeling Multimodal Social Interactions: New Challenges and Baselines
with Densely Aligned Representations
Sangmin Lee1 Bolin Lai2 Fiona Ryan2 Bikram Boote1 James M. Rehg1
1
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign 2 Georgia Institute of Technology
{sangminl,boote,jrehg}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Understanding social interactions involving both verbal
and non-verbal cues is essential for effectively interpreting
social situations. However, most prior works on multimodal
social cues focus predominantly on single-person behaviors or rely on holistic visual representations that are not
aligned to utterances in multi-party environments. Consequently, they are limited in modeling the intricate dynamics of multi-party interactions. In this paper, we introduce
three new challenging tasks to model the fine-grained dynamics between multiple people: speaking target identification, pronoun coreference resolution, and mentioned player
prediction. We contribute extensive data annotations to curate these new challenges in social deduction game settings.
Furthermore, we propose a novel multimodal baseline that
leverages densely aligned language-visual representations
by synchronizing visual features with their corresponding
utterances. This facilitates concurrently capturing verbal
and non-verbal cues pertinent to social reasoning. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach with densely aligned multimodal representations in
modeling fine-grained social interactions. Project website:
https://sangmin-git.github.io/projects/MMSI.

1. Introduction
Real-world social interactions involve intricate behaviors
between multiple people. People communicate not only
through verbal cues (e.g., language) but also through nonverbal cues (e.g., gesture, gaze). While spoken language
conveys explicit meaning, inferring the full social context from language alone can sometimes be ambiguous.
Non-verbal cues can often play a crucial role in clarifying
these subtle social nuances and providing additional context. Consequently, comprehensively understanding social
interactions involving multimodal social cues is essential to
interpret social situations appropriately.
There have been attempts to investigate social behaviors

{bolin.lai,fkryan}@gatech.edu

Speaker

Task 1
Speaking Target
Identification

Speaking Target

30

Speaker: I was the troublemaker, you are lying (To whom)
Pronoun Reference

Task 2

Speaker

Pronoun Coreference
Resolution
Speaker: [He] was the robber who stole the cards

Task 3

Speaker

Mentioned Player

Mentioned Player
Prediction
Speaker: But, [Name] saw the troublemaker in the middle

Figure 1. Concepts of the proposed three social tasks in multiparty environments: speaking target identification, pronoun coreference resolution, and mentioned player prediction.

in multimodal aspects by jointly considering language and
visual cues. Some works tried to learn the relationships
between spoken language and visual gestures for gesture
generation [1, 2, 32] and gesture-language grounding [29].
Other multimodal approaches utilized the interconnection
between spoken language and visual expressions to recognize human sentiment and emotion [9, 21, 22, 39, 42, 53].
However, these works mainly focus on single-person behaviors or rely on holistic visual representations in multi-party
settings, rather than modeling the fine-grained dynamics of
social interactions among multiple people. Modeling such
intricate multi-party dynamics requires understanding the
relationships between language and visual cues at an individual level, rather than using global representations.

14585

