This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pose-Transformed Equivariant Network for 3D Point Trajectory Prediction
Ruixuan Yu
Shandong University, Weihai
Weihai, 264209, China

Jian Sun
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Xi’an, 710049, China

yuruixuan@sdu.edu.cn

jiansun@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Predicting 3D point trajectory is a fundamental learning task which commonly should be equivariant under Euclidean transformation, e.g., SE(3). The existing equivariant models are commonly based on the group equivariant
convolution, equivariant message passing, vector neuron,
frame averaging, etc. In this paper, we propose a novel
pose-transformed equivariant network, in which the points
are firstly uniquely normalized and then transformed by the
learned pose transformations, upon which the points after
motion are predicted and aggregated. Under each transformed pose, we design the point position predictor consisting of multiple Pose-Transformed Points Prediction blocks,
in which the global and local motions are estimated and
aggregated. This framework can be proven to be equivariant to SE(3) transformation over 3D points. We evaluate the pose-transformed equivariant network on extensive datasets including human motion capture, molecular
dynamics modeling and dynamics simulation. Extensive
experimental comparisons demonstrated our SOTA performance compared with the existing equivariant networks for
3D point trajectory prediction.

1. Introduction
3D Point trajectory prediction aims at forecasting the future positions of the given 3D points, and the motion should
be equivariant under the transformation of the input points.
It is widely applied to the areas such as particle dynamics
modeling or simulation [14, 20, 30], human motion capture [14, 33], human robot interaction [22, 32], etc.
Various models have been proposed to achieve SE(3)
equivariance for 3D point analysis. The equivariant GNNbased mothods [14, 15, 26, 33] established equivariant message passing by learning linear combinations of the input vectors, ensuring explicit equivariance for point rotation and translation. The high-order-type methods [10, 11,
16, 29] achieve equivariance by building convolution kernels based on equivariant high-order representation such as

spherical harmonics or lie group. The vector-based methods [6, 17, 19, 28] generalize traditional network layers with
scalar neurons into vector neurons or update scalar-valued
feature using the norm of vector-valued features. The frame
averaging methods [8, 25] build equivariant models by averaging over all the transformation group elements. These
equivariant models have achieved promising results over
point clouds. However, the equivariant network has introduced additional computational cost for ensuring equivariance, and sometimes limits the prediction accuracy.
Under an equivariant framework, how to design the specific network architecture is a challenging task. For point
trajectory prediction, the GNN-type models [14, 15, 26, 33]
are based on SE(3)-invariant relation reasoning to aggregate geometric features such as input point coordinates. In
the high-order-type models [11, 29] and vector-based models [6, 17, 19, 28], they adaptively design fundamental layers such as convolution, non-linear and batch normalization
layer, etc., and build equivariant point trajectory network
based on these layers. For frame averaging methods [8, 25],
they directly utilize the architectures of classical deep learning models [13] to build their network architecture. As a
summary, how to design the equivariant learning framework
and the corresponding network architecture are still challenging and deserving to be investigated.
In this paper, for equivariant 3D point trajectory prediction, we propose a novel pose-transformed equivariant
framework. It firstly normalizes the point cloud pose using
the unique pose-normalization. Then it learns to transform
the pose-normalized point clouds, and estimate/aggregate
the point predictions upon these transformed point clouds.
For the specific network design, we propose to learn the decomposed global and local motion displacements using the
proposed Global-Local Motion Estimation Layer. Based on
these ideas, we design a deep network architecture, dubbed
Pose-Transformed Equivariant Network (PT-EvNet), for 3D
point trajectory prediction. We apply the proposed PTEvNet for 3D point trajectory prediction, including human
motion capture, molecular dynamics modeling and dynamics simulation. Experiments show that PT-EvNet outper-

5503

