This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Matching 2D Images in 3D: Metric Relative Pose from Metric Correspondences
Axel Barroso-Laguna1

Sowmya Munukutla1
1

Victor Adrian Prisacariu1,2

Eric Brachmann1

2
Niantic
University of Oxford
https://nianticlabs.github.io/mickey/

Abstract
Given two images, we can estimate the relative camera
pose between them by establishing image-to-image correspondences. Usually, correspondences are 2D-to-2D and
the pose we estimate is defined only up to scale. Some applications, aiming at instant augmented reality anywhere,
require scale-metric pose estimates , and hence, they rely on
external depth estimators to recover the scale. We present
MicKey, a keypoint matching pipeline that is able to predict metric correspondences in 3D camera space. By learning to match 3D coordinates across images, we are able to
infer the metric relative pose without depth measurements.
Depth measurements are also not required for training, nor
are scene reconstructions or image overlap information.
MicKey is supervised only by pairs of images and their relative poses. MicKey achieves state-of-the-art performance
on the Map-Free Relocalisation benchmark while requiring
less supervision than competing approaches.

1. Introduction
Whether you prefer inches or centimeters, we measure and
understand the world in scale-metric units. Unfortunately,
the scale-metric quality of the world is lost when we project
it to the image plane. The scale-ambiguity is one aspect that
makes computer vision, and building applications on top of
it, hard. Imagine an augmented reality problem where two
people look at the same scene through their phones. Assume we want to insert scaled virtual content, e.g., a virtual
human, into both views. To do that in a believable fashion,
we need to recover the relative pose between both cameras
and we need it up to scale [1, 69].
Estimating the relative pose between two images is a
long-standing problem in computer vision [27, 50, 51]. Solutions based on feature matching offer outstanding quality
even under adverse conditions like wide baseline matching
or changing seasons [37]. However, their geometric reasoning is limited to the 2D plane, so the distance between the
cameras remains unknown [1, 34].
In some settings, we can resort to dedicated hardware to

3D Keypoint Coordinates

Source

Differentiable Pose Estimation

Destination

Metric Relative Pose

Figure 1. We introduce MicKey, a neural network that predicts
3D metric keypoint coordinates in camera space from a 2D input
image. Given two images, MicKey establishes 3D-3D correspondences via descriptor matching and then applies a Kabsch [38]
solver to recover the metric relative pose. We visualize the 3D
keypoint coordinates by mapping them to the RGB cube.

recover the scene scale. Modern phones come with IMU
sensors, but they require the user to move [57]. Some
phones come with LiDAR sensors that measure depth, but
these sensors are limited in terms of range and constrained
to very few high-end devices [30].
The general setting, as recently formalized as “Map-free
Relocalisation” [1], provides only two images and intrinsics
but no further measurements. The best solution to recover
a metric relative pose hitherto was to combine 2D feature
matching with a separate depth estimation network to lift
correspondences to 3D metric space. However, there are
two problems. Firstly, the feature detector and the depth estimator are separate components that operate independently.
Feature detectors generally fire on corners and depth discontinuities [4, 20, 52], exactly the areas where depth estimators struggle. Secondly, learning the best metric depth
estimators usually requires strong supervision with ground
truth depth which can be hard to come by, depending on the
data domain [59]. E.g., for pedestrian imagery recorded by
phones, measured depth is rarely available.

4852

