This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

XFeat: Accelerated Features for Lightweight Image Matching
Guilherme Potje1
Felipe Cadar1,2
André Araujo3
Renato Martins2,4
Erickson R. Nascimento1,5
1

Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais 2 Université de Bourgogne, ICB UMR 6303 CNRS
3
Google Research 4 Université de Lorraine, LORIA, Inria 5 Microsoft

{guipotje,cadar,erickson}@dcc.ufmg.br, renato.martins@u-bourgogne.fr, andrearaujo@google.com

We introduce a lightweight and accurate architecture
for resource-efficient visual correspondence. Our method,
dubbed XFeat (Accelerated Features), revisits fundamental design choices in convolutional neural networks for detecting, extracting, and matching local features. Our new
model satisfies a critical need for fast and robust algorithms
suitable to resource-limited devices. In particular, accurate image matching requires sufficiently large image resolutions – for this reason, we keep the resolution as large as
possible while limiting the number of channels in the network. Besides, our model is designed to offer the choice of
matching at the sparse or semi-dense levels, each of which
may be more suitable for different downstream applications, such as visual navigation and augmented reality. Our
model is the first to offer semi-dense matching efficiently,
leveraging a novel match refinement module that relies on
coarse local descriptors. XFeat is versatile and hardwareindependent, surpassing current deep learning-based local
features in speed (up to 5x faster) with comparable or better
accuracy, proven in pose estimation and visual localization.
We showcase it running in real-time on an inexpensive laptop CPU without specialized hardware optimizations. Code
and weights are available at verlab.dcc.ufmg.br/
descriptors/xfeat_cvpr24.

1. Introduction
As a crucial step for many higher-level vision tasks, local image feature extraction remains a highly active topic
of research. Despite the recent advancements, the large
improvements achieved from recent image matching methods [5, 8, 40, 41] mostly come at the cost of high computational requirements and increased implementation complexity. Since image feature extraction is critical for a myriad of tasks [1, 25, 27, 29, 35, 38, 44], efficient solutions
are highly desirable, especially on resource-constrained

Pose accuracy @ 10°

Abstract

90
XFeat*

80 DISK
ALIKE
70
60 SuperPoint

XFeat

50
40
30

ORB
0

10

20

30

Frames per second

40

50

Figure 1. In XFeat, accuracy meets efficiency. XFeat delivers great trade-off between speed and relative pose estimation accuracy on the Megadepth-1500 dataset, as evidenced by
the Pareto-frontier curve in orange. Its lightweight architecture
enables real-time feature extraction on GPU-free settings and
resource-constrained devices without hardware-specific optimizations. Inference speed on a budget-friendly laptop (Intel(R)
i5-1135G7 @ 2.40GHz CPU) at VGA resolution. ∗ denotes
semi-dense extraction.

platforms such as mobile robots, augmented reality, and
portable devices, where scarce computational resources are
often allocated to multiple tasks simultaneously. Although
specific works aim to perform hardware-level optimization for existing architectures [13], which is still hardwarespecific and cumbersome in practice, few works focus on
the architectural design for efficient feature extraction [46].
Drawing inspiration from the state-of-the-art developments in several fronts of image matching, we present
XFeat: a novel convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture that performs keypoint detection and local feature extraction using carefully designed strategies to reduce
computational footprint as much as possible, while being
robust and accurate. XFeat is designed to be hardwareagnostic, ensuring broad applicability across platforms, but

2682

