This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GS-IR: 3D Gaussian Splatting for Inverse Rendering
Zhihao Liang1,* , Qi Zhang2,* , Ying Feng2 , Ying Shan2 , Kui Jia3,†
1
South China University of Technology, 2 Tencent AI Lab,
3
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
eezhihaoliang@mail.scut.edu.cn, nwpuqzhang@gmail.com,
vonyfeng@gmail.com, yingsshan@tencent.com, kuijia@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
AO

We propose GS-IR, a novel inverse rendering approach
based on 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) that leverages forward mapping volume rendering to achieve photorealistic
novel view synthesis and relighting results. Unlike previous works that use implicit neural representations and volume rendering (e.g. NeRF), which suffer from low expressive power and high computational complexity, we extend
3DGS, a top-performance representation for novel view
synthesis, to estimate scene geometry, surface material, and
environment illumination from multi-view images captured
under unknown lighting conditions. There are two main
problems when introducing 3DGS to inverse rendering: 1)
3DGS does not support producing plausible normal natively; 2) forward mapping (e.g. rasterization and splatting)
cannot trace the occlusion like backward mapping (e.g. ray
tracing). To address these challenges, our GS-IR proposes
an efficient optimization scheme incorporating a depthderivation-based regularization for normal estimation and
a baking-based occlusion to model indirect lighting. The
flexible and expressive 3DGS representation allows us to
achieve fast and compact geometry reconstruction, photorealistic novel view synthesis, and effective physically-based
rendering. We demonstrate the superiority of our method
over baseline methods through qualitative and quantitative
evaluations of various challenging scenes. The source code
is available at https://github.com/lzhnb/GSIR.

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering is a long-standing task, seeking to answer
the question: “How can we deduce physical attributes (e.g.
geometry, material, and lighting) of a 3D scene from multiview images?”. This problem is inherently challenging and
* indicates equal contribution.
† Correspondence to Kui Jia <kuijia@cuhk.edu.cn>.

Albedo Metallic Roughness

Normal

GS-IR

3D gaussians
AO

Relighting

Normal

Albedo

Roughness

Material Editing

Figure 1. Given multi-view captured images of a complex scene,
we propose GS-IR (3D Gaussian Splatting for Inverse Rendering),
which utilizes 3D Gaussian and forward mapping splatting to recover high-quality physical properties (e.g., normal, material, illumination). This enables us to perform relighting and material
editing, resulting in outstanding inverse rendering results. Better
viewed on screen with zoom in, especially the remarkable material decomposition and normal reconstruction of bicycle axle.

ill-posed, particularly when input images are captured in
uncontrolled environments with unknown illumination. Recent research [9, 10, 35, 46] has sought to address this issue
by employing implicit neural representations akin to NeRF
[30] that utilizes multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs). However, current methods incorporating MLP face challenges
in terms of their low expressive capacity and high computational demands, which significantly limits the effectiveness
and efficiency of inverse rendering, especially when it cannot be rendered at interactive rates.
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [24] has recently
emerged as a promising technique to model 3D static scenes
and significantly boost the rendering speed to a real-time
level. It makes the scene representation more compact and
achieves fast and top performance for novel view synthesis.
Introducing it to the inverse rendering pipeline is natural and
essential, including geometry reconstruction, materials decomposition, and illumination estimation. Unlike ray trac-

21644

