This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fully Geometric Panoramic Localization
Junho Kim1 , Jiwon Jeong3 , and Young Min Kim1, 2
1
2

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University

Interdisciplinary Program in Artificial Intelligence and INMC, Seoul National University
3

Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University

Abstract
We introduce a lightweight and accurate localization
method that only utilizes the geometry of 2D-3D lines.
Given a pre-captured 3D map, our approach localizes a
panorama image, taking advantage of the holistic 360◦
view. The system mitigates potential privacy breaches or
domain discrepancies by avoiding trained or hand-crafted
visual descriptors. However, as lines alone can be ambiguous, we express distinctive yet compact spatial contexts
from relationships between lines, namely the dominant directions of parallel lines and the intersection between nonparallel lines. The resulting representations are efficient in
processing time and memory compared to conventional visual descriptor-based methods. Given the groups of dominant line directions and their intersections, we accelerate
the search process to test thousands of pose candidates in
less than a millisecond without sacrificing accuracy. We
empirically show that the proposed 2D-3D matching can localize panoramas for challenging scenes with similar structures, dramatic domain shifts or illumination changes. Our
fully geometric approach does not involve extensive parameter tuning or neural network training, making it a practical
algorithm that can be readily deployed in the real world.
Project page including the code is available through this
link: https://82magnolia.github.io/fgpl/.

1. Introduction
Visual localization considers the problem of estimating the
camera pose with respect to a 3D map using an input image. When designing a visual localization system, the key
desiderata is defining the 3D map and the associated image features to match against the map. The most common
choice in modern localization systems is to use 3D maps
from Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [47, 48] or dense laser
scans [52] and match an image against extracted visual descriptors [2, 11, 34]. While being performant, such a design choice has several limitations [61]: (i) building and
storing the map of image features can be costly, (ii) privacy breaches may occur in client-server localization scenarios as visual descriptors cannot securely hide clients’

Figure 1. Overview of our method. (a) We target fully geometric
localization using panoramas, where we only exploit lines in 2D
and 3D. (b) Our method first searches for promising poses by comparing point and line distance functions that describe the holistic
distribution of lines and their intersections. Then we refine each
selected pose by aligning the line intersections on the sphere.

view [12, 43, 50], and (iii) localization may fail in challenging conditions such as lighting or scene changes.
In this paper, we argue that the holistic context of lines,
when properly exploited, can be sufficient for performing
accurate and scalable panoramic localization. To elaborate,
as shown in Figure 1, we propose to solely use 3D lines as
the map, and 2D lines extracted from the query panorama
as features for localization. Thanks to the large field of
view, localization methods using panoramas [8, 26–28, 58]
are more robust against scene changes or repetitive struc-

20827

