This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UnScene3D: Unsupervised 3D Instance Segmentation for Indoor Scenes
David Rozenberszki1
1

Or Litany2,3

Technical University of Munich

2

Angela Dai1

Technion

3

NVIDIA

https://rozdavid.github.io/unscene3d

Figure 1. We propose UnScene3D, a fully-unsupervised 3D instance segmentation method, effectively separating semantic instances
without requiring any manual annotations. We utilize geometric primitives to ensure crisps masks, and due to our self-training loop we can
also obtain a dense set of predictions even in cluttered indoor scenarios.

Abstract
3D instance segmentation is fundamental to geometric
understanding of the world around us. Existing methods
for instance segmentation of 3D scenes rely on supervision from expensive, manual 3D annotations. We propose
UnScene3D, the first fully unsupervised 3D learning approach for class-agnostic 3D instance segmentation of indoor scans. UnScene3D first generates pseudo masks by
leveraging self-supervised color and geometry features to
find potential object regions. We operate on a basis of geometric oversegmentation, enabling efficient representation
and learning on high-resolution 3D data. The coarse proposals are then refined through self-training our model on
its predictions. Our approach improves over clusteringbased alternatives to unsupervised 3D instance segmentation methods by more than 300% Average Precision score,
demonstrating effective instance segmentation even in challenging, cluttered 3D scenes.

1. Introduction
The increasing availability of commodity RGB-D sensors,
now widely available on iPhones as well as with the Microsoft Kinect or Intel RealSense, has enabled consumer-

level capture of 3D geometry of real-world environments.
To enable applications in robotics, autonomous navigation,
and mixed reality in such scenes, semantic 3D scene understanding is necessary. In particular, 3D instance segmentation is critical to 3D perception, providing dense instance
mask predictions, thus enabling physical and geometric reasoning about objects in an environment. While various
3D deep learning approaches have been developed for 3D
instance segmentation [5, 13, 16, 17, 20, 21, 27, 29, 39–
42, 46–48, 50, 53, 54], they require full supervision from
expensive, manual, dense annotations on 3D scenes.
We introduce UnScene3D, a novel approach designed
for class-agnostic 3D instance segmentation. Our aim is to
identify objects in real-world 3D scans by predicting their
dense instance masks, without any constraints to a predefined set of class categories. Moreover, we avoid expensive
data annotation requirements by operating in an unsupervised fashion, instead leveraging self-supervised 2D and 3D
features for segmentation.
UnScene3D comprises two essential elements. First, we
observe that for RGB-D scan data, self-supervised representation learning methods [18, 56] can provide an innate
signal indicating object-ness through feature similarity. We
thus generate pseudo masks over 3D segment primitives,
based on multimodal analysis of self-supervised color and
geometry features from the RGB-D data. By considering

19957

