This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Robustness of Language Guidance for Low-Level Vision Tasks:
Findings from Depth Estimation
Agneet Chatterjee}
Tejas Gokhale
Chitta Baral}
Yezhou Yang}
}

Arizona State University
University of Maryland, Baltimore County
agneet@asu.edu, gokhale@umbc.edu, chitta@asu.edu, yz.yang@asu.edu

Abstract
Recent advances in monocular depth estimation have
been made by incorporating natural language as additional
guidance. Although yielding impressive results, the impact of the language prior, particularly in terms of generalization and robustness, remains unexplored. In this paper, we address this gap by quantifying the impact of this
prior and introduce methods to benchmark its effectiveness
across various settings. We generate "low-level" sentences
that convey object-centric, three-dimensional spatial relationships, incorporate them as additional language priors
and evaluate their downstream impact on depth estimation.
Our key finding is that current language-guided depth estimators perform optimally only with scene-level descriptions
and counter-intuitively fare worse with low level descriptions. Despite leveraging additional data, these methods
are not robust to directed adversarial attacks and decline
in performance with an increase in distribution shift. Finally, to provide a foundation for future research, we identify points of failures and offer insights to better understand
these shortcomings. With an increasing number of methods
using language for depth estimation, our findings highlight
the opportunities and pitfalls that require careful consideration for effective deployment in real-world settings. 1

1. Introduction
Computational theories of visual perception have proposed
hierarchies of visual understanding, such as in the work
of Gestalt psychologists [8], Barrow and Tenenbaum [2],
and others. In this hierarchy, higher-level vision tasks are
aligned with semantics or human-assigned labels; for instance, recognizing scenes, detecting objects and events, answering questions and generating captions about images, or
retrieving and generating images from text queries. Breakthroughs in large-scale vision–language pretraining [27,
34, 42] and diffusion-based modeling techniques [35, 37]
1 Code/Data: https://github.com/agneet42/lang_depth

have been significantly improved the state-of-the-art in such
higher-level semantic visual understanding tasks. This success has been driven by the idea that natural language is an
effective and free-form way to describe the contents of an
image and that leveraging this data for learning shared representations benefits downstream tasks.
Lower-level vision has a different perspective on image
understanding and seeks to understand images in terms of
geometric and physical properties of the scene such as estimating the depth (distance from the camera), surface normals (orientation relative to the camera) of each pixel in an
image, or other localization and 3D reconstruction tasks. A
physics-based understanding of the scene such as the measurement or estimation of geometric and photometric properties, underlies the solutions for these inverse problems.
As such, until now, state of the art techniques [30, 43] for
lower-level tasks such as depth estimation have not featured
the use of natural language. Surprisingly, recent findings
from VPD [52], TADP [24] and EVP [26] have demonstrated that language guidance can help in depth estimation,
thus potentially building a bridge between low-level and
high-level visual understanding. In this paper, we seek to
inspect this bridge by asking a simple question: what is the
impact of the natural language prior on depth estimation? Our study is positioned to complement early exploration into the role of natural language for training models
for low-level tasks, especially given the emerging evidence
of state-of-the-art performance on tasks such as depth estimation. We argue that in the age of large language models,
it is essential to fully grasp the implications of using language priors for vision tasks and so we examine these methods from multiple perspectives to evaluate their complete
potential. This examination is important as depth estimation is used for many real-world and safety-critical applications such as perception in autonomous vehicles, warehouse
automation, and robot task and motion planning.
We conduct a systematic evaluation to determine the significance of language-conditioning and the effect of this
conditioning under various settings. We also benchmark
the generalization capabilities and robustness of these meth-

2794

