This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Brush2Prompt: Contextual Prompt Generator for Object Inpainting
Mang Tik Chiu1,2 , Yuqian Zhou2 , Lingzhi Zhang2 , Zhe Lin2 ,
Connelly Barnes2 , Sohrab Amirghodsi2 , Eli Shechtman2 , Humphrey Shi1,3
1

UIUC, 2 Adobe, 3 University of Oregon

Abstract
Object inpainting is a task that involves adding objects
to real images and seamlessly compositing them. With the
recent commercialization of products like Stable Diffusion
and Generative Fill, inserting objects into images by using
prompts has achieved impressive visual results. In this paper, we propose a prompt suggestion model to simplify the
process of prompt input. When the user provides an image and a mask, our model predicts suitable prompts based
on the partial contextual information in the masked image,
and the shape and location of the mask. Specifically, we introduce a concept-diffusion in the CLIP space that predicts
CLIP-text embeddings from a masked image. These diffused
embeddings can be directly injected into open-source inpainting models like Stable Diffusion and its variants. Alternatively, they can be decoded into natural language for
use in other publicly available applications such as Generative Fill. Our prompt suggestion model demonstrates a
balanced accuracy and diversity, showing its capability to
be both contextually aware and creatively adaptive.

1. Introduction
In traditional background image inpainting [2], the primary goal is to fill in a masked region using the surrounding background context, thus removing any original objects in that region. These methods usually do not take
conditions like text prompts and typically do not introduce
new elements into the image. However, with the advent of
diffusion-based text-to-image models such as Stable Diffusion [25, 32], DALLE2 [30], and Imagen [33], conditional
models have been trained to insert objects to images using explicit text prompts. This is known as text-guided inpainting. These methods encode the input text prompt into
latent embeddings, which then guide the image diffusion
process through cross-attention. With an appropriately designed text prompt, they can generate highly detailed results
seamlessly blended with the background. Their remarkable
generation capability gained widespread attention spanning
from academic circles to various industries.

Figure 1. We propose a context-aware prompt generator for textguided object inpainting task. We provide diverse prompt suggestions by analyzing both the image context and the shape of the
mask as soon as users draw a mask on the image. Our generator
can be compatible with any text-guided inpainting tools.

Text-guided inpainting can be used for object inpainting, which is the task of adding one or more new objects
to an indicated region of an image [42, 47]. In existing
models, this requires users to provide explicit text prompts
to describe their envisioned concepts. This necessity leads
to a question: Can object insertion be achieved without
an explicit user text prompt? Object insertion without a
text prompt could be beneficial for inexperienced users who
might not know what the text-to-image system is capable of,
or it might help experienced users generate creative ideas,
or it may simply help save time in case a proposed object
matches what the user was imagining. However, in existing models, if the user provides an empty text prompt
or uses vague terms like “high quality,” the model tends
to default to sampling dominant contents from its heavily
skewed training dataset. For instance, applying a mask to
the sky in an image will more likely result in the model filling in with sky textures or clouds, rather than a beautiful
bird. One study [3] proposed to sample meaningful diversity using an inference technique that diversifies the outputs by distancing their generation paths from each other.

12636

