This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging Cross-Modal Neighbor Representation
for Improved CLIP Classification
Chao Yi, Lu Ren, De-Chuan Zhan, Han-Jia Ye(B)
National Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
School of Artificial Intelligence, Nanjing University, China
{yic,renl,zhandc,yehj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
CLIP showcases exceptional cross-modal matching capabilities due to its training on image-text contrastive learning tasks. However, without specific optimization for unimodal scenarios, its performance in single-modality feature
extraction might be suboptimal. Despite this, some studies
have directly used CLIP’s image encoder for tasks like fewshot classification, introducing a misalignment between its
pre-training objectives and feature extraction methods. This
inconsistency can diminish the quality of the image’s feature
representation, adversely affecting CLIP’s effectiveness in
target tasks. In this paper, we view text features as precise
neighbors of image features in CLIP’s space and present
a novel CrOss-moDal nEighbor Representation (CODER)
based on the distance structure between images and their
neighbor texts. This feature extraction method aligns better with CLIP’s pre-training objectives, thereby fully leveraging CLIP’s robust cross-modal capabilities. The key to
construct a high-quality CODER lies in how to create a
vast amount of high-quality and diverse texts to match with
images. We introduce the Auto Text Generator (ATG)
to automatically generate the required texts in a data-free
and training-free manner. We apply CODER to CLIP’s
zero-shot and few-shot image classification tasks. Experiment results across various datasets and models confirm
CODER’s effectiveness. Code is available at: https:
//github.com/YCaigogogo/CVPR24-CODER.

1. Introduction
In recent years, vision-language models have garnered
widespread attention, with CLIP [16] standing out as a
notably powerful exemplar. Trained on a vast array of
image-text pairs through the image-text contrastive learning tasks, CLIP boasts impressive cross-modal matching
capabilities. And it has been applied to fields like image
classification [16], object detection [3], semantic segmen-

tation [7, 25], video understanding [10], voice classification [4], text-to-image generation [19, 34], model pretraining [23], and beyond [17, 31].
Some existing works [21, 23, 32] extract image features
directly from CLIP’s image encoder for intra-modal operation, like calculating similarity between images in fewshot classification [32]. However, these methods overlook
CLIP’s multi-modal capabilities, leading to a misalignment
with CLIP’s pre-training objectives. Furthermore, since
CLIP isn’t optimized for uni-modal scenarios, its performance in intra-modal tasks isn’t guaranteed. To optimize
the image features extracted by CLIP, we ask:
Can we leverage CLIP’s powerful cross-modal
matching capabilities to extract better image features, thereby improving CLIP’s performance on
downstream tasks?
In this paper, we introduce an enhanced image representation based on the distance between images and their
neighboring texts in CLIP’s feature space. This idea stems
from our re-examination of CLIP’s robust zero-shot classification capability from the perspective of nearest neighboring: The previous approaches consider the text features
extracted by CLIP as classifiers and use them to get the classification results. Different from this perspective, we interpret CLIP’s zero-shot image classification as a 1NN problem, as shown in the left part of Figure 1. We treat texts
as the images’ neighbors in the CLIP’s feature space. Then
for each image, CLIP identifies its closest text and assigns
this text’s class as the image’s predicted class. This 1NN
approach shows good performance because CLIP’s robust
image-text matching capabilities ensure images are closer
to their semantically related texts. This suggests that the
cross-modal distance between an image and its neighboring
texts captures information about the image, such as its class.
In zero-shot image classification, CLIP only considers
the distance between an image and its nearest neighbor text,
which loses the information implied in the distance between
the image and other texts. To make full use of this infor-

27402

