This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ConTex-Human: Free-View Rendering of Human from a Single Image with
Texture-Consistent Synthesis
Xiaoyu Li2 † Chaopeng Zhang2 Qi Zhang2 Yanpei Cao2
Ying Shan2 Long Quan1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Tencent AI Lab

Xiangjun Gao1

†

Corresponding author

Figure 1. Our approach “ConTex-Human” can achieve texture-consistent free-view human rendering with high-fidelity using only a single
image on different datasets. The left two are from SSHQ, right two are from THuman2.0. (Check project page for more visual results.)

Abstract
In this work, we propose a method to address the challenge of rendering a 3D human from a single image in a
free-view manner. Some existing approaches could achieve
this by using generalizable pixel-aligned implicit fields to
reconstruct a textured mesh of a human or by employing
a 2D diffusion model as guidance with the Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) method, to lift the 2D image into 3D
space. However, a generalizable implicit field often results
in an over-smooth texture field, while the SDS method tends
to lead to a texture-inconsistent novel view with the input
image. In this paper, we introduce a texture-consistent back
view synthesis module that could transfer the reference image content to the back view through depth and text-guided
attention injection. Moreover, to alleviate the color distortion that occurs in the side region, we propose a visibilityaware patch consistency regularization for texture map-

ping and refinement combined with the synthesized back
view texture. With the above techniques, we can achieve
high-fidelity and texture-consistent human rendering from
a single image. Experiments conducted on both real and
synthetic data demonstrate the effectiveness of our method
and show that our approach outperforms previous baseline
methods.

1. Introduction
Free-view human synthesis or rendering is essential for
various applications, including virtual reality, electronic
games, and movie production. Traditional approaches often require a dense camera rig or depth sensors [5, 9] to reconstruct the geometry and refine the texture of the subject,
resulting in a tedious and time-consuming process.
Recently, with the advent of implicit fields, remarkable
progress has been made in 3D human free-view synthesis
from a single RGB image. Several methods [43, 44, 57] ac-

10084

