This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ICP-Flow: LiDAR Scene Flow Estimation with ICP
Yancong Lin and Holger Caesar
Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands

Abstract
Scene flow characterizes the 3D motion between two LiDAR scans captured by an autonomous vehicle at nearby
timesteps. Prevalent methods consider scene flow as pointwise unconstrained flow vectors that can be learned by either large-scale training beforehand or time-consuming optimization at inference. However, these methods do not
take into account that objects in autonomous driving often move rigidly. We incorporate this rigid-motion assumption into our design, where the goal is to associate objects
over scans and then estimate the locally rigid transformations. We propose ICP-Flow, a learning-free flow estimator.
The core of our design is the conventional Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm, which aligns the objects over
time and outputs the corresponding rigid transformations.
Crucially, to aid ICP, we propose a histogram-based initialization that discovers the most likely translation, thus
providing a good starting point for ICP. The complete scene
flow is then recovered from the rigid transformations. We
outperform state-of-the-art baselines, including supervised
models, on the Waymo dataset and perform competitively
on Argoverse-v2 and nuScenes. Further, we train a feedforward neural network, supervised by the pseudo labels from
our model, and achieve top performance among all models
capable of real-time inference. We validate the advantage
of our model on scene flow estimation with longer temporal
gaps, up to 0.4 seconds where other models fail to deliver
meaningful results.

1. Introduction
Motion is vital for visual perception, particularly for highly
automated vehicles that operate in a dynamically changing
3D world, as motion facilitates the detection of dynamic objects around an autonomous vehicle. A popular task in motion prediction is scene flow estimation, which calculates
point-wise motion from two temporarily adjacent LiDAR
scans, i.e. a 3D vector that describes the displacement of a
point [3, 12, 28, 43]. Scene flow lays the foundation for numerous high-level tasks in perception, particularly in scene
understanding without relying on large amounts of annota-

ICP Flow
Neural Network

Iterative Closest Point (ICP)

x

z

Ground + Clusters
(in color)

Scene Flow calculation

Supervision

y
Feedforward
Neural Network

Real-time
Inference

Figure 1. ICP for scene flow. Given two LiDAR scans, we remove
the ground, cluster points, and align clusters using ICP, as objects
move rigidly. We infer a rigid transformation for each pair of clusters, from which the scene flow can be recovered. Further, we
train a feedforward network using the prediction from our model
as supervision. The network runs in real-time with only marginal
performance loss.

tions [14, 34, 51, 57]. As an example, [34] leverages scene
flow to segment dynamic objects from a scene and associate them over multiple frames, from which one can create
bounding boxes for training object detectors in an unsupervised manner. [51] builds on top of scene flow and takes
advantage of motion cues to discover and track objects from
a large volume of unlabeled data. These works treat scene
flow estimation as a cornerstone and consider motion as a
useful prior for temporal perception. The motion prior not
only reduces the dependency on manual annotation but also
scales up when ample data is available, particularly in autonomous driving where ample unlabeled data is relatively
cheap to acquire. Thus, it is important to develop a reliable
scene flow method for autonomous driving.
There has been a strong demand for unsupervised scene
flow, as many works [14, 34, 51, 57] count on scene flow to
extract object information, such as tracked bounding boxes
over time, for free, i.e., without human labeling. Recent
works in [2, 33] have made great strides towards this direction, by utilizing the cycle consistency of forward and
backward flows. Further, the work in [26, 27] proposes
test-time optimization that conducts learning from scratch
per sample, thus eliminating the need for training data. Un-

15501

