This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Depth Enhancement via Polarization Prompt Fusion Tuning
Kei Ikemura6 * Yiming Huang5 * Felix Heide2
Zhaoxiang Zhang1,4 Qifeng Chen3 Chenyang Lei1,2†
1

CAIR, HKISI-CAS

2

Princeton University

3

HKUST

4

CASIA

5

CUHK

6

KTH Royal Institute of Technology

Abstract

1. Introduction
Estimating accurate depth is crucial for a wide range of applications, from autonomous driving to 3D reconstruction.
Over the past decades, various depth sensing methods have
been investigated, including Direct [45, 59] and Indirect
[16, 20, 49] Time-of-Flight (ToF) cameras, structured light
sensors [14, 15], and stereo cameras [13]. Despite wide
application, these sensing systems live in a complex tradeoff space where each has its own vulnerabilities, including
specularities [42], transparency [3], Multi-Path-Interference
(MPI) [16, 49], strong ambient light [14, 15], and texturelessness [3] just to name a few.
In this work, we are interested in using polarization data
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Point cloud of sensor depth

Point cloud by ours

GT depth

Sensor depth

Our enhanced depth

Input intensity

Error of sensor depth

Error of ours

error [mm]

350

212

depth [mm]

1264

GT point cloud

0

Existing depth sensors are imperfect and may provide
inaccurate depth values in challenging scenarios, such as
in the presence of transparent or reflective objects. In this
work, we present a general framework that leverages polarization imaging to improve inaccurate depth measurements from various depth sensors. Previous polarizationbased depth enhancement methods focus on utilizing pure
physics-based formulas for a single sensor. In contrast,
our method first adopts a learning-based strategy where
a neural network is trained to estimate a dense and complete depth map from polarization data and a sensor depth
map from different sensors. To further improve the performance, we propose a Polarization Prompt Fusion Tuning (PPFT) strategy to effectively utilize RGB-based models pre-trained on large-scale datasets, as the size of the
polarization dataset is limited to train a strong model from
scratch. We conducted extensive experiments on a public dataset, and the results demonstrate that the proposed
method performs favorably compared to existing depth enhancement baselines. Code and demos are available at
https://lastbasket.github.io/PPFT/.

Figure 1. Visualization of the results of our proposed framework. The sensor depth shown is from a d-ToF sensor. Our
method leverages the dense shape cues from polarization and produces accurate results on challenging depth enhancement problems, including depth in-painting, restoring depth on transparent
surfaces, shape correction, etc. For example, see that the depth of
the transparent water bottle is restored. Note that on the error map
of the sensor depth, we clamp values to the maximum scale used.

as generalizable geometry cues for depth enhancement. The
polarization state is closely related to the local surface orientation, providing valuable information for accurate depth
estimation. Moreover, as a passive sensor, polarization
cameras have the advantage of capturing dense geometry
cues without being limited by the depth range [29]. Further, polarization measurement can be used to detect abnormal conditions such as reflection [29, 37] and transparency
[25]. This can be significantly reliable for detecting and correcting false depth measurements. Hence, polarization can
serve as a highly effective complementary component to existing depth sensors, enhancing their overall performance
and expanding their capabilities in various applications.
To the best of our knowledge, no existing work focuses on a general depth enhancement that applies to various depth-sensing technologies using polarization guidance. Some previous studies have explored physics-based
methods [22, 62], achieving accurate depth enhancement

20710

