This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lane2Seq: Towards Unified Lane Detection via Sequence Generation
Kunyang Zhou
Southeast University
kunyangzhou@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel sequence generationbased framework for lane detection, called Lane2Seq. It
unifies various lane detection formats by casting lane detection as a sequence generation task. This is different from
previous lane detection methods, which depend on welldesigned task-specific head networks and corresponding
loss functions. Lane2Seq only adopts a plain transformerbased encoder-decoder architecture with a simple crossentropy loss. Additionally, we propose a new multi-format
model tuning based on reinforcement learning to incorporate the task-specific knowledge into Lane2Seq. Experimental results demonstrate that such a simple sequence generation paradigm not only unifies lane detection but also
achieves competitive performance on benchmarks. For example, Lane2Seq gets 97.95% and 97.42% F1 score on
Tusimple and LLAMAS datasets, establishing a new stateof-the-art result for two benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Lane detection is a fundamental task in computer vision [31, 36, 40]. It aims to predict the location of the lane
in a given image. Lane detection plays a crucial role in
many applications, such as adaptive cruise control and lane
keeping. Existing lane detection methods generally adopt
a divide-and-conquer strategy, which decomposes the lane
detection into multiple subtasks. Each subtask is accomplished by a task-specific head network. For instance, as
shown in Fig. 1, segmentation-based methods [28,49] adopt
a head network along with a task-specific module, such
as the message-passing module [28], to predict per-pixel
masks. Anchor-based methods [17, 36] utilize a classification head network for distinguishing lane instances and
an anchor refinement network for regressing accurate lanes.
Parameter-based methods [13, 23] use a network to predict
the parameters of lanes and a vertical offset prediction network to locate the start points of lanes.
Although divide-and-conquer strategy has been proved
an effectively way to address the certain subtask in the ex-

Figure 1. Comparison of different lane detection frameworks.

isting methods, there still exist several limitations. (1) Each
subtask needs a customized task-specific head network, resulting in a complicated lane detection model. (2) Each
task-specific head requires one or more loss functions, e.g.,
cross-entropy loss and Line-IOU loss [17], bringing out extra hyper-parameters.
In this paper, we present a novel sequence generationbased lane detecton (Lane2Seq) framework to tackle the
aforementioned issues. By formulating the lane detection
as a sequence generation task, Lane2Seq gets rid of customized head networks and task-specific loss function. It
is based on the intuition that if the detection model knows
where the target lane is, model can be simply teached how
to read the location of lane out, instead of designing additional classification head or regression head by the divideand-conquer strategy.
Therefore, we convert the outputs of different lane detection formats, i.e., segmentation-based, anchor-based, and

16944

