This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contrastive Learning for DeepFake Classification and Localization via
Multi-Label Ranking
Cheng-Yao Hong

Yen-Chi Hsu

Tyng-Luh Liu

Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
{sensible, yenchi, liutyng}@iis.sinica.edu.tw
Sequential
Deepfake

Abstract
We propose a unified approach to simultaneously addressing the conventional setting of binary deepfake classification
and a more challenging scenario of uncovering what facial
components have been forged as well as the exact order of
the manipulations. To solve the former task, we consider multiple instance learning (MIL) that takes each image as a bag
and its patches as instances. A positive bag corresponds to
a forged image that includes at least one manipulated patch
(i.e., a pixel in the feature map). The formulation allows us
to estimate the probability of an input image being a fake
one and establish the corresponding contrastive MIL loss.
On the other hand, tackling the component-wise deepfake
problem can be reduced to solving multi-label prediction, but
the requirement to recover the manipulation order further
complicates the learning task into a multi-label ranking problem. We resolve this difficulty by designing a tailor-made
loss term to enforce that the rank order of the predicted
multi-label probabilities respects the ground-truth order of
the sequential modifications of a deepfake image. Through
extensive experiments and comparisons with other relevant
techniques, we provide extensive results and ablation studies
to demonstrate that the proposed method is an overall more
comprehensive solution to deepfake detection.

1. Introduction
With the rapid growth of face-swapping techniques, deep
forgery has become a concern on social media. An effective
solution to address the matter is to utilize neural networkbased approaches to decide the authenticity of given images. The task of deepfake classification is usually formulated as a binary classification problem. Recent research
efforts on deepfake classification have delivered saturated
performances [2, 5, 34, 40, 41]. Nevertheless, owing to the
impressive development of generative networks, e.g., StyleGAN [17] and diffusion models [18, 19, 29], deep forgery is
no longer limited to face-to-face interchange. In particular,

Single
Manipulation

Multiple
Manipulations

MIL
Deepfake Classification

Deepfake
Detector

Conventional
Deepfake
Bag

Deepfake
Detector
Binary Prediction
Type:
Fake

Fake

Multi-label
Localization and Ranking

Multiple Instances

Fine-grained
Prediction
Rank:
Manipulation:
Nose
Eye
Eyebrow
Lip
Hair

1

Nose
Eye
Genuine
Eyebrow
Fake
Lip
Localization
Dichotomize
Ranking
Hair
Same Manipulated Regions with
Different Orders

1
3
2
4
2
1
5
3

5
2
3
1
4

Figure 1. Overview. While addressing the conventional binary
deepfake detection that dichotomies the images into genuine/fake,
this work also focuses on the subtle scenario that forged images via
deepfake mechanisms may be locally manipulated by one or more
than one facial component/attribute. We introduce a multi-label
ranking approach to tackling the “fine-grained” deepfake task (i.e.,
to localize the modified facial components and to identify the order
of manipulations) and develop a contrastive multi-instance learning
(MIL) framework to solve the binary classification. It is noteworthy
to mention that manipulating the same regions in different orders
could result in distinct manipulated images.

Shao et al. [32] propose a sequential facial manipulation
dataset, Seq-DeepFake, in which the fake facial images are
manipulated with the requested sequential constraints from
the source (e.g., components and attributes) by StyleMapGAN [19]. Take, for example, in Figure 1, the annotation of
“Eyebrow-Hair-Lip” indicates that the resulting facial image
has been successively manipulated with the eyebrow, hair
and lip in the specified order. The sequential manipulations
can be treated as a multi-label “localization” problem to decide not only which facial components have been forged but
also what the manipulation order is. The latter task further
complicates the localization scenario into a ranking problem,

17627

