This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Joint Reconstruction of 3D Human and Object
via Contact-Based Refinement Transformer
Hyeongjin Nam1,3∗
Daniel Sungho Jung2,3∗
Gyeongsik Moon4
Kyoung Mu Lee1,2,3
1
2
Dept. of ECE&ASRI, IPAI, Seoul National University, Korea
3
SNU-LG AI Research Center, 4 Codec Avatars Lab, Meta
{namhjsnu28, dqj5182}@snu.ac.kr, mks0601@meta.com, kyoungmu@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Human-object contact serves as a strong cue to understand how humans physically interact with objects. Nevertheless, it is not widely explored to utilize human-object
contact information for the joint reconstruction of 3D
human and object from a single image. In this work,
we present a novel joint 3D human-object reconstruction
method (CONTHO) that effectively exploits contact information between humans and objects. There are two core designs in our system: 1) 3D-guided contact estimation and 2)
contact-based 3D human and object refinement. First, for
accurate human-object contact estimation, CONTHO initially reconstructs 3D humans and objects and utilizes them
as explicit 3D guidance for contact estimation. Second, to
refine the initial reconstructions of 3D human and object,
we propose a novel contact-based refinement Transformer
that effectively aggregates human features and object features based on the estimated human-object contact. The
proposed contact-based refinement prevents the learning of
erroneous correlation between human and object, which enables accurate 3D reconstruction. As a result, our CONTHO achieves state-of-the-art performance in both humanobject contact estimation and joint reconstruction of 3D human and object. The code is publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Joint reconstruction of 3D human and object is an essential task for various applications of immersive experiences
of AR/VR and robot manipulation of robotics. In essence,
the task aims to learn a meaningful human-object interaction that further improves the reconstruction of humans and
objects. Physical human-object contact is notably one of
the most prevalent and basic interactions that humans make
with objects.
Although human-object contact is a strong cue in joint
1 https://github.com/dqj5182/CONTHO_RELEASE

Contact
Former
Human-object contact maps

CRFormer
Input image

Refined 3D
human and object

Initial reconstruction

(a) Simplified pipeline of CONTHO

Input image

Before refine.

After refine.

Input image

Before refine. After refine.

(b) Refinement results from CRFormer

Figure 1. Overview of CONTHO. Our proposed CONTHO estimates human-object contact maps through our proposed ContactFormer and exploits the contact maps for 3D human and object
refinement with CRFormer. The green color indicates humanobject contact regions estimated from ContactFormer.

reconstruction of 3D human and object, recent works of
human-object interaction have been studied separately in
two major tracks: 1) human-object contact estimation and
2) 3D human and object reconstruction. The recent research
track for human-object contact estimation [13, 37, 40] predicts a contact map on the surface of a pre-defined human body model [24, 31] without reconstructing 3D human and object. Another research track for 3D human and
object reconstruction [45, 46, 48, 52] does not yet sufficiently explore how to extract and utilize contact information for the reconstruction. For example, PHOSA [52] and
D3D-HOI [48] heuristically pre-define contacting regions
and follow the pre-defined regions as a hard constraint during their optimizations. The pre-defined contacting regions
can be different from the authentic ones in the image, which

10218

