This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Masked and Shuffled Blind Spot Denoising for Real-World Images
Hamadi Chihaoui
Computer Vision Group
University of Bern, Switzerland

Paolo Favaro
Computer Vision Group
University of Bern, Switzerland

hamadi.chihaoui@unibe.ch

paolo.favaro@unibe.ch

Abstract
We introduce a novel approach to single image denoising
based on the Blind Spot Denoising principle, which we call
MAsked and SHuffled Blind Spot Denoising (MASH). We
focus on the case of correlated noise, which often plagues
real images. MASH is the result of a careful analysis to
determine the relationships between the level of blindness
(masking) of the input and the (unknown) noise correlation.
Moreover, we introduce a shuffling technique to weaken the
local correlation of noise, which in turn yields an additional denoising performance improvement. We evaluate
MASH via extensive experiments on real-world noisy image
datasets. We demonstrate state-of-the-art results compared
to existing self-supervised denoising methods. Website:
https://hamadichihaoui.github.io/mash.

1. Introduction
The removal of noise from real images, i.e., image denoising, is a fundamental and still open problem in image processing despite having a long history of dedicated research
(see [9] for an overview of the classic and recent methods).
In classic methods, the primary strategies involve manually
designing image priors and optimization techniques to enhance both reconstruction accuracy and speed. In contrast,
in the context of deep learning methods, neural networks
naturally introduce a very powerful prior for images [24]
and provide models that could perform denoising efficiently
at inference time. These innate capabilities of neural networks opened the doors to a wide range of methods that
could not only learn to denoise image from examples of
noisy and clean image pairs, but, even more remarkably,
directly from single noisy images [12, 15, 25, 26].
In this work, we push the limits of these advanced methods one step further. We focus on the family of methods
called Blind Spot Denoising (BSD)[15], since it provides a
powerful and general framework. Moreover, we consider
the case where only a single image is used for denoising
(i.e., we do not rely on a supporting dataset). As also ob-

served by Wang et al [25], training on a dataset may not
generalize well on new data, where the noise distribution is
unknown. This is particularly true for real images, where
noise is often correlated. In these settings, most modern
methods find it challenging to handle non-iid data.
In our work, similar to the approach in [21], we explore
the more general setting of random masking beyond the single blind spot method introduced in [15]. In our analysis,
we uncover valuable connections between the performance
of Blind Spot Denoising (BSD) methods trained with various input masking techniques and the degree of noise correlation. Surprisingly, we observe that models trained with
a higher masking ratio tend to perform better when dealing
with highly correlated noise, whereas models trained with a
lower masking ratio excel in denoising tasks with iid noise.
This discovery offers two key contributions: 1) it provides a
method to estimate the unknown level of noise correlation,
and 2) it offers a strategy for achieving enhanced denoising
performance. Furthermore, our analysis reveals that noise
correlation significantly hampers the denoising capabilities
of BSD models. This suggests that a more radical approach
would be to directly eliminate the correlation in the input
data. An intuitive method to achieve this would involve
randomly permuting all pixels that correspond to the same
clean-image color intensity. However, this presents a classic
chicken and egg dilemma, as we would typically need the
clean image to perform the permutation, yet the clean image is precisely what we are trying to restore. To tackle this
challenge, we utilize an intermediate denoised image as a
pseudo-clean image to define the permutation set. Furthermore, given that adjacent pixels are likely to have similar
color intensities, we focus on shuffling only pixels within
small neighborhoods. We incorporate these insights into a
novel method called MAsked and SHuffled Blind Spot Denoising (MASH), which we elaborate on further in Sec. 3.
Our contributions are summarized as follows
• We provide an analysis of BSD, showcasing the impact of
various masking ratios on correlated noise and presenting
a method for estimating the noise correlation level;
• We introduce MASH, an enhanced version of BSD that

3025

