This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Positive-Unlabeled Learning by Latent Group-Aware Meta Disambiguation
Lin Long1 * Haobo Wang1∗ Zhijie Jiang1 Lei Feng2 Chang Yao1† Gang Chen1 Junbo Zhao1
1
Zhejiang University, China 2 Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
{llong, wanghaobo, zjjjj882, changy, cg, j.zhao}@zju.edu.cn, lfengqaq@gmail.com

Abstract
Positive-Unlabeled (PU) learning aims to train a binary classifier using minimal positive data supplemented
by a substantially larger pool of unlabeled data, in the specific absence of explicitly annotated negatives. Despite its
straightforward nature as a binary classification task, the
currently best-performing PU algorithms still largely lag
behind the supervised counterpart. In this work, we identify that the primary bottleneck lies in the difficulty of deriving discriminative representations under unreliable binary supervision with poor semantics, which subsequently
hinders the common label disambiguation procedures. To
cope with this problem, we propose a novel PU learning framework, namely Latent Group-Aware Meta Disambiguation (LaGAM), which incorporates a hierarchical contrastive learning module to extract the underlying
grouping semantics within PU data and produce compact
representations. As a result, LaGAM enables a more aggressive label disambiguation strategy, where we enhance
the robustness of training by iteratively distilling the true
labels of unlabeled data directly through meta-learning.
Extensive experiments show that LaGAM significantly outperforms the current state-of-the-art methods by an average of 6.8% accuracy on common benchmarks, approaching the supervised baseline. We also provide comprehensive ablations as well as visualized analysis to verify
the effectiveness of our LaGAM. The code is available at
https://github.com/llong-cs/LaGAM.

1. Introduction
The remarkable success of deep learning can be largely attributed to the availability of comprehensively annotated
data which provides valid supervision. However, the necessity for high-quality labeled data is not always feasible
in many scenarios [21, 39, 50]. A real-world case lies in the
medical field [50], where the application of deep learning
for diagnosing certain chronic diseases can be challenging
* Joint first authors.
† Corresponding author.

MRI Image-Level
Entricular Enlargement

Hippocampal Atrophy

Pathogenesis-Level
Very-M
ild

Mild

Diagnosis-Level

Non

White Matter Lesions

Moderat
e

e
itiv
Pos

Neg

e
ativ

Classification
Boundary

Figure 1. Illustration for hierarchical Alzheimer’s Disease diagnosis with brain MRI. Given an MRI image (1st Level), firstly we
need to identify any suspicious structural changes and match them
with typical lesion characteristics of AD. (2nd Level). The final
diagnosis (4th Level) will then be given based on a comprehensive
assessment of the number and severity of symptoms (3rd Level).

due to the scarcity of diagnosed (positive) samples available
for training. While data from a larger population of undiagnosed individuals are more accessible, they are all “unlabeled” for possibly being either diseased or healthy. Such
label ambiguity will hamper effective model training.
Addressing this issue, Positive-Unlabeled (PU) learning has been increasingly studied in recent years [2]. PU
learning refers to a specific binary classification task where
only a limited amount of positive samples are explicitly
labeled but all other instances are unlabeled[30, 32]. A
popular strategy for PU learning is to cast it as a costsensitive classification task through importance reweighting [12, 13, 26, 43]. For instance, Self-PU [10] pioneers
meta-learning to diminish the influence of false negatives.
Despite the promising results, samples being “filtered out”
are actually not being effectively utilized for model training. Another set of works tries to select reliable negative
(or positive) samples from the unlabeled set to construct a
pseudo-binary labeled set [10, 29, 32, 43]. However, the
selection results are not always precise, which may lead to
confirmation bias or accumulated error [18, 49, 51].
While most previous studies target at straight label dis-

23138

