This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Pseudo Label Refinery for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
on Cross-dataset 3D Object Detection
Zhanwei Zhang1,4∗ Minghao Chen3∗ Shuai Xiao5 Liang Peng4 Hengjia Li1
Binbin Lin2,6† Ping Li3 Wenxiao Wang2 Boxi Wu2 Deng Cai1
1
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University
2
School of Software Technology, Zhejiang University
3
School of Computer Sciene and Technology, Hangzhou Dianzi University
4
Fabu Inc. 5 Alibaba Group 6 Fullong Inc.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Three dimension LIDAR-based detection has prominent
significance in perceiving objects in 3D scenarios. This task
is driven by the availability of the large-scale annotated data
∗ Equal contribution. This work was done when Zhanwei Zhang was
an intern at Fabu Inc.
† Corresponding author

(b)

Confidence Threshold

(a)

High Threshold

Low Threshold
Target Domain

True Positive

False Positive

Threshold Interval

True Negative

False Negative

Average Point Number of Instances

Recent self-training techniques have shown notable improvements in unsupervised domain adaptation for 3D object detection (3D UDA). These techniques typically select
pseudo labels, i.e., 3D boxes, to supervise models for the
target domain. However, this selection process inevitably
introduces unreliable 3D boxes, in which 3D points cannot
be definitively assigned as foreground or background. Previous techniques mitigate this by reweighting these boxes as
pseudo labels, but these boxes can still poison the training
process. To resolve this problem, in this paper, we propose
a novel pseudo label refinery framework. Specifically, in the
selection process, to improve the reliability of pseudo boxes,
we propose a complementary augmentation strategy. This
strategy involves either removing all points within an unreliable box or replacing it with a high-confidence box. Moreover, the point numbers of instances in high-beam datasets
are considerably higher than those in low-beam datasets,
also degrading the quality of pseudo labels during the training process. We alleviate this issue by generating additional
proposals and aligning RoI features across different domains. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
effectively enhances the quality of pseudo labels and consistently surpasses the state-of-the-art methods on six autonomous driving benchmarks. Code will be available at
https://github.com/Zhanwei-Z/PERE.

(b)

Car

Waymo - 64 beam
KITTI - 64 beam
Nuscenes - 32 beam

Pedestrian

Cyclist

Target Car
Target Pedestrian
Target Cyclist

T-SNE visualization of
RoI feature distribution

Figure 1. Self-training methods generally consist of the selection and the training process. (a) In the selection process, setting
the threshold whether high or low would lead to inevitable false
negatives or false positives during the threshold interval. (b) In
the training process, the point numbers of instances in high-beam
datasets are markedly higher than those in low-beam datasets,
which causes RoI feature confusion across different categories.

[2, 8, 32] and the advancements in deep neural networks
[24, 29, 41]. However, due to cross-dataset domain discrepancies, models trained on the labeled source domain often
have notorious generalization performance when applied to
the unlabeled target domain [38]. Consequently, 3D UDA
has emerged as a hot topic [39, 42, 43, 45].
Recently, several self-training methods [4, 11, 20, 22, 42,
43, 45, 47, 48, 49] have achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA)
performance in the field of 3D UDA. These methods commonly involve pre-training models in the source domain,

15291

