This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

The Audio-Visual Conversational Graph:
From an Egocentric-Exocentric Perspective
Wenqi Jia1,2,∗ , Miao Liu4 , Hao Jiang2 , Ishwarya Ananthabhotla2 ,
James M. Rehg3 , Vamsi Krishna Ithapu2 , Ruohan Gao2
1
Georgia Tech, 2 Meta Reality Labs, 3 UIUC, 4 GenAI, Meta
wenqi.jia@gatech.edu, {miaoliu,haojiang,ishwarya,ithapu,rhgao}@meta.com, jrehg@illinois.edu

Abstract
In recent years, the thriving development of research related to egocentric videos has provided a unique perspective
for the study of conversational interactions, where both visual and audio signals play a crucial role. While most prior
work focus on learning about behaviors that directly involve the camera wearer, we introduce the Ego-Exocentric
Conversational Graph Prediction problem, marking the
first attempt to infer exocentric conversational interactions
from egocentric videos. We propose a unified multi-modal
framework—Audio-Visual Conversational Attention (AVC ONV), for the joint prediction of conversation behaviors—
speaking and listening—for both the camera wearer as
well as all other social partners present in the egocentric
video. Specifically, we adopt the self-attention mechanism
to model the representations across-time, across-subjects,
and across-modalities. To validate our method, we conduct experiments on a challenging egocentric video dataset
that includes multi-speaker and multi-conversation scenarios. Our results demonstrate the superior performance of
our method compared to a series of baselines. We also
present detailed ablation studies to assess the contribution
of each component in our model. Check our Project Page.

Figure 1. We propose (d) the Ego-Exocentric Conversational
Graph Prediction problem that jointly learns (a) the egocentric
behaviors—whether the camera wearer is speaking or listening to
others, and (b) the exocentric behaviors—whether the other social
partners in the scene are speaking or listening to one another, given
only the egocentric video input (c).

1. Introduction
With the thriving growth of social media and messagebased communication in recent decades, the concept of Social Graph [41] has found wide applications, such as on
human intention understanding, personalized recommendations [12, 24, 32], etc. Going beyond texts and images, the
latest advancement of VR/AR technology and egocentric
perception presents a new multimodal data format and also
the associated new challenges on constructing graph representation for the multi-participant conversational behaviors
in egocentric video streams.
* This work was done during an internship at Meta Reality Labs.

While there has been exciting progress on building largescale egocentric datasets [7, 13] and models to detect the
talking and listening behaviors [19, 31, 36] of the subjects
in egocentric videos, existing work mostly focus on analyzing behaviors or actions that directly involve the camera
wearer (ego). However, cognitive science studies tell us that
we humans also have remarkable ability of understanding
other people’ belief state during social interactions, often
referred as Theory of Mind (ToM) [44]. Subjects involved
in a conversation often enact orienting behaviors, such as
shifting the position of the head or the focus of the eyes and

26396

