This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Makeup Prior Models for 3D Facial Makeup Estimation and Applications
Xingchao Yang1,2 , Takafumi Taketomi1 , Yuki Endo2 , Yoshihiro Kanamori2
1
CyberAgent 2 University of Tsukuba
{you koutyo, taketomi takafumi}@cyberagent.co.jp, {endo, kanamori}@cs.tsukuba.ac.jp

3D facial makeup estimation

Robustness

3D makeup interpolation and transfer

Ref.A

Source

Recons.

Ref.B

Makeup estimation (PCA)

Input

Yang-Ext

Yang-Res

Ours (PCA) Ours (StyleGAN2)
Estimated

3D face reconstruction with makeup prior models

Input

Yang-Res

Ours
(PCA)

Ours
(StyleGAN2)

DECA

Interpolation

Estimated

Makeup transfer

DECA + Ours
(StyleGAN2)

3D makeup transfer results

Figure 1. Example of 3D facial makeup estimation and applications using makeup prior models. Top left: The effectiveness of
our prior models (PCA and StyleGAN2) for estimating 3D facial makeup layers. Compared to the existing method [84] (Yang-Ext and
Yang-Res), our method robustly estimates makeup layers, especially in the case of self-occluded faces. Bottom left: The result of 3D
face reconstruction using makeup prior models. Our method accurately recovers the makeup of 3D faces and it can be compatible with
the existing 3D face reconstruction framework [24]. Right: 3D makeup interpolation and transfer applications using the PCA-based prior
model. Note that the StyleGAN2-based prior model has equivalent functionality.

Abstract
In this work, we introduce two types of makeup prior
models to extend existing 3D face prior models: PCA-based
and StyleGAN2-based priors. The PCA-based prior model
is a linear model that is easy to construct and is computationally efficient. However, it retains only low-frequency
information. Conversely, the StyleGAN2-based model can
represent high-frequency information with relatively higher
computational cost than the PCA-based model. Although
there is a trade-off between the two models, both are applicable to 3D facial makeup estimation and related applications. By leveraging makeup prior models and designing a makeup consistency module, we effectively address
the challenges that previous methods faced in robustly esti-

mating makeup, particularly in the context of handling selfoccluded faces. In experiments, we demonstrate that our
approach reduces computational costs by several orders of
magnitude, achieving speeds up to 180 times faster. In addition, by improving the accuracy of the estimated makeup,
we confirm that our methods are highly advantageous for
various 3D facial makeup applications such as 3D makeup
face reconstruction, user-friendly makeup editing, makeup
transfer, and interpolation.

1. Introduction
The first 3D face prior model, known as the 3D Morphable Model (3DMM), was published over two decades
ago [5]. In recent years, a diverse array of novel 3DMMs

2165

