This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Score-Guided Diffusion for 3D Human Recovery
Anastasis Stathopoulos
Rutgers University
Input Image

Ligong Han
Rutgers University
SOTA Method

Dimitris Metaxas
Rutgers University
SOTA Method + Our Refinement

Figure 1. Although achieving remarkable 3D human reconstructions, a recent state-of-the-art monocular regression approach [13] may
encounter challenges in aligning the human body model to the image (middle image). To address this, we propose an iterative refinement
approach that utilizes image observations (e.g., 2D keypoint detections) and achieves better image-model alignment (right image).

Abstract
We present Score-Guided Human Mesh Recovery
(ScoreHMR), an approach for solving inverse problems for
3D human pose and shape reconstruction. These inverse
problems involve fitting a human body model to image observations, traditionally solved through optimization techniques. ScoreHMR mimics model fitting approaches, but
alignment with the image observation is achieved through
score guidance in the latent space of a diffusion model.
The diffusion model is trained to capture the conditional
distribution of the human model parameters given an input image. By guiding its denoising process with a taskspecific score, ScoreHMR effectively solves inverse problems for various applications without the need for retraining the task-agnostic diffusion model. We evaluate our approach on three settings/applications. These are: (i) singleframe model fitting; (ii) reconstruction from multiple uncalibrated views; (iii) reconstructing humans in video sequences. ScoreHMR consistently outperforms all optimization baselines on popular benchmarks across all settings.
We make our code and models available on the project website: https://statho.github.io/ScoreHMR.

1. Introduction
Approaches for recovering the 3D human pose and
shape from 2D evidence (e.g., image, 2D keypoints) typ-

ically predict the parameters of a human body model,
such as SMPL [38], and solve the problem with regression [12, 13, 20, 25, 62] or optimization [2, 29, 40, 60]. The
traditional approach estimates the model parameters by iteratively fitting the model to 2D measurements using handcrafted objectives and energy minimization techniques [2].
However, this optimization process contains multiple local
minima, is sensitive to the choice of initialization and typically slow. To avoid those drawbacks, regression methods
train a neural network to predict the human model parameters directly from images. But no existing feed-forward system achieves both accurate 3D reconstruction and imagemodel alignment, especially in the monocular setting. A
synergy between the regression and optimization paradigms
has been established [19, 26, 28], where the regression estimate is further refined through optimization given additional observations (e.g., 2D keypoint detections). However, even in that case the optimization remains challenging, riddled with multiple local minima, while several prior
terms are necessary to obtain a meaningful solution.
Diffusion models [17, 50] have recently gained a lot of
attention for their ability to capture complex data distributions [10, 43]. These models learn the implicit prior of the
underlying data distribution x by matching the gradient of
the log density ∇x log p(x) [50], also known as the score
function. This learned prior can be utilized when solving inverse problems that aim to recover x from the observations y by incorporating the gradient of the log likeli-

906

