This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leak and Learn: An Attacker’s Cookbook to Train Using Leaked Data from
Federated Learning
Joshua C. Zhao, Ahaan Dabholkar, Atul Sharma, Saurabh Bagchi
Purdue University
{zhao1207,adabholk,sharm438,sbagchi}@purdue.edu

Abstract

1

FL training

Final FL model

Is leaked data useful?
1 Benign FL training

Federated learning is a decentralized learning paradigm
introduced to preserve privacy of client data. Despite this,
prior work has shown that an attacker at the server can still
reconstruct the private training data using only the client
updates. These attacks are known as data reconstruction
attacks and fall into two major categories: gradient inversion (GI) and linear layer leakage attacks (LLL). However,
despite demonstrating the effectiveness of these attacks in
breaching privacy, prior work has not investigated the usefulness of the reconstructed data for downstream tasks. In
this work, we explore data reconstruction attacks through
the lens of training and improving models with leaked data.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of both GI and LLL attacks in maliciously training models using the leaked data
more accurately than a benign federated learning strategy.
Counter-intuitively, this bump in training quality can occur
despite limited reconstruction quality or a small total number of leaked images. Finally, we show the limitations of
these attacks for downstream training, individually for GI
attacks and for LLL attacks.

1. Introduction
With growing concerns of data privacy, federated learning (FL) [17] has gained traction as a potential privacypreserving method for training machine learning models.
Compared to centralized learning where training is done
on data localized at a central server, FL takes a decentralized approach where participating clients train a model on
their local data and send their updates to the server. A typical training round involves a server sending a model to the
clients, the clients training the model using their local data,
and finally having the clients send their updates to the server
for aggregation. However, the privacy-preserving property
of FL only holds if the updates cannot be used to extract
sensitive information about the local training data.
Despite only sending updates, prior works have shown
the ability of attackers to gain information about the private training data through membership inference attacks [3,

2

Training a model from
scratch

3 Improving the final FL model

2

FL training

Training on
leaked data

Reconstructed
data

Final model

New model

Final FL model
3
FL training

Additional
training with
leaked data

Final model

Reconstructed
data

Figure 1. Training using leaked data.

19, 22], property-inference attacks [15, 18], or GAN-based
methods [9, 23]. Within these privacy attacks, data reconstruction has stood out as the most powerful, allowing attackers to directly recover the training data of clients [20,
24]. Within data reconstruction attacks, gradient inversion
(optimization-based attacks) [6, 26, 32] and linear layer
leakage [1, 5, 30] attacks stand out as the most common.
While prior works have discussed the power and the limitations of these attacks in the context of an attacker simply
breaching privacy [10, 29], to the best of our knowledge,
none has discussed the effectiveness of using the leaked data
for downstream model training. Figure 1 shows this process
of training using leaked data. With the onset of deep learning, data has become a valuable commodity. This growth in
AI also means that the value of data no longer lies just in
breaching privacy of the raw data, but in the ability of the
data to be used downstream for creating powerful models.
Therefore, one measure of the success of a data reconstruction attack should be whether the leaked data is useful for
machine learning training, an aspect omitted in prior work.

12247

