This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Active Object Detection with Knowledge Aggregation and Distillation
from Large Models
Dejie Yang
Yang Liu*
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
ydj@stu.pku.edu.cn yangliu@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

1. cutting using a knife
2. breaking by hands

Accurately detecting active objects undergoing state
changes is essential for comprehending human interactions
and facilitating decision-making. The existing methods for
active object detection (AOD) primarily rely on visual appearance of the objects within input, such as changes in size,
shape and relationship with hands. However, these visual
changes can be subtle, posing challenges, particularly in
scenarios with multiple distracting no-change instances of
the same category. We observe that the state changes are
often the result of an interaction being performed upon the
object, thus propose to use informed priors about object
related plausible interactions (including semantics and visual appearance) to provide more reliable cues for AOD.
Specifically, we propose a knowledge aggregation procedure to integrate the aforementioned informed priors into
oracle queries within the teacher decoder, offering more
object affordance commonsense to locate the active object.
To streamline the inference process and reduce extra knowledge inputs, we propose a knowledge distillation approach
that encourages the student decoder to mimic the detection
capabilities of the teacher decoder using the oracle query
by replicating its predictions and attention. Our proposed
framework achieves state-of-the-art performance on four
datasets, namely Ego4D, Epic-Kitchens, MECCANO, and
100DOH, which demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach in improving AOD. The code and models are available at https://github.com/idejie/KAD.git.

1. Introduction
Active object detection (AOD) focuses on localizing key
objects that are undergoing state changes as a result of a
sequence of human actions, interactions, or manipulations,
which has broad potential applications [8, 12, 13].
Existing methods explore conventional object detectors,
* Corresponding Author

3. making into juice
…

(a) subtle difference and multiple
distractors

(b) diverse interaction and large
intra-class variance

Figure 1. An example of state-change carrot. Active objects
detection (state change carrots) is difficult, as there are (1) visual
changes can be subtle between the carrot undergoing state-change
or not, and multiple distractors, (2) intra-class visual appearance
variance for the carrot under state changes is large. To achieve
accurate detection, we propose to construct triple priors to provide
hints for the model, including semantic interaction priors, finegrained visual priors, and spatial priors of active objects.

i.e., Faster RCNN [23], DETR [1], CenterNet [6], or specialized hand-object interaction models [9, 26] for AOD, which
primarily rely on visual appearance of the objects within
input, such as changes in size, shape and its relationship with
hands. However, only using visual cues is often inadequate
for AOD due to the following reasons: (1) The visual changes
can be subtle between the instance undergoing state-change
or not, posing challenges, particularly in scenarios with multiple distracting no-change instances of the same category
in Figure1a, or the target active object suffers from hands
occlusion. (2) The intra-class visual appearance variance
for the same object under state changes is large. As shown
in Figure1b, a state-change of the carrot can be caused by
many interactions, such as ‘cutting using a knife’, ‘breaking
by hands’ or ‘making into juice’.
In practice, we notice that alterations in the object’s state
frequently stem from interactions carried out on the object.
This underscores the significance of common-sense understanding of object affordance in the context of AOD. If we
can establish well-informed priors that model this commonsense knowledge concerning plausible object interactions
beforehand (out of the scope of the current input), we can uncover the aforementioned ‘intra-class variance’. In principle,

16624

