This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LiDAR-based Person Re-identification
Wenxuan Guo1
Zhiyu Pan1
Yingping Liang2
Ziheng Xi1
Zhicheng Zhong1
Jianjiang Feng1 *
Jie Zhou1
1
2
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University
Beijing Institute of Technology
{gwx22,pzy20,xizh21,zhongzc18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

liangyingping@bit.edu.cn

{jfeng,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

C1
C2

Camera-based person re-identification (ReID) systems
have been widely applied in the field of public security.
However, cameras often lack the perception of 3D morphological information of human and are susceptible to various limitations, such as inadequate illumination, complex
background, and personal privacy. In this paper, we propose a LiDAR-based ReID framework, ReID3D, that utilizes pre-training strategy to retrieve features of 3D body
shape and introduces Graph-based Complementary Enhancement Encoder for extracting comprehensive features.
Due to the lack of LiDAR datasets, we build LReID, the
first LiDAR-based person ReID dataset, which is collected
in several outdoor scenes with variations in natural conditions. Additionally, we introduce LReID-sync, a simulated pedestrian dataset designed for pre-training encoders
with tasks of point cloud completion and shape parameter learning. Extensive experiments on LReID show that
ReID3D achieves exceptional performance with a rank-1
accuracy of 94.0, highlighting the significant potential of
LiDAR in addressing person ReID tasks. To the best of
our knowledge, we are the first to propose a solution for
LiDAR-based ReID. The code and dataset are available at
https://github.com/GWxuan/ReID3D.

1. Introduction
Person ReID has numerous practical applications, such as
video surveillance, intelligent transportation and public security. Most ReID systems use cameras as sensors, aiming
to recognize the same individual in images or videos caught
by different cameras. With the development of computer vision technology, camera-based ReID has witnessed continuous advancements. However, certain challenges have not
yet been effectively addressed. Firstly, cameras introduce
limitations in terms of visual ambiguity caused by poor illu* Corresponding author

Tn
…

T5

C3
T4

T3

T2

T1

2D
ReID
Model

2D Appearance

Color of clothes
Accessories
…
Shoes

3D
ReID
Model

3D Intrinsic
Features

Height
Shape
…
Gait

C4

L1
L2
Tn
…

T5

T4

L3
T3

T2

T1

L4

Figure 1. Overview of camera-based and LiDAR-based person ReID. Camera-based methods primarily learn the 2D appearance of human, such as color of clothes, accessories, and shoes.
LiDAR-based methods utilize 3D structural information to learn
intrinsic features, such as height, body shape, and gait.

mination and complex backgrounds [34]. Additionally, current camera-based ReID models primarily learn appearance
information [47]. Therefore, variations in human appearance considerably impact the performance of models [19].
Furthermore, camera-based person ReID systems raise personal privacy issues [1, 4] for applications in some areas.
In recent years, Kinect-based ReID approaches have
been proposed [28, 32] to address these challenges by utilizing depth information. However, Kinect is primarily designed for indoor scenes and has a limited measurement
range [17], restricting its applicability in large-scale outdoor
scenarios. Recently, researchers have explored the use of
radar for gait recognition, identity recognition, and person
ReID [7, 26]. While radar is cost-effective, it suffers from
poor angular and distance resolution, as well as a limited
effective measurement range [7], which poses challenges in
discriminating individuals with similar body shapes.
In the past few years, LiDAR has been widely adopted
in autonomous driving, driven by its improved accuracy and
reduced costs [38]. The successful applications of LiDAR
motivate us to explore its potential in person ReID within
complex outdoor scenes. LiDAR can offer a broader measurement range and higher resolution, enabling precise perception about individuals in large-scale outdoor settings.

17437

