This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Understanding and Improving
Adversarial Robustness of Vision Transformers
Samyak Jain
Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi
samyakjain.cse18@iitbhu.ac.in

Tanima Dutta
Indian Institute of Technology (BHU) Varanasi
tanima.cse@iitbhu.ac.in

Abstract

challenge known as gradient masking, creating a false sense
of security [6, 20, 30, 39, 42]. Some defenses employ randomized or non-differentiable elements, hindering precise
gradient calculation and thwarting strong adversarial attacks.
This phenomenon raises concerns about the efficacy of defense strategies [2, 9, 34] and have demonstrated that these
defenses can be bypassed by adaptive attacks specifically
tailored to the targeted model.
Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) [24] was an early popular attack, but subsequent methods like like GAMA [31],
Carlini and Wagner (in short CW) [8], and AutoAttack [10]
have demonstrated superior performance. Yu and Xu [40]
discovered that proper scaling of logits in the output space
allows PGD to perform similarly. The authors characterized
that taking softmax leads to floating point underflow errors. Attacks, like GAMA and CW, which avoid softmax,
are naturally resilient to these errors, possibly contributing
to their success in CNNs. Further, Hitaj et al. [21] found that
adversarial training methods like GAIRAT [42] can enhance
logits magnitude, thwarting attacks. However, scaling logits down [7, 11, 21] results in strong attacks, significantly
reducing GAIRAT’s robustness.
Transformers have set new benchmarks in various tasks
[5, 14, 28, 35], and Vision Transformers (VITs) [15, 33]
have shown improved performance over CNNs. However,
a debate persists on whether VITs are inherently more robust. Past studies [4, 25, 29] suggested VITs exhibit lower
attack transferability in black box settings, implying greater
robustness than CNNs. Yet, recent work [3] challenged this,
demonstrating that, under strong attacks (e.g. AutoAttack)
and activation functions, like GELU in CNNs, transformers
are no more robust than CNNs. Naseer et al. [27] improved
adversarial transferability for VITs through classifier training
and backpropagation, while Wei et al. [37] showed dropping
input patches enhances attack transferability. Despite these
findings, there’s still a lack of a fundamental understanding
of why generating strong attacks on VITs is challenging.
In this work, we rethink the understanding of the adversarial robustness of VITs and discuss the fundamental causes of
gradient masking in VITs that leads to poor attack strength

Recent literature has demonstrated that vision transformers
(VITs) exhibit superior performance compared to convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The majority of recent
research on adversarial robustness, however, has predominantly focused on CNNs. In this work, we bridge this gap by
analyzing the effectiveness of existing attacks on VITs. We
demonstrate that due to the softmax computations in every
attention block in VITs, they are inherently vulnerable to
floating point underflow errors. This can lead to a gradient masking effect resulting in suboptimal attack strength of
well-known attacks, like PGD, Carlini and Wagner (CW) and
GAMA. Motivated by this, we propose Adaptive Attention
Scaling (AAS) attack that can automatically find the optimal
scaling factors of pre-softmax outputs using gradient-based
optimization. We show that the proposed simple strategy
can be incorporated with any existing adversarial attacks as
well as adversarial training methods and achieved improved
performance. On VIT-B16, we demonstrate an improved
attack strength of upto 2.2% on CIFAR10 and upto 2.9%
on CIFAR100 by incorporating the proposed AAS attack
with state-of-the-art single attack methods like GAMA attack. Further, we utilise the proposed AAS attack for every
few epochs in existing adversarial training methods, which is
termed as Adaptive Attention Scaling Adversarial Training
(AAS-AT). On incorporating AAS-AT with existing methods,
we outperform them on VITs over 1.3-3.5% on CIFAR10.
We observe improved performance on ImageNet-100 as well.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the rise of deep neural networks (DNNs) has
been accompanied by a concerning vulnerability to imperceptible perturbations known as Adversarial Attacks [17, 32].
These subtle perturbations can mislead DNN predictions
with potentially severe consequences. Efforts to bolster
DNN robustness against such attacks have led to numerous
defense mechanisms. However, many defenses succumb to a

24736

