This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FreeKD: Knowledge Distillation via Semantic Frequency Prompt
Yuan Zhang1 , Tao Huang2 , Jiaming Liu1 , Tao Jiang3 , Kuan Cheng1 , Shanghang Zhang1†
1

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University 2 The University of Sydney 3 Zhejiang University

Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) has been applied to various tasks successfully, and mainstream methods typically
boost the student model via spatial imitation losses. However, the consecutive downsamplings induced in the spatial
domain of teacher model is a type of corruption, hindering the student from analyzing what specific information
needs to be imitated, which results in accuracy degradation. To better understand the underlying pattern of corrupted feature maps, we shift our attention to the frequency
domain. During frequency distillation, we encounter a
new challenge: the low-frequency bands convey general
but minimal context, while the high are more informative
but also introduce noise. Not each pixel within the frequency bands contributes equally to the performance. To
address the above problem: (1) We propose the Frequency
Prompt plugged into the teacher model, absorbing the semantic frequency context during finetuning. (2) During the
distillation period, a pixel-wise frequency mask is generated
via Frequency Prompt, to localize those pixel of interests
(PoIs) in various frequency bands. Additionally, we employ
a position-aware relational frequency loss for dense prediction tasks, delivering a high-order spatial enhancement
to the student model. We dub our Frequency Knowledge
Distillation method as FreeKD, which determines the optimal localization and extent for the frequency distillation.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that FreeKD not only
outperforms spatial-based distillation methods consistently
on dense prediction tasks (e.g., FreeKD brings 3.8 AP gains
for RepPoints-R50 on COCO2017 and 4.55 mIoU gains for
PSPNet-R18 on Cityscapes), but also conveys more robustness to the student. Notably, we also validate the generalization of our approach on large-scale vision models (e.g.,
DINO and SAM).

1. Introduction
In the quest for significant advancements, recent deep learning models have witnessed a substantial increase in both
† Corresponding author. Shanghang Zhang is supported by the National
Key Research and Development Project of China (No. 2022ZD0117801).

Original
Image

Downsample Downsample Downsample
1x
2x
3x

Spatial
Domain

Frequency
Domain

Figure 1. Comparison of the presentation of the bear at different downsampling ratios on spatial and frequency domain.

depth and width, as exemplified by notable works such as
[16, 23, 28]. However, pursuing larger and more powerful models results in unwieldy and inefficient deployments
on resource-limited edge devices. To address this dilemma,
knowledge distillation (KD) [8, 11, 17, 20, 50] has emerged
as a promising solution to transfer the knowledge encapsulated within a heavy model (teacher) to a more compact,
pocket-size model (student).
Among diverse computer vision tasks, the transfer of
dark knowledge for dense prediction tasks poses unique
challenges, particularly requiring fine-grained distillation at
the feature level. Recent distillation methods have aimed
to enhance performance through spatial-level distillation
losses, refining valuable information within the features.
However, the sequential downsampling applied in the spatial domain of the teacher model introduces a form of corruption. This corruption hampers the student’s ability to
discern specific information that should be mimicked, resulting in a decline in accuracy.
As illustrated in Figure 1, downsampling operations
prominently remove high-frequency image details in the
frequency domain, revealing underlying patterns not easily discernible from raw pixel values [3, 45, 47]. This
observation prompts us to explore the potential of leveraging frequency signals for knowledge distillation. However, directly employing this approach raises two significant
challenges: (a) The low-frequency bands from the teacher
model convey general yet minimal contextual information,

15931

