This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Adaptive Multi-Modal Cross-Entropy Loss for Stereo Matching
Peng Xu Zhiyu Xiang* Chengyu Qiao Jingyun Fu Tianyu Pu
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
{xxxupeng, xiangzy, 3140104437, fujingyun, 3190105835}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite the great success of deep learning in stereo
matching, recovering accurate disparity maps is still challenging. Currently, L1 and cross-entropy are the two most
widely used losses for stereo network training. Compared
with the former, the latter usually performs better thanks
to its probability modeling and direct supervision to the
cost volume. However, how to accurately model the stereo
ground-truth for cross-entropy loss remains largely underexplored. Existing works simply assume that the groundtruth distributions are uni-modal, which ignores the fact
that most of the edge pixels can be multi-modal. In this paper, a novel adaptive multi-modal cross-entropy loss (ADL)
is proposed to guide the networks to learn different distribution patterns for each pixel. Moreover, we optimize the
disparity estimator to further alleviate the bleeding or misalignment artifacts in inference. Extensive experimental results show that our method is generic and can help classic stereo networks regain state-of-the-art performance. In
particular, GANet with our method ranks 1st on both the
KITTI 2015 and 2012 benchmarks among the published
methods. Meanwhile, excellent synthetic-to-realistic generalization performance can be achieved by simply replacing the traditional loss with ours. Code is available at
https://github.com/xxxupeng/ADL.

1. Introduction
As a long-standing and active topic in computer vision,
stereo matching plays an essential role in wide applications such as autonomous driving and virtual reality. While
conventional methods suffer from poor reliability in tackling illumination change and weak texture, the learningbased stereo methods show their superiority in these complex scenes.
Stereo matching is usually regarded as a regression task
in deep learning [1, 3, 11, 13, 33]. In these works, L1 loss is
employed for training, followed by the soft-argmax estima* Corresponding author.

(a) Over-smoothing artifacts from PSMNet [1]

(b) Misalignment artifacts from PSMNet + [2]

(c) PSMNet + Ours

Figure 1. Comparison of the reconstructed point clouds. Our
method can alleviate the over-smoothing and misalignment artifacts, which is critical to the performance of downstream tasks.

tor [13] to predict sub-pixel disparity. The main problem of
L1 loss is that it lacks direct supervision of the cost volume
and is thereby prone to overfitting [36]. Moreover, softargmax is based on the assumption that the output distributions are uni-modal and centered on the ground-truth [13],
which is not always true especially for the edge pixels with
ambiguous depths. As shown in Fig. 1a, soft-argmax on
edge pixels suffers from severe over-smoothing problem,
causing bleeding artifacts at the edge.
Another line of research treats stereo matching as a classification task, where the cross-entropy loss could be used.
To guide the network to output uni-modal distributions,
researchers model the ground-truth disparity with discrete
Laplacian or Gaussian distributions [2, 16, 28, 36]. The
single-modal disparity estimator (SME) [2, 28] is further
employed to extract correct modals from the predicted distributions. The cross-entropy loss can directly supervise the

5135

