This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spectral Meets Spatial: Harmonising 3D Shape Matching and Interpolation
Dongliang Cao1

Marvin Eisenberger2
University of Bonn

2

Daniel Cremers2

Technical University of Munich

3D shape interpolation

Source

Florian Bernard1

Target

Ours

NeuroMorph

1

Nafie El Amrani1

shape-dominant

3D shape matching

Source

URSSM

Ours

Target

pose-dominant

Figure 1. Top: 3D shape interpolation. Compared to the SOTA shape interpolation method NeuroMorph [27], our method obtains more
reliable interpolation even under large non-isometry. Bottom left: 3D shape matching. The point-wise correspondences found by the
SOTA shape matching method URSSM [12] contains local mismatches. In contrast, our method enables smooth shape matching. Bottom
right: 3D shape matching and interpolation. Our method is the first unsupervised method that obtains both accurate correspondences
(shown as texture transfer) and realistic interpolation that capture both the pose-dominant and shape-dominant deformations.

Abstract
Although 3D shape matching and interpolation are
highly interrelated, they are often studied separately and
applied sequentially to relate different 3D shapes, thus resulting in sub-optimal performance. In this work we present
a unified framework to predict both point-wise correspondences and shape interpolation between 3D shapes. To this
end, we combine the deep functional map framework with
classical surface deformation models to map shapes in both
spectral and spatial domains. On the one hand, by incorporating spatial maps, our method obtains more accurate and
smooth point-wise correspondences compared to previous
functional map methods for shape matching. On the other
hand, by introducing spectral maps, our method gets rid

of commonly used but computationally expensive geodesic
distance constraints that are only valid for near-isometric
shape deformations. Furthermore, we propose a novel testtime adaptation scheme to capture both pose-dominant and
shape-dominant deformations. Using different challenging
datasets, we demonstrate that our method outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods for both shape matching and
interpolation, even compared to supervised approaches.

1. Introduction
Computing maps between 3D shapes is a fundamental problem in computer vision and computer graphics, since it
opens the door to understanding different object categories
and enables both shape analysis [50] and shape genera-

3658

