This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Beyond Image Super-Resolution for Image Recognition
with Task-Driven Perceptual Loss
Jaeha Kim1 Junghun Oh1 Kyoung Mu Lee1,2
1
Dept. of ECE&ASRI, 2 IPAI, Seoul National University, Korea
jhkim97s2@gmail.com, {dh6dh, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
In real-world scenarios, image recognition tasks, such
as semantic segmentation and object detection, often pose
greater challenges due to the lack of information available
within low-resolution (LR) content. Image super-resolution
(SR) is one of the promising solutions for addressing the
challenges. However, due to the ill-posed property of SR,
it is challenging for typical SR methods to restore taskrelevant high-frequency contents, which may dilute the advantage of utilizing the SR method. Therefore, in this paper, we propose Super-Resolution for Image Recognition
(SR4IR) that effectively guides the generation of SR images
beneficial to achieving satisfactory image recognition performance when processing LR images. The critical component of our SR4IR is the task-driven perceptual (TDP) loss
that enables the SR network to acquire task-specific knowledge from a network tailored for a specific task. Moreover,
we propose a cross-quality patch mix and an alternate training framework that significantly enhances the efficacy of the
TDP loss by addressing potential problems when employing
the TDP loss. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our SR4IR achieves outstanding task performance by generating SR images useful for a specific image
recognition task, including semantic segmentation, object
detection, and image classification. The implementation
code is available at https://github.com/JaehaKim97/SR4IR.

1. Introduction
After the pioneering AlexNet [31], numerous deep neural network-based methods have achieved superior performance in various image recognition tasks, such as image
classification [13, 20, 23, 24, 40, 53, 56], object detection [37, 39, 47, 48], and semantic segmentation [6, 42,
64, 72]. In real-world applications, such as medical image recognition and surveillance systems, a network for a
task, which we refer to as a task network, may encounter input images containing low-resolution (LR) contents due to

(a) Ground-truth

(b) Bilinear-up

(c) SwinIR [33]

(d) SwinIR[33] + SR4IR(Ours)

Figure 1. Visualizations and comparisons of the results on semantic segmentation task with PASCAL VOC dataset [14].
(a) The ground-truth image and the class label map. (b) The
bilinear-upsampled image and the predicted result when trained on
bilinear-upsampled images. (c) the SR result of the SwinIR [33]
and the predicted result when trained on the SR images. (d) the
SR result of the SwinIR and the predicted result when trained by
the proposed SR4IR framework. We use DeepLabV3 [7] as a task
network and the downsampling scale factor is x4.

various factors, including limitations of cameras or storage
capabilities and the presence of tiny objects. In this circumstance, achieving satisfactory task performance is limited
by the lack of high-frequency components crucial for a task.
In this paper, we address these challenges by employing single image super-resolution (SR) methods, as SR can
serve as a prominent pre-processing tool to restore missing high-frequency details in LR images. Conventionally,
SR aims to restore high-resolution (HR) images mainly
via pixel-wise loss [18, 29, 33, 35, 70, 74] or perceptual
loss [5, 15, 27]. However, due to the ill-posed nature of SR,
these approaches may not ensure the reconstruction of features crucial for achieving better performance for a specific
task, thereby leading to marginal performance improvement
from SR. Thus, in this paper, our primary goal is to develop
a comprehensive framework, named Super-Resolution for

2651

