This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Finding Lottery Tickets in Vision Models
via Data-driven Spectral Foresight Pruning
Leonardo Iurada
Marco Ciccone
Tatiana Tommasi
Politecnico di Torino, Italy
{leonardo.iurada, marco.ciccone, tatiana.tommasi}@polito.it

Abstract
Recent advances in neural network pruning have shown
how it is possible to reduce the computational costs and
memory demands of deep learning models before training.
We focus on this framework and propose a new pruning
at initialization algorithm that leverages the Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) theory to align the training dynamics
of the sparse network with that of the dense one. Specifically, we show how the usually neglected data-dependent
component in the NTK’s spectrum can be taken into account by providing an analytical upper bound to the NTK’s
trace obtained by decomposing neural networks into individual paths. This leads to our Path eXclusion (PX), a foresight pruning method designed to preserve the parameters
that mostly influence the NTK’s trace. PX is able to find
lottery tickets (i.e. good paths) even at high sparsity levels and largely reduces the need for additional training.
When applied to pre-trained models it extracts subnetworks
directly usable for several downstream tasks, resulting in
performance comparable to those of the dense counterpart
but with substantial cost and computational savings. Code
available at: https://github.com/iurada/pxntk-pruning

1. Introduction
Almost daily we hear about new breakthroughs achieved
by artificial intelligence. Most of them are obtained by
powerful foundational models [3, 25, 38] that however require prohibitively high computational resources and energy costs. These issues raise critical concerns in terms
of financial and environmental sustainability [32, 42] and
pose significant challenges for future applications requiring lightweight and efficient models embedded in alwayson devices and the Internet of Things (IoT).
Given the over-parameterized nature of modern deep
neural networks, one solution to alleviate their resource demands involves removing a significant number of less im-

Figure 1. Our Path eXclusion (PX) involves two copies of the original dense network. One copy (bottom left) estimates data-relevant
paths, depicted by blue arrows, and injects the extracted information into the other network (blue shading). The other copy (bottom
right) evaluates path relevance in terms of parameter connections
in the network, illustrated by black connections. These estimations
are then combined to score each parameter, finding a subnetwork
by retaining only the most relevant paths based on data, architecture, and initialization. The identified sparse subnetwork closely
mimics the training dynamics of the original dense network.

portant neurons or connections. Several pruning approaches
have been developed with the goal of lowering networks’
complexity without sacrificing accuracy [17, 31, 46, 47, 50],
and they can further benefit from efficient implementations
of sparse primitives [11, 36] and hardware designed to exploit sparsity [45]. These methods are traditionally applied
late in training or post-training with the goal of reducing inference time, but recent findings suggest that pruning can
also be performed in advance [13].
Specifically, Pruning at Initialization (PaI) searches for
randomly initialized subnetworks that once trained can
match the test accuracy of the original dense networks with
a largely reduced learning cost. Prior works have proposed
PaI strategies based on the impact of each parameter on the
loss [1, 30] or on different saliency metrics that estimate the
information flow in the network [44]. Some recent publica-

16142

