This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning without Exact Guidance: Updating Large-scale High-resolution Land
Cover Maps from Low-resolution Historical Labels
Zhuohong Li1∗ , Wei He1∗ , Jiepan Li1 , Fangxiao Lu1 , Hongyan Zhang1,2†
1
Wuhan University 2 China University of Geosciences
{ashelee, weihe1990, jiepanli, fangxiaolu}@whu.edu.cn, zhanghongyan@cug.edu.cn

Abstract
Large-scale high-resolution (HR) land-cover mapping is
a vital task to survey the Earth’s surface and resolve many
challenges facing humanity. However, it is still a nontrivial task hindered by complex ground details, various
landforms, and the scarcity of accurate training labels over
a wide-span geographic area. In this paper, we propose
an efficient, weakly supervised framework (Paraformer)
to guide large-scale HR land-cover mapping with easyaccess historical land-cover data of low resolution (LR).
Specifically, existing land-cover mapping approaches reveal the dominance of CNNs in preserving local ground
details but still suffer from insufficient global modeling in
various landforms. Therefore, we design a parallel CNNTransformer feature extractor in Paraformer, consisting of a
downsampling-free CNN branch and a Transformer branch,
to jointly capture local and global contextual information.
Besides, facing the spatial mismatch of training data, a
pseudo-label-assisted training (PLAT) module is adopted to
reasonably refine LR labels for weakly supervised semantic segmentation of HR images. Experiments on two largescale datasets demonstrate the superiority of Paraformer
over other state-of-the-art methods for automatically updating HR land-cover maps from LR historical labels.

1. Introduction
Land-cover mapping is a semantic segmentation task that
gives each pixel of remote-sensing images a land-cover
class such as ”cropland” or ”building” [14]. The land-cover
data should be continuously updated since nature and human activities frequently change the landscape [37]. As
sensors and satellites developed, massive high-resolution
(HR) remote-sensing images (≤ 1 meter/pixel) could be
easily obtained [1]. Rapid large-scale HR land-cover map∗ Indicates equal contribution. † Corresponding author. The code
and data are released at https://github.com/LiZhuoHong/
Paraformer

Figure 1. Illustration of resolution mismatched issue in using the HR
remote-sensing image (Source) and LR historical labels (Guide) to generate HR land-cover results (Target).

ping is even more critical to facilitate downstream applications as the up-to-date HR land-cover data can accurately
describe the land surface [21, 27, 55]. However, the complex ground details reflected by HR images and various
landforms over wide-span areas still challenge the periodic
updating of large-scale HR land-cover maps [28].
The advanced methods for HR land-cover mapping
have been dominated by the convolutional neural network (CNN) for many years. Although CNN-based models can finely capture local details for semantic segmentation of HR images, the intrinsic locality of convolution operations still limits their implementation in various
landforms across larger areas [2]. Recently, Transformer
has achieved tremendous success in semantic segmentation
[5, 18, 34] and large-scale applications of Earth observation
[11, 41, 48]. It adopts multi-head self-attention mechanisms
to model global contexts but struggles in the representation of local details due to the shortage of low-level features [10, 48]. Besides, current methods with either CNN
or Transformer structures generally rely on sufficient exact training labels by adopting a fully supervised strategy

27717

