This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Going Beyond Multi-Task Dense Prediction with Synergy Embedding Models
Huimin Huang1 , Yawen Huang2 † , Lanfen Lin1 ,* Ruofeng Tong1,3 , Yen-Wei Chen4* ,
Hao Zheng2 , Yuexiang Li5 , Yefeng Zheng2
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Jarvis Research Center, Tencent YouTu Lab, 3 Zhejiang Lab,
4
Ritsumeikan University, 5 Guangxi Medical University

Abstract
Multi-task visual scene understanding aims to leverage
the relationships among a set of correlated tasks, which
are solved simultaneously by embedding them within a unified network. However, most existing methods give rise to
two primary concerns from a task-level perspective: (1) the
lack of task-independent correspondences for distinct tasks,
and (2) the neglect of explicit task-consensual dependencies
among various tasks. To address these issues, we propose
a novel synergy embedding models (SEM), which goes beyond multi-task dense prediction by leveraging two innovative designs: the intra-task hierarchy-adaptive module and
the inter-task EM-interactive module. Specifically, the constructed intra-task module incorporates hierarchy-adaptive
keys from multiple stages, enabling the efficient learning of
specialized visual patterns with an optimal trade-off. In addition, the developed inter-task module learns interactions
from a compact set of mutual bases among various tasks,
benefiting from the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm. Extensive empirical evidence from two public benchmarks, NYUD-v2 and PASCAL-Context, demonstrates that
SEM consistently outperforms state-of-the-art approaches
across a range of metrics.

1. Introduction
Dense scene understanding is a rapidly growing field that
learns multiple objectives from shared representations [17,
24, 34], allowing for improving the efficiency and accuracy
of each task. Its success on computer vision encompassing numerous dense prediction tasks, for example, semantic segmentation [38, 47], boundary detection [11, 27], and
geometric tasks like depth/normal estimation [10, 15, 21].
Intuitively, these dense prediction tasks inherently possess
distinctive representations (as illustrated in Fig. 1). This
distinction is of significant importance when striving for ex* Corresponding Authors: Lanfen Lin (llf@zju.edu.cn), Yen-Wei Chen
(chen@is.ritsumei.ac.jp).
†Huimin Huang and Yawen Huang are co-first authors, and this work is
done during the internship at Tencent YouTu Lab.

cellence in resolving individual tasks. On the other hand,
exploring the interrelatedness among tasks is also crucial,
as leveraging these cross-task synergies can provide mutual benefits. For instance, abrupt alterations in depth maps
could indicate semantic boundaries in segmentation maps.
Similarly, pixels belonging to certain semantic classes, such
as “bed”, might exhibit similar surface normals [22].
In this context, potential advantages of using both taskindependent and task-consensual representations go beyond
the direct implications of learning independently, since
learning multiple related tasks has been empirically shown
to often significantly improve performance [42, 43]. However, there remains a challenging issue in effectively learning the unique characteristics of each task (intra-task specialty) and the complementary aspects across separate tasks
(inter-task complementarity) within a unified model. As depicted in Fig. 1, the multi-task learning baseline (MTLB)
produces subpar predictions, with feature maps for each
task tending to be confusing and lacking clear distinction,
leading to unsatisfactory results for individual tasks.
In the pursuit of advancing multi-task learning (MTL),
most existing research [8, 24, 33, 39] heavily relies on
the capabilities of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN)
[20, 32]. Significant progresses have been made in developing multi-task optimization losses [14], as well as in designing [18, 33] or searching [9] for multi-task information sharing strategies and network structures. Despite the success
of CNN-based MTL models, which have shown promising performance in multi-task dense prediction tasks, these
algorithms are still constrained by the limitations inherent in convolutional operations. Specifically, they lack the
ability for global modeling and cross-task interaction [41].
To address these problems, recent Transformer-based MTL
methods [1, 40, 41] have leveraged the attention mechanism [6, 19, 36], enabling effective global modeling and
task interactions. However, these approaches still struggle
with two key issues. (i) Intra-task dependency: Existing
Transformer-based methods either focus on learning at a
single stage or the simply concatenated multi-stage feature
maps. Such approaches overlook the importance of each

28181

