This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Predict Activity Progress by Self-Supervised Video Alignment
Gerard Donahue
Northeastern University
Boston, MA, USA

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University
Boston, MA, USA

donahue.g@northeastern.edu

e.elhamifar@northeastern.edu

In this paper, we tackle the problem of self-supervised
video alignment and activity progress prediction using inthe-wild videos. Our proposed self-supervised representation learning method carefully addresses different action
orderings, redundant actions, and background frames to
generate improved video representations compared to previous methods. Our model generalizes temporal cycleconsistency learning to allow for more flexibility in determining cycle-consistent neighbors. More specifically,
to handle repeated actions, we propose a multi-neighbor
cycle consistency and a multi-cycle-back regression loss
by finding multiple soft nearest neighbors using a Gaussian Mixture Model. To handle background and redundant
frames, we introduce a context-dependent drop function in
our framework, discouraging the alignment of droppable
frames. On the other hand, to learn from videos of multiple activities jointly, we propose a multi-head crosstask network, allowing us to embed a video and estimate progress
without knowing its activity label. Experiments on multiple
datasets show that our method outperforms the state-of-theart for video alignment and progress prediction.1

1. Introduction
Understanding progress is central to a human’s learning
experience. We constantly modify and enhance our actions and behaviors based on our progress in different daily
tasks [31]. Progress understanding is also fundamental
for machines whose goal is to guide (e.g., assistive technologies) and seamlessly interact (e.g., robots) with humans [6, 35]. Imagine wearing augmented reality (AR) assistant glasses when assembling a complex machine, performing a medical procedure, or cooking a new hour-long
recipe. Depending on the amount of progress made in the
1 Code is publicly available at https : / / github . com /
gerardDonahue/GTCC_CVPR2024.

progress 𝒂 𝒂
𝟏
𝟐 𝑺𝑰𝑳

In-the-Wild Alignment

Abstract

𝑉2
𝑉1

𝒂𝟏

4/4

𝒂𝟒

𝜙

𝒂𝟑

Online
Progress
Estimation

𝒂𝟐
𝑺𝑰𝑳

Embedding Space

𝒂𝟑

𝒂𝟒

3/4
2/4
1/4
Ground truth progress

0/4
0

𝑇

Figure 1. We develop a framework for self-supervised in-the-wild video
alignment and online activity progress prediction.

current step, the AR needs to show information about the
current or next step(s). Additionally, progress is an important signal for computer vision tasks to run on AR task assistants, such as action segmentation and anticipation (depending on little/full progress in a step, subsequent frames
will belong to the same/next step) [50] and anomaly/error
detection (a decrease in progress indicates an error) [34].
Learning to predict progress, however, is challenging [8].
Progress can not be precisely calculated solely on the
amount of time spent in an action (an expert often makes
more progress than a novice within the same time window)
and can be influenced by factors other than the user such
as the environment (imagine cooking a recipe in a wellorganized vs a cluttered kitchen). To estimate progress,
we can break down an action into smaller phases and track
where the user is within these phases (e.g., putting a coffee filter into a dripper involves taking a filter from its bag,
folding it in half, folding it again into a quarter circle, creating a cone and inserting it into the dripper). Therefore,
one approach for progress estimation is to label video clips
of an action with its different phases and train a supervised
phase classification model [3]. However, the ambiguity of
defining a dictionary of fine-grained phases in advance and
the high cost of annotating video frames with many action
phases makes supervised learning impractical.
Self-supervised video alignment is an appealing alternative for progress prediction. It finds frame representations and associations between frames of different videos
(ideally, aligning the same phases across videos), without
requiring fine-grained human labeling. There has been a
large body of recent literature addressing video alignment

18667

