This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning CNN on ViT: A Hybrid Model to Explicitly Class-specific Boundaries for
Domain Adaptation
Ba Hung Ngo1, *, Nhat-Tuong Do-Tran2,∗ , Tuan-Ngoc Nguyen3 , Hae-Gon Jeon4 , Tae Jong Choi1,†
1
Graduate School of Data Science, Chonnam National University, South Korea
2
Department of Computer Science, National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University, Taiwan
3
Digital Transformation Center, FPT Telecom, VietNam, 4 AI Graduate School, GIST, South Korea
ngohung@chonnam.ac.kr

tuongdotn.cs11@nycu.edu.tw

tuannn55@fpt.com

Hyperspace

Abstract
Most domain adaptation (DA) methods are based on either a convolutional neural networks (CNNs) or a vision
transformers (ViTs). They align the distribution differences
between domains as encoders without considering their
unique characteristics. For instance, ViT excels in accuracy
due to its superior ability to capture global representations,
while CNN has an advantage in capturing local representations. This fact has led us to design a hybrid method to
fully take advantage of both ViT and CNN, called Explicitly
Class-specific Boundaries (ECB). ECB learns CNN on ViT
to combine their distinct strengths. In particular, we leverage ViT’s properties to explicitly find class-specific decision
boundaries by maximizing the discrepancy between the outputs of the two classifiers to detect target samples far from
the source support. In contrast, the CNN encoder clusters
target features based on the previously defined class-specific
boundaries by minimizing the discrepancy between the probabilities of the two classifiers. Finally, ViT and CNN mutually
exchange knowledge to improve the quality of pseudo labels
and reduce the knowledge discrepancies of these models.
Compared to conventional DA methods, our ECB achieves
superior performance, which verifies its effectiveness in this
hybrid model. The project website can be found here.

1. Introduction
Over the past few years, convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [13] have been the cornerstone of deep learning
techniques in computer vision tasks. This progress is mainly
attributed to a convolution layer, which efficiently captures
local spatial hierarchies for robust image representations.
This local feature extraction capability has enabled CNNs to
achieve State-of-the-Art (SOTA) performance in a variety of
vision tasks, from image classification to object detection. In
spite of its powerful local feature extraction, CNNs are some* Co-first author.

† Corresponding author.

haegonj@gist.ac.kr

Hyperspace

Labeled Data

ctj17@jnu.ac.kr

Unlabeled Data

Supervised Training

Maximize Discrepancy

Co-training

Minimize Discrepancy

Figure 1. Illustration of the proposed hybrid network architecture
that leverages the strengths of ViT and CNN models.

what limited in capturing more global and comprehensive
visual context. To overcome this limitation, vision transformer (ViT) [7] was introduced. ViT starts by dividing an
image into patches, which are transformed into a sequence
of tokens. Positional embeddings are incorporated into the
tokens to retain the order of these patches. The model then
uses transformer blocks to extract these tokens into features
as image representations. Thanks to self-attention mechanisms in ViT, it is able to weigh the importance of different
regions in an image irrespective of their spatial proximity,
leading to comprehensive global representations with impressive accuracy. The advancements in ViT have led to
a growing inclination in the machine learning realm over
CNN-based approaches for a range of tasks.
Instead of focusing solely on replacing CNN with ViT,
our approach diverges from this trend. We believe that both

28545

