This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StreamingFlow: Streaming Occupancy Forecasting with Asynchronous
Multi-modal Data Streams via Neural Ordinary Differential Equation
Yining Shi1,3 * Kun Jiang1† Ke Wang2 Jiusi Li1 Yunlong Wang1 Mengmeng Yang1 Diange Yang1†
1
School of Vehicle and Mobility, Tsinghua University 2 KargoBot, Inc 3 DiDi Chuxing

Abstract
Predicting the future occupancy states of the surrounding environment is a vital task for autonomous driving.
However, current best-performing single-modality methods
or multi-modality fusion perception methods are only able
to predict uniform snapshots of future occupancy states
and require strictly synchronized sensory data for sensor
fusion. We propose a novel framework, StreamingFlow,
to lift these strong limitations. StreamingFlow is a novel
BEV occupancy predictor that ingests asynchronous multisensor data streams for fusion and performs streaming forecasting of the future occupancy map at any future timestamps. By integrating neural ordinary differential equations
(N-ODE) into recurrent neural networks, StreamingFlow
learns derivatives of BEV features over temporal horizons,
updates the implicit sensor’s BEV features as part of the
fusion process, and propagates BEV states to the desired
future time point. It shows good zero-shot generalization
ability of prediction, reflected in the interpolation of the observed prediction time horizon and the reasonable inference
of the unseen farther future period. Extensive experiments
on two large-scale datasets,nuScenes [2] and Lyft L5 [14],
demonstrate that StreamingFlow significantly outperforms
previous vision-based, LiDAR-based methods, and shows
superior performance compared to state-of-the-art fusionbased methods.

1. Introduction
Occupancy grid is gaining more traction in the self-driving
community, due to its versatilities in downstream tasks, e.g.,
irregularly shaped object representation, robot navigation,
etc. With the help of modern deep learning technologies,
occupancy grid maps (OGMs) have evolved significantly.
For example, not just LiDAR point clouds, camera images
can now be used to construct high-quality occupancy grid
maps [26]. In addition to its fine-grained geometric infor* Work done during internship at DiDi Chuxing.
† Corresponding author: Kun Jiang, Diange Yang.

Synchronized BEV-based fusion
Vision
encoder
SYNC

Fuse
BEV fuser

BEV
decoder

Project
LiDAR
encoder

Interactive
Fuser

Asynchronous N-ODE BEV fusion
Vision
encoder

N-ODE
predictor

BEV
decoder

ASYNC
Fuse with update
LiDAR
encoder

N-ODE
updater

BEV
decoder

Figure 1. Comparison between conventional synchronized BEV
fusion (top) and our asynchronous BEV fusion (bottom). We formulate fusion with an update-predict-update approach.

mation, occupancy grids can also represent rich semantic
and motion cues [1, 9–11]. Such cues grant occupancy networks the ability to predict the occupancy state of the environment at desired future timestamps. While trajectory
forecasting only contains object-level information, the occupancy grid conveys a much more comprehensive understanding of the surrounding environment, which is the key
to achieving better intelligence and driving safety.
Despite the great potential of occupancy-based prediction, we notice that existing methods can only predict at
fixed frequencies [1, 9–11, 33]. This comes from the fact
that sensors sample the environment at predetermined frequencies, e.g., motors in mechanical LiDARs spin at 10Hz,
and many cameras captures images at 30FPS. Thus, previous algorithms predict at the same intervals as they are
trained with ground-truth labels of future intervals. If future
occupancy can be predicted at any given timestamps in a
continuous manner, self-driving algorithms can have shorter
latency and more rapid responses. Streaming forecasting
can also relax the sensor synchronization constraints, as
the continuous forecasting model can update the prediction as new sensory data come in. Compared with discrete snapshot-based prediction, streaming motion forecast-

14833

