This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PoNQ: a Neural QEM-based Mesh Representation
Nissim Maruani

Maks Ovsjanikov

Pierre Alliez

Inria, Université Côte d’Azur
nissim.maruani@inria.fr

LIX, École Polytechnique, IP Paris
maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Inria, Université Côte d’Azur
pierre.alliez@inria.fr

Mathieu Desbrun
Inria Saclay - Ecole Polytechnique
mathieu.desbrun@inria.fr

Abstract
Although polygon meshes have been a standard representation in geometry processing, their irregular and combinatorial nature hinders their suitability for learning-based
applications. In this work, we introduce a novel learnable mesh representation through a set of local 3D sample Points and their associated Normals and Quadric error
metrics (QEM) w.r.t. the underlying shape, which we denote PoNQ. A global mesh is directly derived from PoNQ
by efficiently leveraging the knowledge of the local quadric
errors. Besides marking the first use of QEM within a neural shape representation, our contribution guarantees both
topological and geometrical properties by ensuring that a
PoNQ mesh does not self-intersect and is always the boundary of a volume. Notably, our representation does not rely
on a regular grid, is supervised directly by the target surface alone, and also handles open surfaces with boundaries
and/or sharp features. We demonstrate the efficacy of PoNQ
through a learning-based mesh prediction from SDF grids
and show that our method surpasses recent state-of-the-art
techniques in terms of both surface and edge-based metrics.

1. Introduction
In recent years, learning-based methods have shown great
promise as an efficient means to handle ill-posed shape processing tasks with complex priors [20, 23, 59]. Yet, despite the slew of advanced architectures to analyze or process 3D datasets, there is a lack of learnable 3D representations that can capture ridges and corners, while guaranteeing valid output meshes representing real 3D shapes for
even the most basic learning tasks.
Early works on shape representation for learning
predominantly relied on implicit volumetric representations [59, 60], which, while eventually yielding a mesh
through extraction, posed significant challenges. Notably,
their training can be costly due to the volumetric nature

(a) PoNQ over input

(b) PoNQ mesh

(c) Poisson mesh [27]

Figure 1. PoNQ representation. Quadric error metric (QEM)
matrices are fitted and visualized on a given shape (left). Note that
their aspect ratios (green to blue) capture the underlying surface
information: pancakes for flat regions, cigars for sharp edges and
balls for corners. Our mesh extraction outputs a watertight (or,
optionally, open, see bottom) and non-self-intersecting mesh that
preserves salient features of the input shape (center) and is more
concise and faithful than current implicit approaches (right).

of these representations. Moreover, the resulting mesh surfaces often lack detail, tending to generate overly smoothed
shapes even where sharp features are expected. In response
to these limitations, recent advancements have formulated explicit representations that effectively encode shapes
through strategically chosen sample points and other geometric entities such as normals, from which more accurate
meshes can be derived [35, 42]. While these representations
offer higher generalizability and greater control over the
generated surfaces, they often cannot guarantee important
properties such as watertightness (i.e., the mesh must be the
boundary of a non-degenerated volume), or the absence of

3647

