This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EditGuard: Versatile Image Watermarking for Tamper Localization and
Copyright Protection
Xuanyu Zhang1,2 , Runyi Li1 , Jiwen Yu1 , Youmin Xu1 , Weiqi Li1 , Jian Zhang1,2 B
1
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
2
Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School-Rabbitpre AIGC Joint Research Laboratory
Please help protect my image
against intentional tampering. My
exclusive copyright information is
00111010110…

Original

Tampered

Our Predicted mask

Original

Tampered

Our Predicted mask

Original Image

Users

Container Image

I‘ve added the exclusive EditGuard
watermark to it. You can post the
picture on the left and I will be
responsible for its protection.

Remove the woman

AI Fill, “A Picasso painting on the wall”

Change the cloth, “A pink shirt, high quality”

Replace background, “A man in an office”

Tamper with AI-generated images, “A volcano”

Secondary creation of artworks, “A straw hat”

Text Forgery

Swap Face

The picture is cool. I will manipulate and share it.

Tamperer

Users

Container Image

Tampered Image

I find a picture online that looks
similar to mine. Can you provide
evidence to prove my copyright
and pinpoint tampered areas?

Predicted Mask

Tampered Image

I have m a r ke d t h e t a m pe r e d
areas for you and extracted its
copyright as 00111010110...,
which matches your copyright.
Please use this as evidence to
defend your rights.

Figure 1. We propose a versatile proactive forensics framework EditGuard. The application scenario is shown on the left, wherein users
embed invisible watermarks to their images via EditGuard in advance. If suffering tampering, users can defend their rights via the tampered
areas and copyright information provided by EditGuard. Some supported tampering methods (marked in blue) and localization results of
EditGuard are placed on the right. Our EditGuard can achieve over 95% localization precision and nearly 100% copyright accuracy.

Abstract
In the era of AI-generated content (AIGC), malicious
tampering poses imminent threats to copyright integrity
and information security. Current deep image watermarking, while widely accepted for safeguarding visual content,
can only protect copyright and ensure traceability. They
fall short in localizing increasingly realistic image tampering, potentially leading to trust crises, privacy violations,
and legal disputes. To solve this challenge, we propose
an innovative proactive forensics framework EditGuard, to
unify copyright protection and tamper-agnostic localization, especially for AIGC-based editing methods. It can
offer a meticulous embedding of imperceptible watermarks
and precise decoding of tampered areas and copyright information. Leveraging our observed fragility and locality
of image-into-image steganography, the realization of EditThis work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62372016. (B Corresponding author: Jian Zhang.)

Guard can be converted into a united image-bit steganography issue, thus completely decoupling the training process
from the tampering types. Extensive experiments verify that
our EditGuard balances the tamper localization accuracy,
copyright recovery precision, and generalizability to various AIGC-based tampering methods, especially for image
forgery that is difficult for the naked eye to detect.

1. Introduction
Owing to the advantageous properties of diffusion models and the bolstering of extensive datasets, AI-generated
content (AIGC) models like DALL·E 3 [14], Imagen [52],
and Stable Diffusion [51], can produce lifelike and wondrous images, which brings great convenience to photography enthusiasts and image editors. Nonetheless, the remarkable capabilities of these models come with a doubleedged sword, presenting new challenges in copyright protection and information security. The efficiency of image
manipulation [43, 47, 49, 51, 55, 68, 72] has blurred the

11964

