This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S-DyRF: Reference-Based Stylized Radiance Fields for Dynamic Scenes
Xingyi Li1,2 Zhiguo Cao1 Yizheng Wu1,2 Kewei Wang1,2 Ke Xian1,2 * Zhe Wang3 Guosheng Lin2 *
1
School of AIA, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
SenseTime Research
{xingyi li,zgcao,kxian}@hust.edu.cn, gslin@ntu.edu.sg
https://xingyi-li.github.io/s-dyrf

Figure 1. Our method can stylize dynamic 3D scenes, maintaining semantic consistency with the given reference image across both spatial
and temporal dimensions. Besides novel time synthesis (the leftmost one), our stylized dynamic radiance field can synthesize novel views
(the second one) or perform space-time view synthesis (the third one) [28, 30, 41]. Furthermore, our method can also stylize synthetic
objects (the rightmost one). We encourage readers to experience the animations by viewing them with Adobe Acrobat or KDE Okular.

Abstract
Current 3D stylization methods often assume static
scenes, which violates the dynamic nature of our real world.
To address this limitation, we present S-DyRF, a referencebased spatio-temporal stylization method for dynamic neural radiance fields. However, stylizing dynamic 3D scenes
is inherently challenging due to the limited availability of
stylized reference images along the temporal axis. Our key
insight lies in introducing additional temporal cues besides
the provided reference. To this end, we generate temporal
pseudo-references from the given stylized reference. These
pseudo-references facilitate the propagation of style information from the reference to the entire dynamic 3D scene.
For coarse style transfer, we enforce novel views and times
to mimic the style details present in pseudo-references at the
feature level. To preserve high-frequency details, we create
a collection of stylized temporal pseudo-rays from temporal
pseudo-references. These pseudo-rays serve as detailed and
explicit stylization guidance for achieving fine style transfer. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world datasets
demonstrate that our method yields plausible stylized results of space-time view synthesis on dynamic 3D scenes.

* Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Style transfer [10, 17, 20, 23, 26, 29, 43] involves the process of reimagining an image’s content by emulating the
artistic style of another. While it can produce high-quality
stylized images, it confines the results to an identical viewpoint as the content image. In recent years, there has
been a burgeoning demand for the stylization and editing
of 3D scenes and objects across a range of industries, encompassing the realms of gaming, cinematic experiences,
and mixed reality applications. Previous methods primarily
concentrate on stylizing 3D objects and scenes using point
clouds [2, 16, 34, 39], meshes [14, 21], or applying style
transfer to both the geometry and texture [50].
As neural radiance fields continue to evolve at a rapid
pace [1, 3, 27, 33, 35], recent advancements [5–7, 11, 16,
18, 32, 36, 40, 46, 47] have incorporated neural radiance
fields into 3D stylization, significantly easing the process of
transferring style from any 2D style reference to 3D scenes.
While these methods excel at producing high-quality geometrically consistent 3D content, they often fall short in
providing users, including artists and designers, with finegrained control over the stylization process, which can be
limiting in achieving the precise aesthetic effects desired.
To address this challenge, several methods have emerged
as promising solutions. For example, Ref-NPR [54] intro-

20102

