This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards More Unified In-context Visual Understanding
Dianmo Sheng1,2 , Dongdong Chen3 , Zhentao Tan1,2 , Qiankun Liu4 , Qi Chu1,2 ,
Jianmin Bao3 , Tao Gong1,2,† , Bin Liu1,2 , Shengwei Xu5 , Nenghai Yu1,2
1
School of Cyber Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China
2
3
Anhui Province Key Laboratory of Digital Security
Microsoft
4
5
Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing Electronic Science and Technology Institute
dmsheng@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tgong@ustc.edu.cn, xusw@besti.edu.cn

In-context Prompts

In-context Prompts

Input Image

Input Image

Semantic Segmentation

Visual Output

SegGPT
In-context Prompts

Input Image

Ours

Image Captioning
Group of cars
parked alongside
the road on a
narrow street.

Textual Output

Flamingo

An outdoor table
covered with a
laptop, a drink
and some food.

Group of cars
parked alongside
the road.

A black car
parked on the
street.

A white laptop
sitting on a table.

A laptop is
placed on the
table.

Figure 1. Motivation illustration of our method. In earlier efforts, existing in-context visual understanding models were confined to
a particular output modality. For instance, SegGPT specialized in “Image → Image” applications, tailored for tasks involving image
segmentation. Similarly, Flamingo was purpose-built for “Image → Text” scenarios, focusing on language-centric tasks such as image
captioning. In contrast, we take a further attempt to design a unified model capable of handling multimodal in-context visual understanding
tasks for “Image → Image / Text” scenarios.

Abstract
The rapid advancement of large language models
(LLMs) has accelerated the emergence of in-context learning (ICL) as a cutting-edge approach in the natural language processing domain. Recently, ICL has been employed
in visual understanding tasks, such as semantic segmentation and image captioning, yielding promising results.
However, existing visual ICL framework can not enable
producing content across multiple modalities, which limits
their potential usage scenarios. To address this issue, we
present a new ICL framework for visual understanding with
multi-modal output enabled. First, we quantize and embed
both text and visual prompt into a unified representational
space, structured as interleaved in-context sequences. Then
a decoder-only sparse transformer architecture is employed
to perform generative modeling on them, facilitating incontext learning. Thanks to this design, the model is capa† Corresponding author.

ble of handling in-context vision understanding tasks with
multimodal output in a unified pipeline. Experimental results demonstrate that our model achieves competitive performance compared with specialized models and previous
ICL baselines. Overall, our research takes a further step
toward unified multimodal in-context learning.

1. Introduction
With the rapid progress of large language models, in-context
learning (ICL) [5, 29, 51] has gradually become a new
paradigm in the field of natural language processing (NLP).
As introduced in GPT-3 [5], given language sequences as a
universal interface, the model can quickly adapt to different language-centric tasks by utilizing a limited number of
prompts and examples.
Some following works [1, 42] present some early attempt
at applying ICL into the vision-language (VL) tasks with
the design of interleaved image and text data. For example,

13362

