This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Keypoints from Pretrained Diffusion Models
Eric Hedlin1 Gopal Sharma1 Shweta Mahajan1, 2 Xingzhe He1 Hossam Isack3
Abhishek Kar3 Helge Rhodin1 Andrea Tagliasacchi4, 5, 6 Kwang Moo Yi1
1
University of British Columbia 2 Vector Institute for AI 3 Google Research
4
Google DeepMind 5 Simon Fraser University 6 University of Toronto
https://stablekeypoints.github.io/

Image dataset

Optimized tokens

Randomly initialized tokens

Estimated keypoints

Localize

Figure 1. Teaser – we propose an unsupervised method to learn keypoints based on optimizing text embeddings of latent diffusion
models [44]. Our method is motivated by the fact that random text tokens already respond roughly consistently to semantically similar
regions. By promoting localization we obtain unsupervised keypoints that outperform the state-of-the-art.

Abstract

Unsupervised learning of keypoints and landmarks has
seen significant progress with the help of modern neural
network architectures, but performance is yet to match the
supervised counterpart, making their practicability questionable. We leverage the emergent knowledge within textto-image diffusion models, towards more robust unsupervised keypoints. Our core idea is to find text embeddings
that would cause the generative model to consistently attend to compact regions in images (i.e. keypoints). To
do so, we simply optimize the text embedding such that
the cross-attention maps within the denoising network are
localized as Gaussians with small standard deviations.
We validate our performance on multiple datasets: the
CelebA, CUB-200-2011, Tai-Chi-HD, DeepFashion, and
Human3.6m datasets. We achieve significantly improved
accuracy, sometimes even outperforming supervised ones,
particularly for data that is non-aligned and less curated.
Our code is publicly available at the project page.

1. Introduction
Keypoints or landmarks have played a critical role in computer vision for various task including image matching [31],
3D reconstruction [18], and motion tracking [32, 60]. Similarly to many other areas of computer vision, research has
quickly adopted supervised learning to tackle this problem [3, 27]. However, labeling is tedious and sometimes
even ambiguous—for example, it is difficult to consistently
decide which keypoints on a human face are the “most important”. Researchers have therefore been investigating unsupervised approaches [12, 13, 19, 30, 55, 67]. These are
typically implemented as autoencoders paired with handcrafted intermediate layers, or losses that enforce spatial
locality and equivariance of keypoint locations under deformation. However, as we will show later, these methods
struggle with non-preprocessed data, and their performance
is heavily reliant on knowing the ground truth location of
objects, clearly limiting their practical applicability.
To enhance the learning of unsupervised keypoints, we
draw inspiration from the demonstrated success of scaling
up datasets [52]. For example, in natural language pro-

22820

