This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image-to-Image Matching via Foundation Models: A New Perspective for
Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Yuan Wang1∗

Naisong Luo1
Yuwen Pan1
Tianzhu Zhang1,2†
Rui Sun1 *
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Deep Space Exploration Laboratory

{wy2016, issunrui, lns6, panyw}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract

(a) Text-to-image Matching V.S. Image-to-image Matching
person

Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation (OVS) aims to
segment images of arbitrary categories specified by class
labels or captions. However, most previous best-performing
methods, whether pixel grouping methods or region recognition methods, suffer from false matches between image
features and category labels. We attribute this to the natural gap between the textual features and visual features. In
this work, we rethink how to mitigate false matches from
the perspective of image-to-image matching and propose
a novel relation-aware intra-modal matching (RIM) framework for OVS based on visual foundation models. RIM
achieves robust region classification by firstly constructing
diverse image-modal reference features and then matching
them with region features based on relation-aware ranking
distribution. The proposed RIM enjoys several merits. First,
the intra-modal reference features are better aligned, circumventing potential ambiguities that may arise in cross-modal
matching. Second, the ranking-based matching process harnesses the structure information implicit in the inter-class
relationships, making it more robust than comparing individually. Extensive experiments on three benchmarks demonstrate that RIM outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods by large margins, obtaining a lead of more than 10% in
mIoU on PASCAL VOC benchmark.

1. Introduction
Aiming at allocating semantic labels to the corresponding
pixels, semantic segmentation has achieved conspicuous
achievements attributed to the development of large-scale
datasets [11, 22, 25, 74] and elaborate algorithms [7, 8, 28].
However, the capabilities of conventional semantic segmentation models are restricted to predefined training categories,
failing to recognize a broader spectrum of concepts, which
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

…

sofa
chair

…

keyboard

desk

car

…

…

Cross-modal
references

𝒎𝟏

…

…

…

Mask Proposals

Intra-modal references

(b) Individual Matching V.S. Relation-aware Matching
Region feature

Category reference feature

Ranking distribution

0.11

0.45 0.35

…

…
car desk chair

Category
agents

…
car desk chair

desk chair sofa
Ranking
distribution

0.02

car

0.10 0.51

desk

…

chair

Figure 1. Motivation of our method. (a) False matches tend to
occur in cross-modal features. We establish well-aligned imagemodal reference features thus transit the text-to-image matching to
image-to-image matching. (b) Indivdual matching tends to suffer
from disturbances. We propose a novel relation-aware matching
strategy for more robust region classification.

poses a severe limitation for their practical applications. In
pursuit of the human-like intelligence of unbounded and
fine-grained scene understanding, open-vocabulary segmentation (OVS) [2, 67] has attracted increasing interest recently,
which enables segmentation with an unrestricted vocabulary.
OVS is highly challenging as it requires not only grouping
all pixels to corresponding visual concepts but also assigning
each region the correct semantic label from a large vocabulary. Some early attempts [29, 64] optimize the pixel grouping process and the classification of visual concepts simultaneously by employing contrastive learning with image-text
pairs. These methods inevitably yield masks of relatively
low quality with only coarse supervision available. Another
line of works [24, 67, 68] significantly dominate this field by
modeling the OVS as a region recognition problem, which
decouple OVS into two procedures, i.e. class-agnostic mask
proposals prediction and mask class recognition. Though
the mask proposals generation has been significantly improved with the assistance of pixel-level supervision and

3952

