This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Parameter Efficient Fine-tuning via Cross Block Orchestration for Segment
Anything Model
Zelin Peng1,† , Zhengqin Xu1,† , Zhilin Zeng1 , Lingxi Xie2 , Qi Tian2 , and Wei Shen1(B)
1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Inc.
{zelin.peng, fate311, bernardeschi, wei.shen}@sjtu.edu.cn;
198808xc@gmail.com; tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) is an effective
methodology to unleash the potential of large foundation
models in novel scenarios with limited training data. In the
computer vision community, PEFT has shown effectiveness
in image classification, but little research has studied its
ability for image segmentation. Fine-tuning segmentation
models usually requires a heavier adjustment of parameters
to align the proper projection directions in the parameter
space for new scenarios. This raises a challenge to existing
PEFT algorithms, as they often inject a limited number of
individual parameters into each block, which prevents substantial adjustment of the projection direction of the parameter space due to the limitation of Hidden Markov Chain
along blocks. In this paper, we equip PEFT with a crossblock orchestration mechanism to enable the adaptation of
the Segment Anything Model (SAM) to various downstream
scenarios. We introduce a novel inter-block communication module, which integrates a learnable relation matrix
to facilitate communication among different coefficient sets
of each PEFT block’s parameter space. Moreover, we propose an intra-block enhancement module, which introduces
a linear projection head whose weights are generated from
a hyper-complex layer, further enhancing the impact of the
adjustment of projection directions on the entire parameter space. Extensive experiments on diverse benchmarks
demonstrate that our proposed approach consistently improves the segmentation performance significantly on novel
scenarios with only around 1K additional parameters.

1. Introduction
A notable recent development in AI community is large
foundation models [4, 20], which have made an increasB Corresponding Author: wei.shen@sjtu.edu.cn
† Indicates equal contribution.

SAM’s Parameter
Space

Each block is
individual

HMC

(a)
Projection direction adjustment
SAM’s Parameter
Space

New Scenarios

Cross-block
Orchestration

(b)
Projection direction adjustment

New Scenarios

Figure 1. Comparison between traditional PEFT paradigms
and our proposed SAM-COBOT. (a) Traditional methods typically adjust the projection direction of each layer in SAM’s parameter space individually, which is limited by the Hidden Markov
Chain (HMC). This often leads to relatively minor adjustments.
(b) In contrast, our SAM-COBOT approach enhances PEFT with
cross-block orchestration, enabling more effective and large adjustments of the projection directions.

ing impact widely across various domains, e.g., natural language processing (NLP) [17] and computer vision [10].
Despite their surprising zero-shot performance, fine-tuning
still remains a crucial step for unleashing their potential in
novel scenarios [26, 28]. To mitigate the extensive finetuning costs associated with a large number of pre-trained
parameters, parameter efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) [6, 13,
14], which involves tuning a small subset of parameters
while maintaining the vast majority frozen, has attracted increasing attentions in various fields.
In the field of computer vision, the majority of leading PEFT methodologies have focused on image classification tasks [15, 16, 40]. These approaches demonstrate that
large classification models can be fine-tuned by injecting
a small number of parameters. As evidence, their perfor-

3743

