This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Light the Night: A Multi-Condition Diffusion Framework for Unpaired
Low-Light Enhancement in Autonomous Driving
Jinlong Li1 *, Baolu Li1∗ , Zhengzhong Tu2 , Xinyu Liu1 , Qing Guo3 , Felix Juefei-Xu4 ,
Runsheng Xu5† , Hongkai Yu1†
1
Cleveland State University 2 University of Texas at Austin
3
Centre for Frontier AI Research (CFAR), A*STAR 4 New York University
5
University of California, Los Angeles
Abstract
Vision-centric perception systems for autonomous driving have gained considerable attention recently due to their
cost-effectiveness and scalability, especially compared to
LiDAR-based systems. However, these systems often struggle in low-light conditions, potentially compromising their
performance and safety. To address this, our paper introduces LightDiff, a domain-tailored framework designed
to enhance the low-light image quality for autonomous
driving applications. Speciﬁcally, we employ a multicondition controlled diffusion model. LightDiff works without any human-collected paired data, leveraging a dynamic
data degradation process instead. It incorporates a novel
multi-condition adapter that adaptively controls the input
weights from different modalities, including depth maps,
RGB images, and text captions, to effectively illuminate
dark scenes while maintaining context consistency. Furthermore, to align the enhanced images with the detection
model’s knowledge, LightDiff employs perception-speciﬁc
scores as rewards to guide the diffusion training process
through reinforcement learning. Extensive experiments on
the nuScenes datasets demonstrate that LightDiff can significantly improve the performance of several state-of-the-art
3D detectors in night-time conditions while achieving high
visual quality scores, highlighting its potential to safeguard
autonomous driving.

1. Introduction
Driving at night is challenging for humans, even more so
for autonomous vehicles, as shown in Fig. 1. On March
18, 2018, a catastrophic incident highlighted this challenge
when an Uber Advanced Technologies Group self-driving
vehicle struck and killed a pedestrian in Arizona [37].
† Co-corresponding author, email address:
* Equal contribution.
xrxx3386@ucla.edu, h.yu19@csuohio.edu.

Figure 1. Nighttime driving scenarios pose a greater fatal threat than
daytime. The fatal rate at night is much higher [4]. This paper aims to
enhance nighttime images to improve the overall driving safety at night.

This incident, resulting from the vehicle’s failure to detect
the pedestrian under low-light conditions accurately, has
brought the safety concerns of autonomous vehicles to the
forefront, especially in such demanding environments. As
vision-centric autonomous driving systems predominantly
relying on camera sensors become more prevalent, addressing the safety implications of low-light conditions has become increasingly critical to ensure the overall safety of
these vehicles.
One intuitive solution is to collect extensive night-time
driving data. However, this approach is not only laborintensive and costly, but it also risks impairing daytime
model performance due to the differing image distributions
between night and day. To navigate these challenges, we
propose a Lighting Diffusion (LightDiff) model, a novel
method that eliminates the need for manual data collection
and maintains model performance during the daytime.
LightDiff aims to enhance low-light camera images, improving perception model performance. Utilizing a dy-

15205

