This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Ranking Distillation for Open-Ended Video Question Answering
with Insufficient Labels
Tianming Liang1 , Chaolei Tan1 , Beihao Xia2 , Wei-Shi Zheng1 , Jian-Fang Hu1 *
1
Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
{liangtm, tanchlei}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, hujf5@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper focuses on open-ended video question answering, which aims to find the correct answers from a
large answer set in response to a video-related question.
This is essentially a multi-label classification task, since
a question may have multiple answers. However, due to
annotation costs, the labels in existing benchmarks are always extremely insufficient, typically one answer per question. As a result, existing works tend to directly treat all
the unlabeled answers as negative labels, leading to limited ability for generalization. In this work, we introduce a
simple yet effective ranking distillation framework (RADI)
to mitigate this problem without additional manual annotation. RADI employs a teacher model trained with incomplete labels to generate rankings for potential answers,
which contain rich knowledge about label priority as well
as label-associated visual cues, thereby enriching the insufficient labeling information. To avoid overconfidence in
the imperfect teacher model, we further present two robust
and parameter-free ranking distillation approaches: a pairwise approach which introduces adaptive soft margins to
dynamically refine the optimization constraints on various
pairwise rankings, and a listwise approach which adopts
sampling-based partial listwise learning to resist the bias
in teacher ranking. Extensive experiments on five popular
benchmarks consistently show that both our pairwise and
listwise RADIs outperform state-of-the-art methods. Further analysis demonstrates the effectiveness of our methods
on the insufficient labeling problem.

1. Introduction
Video question answering [23, 35, 65] is one of the most
popular research domains to explore the capability of AI
models in understanding videos and languages. In this
work, we rethink a fundamental task within this domain
— open-ended video question answering (OE-VQA) [20,
* Corresponding author.

Question: Who is talking to the judges on the voice?
contestant
Labeled Answer

bat, boxing gloves, boy, competitor, desk, glasses,
guitar, hat, start, performer, talking, video, yard ...
Unlabeled Answers

Question: What does a girl in black take out?
hat
Labeled Answer

bat, boxing gloves, boy, competitor, contestant, desk,
glasses, guitar, start, performer, talking, video, yard...
Unlabeled Answers

Figure 1. Two examples about the insufficient labeling problem in
MSRVTT-QA dataset. The correct answers to each questions are
colored in red. Existing OE-VQA methods tend to directly regard
the entire unlabeled set as negative answers.

50, 52, 59], which requires the model to find the correct answers in a large vocabulary (with over 1K possible answers)
in response to the question regarding a given video.
Essentially, OE-VQA is supposed to be a multi-label
classification task, as there is always more than one answer
corresponding to a question. However, due to the cost of annotation, the labels provided by existing public benchmarks
are extremely insufficient, typically one labeled answer per
question, as illustrated in Figure 1. In this study, we term
this challenge as an insufficient labeling problem in OEVQA. This problem is critical but surprisingly neglected by
even state-of-the-art approaches [27, 45, 49, 53], which tend
to formulate OE-VQA as a regular multi-class classification
task by directly recognizing all the unlabeled answers as
negative labels, as shown in Figure 2(a). These approaches
ignore the numerous potentially correct answers, leading to
a limited ability in open-world video question answering.
To overcome this problem without extra manual labeling,
three baseline schemes could be preliminarily considered:
(i) Label smoothing prevents overfitting the hard labels
by replacing them with smoothed ones, as shown in Fig-

13161

