This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DUSt3R: Geometric 3D Vision Made Easy
Shuzhe Wang∗ , Vincent Leroy† , Yohann Cabon† , Boris Chidlovskii† and Jerome Revaud†
∗
†
Aalto University
Naver Labs Europe
shuzhe.wang@aalto.fi

firstname.lastname@naverlabs.com

Figure 1. Top: DUSt3R takes as input an unconstrained collection of images and outputs pointmaps, from which various geometric quantities
can be straightforwardly derived. Bottom: Fully-consistent 3D reconstructions without input camera poses nor intrinsics. From left to
right: input image, colored point-cloud, rendered with shading. DUSt3R can also reconstruct scenes without any visual overlap (top-right).

Abstract
Multi-view stereo reconstruction (MVS) in the wild requires to first estimate the camera intrinsic and extrinsic
parameters. These are usually tedious and cumbersome to
obtain, yet they are mandatory to triangulate corresponding
pixels in 3D space, which is at the core of all best performing MVS algorithms. In this work, we take an opposite
stance and introduce DUSt3R, a radically novel paradigm
for Dense and Unconstrained Stereo 3D Reconstruction of
arbitrary image collections, operating without prior information about camera calibration nor viewpoint poses. We
cast the pairwise reconstruction problem as a regression of
pointmaps, relaxing the hard constraints of usual projective
camera models. We show that this formulation smoothly
unifies the monocular and binocular reconstruction cases.
In the case where more than two images are provided, we further propose a simple yet effective global alignment strategy
that expresses all pairwise pointmaps in a common reference frame. We base our network architecture on standard
Transformer encoders and decoders, allowing us to leverage
powerful pretrained models. Our formulation directly provides a 3D model of the scene as well as depth information,
but interestingly, we can seamlessly recover from it, pixel
matches, focal lengths, relative and absolute cameras. Exten-

sive experiments on all these tasks showcase how DUSt3R
effectively unifies various 3D vision tasks, setting new performance records on monocular & multi-view depth estimation
as well as relative pose estimation. In summary, DUSt3R
makes many geometric 3D vision tasks easy. Code and models at https://github.com/naver/dust3r.

1. Introduction
Unconstrained dense 3D reconstruction from multiple RGB
images is one long-researched end-goal of computer vision [21, 58, 72]. In a nutshell, it is the task of estimating the 3D geometry and camera parameters of a particular
scene, given a set of photographs of this scene. Not only
does it have numerous applications like mapping [12, 59],
navigation [13], archaeology [70, 99], cultural heritage
preservation [37], robotics [63], but perhaps more importantly, it holds a fundamentally special place among all the
tasks from the 3D vision research field. Indeed, it subsumes nearly all geometric 3D vision tasks, and modern
approaches for 3D reconstruction thus consists in a sequential succession of many components, such as keypoint detection [23, 26, 53, 77] and matching [9, 51, 81, 92], robust estimation [3, 9, 137], Structure-from-Motion (SfM)
and Bundle Adjustment (BA) [18, 50, 83], dense Multi-

20697

