This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Faithfulness of Vision Transformer Explanations
Junyi Wu1 , Weitai Kang1 , Hao Tang2 , Yuan Hong3 , Yan Yan1,†
1
Department of Computer Science, Illinois Institute of Technology, USA
2
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, USA
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Connecticut, USA
{jwu125, wkang11}@hawk.iit.edu, haotang2@cmu.edu, yuan.hong@uconn.edu, yyan34@iit.edu

Abstract
To interpret Vision Transformers, post-hoc explanations
assign salience scores to input pixels, providing humanunderstandable heatmaps. However, whether these interpretations reflect true rationales behind the model’s output
is still underexplored. To address this gap, we study the
faithfulness criterion of explanations: the assigned salience
scores should represent the influence of the corresponding
input pixels on the model’s predictions. To evaluate faithfulness, we introduce Salience-guided Faithfulness Coefficient
(SaCo), a novel evaluation metric leveraging essential information of salience distribution. Specifically, we conduct pair-wise comparisons among distinct pixel groups
and then aggregate the differences in their salience scores,
resulting in a coefficient that indicates the explanation’s
degree of faithfulness. Our explorations reveal that current metrics struggle to differentiate between advanced explanation methods and Random Attribution, thereby failing
to capture the faithfulness property. In contrast, our proposed SaCo offers a reliable faithfulness measurement, establishing a robust metric for interpretations. Furthermore,
our SaCo demonstrates that the use of gradient and multilayer aggregation can markedly enhance the faithfulness
of attention-based explanation, shedding light on potential
paths for advancing Vision Transformer explainability.

1. Introduction
The prevalent use of Transformers in computer vision underscores the imperative to demystify their black-box nature
[10, 17, 48]. This presents a challenge to traditional posthoc interpretation methods, which were primarily tailored
for MLPs and CNNs [1, 12]. As a response, a growing line
of work aimed at developing new explanation paradigms
specific to Vision Transformers, where attention mechanisms play a dominant role [1, 4, 11, 12, 35]. By incor† Corresponding author

porating attention distributions, these explanation methods
estimate salience scores w.r.t. the tokens extracted from
input image patches. Subsequently, these scores are interpolated across pixel space, resulting in visually convincing
heatmaps that align with human intuition [14].
However, recent works [16, 23] claimed that it is crucial to evaluate how accurately these interpretations reflect
the true reasoning process of the Transformer model and
termed this aspect as faithfulness. To evaluate the quality
of post-hoc explanations, recent studies commonly adopt
an ablation approach [50]. This involves perturbing input
image pixels that are identified as most or least important
by the explanation method under evaluation. For example,
they perturb pixels with the highest salience scores and then
observe whether there is a decrease in the model’s accuracy,
which serves as a surrogate examination [6, 13, 29, 33, 42].
Despite the prevalence of these strategies, our study reveals
that they all overlook a proper evaluation of the degree of
faithfulness. We advance our discussion by characterizing
the core assumption of faithfulness that underpins explanation methods: the magnitude of salience scores signifies
the level of anticipated impacts. Consequently, (i) input
pixels assigned higher scores are expected to exert greater
influence on the model’s prediction, compared with those
with lower scores, and (ii) two groups of pixels with a larger
difference in salience scores are expected to cause a greater
disparity in their influences on the model’s prediction.
In response to these desiderata, for a thorough faithfulness metric, it is necessary to: (i) explicitly compare
the influences of input pixels with different magnitudes of
salience, and (ii) quantify the differences in salience scores
to reflect the expected disparities in their impacts. However, existing metrics fall short in both aspects, as they rely
on cumulative perturbation [41] and do not consider the information embedded in the distribution of the magnitude of
salience scores. For example, with cumulative perturbation
(see Figure 1), it is difficult to discern the influence of pixels ranked between the top 0-10% (the elephant’s body) and
90-100% (the sky) of salience. This is because the removal

10936

