This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Drag Your Noise: Interactive Point-based Editing
via Diffusion Semantic Propagation
Haofeng Liu1,2*
1

(a) Input

Chenshu Xu1*

Yifei Yang1
2

Singapore Management University

(b) DragNoise

(c) DragDiffusion

(d) DragGAN

Lihua Zeng2

†

Shengfeng He1

South China Normal University

(e) Input

(f) DragNoise

(g) DragDiffusion

(h) DragGAN

Figure 1. We present DragNoise, a point-based interactive editing framework that avoids the global adjustments of the latent code/map, a
common issue in frameworks like DragGAN [23] and DragDiffusion [29], facilitating stable and semantically accurate point-based editing.

Abstract
Point-based interactive editing serves as an essential tool
to complement the controllability of existing generative models. A concurrent work, DragDiffusion, updates the diffusion
latent map in response to user inputs, causing global latent
map alterations. This results in imprecise preservation of
the original content and unsuccessful editing due to gradient
vanishing. In contrast, we present DragNoise, offering robust and accelerated editing without retracing the latent map.
The core rationale of DragNoise lies in utilizing the predicted
noise output of each U-Net as a semantic editor. This approach is grounded in two critical observations: firstly, the
bottleneck features of U-Net inherently possess semantically
rich features ideal for interactive editing; secondly, highlevel semantics, established early in the denoising process,
show minimal variation in subsequent stages. Leveraging
these insights, DragNoise edits diffusion semantics in a single denoising step and efficiently propagates these changes,
ensuring stability and efficiency in diffusion editing. Comparative experiments reveal that DragNoise achieves superior
control and semantic retention, reducing the optimization
time by over 50% compared to DragDiffusion. Our codes
are available at https://github.com/haofengl/DragNoise.

1. Introduction
The limited controllability inherent in diffusion models [7,
11] highlights the need for interactive editing in image ma* The first two authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author (shengfenghe@smu.edu.sg).

nipulation. Consequently, recent advancements have led
to a variety of interactive approaches. These include textguided editing [3, 5, 10, 16, 17], stroke-based editing [20],
and exemplar-based methods [9, 13, 39, 42]. As the demand
for more user-friendly and precise editing methods grows,
the implementation of drag-and-drop manipulation of control points has emerged as a straightforward and efficient
approach in real-world applications.
In the field of point-based image editing, DragGAN [23]
represents a significant milestone by leveraging generative
adversarial networks (GANs) [8, 15]. Despite its innovation,
the inherent constraints of GANs often limit achieving highquality edited outcomes. Additionally, GAN-based editing
methods [1, 36, 38, 44, 45], which involve optimizing a new
latent code corresponding to the edited result, struggle with
preserving global content, as illustrated in Figs. 1d and 1h.
Different from traditional “outer-inversion” that converts a
real image into a latent code, we term this internal optimization process of inverting user editing into the latent code as
“inner-inversion” (see Fig. 4a). A concurrent work, DragDiffusion [29] progresses this field by applying diffusion models, capitalizing on the strengths of large-scale pre-trained
models. Although DragDiffusion applies diffusion models,
it adheres to the concept of “inner-inversion”. This method
guides the optimization of intermediate noisy latent maps to
generate outputs that reflect the intended editing (Fig. 4b).
However, two main issues emerge with DragDiffusion:
gradient vanishing and inversion fidelity. Gradient vanishing during optimization occurs due to the reliance on motion

6743

