This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Three Pillars improving Vision Foundation Model Distillation for Lidar
Spyros Gidaris1

Gilles Puy1
Corentin Sautier1,3

Patrick Pérez2 *

Alexandre Boulch1

Oriane Siméoni1

Andrei Bursuc1

Renaud Marlet1,3

1

2
valeo.ai, Paris, France
Kyutai, Paris, France
3
LIGM, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-Vallée, France

Abstract
Self-supervised image backbones can be used to address
complex 2D tasks (e.g., semantic segmentation, object discovery) very efficiently and with little or no downstream supervision. Ideally, 3D backbones for lidar should be able
to inherit these properties after distillation of these powerful 2D features. The most recent methods for image-tolidar distillation on autonomous driving data show promising results, obtained thanks to distillation methods that
keep improving. Yet, we still notice a large performance
gap when measuring by linear probing the quality of distilled vs fully supervised features. In this work, instead
of focusing only on the distillation method, we study the
effect of three pillars for distillation: the 3D backbone,
the pretrained 2D backbone, and the pretraining 2D+3D
dataset. In particular, thanks to our scalable distillation
method named ScaLR, we show that scaling the 2D and
3D backbones and pretraining on diverse datasets leads to
a substantial improvement of the feature quality. This allows us to significantly reduce the gap between the quality of distilled and fully-supervised 3D features, and to improve the robustness of the pretrained backbones to domain gaps and perturbations. The code is available at
https://github.com/valeoai/ScaLR.

1. Introduction
Lidars capture the 3D geometry of a scene with high accuracy while being little sensitive to adverse light conditions, which is useful for advanced driver assistance systems. However, annotating lidar point clouds to train deep
neural networks is notoriously long and expensive [5].
More frugal learning can be achieved by pretraining backbone networks with self-supervision on a pretext
task [8, 9, 22, 24, 25] and a non-annotated dataset. The
pretrained network can then be finetuned on various down* Work done at valeo.ai.

stream tasks and other datasets, with much less supervision for the same level of performance, or with a higher
performance than when trained from scratch. Such pretraining has been particularly successful for image backbones [9, 12, 22]. In particular, the gap between supervised
and self-supervised representations, as evaluated by linear
probing, has been closed on ImageNet [8, 9, 12, 21, 22, 24].
On autonomous driving (AD) data, we distinguish
mainly two categories of self-supervised methods for 3D
backbones: (1) methods leveraging only lidar data and
defining a pretext task at the level of a single [6, 44, 81]
or multiple scans [45, 59, 67, 70], and (2) methods exploiting images acquired in synchronization with the point
clouds and distilling image representations to a 3D backbone [38, 39, 41, 58]. Our focus is on the second category
of methods, thanks to which 3D backbones can inherit the
properties of self-supervised image backbones.
Image-to-lidar distillation has improved a lot recently, in
particular by designing better distillation losses. Yet, we
still observe a large gap between distilled and supervised
3D representations when directly measuring their quality by
linear probing: they achieve respectively 45.0% and 74.7%
mIoU in linear probing on the validation of nuScenes in [39]
for a MinkUNet [14] with cylindrical voxels [84].
To improve the quality of distilled features, we explore
here the effect of three other pillars, instead of focusing only
on the distillation method. These pillars are: (i) the 3D
backbone, (ii) the pretrained 2D backbones and (iii) the pretraining 2D+3D dataset. We show that scaling the 2D and
3D backbones, and pretraining on diverse datasets leads to a
considerable improvements of the feature quality. The role
of these pillars is actually more important than the distillation method itself, which we simplify for easier scaling.
After proposing and studying a scalable distillation
method, which we call ScaLR for Scalabale Lidar Representation, we make the following contributions.
First, we are able to significantly reduce the gap between
distilled and supervised lidar representations. We reach an
mIoU of 67.8% in linear probing on the validation set of

21519

