This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D-Aware Face Editing via Warping-Guided Latent Direction Learning
Yuhao Cheng1

Zhuo Chen1 Xingyu Ren1
Di Xu2 Changpeng Yang2

Wenhan Zhu1
Yichao Yan1*

Zhengqin Xu1

1

MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Huawei Cloud Computing Technologies Co., Ltd
{chengyuhao,ningci5252,rxy sjtu,zhuwenhan823,fate311,yanyichao}@sjtu.edu.cn,
{xudi21,yangchangpeng}@huawei.com

Figure 1. An example of our warping-guided 3D-aware face editing method. Our method supports users to edit 3D faces in an intuitive
way that drags points from multiple perspectives. Moreover, our method can achieve disentangled editing for shape, expression, and view,
while maintaining 3D consistency. Please zoom-in for detailed observation.

Abstract
3D facial editing, a longstanding task in computer vision
with broad applications, is expected to fast and intuitively
manipulate any face from arbitrary viewpoints following the
user’s will. Existing works have limitations in terms of intuitiveness, generalization, and efficiency. To overcome these
challenges, we propose FaceEdit3D, which allows users to
directly manipulate 3D points to edit a 3D face, achieving natural and rapid face editing. After one or several
points are manipulated by users, we propose the tri-plane
warping to directly deform the view-independent 3D representation. To address the problem of distortion caused
by tri-plane warping, we train a warp-aware encoder to
project the warped face onto a standardized latent space.
In this space, we further propose directional latent editing
to mitigate the identity bias caused by the encoder and realize the disentangled editing of various attributes. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves superior
results with rich facial details and nice identity preservation. Our approach also supports general applications like
* Corresponding author

multi-attribute continuous editing and cat/car editing. The
project website is https://cyh-sj.github.io/FaceEdit3D/.

1. Introduction
High-quality face editing has long been an important research topic in computer vision with a wide range of applications, including social media and film production. Previous methods [16, 36, 43] based on 2D GANs [22, 23]
have demonstrated the capability of editing facial images
with high-fidelity. Recently, benefiting from the impressive
achievements of 3D-aware generative models, especially in
generative digital human [2–4, 11, 15, 32, 33, 41, 45, 51,
53, 55, 56, 64], the field of 3D facial editing has further attracted significant interest due to its promising capacity of
manipulating a 3D representation.
Typically, 3D face editing methods can be generally
classified into three categories: prior-guided conditioning,
parameter-space fine-tuning, and latent-space optimization,
as summarized in Tab. 1. Specifically, prior-guided conditioning methods [18, 46–48] employ an additional well-

916

