This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

L0 -Sampler: An L0 Model Guided Volume Sampling for NeRF
Liangchen Li

Juyong Zhang*

University of Science and Technology of China
{vvmno180662@mail., juyong@}ustc.edu.cn

Coarse {

}

NeRF’s HVS
-Sampler
Basket
NeRF++

Reference w/ 𝐿0 -Sampler

NeuS

Reference w/ 𝐿0 -Sampler

Jade

\0
Figure 1. We present L0 -Sampler, an upgrade of the Hierarchical Volume Sampling strategy of NeRF. By testing on different datasets,
our proposed L0 -Sampler with different NeRF frameworks can achieve stable performance improvements on rendering and reconstruction
tasks with few lines of code modifications and around the same training time. Left: Results comparison between works with original HVS
and our L0 -Sampler. Right: Instead of using piecewise constant functions when fitting w(t), we use piecewise exponential functions for
interpolation to get a quasi-L0 w(t), resulting in more concentrated and precise sampling.

Abstract
Since its proposal, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) has
achieved great success in related tasks, mainly adopting the
hierarchical volume sampling (HVS) strategy for volume
rendering. However, the HVS of NeRF approximates distributions using piecewise constant functions, which provides a relatively rough estimation. Based on the observation that a well-trained weight function w(t) and the L0
distance between points and the surface have very high similarity, we propose L0 -Sampler by incorporating the L0
model into w(t) to guide the sampling process. Specifically, we propose using piecewise exponential functions
rather than piecewise constant functions for interpolation,
which can not only approximate quasi-L0 weight distributions along rays quite well but can be easily implemented with a few lines of code change without additional
computational burden. Stable performance improvements
can be achieved by applying L0 -Sampler to NeRF and related tasks like 3D reconstruction. Code is available at
https://ustc3dv.github.io/L0-Sampler/.

* Corresponding Author

1. Introduction
The advent of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [29] has revolutionized the field of inverse rendering, providing powerful solutions for tasks like novel view synthesis, 3D surface
reconstruction [55, 61], and dynamic deformation [37, 41].
Volume rendering plays a crucial role in the success of
NeRF, as it optimizes the density and color networks to calculate pixel colors. It involves tracing rays through pixels and sampling points along the rays. By leveraging the
volume rendering formula, NeRF combines the features of
these sampled points to determine the final color. We are
aware that in most cases, most sampled points are unoccupied and have little influence on the final result. As a result,
the colors obtained through volume rendering mainly rely
on points near the surface. As illustrated in Figs. 2a and 2b,
providing an accurate geometry to guide the sampling process can significantly improve the training speed and final
convergence results. Therefore, a key research problem to
further improve volume rendering methods such as NeRF
is improving the sampling efficiency and concentrating the
sampling points as close to the surface as possible.
NeRF introduces the Hierarchical Volume Sampling
(HVS) strategy, inspired by [19], as an efficient approach
for sampling near the surface. HVS utilizes volume densities to generate a weight function w(t) and normalize it

21390

