This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mitigating Object Dependencies: Improving Point Cloud Self-Supervised
Learning through Object Exchange
Yanhao Wu 1 Tong Zhang2
Wei Ke1 Congpei Qiu1 Sabine Süsstrunk2 Mathieu Salzmann2
1
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL Switzerland
Origin

Repositioned

MSC[32]

OESSL (Ours)

X
Desk

√
Chair

Chair √

Chair √

mIoU %
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
0

√
Dustbin

X
Chair

0.2

Ours
MSC [32]

0.4
0.6
0.8
ratio rearranged
DepthContrast [37]
Random initialization

(b)

(a)

Figure 1. (a) Visualization of semantic segmentation for edited scenes. We relocate objects to places where they appear less frequently. Our
pre-trained model segments the relocated object accurately, while the pre-trained model from MSC [32] labels the objects incorrectly. (b)
Bar chart depicting the semantic segmentation performance on ScanNet [9] with varying ratios of rearranged objects. The X-axis indicates
the ratios of rearranged objects for each scene, and the Y-axis shows the mean Intersection over Union (mIoU) scores. The models are
pre-trained and fine-tuned on ScanNet with 10% labels. We compare OESSL (Ours) with MSC [32], DepthContrast [37], and training from
scratch (weights are randomly initialized).

Abstract
In the realm of point cloud scene understanding, particularly in indoor scenes, objects are arranged following human habits, resulting in objects of certain semantics being
closely positioned and displaying notable inter-object correlations. This can create a tendency for neural networks
to exploit these strong dependencies, bypassing the individual object patterns. To address this challenge, we introduce
a novel self-supervised learning (SSL) strategy. Our approach leverages both object patterns and contextual cues
to produce robust features. It begins with the formulation of
an object-exchanging strategy, where pairs of objects with
comparable sizes are exchanged across different scenes, effectively disentangling the strong contextual dependencies.
Subsequently, we introduce a context-aware feature learning strategy, which encodes object patterns without relying on their specific context by aggregating object features
across various scenes. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method over existing SSL techniques, further showing its better robustness to environmen-

tal changes. Moreover, we showcase the applicability of
our approach by transferring pre-trained models to diverse
point cloud datasets. 1

1. Introduction
Understanding the semantic content of 3D point cloud
data, particularly indoor scenes, is crucial in diverse fields,
including applications such as indoor robotics [3, 5, 29, 35].
Recent advancements in deep learning [8, 31] have showcased remarkable results in this domain. While effective,
these methods rely heavily on annotated training data and
fail when faced with distribution shifts in the test data [38].
Consequently, the extraction of resilient object features
from unlabeled data has become critical to advance the field.
Existing self-supervised learning (SSL) methods [2, 19,
20, 25, 33] concentrate on feature aggregation by creating
positive pairs from the same object in different augmented
1 Our code is available at https://github.com/YanhaoWu/OESSL.
: Corresponding author

23052

