This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VidLA: Video-Language Alignment at Scale
Mamshad Nayeem Rizve1
Fan Fei1
Benjamin Z. Yao1
Belinda Zeng1
1
Amazon Shopping

Jayakrishnan Unnikrishnan1
Son Tran1
Mubarak Shah1,2
Trishul Chilimbi1
2
University of Central Florida

{mnrizve, feiff, jayunn, sontran, benjamy, zengb, shahmub, trishulc}@amazon.com

Abstract
In this paper, we propose VidLA, an approach for videolanguage alignment at scale. There are two major limitations of previous video-language alignment approaches.
First, they do not capture both short-range and long-range
temporal dependencies and typically employ complex hierarchical deep network architectures that are hard to integrate with existing pretrained image-text foundation models. To effectively address this limitation, we instead keep
the network architecture simple and use a set of data tokens
that operate at different temporal resolutions in a hierarchical manner, accounting for the temporally hierarchical nature of videos. By employing a simple two-tower architecture, we are able to initialize our video-language model with
pretrained image-text foundation models, thereby boosting
the final performance. Second, existing video-language
alignment works struggle due to the lack of semantically
aligned large-scale training data. To overcome it, we
leverage recent LLMs to curate the largest video-language
dataset to date with better visual grounding. Furthermore,
unlike existing video-text datasets which only contain short
clips, our dataset is enriched with video clips of varying durations to aid our temporally hierarchical data tokens in extracting better representations at varying temporal scales. Overall, empirical results show that our proposed approach surpasses state-of-the-art methods on multiple retrieval benchmarks, especially on longer videos, and
performs competitively on classification benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Vision-language alignment is crucial for solving many
vision-language tasks like text-guided retrieval [41, 42, 47,
65, 74], visual question answering [11, 40, 88, 99], visual
captioning [40, 42, 61, 86], etc. In the past few years,
training on web-scale image-text pairs has significantly
improved performance in many of these vision-language
tasks [43, 44, 65, 99]. However, humans perceive the world
as a continuous stream of images, which is also reflected

Figure 1. Recall@1 performance on retrieval benchmarks compared to previous SoTA with ViT-B scale models.

in the increasing number of videos uploaded to the web
daily. Despite the ubiquitous use of videos, when compared
to image-language alignment, video-language alignment is
significantly more challenging for two key reasons.
First, unlike image-language data, it is much harder to
collect aligned video-language data at scale. To address
this issue, most prior works utilize automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems [2, 66, 102] to extract textual transcripts and generate paired video-language data for largescale training [57, 93, 100]. However, it has been shown
that transcripts often corresponds poorly with their associated visual contents [32, 56, 57, 72]. As a result, some
recent works [12, 38, 46, 79] skipped large-scale videolanguage training and worked around by utilizing languagealigned image encoders, followed by lightly adapting them
with temporal modules on small-scale video datasets with
paired textual descriptions [6, 59]. However, training on
such small-scale datasets often leads to overfitting [94] and
does not encourage learning temporally diverse representations [38]. Second, since the vision transformer architecture lacks strong visual inductive bias such as that in
CNN-type architectures, it requires large-scale pretraining
data for effective generalization [21, 67]. In case of videos,
this problem is amplified further due to the added temporal dimension. Facing this challenge, to be more efficient, existing works utilize factorized [4, 7, 60] or hierarchical [45, 48, 52, 68] space-time attention. However, neither of these solutions are optimal for large-scale

14043

