This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D IFFUSION 3D F EATURES (D IFF 3F)
Decorating Untextured Shapes with Distilled Semantic Features
Niladri Shekhar Dutt1,2
1

Sanjeev Muralikrishnan1

University College London

2

Ready Player Me

Niloy J. Mitra1,3
3

Adobe Research

https://diff3f.github.io/

Figure 1. Correspondence in-the-wild. We introduce D IFF 3F, a novel feature distiller that harnesses the expressive power of inpainting diffusion features and distills them to points on 3D surfaces. Here, the proposed features are employed for point-to-point shape
correspondence between assets varying in shape, pose, species, and topology. We achieve this without any fine-tuning of the underlying
diffusion models, and demonstrate results on untextured meshes, point clouds, and raw scans. The leftmost mesh is the source, and all the
remaining 3D shapes are targets. Note that we show raw point-to-point correspondence, without any regularization or smoothing. Inputs are
point clouds, non-manifold meshes, or 2-manifold meshes. Corresponding points are similarly colored across the shapes.

Abstract
We present D IFF 3F as a simple, robust, and classagnostic feature descriptor that can be computed for untextured input shapes (meshes or point clouds). Our method
distills diffusion features from image foundational models
onto input shapes. Specifically, we use the input shapes to
produce depth and normal maps as guidance for conditional
image synthesis. In the process, we produce (diffusion) features in 2D that we subsequently lift and aggregate on the
original surface. Our key observation is that even if the
conditional image generations obtained from multi-view rendering of the input shapes are inconsistent, the associated
image features are robust and, hence, can be directly aggregated across views. This produces semantic features on the

input shapes, without requiring additional data or training.
We perform extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks
(SHREC’19, SHREC’20, FAUST, and TOSCA) and demonstrate that our features, being semantic instead of geometric,
produce reliable correspondence across both isometric and
non-isometrically related shape families. Code is available
at https://github.com/niladridutt/Diffusion-3D-Features.

1. Introduction
Feature descriptors are crucial building blocks in most shape
analysis tasks. The ability to extract reliable features from
input meshes or point clouds paves the way for establishing shape correspondence, extracting low-dimensional shape
spaces, and learning 3D generative models, to name a few

4494

