This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DemoCaricature: Democratising Caricature Generation with a Rough Sketch
Dar-Yen Chen

Ayan Kumar Bhunia
Subhadeep Koley
Aneeshan Sain
Pinaki Nath Chowdhury
Yi-Zhe Song
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.

{d.chen, a.bhunia, s.koley, a.sain, p.chowdhury, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk
https://democaricature.github.io

ID

Sketch 1

ID

Sketch

Ours

Style

Sketch 2

Ours

Ours

ID

ID

Sketch

Sketch

Style

Ours

Ours

330

Figure 1. Given an abstract freehand sketch and an image depicting the facial identity of a person, our method transforms the deformed
sketch into a plausible-looking caricature while maintaining identity-fidelity and imitating the exaggerations portrayed in the input sketch.
Additionally, it can seamlessly transmit the look-and-feel of a given style-image into the output caricature.

Abstract
In this paper, we democratise caricature generation, empowering individuals to effortlessly craft personalised caricatures with just a photo and a conceptual sketch. Our
objective is to strike a delicate balance between abstraction
and identity, while preserving the creativity and subjectivity inherent in a sketch. To achieve this, we present Explicit
Rank-1 Model Editing alongside single-image personalisation, selectively applying nuanced edits to cross-attention
layers for a seamless merge of identity and style. Additionally, we propose Random Mask Reconstruction to enhance
robustness, directing the model to focus on distinctive iden-

tity and style features. Crucially, our aim is not to replace
artists but to eliminate accessibility barriers, allowing enthusiasts to engage in the artistry.

1. Introduction
Ever wondered when you would finally decide to get that
personalised caricature created, perhaps during a holiday?
Look no further, this paper is for you – we strive to
democratise caricature [6, 26, 27] generation for everyone!
With a portrait of yourself and a conceptual sketch of how
you envision your caricature, we will automatically generate a high-fidelity caricature that unmistakably captures

8629

