This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Unified Approach for Text- and Image-guided 4D Scene Generation
Yufeng Zheng1,2,3 , Xueting Li1 , Koki Nagano1 , Sifei Liu1 , Otmar Hilliges2 , Shalini De Mello1
1
NVIDIA, 2 ETH Zurich, 3 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems

Figure 1. Text-to-4D. Our method provides a unified approach for generating 4D dynamic content from a text prompt with diffuion
guidance, supporting both unconstrained generation and controllable generation, where appearance is defined by one or multiple images.

Abstract

Large-scale diffusion generative models are greatly simplifying image, video and 3D asset creation from userprovided text prompts and images. However, the challenging problem of text-to-4D dynamic 3D scene generation
with diffusion guidance remains largely unexplored. We
propose Dream-in-4D, which features a novel two-stage approach for text-to-4D synthesis, leveraging (1) 3D and 2D
diffusion guidance to effectively learn a high-quality static
3D asset in the first stage; (2) a deformable neural radiance field that explicitly disentangles the learned static asset from its deformation, preserving quality during motion
learning; and (3) a multi-resolution feature grid for the deformation field with a displacement total variation loss to
effectively learn motion with video diffusion guidance in the
second stage. Through a user preference study, we demonstrate that our approach significantly advances image and
motion quality, 3D consistency and text fidelity for text-to4D generation compared to baseline approaches. Thanks to
its motion-disentangled representation, Dream-in-4D can
also be easily adapted for controllable generation where
appearance is defined by one or multiple images, without
the need to modify the motion learning stage. Thus, our
method offers, for the first time, a unified approach for textto-4D, image-to-4D and personalized 4D generation tasks.

1. Introduction
The advent of large-scale text-conditioned diffusion-based
generative models for images has ushered in a new era of
imaginative, high-quality image synthesis [1, 28, 30]. Their
simple and intuitive conditioning in the form of text prompts
are game-changers in democratizing visual content creation
for non-expert users. Subsequently, these developments
have also led to impressive progress in (1) text- or imageconditioned static 3D content creation [15, 20, 24, 26],
achieved by leveraging guidance from generic and 3Daware [16, 17, 31] image diffusion models, and (2) video
content creation via video diffusion models [2–4, 32].
However, for various real-world applications such as
gaming, AR/VR, and advertising, synthesizing static 3D assets alone does not suffice. It is desirable to also animate
3D assets using intuitive user-provided text prompts to further save animators’ time and level-of-expertise. To go beyond static 3D content creation, we delve into the largely
unexplored problem of text-conditioned 4D scene generation, a.k.a., text-to-4D synthesis with diffusion guidance.
This is a challenging problem encompassing both text-to3D and text-to-video synthesis. It requires learning not only
a 3D-consistent representation of a static scene capable of
free-view rendering, but also its plausible and semanticallyWork was partially done during an internship at NVIDIA. Project page:
https://research.nvidia.com/labs/nxp/dream-in-4d/

7300

