This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Loopy-SLAM: Dense Neural SLAM with Loop Closures
Lorenzo Liso1 * Erik Sandström1 * Vladimir Yugay3
Luc Van Gool1,2,4
Martin R. Oswald1,3
1
2
ETH Zürich
KU Leuven 3 University of Amsterdam 4 INSAIT

Point-SLAM [43]

ESLAM [26]

GO-SLAM [74]

Loopy-SLAM (Ours)

ATE Depth L1
31.55 cm 7.94 cm

ATE Depth L1
29.73 cm 42.89 cm

ATE Depth L1
4.64 cm 8.79 cm

ATE Depth L1
7.03 cm 3.81 cm

Figure 1. Beneﬁts of Loopy-SLAM. While Point-SLAM yields high-ﬁdelity reconstructions it does not implement loop closure and may
duplicate geometries due to drift. ESLAM is faced by the same problem due to the lack of loop closure. GO-SLAM implements loop
closure, but computes rather low quality map geometry. In contrast to GO-SLAM which requires to save the entire history of input frames
used for mapping to update the map after loop closures, our approach anchors the neural scene representation on points which can simply
be shifted without recomputing the dense map from scratch. We show the ATE RMSE and the depth L1 re-rendering error on the mesh for
the TUM-RGBD fr1 room scene.

Abstract
Neural RGBD SLAM techniques have shown promise in
dense Simultaneous Localization And Mapping (SLAM), yet
face challenges such as error accumulation during camera tracking resulting in distorted maps. In response, we
introduce Loopy-SLAM that globally optimizes poses and
the dense 3D model. We use frame-to-model tracking using a data-driven point-based submap generation method
and trigger loop closures online by performing global place
recognition. Robust pose graph optimization is used to
rigidly align the local submaps. As our representation is
point based, map corrections can be performed efﬁciently
without the need to store the entire history of input frames
used for mapping as typically required by methods employing a grid based mapping structure. Evaluation on the
synthetic Replica and real-world TUM-RGBD and ScanNet datasets demonstrate competitive or superior performance in tracking, mapping, and rendering accuracy when
compared to existing dense neural RGBD SLAM methods.
Project page: notchla.github.io/Loopy-SLAM/.

∗ Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Online dense 3D reconstruction of scenes with an RGBD
camera has been an active area of research for years [12,
34, 35, 46, 69, 75], and remains an open problem. Recently,
several works proposed to optimize an encoder-free neural
scene representation at test time [26, 43, 52, 59, 71, 75] with
the potential to improve compression, extrapolate unseen
geometry, provide a more seamless stepping point towards
higher level reasoning such as 3D semantic prediction and
leverage strong learnable priors as well as adapt to test time
constraints via online optimization. One can make the distinction between coupled [26, 43, 44, 52, 55, 59, 71, 75] and
decoupled [9, 29, 40, 74] solutions where coupled methods use the same representation for tracking and mapping
while decoupled methods use independent frameworks for
each task. Currently, the decoupled methods have achieved
better tracking accuracy, but the decoupling creates undesirable data redundancy and independence since the tracking is performed independently of the estimated dense map.
Tracking and mapping are coupled tasks and we therefore
believe they should ultimately make use of the same scene
representation. On the one hand, of the coupled methods,
all but the concurrent MIPS-Fusion [55] implement just
frame-to-model tracking, leading to signiﬁcant camera drift
on noisy real-world data, with corrupted maps as a result.
On the other hand, the decoupled methods all make use of

20363

