This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progress-Aware Online Action Segmentation for Egocentric Video2
Video28
Procedural Task Videos
Yuhan Shen
Northeastern University

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University

shen.yuh@northeastern.edu

e.elhamifar@northeastern.edu
put bread on plate
apply jam

apply peanut butter
press bread slices together

Abstract
We address the problem of online (streaming) action segmentation for egocentric procedural task videos. While previous studies have mostly focused on offline action segmentation, where entire videos are available for both training
and inference, the transition to online action segmentation
is crucial for practical applications like AR/VR task assistants. Notably, applying an offline-trained model directly to
online inference results in a significant performance drop
due to the inconsistency between training and inference. We
propose an online action segmentation framework by first
modifying existing architectures to make them causal. Second, we develop a novel action progress prediction module
to dynamically estimate the progress of ongoing actions and
using them to refine the predictions of causal action segmentation. Third, we propose to learn task graphs from training
videos and leverage them to obtain smooth and procedureconsistent segmentations. With the combination of progress
and task graph with casual action segmentation, our framework effectively addresses prediction uncertainty and oversegmentation in online action segmentation and achieves
significant improvement on three egocentric datasets.1

1. Introduction
The future of computer vision holds exciting possibilities
for seamlessly integrating augmented and virtual reality
(AR/VR) into our daily lives. Imagine wearing AR glasses
while you assemble or repair a complex machine, perform
a medical procedure on a patient or cook a gourmet meal.
Your virtual task assistant would recognize your actions in
real-time, anticipate your next steps and guide you through
the entire procedure. In this context, advanced computer
vision technologies, including online and real-time user
action understanding, become increasingly important.
1 Code is available at https://github.com/Yuhan- Shen/
ProTAS.

(a) online action segmentation

(b) action progress prediction
spread peanut butter
put tortilla on
cutting board

roll tortilla
spread jelly
(c) task graph

How to
complete step?
step: spread jelly
current progress: 20%

Next
step?

roll tortilla

progress: 50% progress: 75% progress: 100%
Reference Videos

(d) online prediction using progress and task graph

Figure 1. (a) Online action segmentation: use past and current frames
to make predictions. (b) Action progress prediction: estimate the progress
of each ongoing action in real time. (c) Task graph captures all feasible
transcripts to perform a procedural task. We learn the task graph from
training videos. (d) We use the predicted action progress and the learned
task graph to improve online action predictions. Our framework allows us
to demonstrate how to complete the current step based on the estimated
progress and anticipate or guide the user to the next possible step(s).

While there have been extensive studies on video action
segmentation, whose goal is to divide long videos (including procedural ones) into multiple segments of actions, the
literature in this area has predominantly focused on offline
action segmentation, where entire videos are given and used
during both training and inference [2, 7, 22, 41, 45, 51, 52,
56, 64, 69–71, 73, 83–85, 87]. Such methods leverage past
and future frames to predict the action of a given frame.
However, achieving the vision of AR/VR task assistants requires a shift from traditional offline action segmentation to
the dynamic realm of online (streaming) action segmentation, where actions must be recognized as frames arrive.
Notice that one can train an action segmentation model
in an offline fashion and apply it online to all frames up to
the current time or using a sliding window [28]. However,
this approach suffers from major issues: i) it incurs a very

18186

