This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SD2Event:Self-supervised Learning of Dynamic Detectors and Contextual
Descriptors for Event Cameras

1

Yuan Gao1 ,Yuqing Zhu1 , Xinjun Li1 , Yimin Du1 , Tianzhu Zhang1,2, *
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Deep Space Exploration Laboratory
{wazs98, yuqingzhu, lxj3017, ymdu}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Event
Frame

Event cameras offer many advantages over traditional
frame-based cameras, such as high dynamic range and low
latency. Therefore, event cameras are widely applied in diverse computer vision applications, where event-based keypoint detection is a fundamental task. However, achieving
robust event-based keypoint detection remains challenging
because the ground truth of event keypoints is difficult to
obtain, descriptors extracted by CNN usually lack discriminative ability in the presence of intense noise, and fixed keypoint detectors are limited in detecting varied keypoint patterns. To address these challenges, a novel event-based keypoint detection method is proposed by learning dynamic detectors and contextual descriptors in a self-supervised manner (SD2Event), including a contextual feature descriptor
learning (CFDL) module and a dynamic keypoint detector
learning (DKDL) module. The proposed SD2Event enjoys
several merits. First, the proposed CFDL module can model
long-range contexts efficiently and effectively. Second, the
DKDL module generates dynamic keypoint detectors, which
can detect keypoints with diverse patterns across various
event streams. Third, the proposed self-supervised signals
can guide the model’s adaptation to event data. Extensive
experimental results on three challenging benchmarks show
that our proposed method significantly outperforms stateof-the-art event-based keypoint detection methods.

1. Introduction
Different from traditional frame-based cameras, event cameras possess a distinctive capability to capture individual
events at their corresponding pixel positions, triggered by
changes in pixel brightness over a temporal resolution.
This unique paradigm offers unique advantages, including
high dynamic range, low latency, microsecond temporal
resolution, low power consumption, and high pixel bandwidth [1, 11, 17, 21, 25]. Owing to these inherent characteristics, event cameras are widely applied in diverse com* Corresponding Author

(a) Event keypoints extracted by Superpoint pre-trained model

D1

Limited
receptive field

D2

Full Attention

Agent-based Attention

(b) Activation areas for different attention mechanisms

(c) Diverse keypoint patterns across various event frames

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. (a) presents the keypoint
matching results for an event frame pair by applying the Superpoint model trained on conventional image datasets. Correct and
incorrect matches are denoted by green and red stars, respectively.
(b) shows the comparative analysis between our agent-based attention and full attention, where full attention would aggregate irrelevant noise from event streams. (c) illustrates the diverse event
keypoint patterns (e.g., bicycles and mountains in the second row)
across different event frames, which can be effectively captured by
our proposed dynamic keypoint detectors ({D}2i=1 ).

puter vision applications, such as structured light 3D scanning [19], optical flow estimation [3, 32], HDR image reconstruction [26, 28] and Simultaneous Localization and
Mapping (SLAM) [21]. Among these applications, keypoint detection for event data has attracted increasing attention from both academia and industry [1, 13, 15, 17, 18],
due to its fundamental role in 3D scene analysis. Nevertheless, achieving robust event-based keypoint detection remains challenging due to various factors, such as the unique
spatio-temporal data structure, diverse noise patterns, illumination fluctuations, and viewpoint transformations.
To address the above challenges, numerous methods
have been proposed for event-based keypoint detection [1,
7, 15, 18, 29]. Generally, existing approaches can be categorized into two main classes including hand-crafted methods [1, 7, 13, 20, 29] and data-driven methods [15, 18].
Hand-crafted methods localize salient keypoints through
detectors designed based on human prior knowledge[1, 7,
29]. For example, evHarris [29] creates a binary frame indicating the event’s occurrence at each pixel. Then, the Harris

3055

