This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

In-distribution Public Data Synthesis with Diffusion Models
for Differentially Private Image Classification
Jinseong Park1†
Yujin Choi1†
Jaewook Lee1 *
1 Seoul National University
{jinseong, uznhigh, jaewook} @snu.ac.kr

Abstract
To alleviate the utility degradation of deep learning image classification with differential privacy (DP), employing
extra public data or pre-trained models has been widely explored. Recently, the use of in-distribution public data has
been investigated, where tiny subsets of datasets are released publicly. In this paper, we investigate a framework
that leverages recent diffusion models to amplify the information of public data. Subsequently, we identify data diversity and generalization gap between public and private
data as critical factors addressing the limited public data.
While assuming 4% of training data as public, our method
achieves 85.48% on CIFAR-10 with a privacy budget of
" = 2, without employing extra public data for training.

1. Introduction
Differential privacy (DP) [18, 19] establishes a mathematical framework to ensure the privacy of training data. In
deep learning, differentially private SGD (DP-SGD) [1]
has become the de facto standard method to guarantee the
models’ privacy. However, differentially private training inevitably degrades performance compared to standard (nonDP) training [6, 45]. As a practical solution, leveraging public pre-trained models or public data has been explored to
enhance utility [12, 39, 59, 65–67]. As using public data
raises no privacy concerns, fine-tuning pre-trained models
on private data can make use of learned features for free.
Nevertheless, their effectiveness might be diminished when
addressing out-of-distribution (OOD) public data of small
shared characteristics with private data [59].
As an alternative, researchers have investigated the use
of in-distribution (ID) public data, indicating that a small
portion of in-distribution data is made public [38]. For example, some data owners decide to share their data publicly
in exchange for economic incentives or public interest. This
setup allows us to leverage public data with a distribution
* Corresponding author. † Equal contribution.

Optim

Side Information

Public

Ours

Warm-up
Training

Diffusion
Models

Extended
Optimization

Private
Models

Private
Sensitive Data

Augmentation
Generalization

Diversify

Warm-up
Training

Synthetic
Public Data

In-distribution Public

Synthetic Public

Private
Models
Private

Figure 1. Illustration of (Top) existing optimization-based methods and (Bottom) proposed training procedure for amplifying indistribution public data and utilizing the synthetic data.

similar to private data. In contrast to previous approaches,
such as utilizing extra OOD data or distribution shift, we
need to assume a limited amount of ID public data since the
public data might contain more sensitive information. However, the repeated use of limited-sized public data can raise
critical issues related to memorization and overfitting [43].
To mitigate the aforementioned problems, previous studies
mainly have focused on utilizing side information from the
little public data to enhance the optimization of differentially private deep learning [2, 4, 38, 43].
Recently, Ganesh et al. [21] pointed out that warm-up
training with public data plays a crucial in private optimization to find a good basin with a small loss, whereas DP-SGD
from a random initial point faces a high loss and poor optimization. From this viewpoint, we suggest that enlarging
the public dataset could improve the performance of private
learning. By using the recent diffusion models [28, 30], we
aim to enrich the contextual information of public data. We
further identify that data diversity and generalization gap
between public and private data act as critical factors, particularly addressing the limited size of public data.
The proposed framework is illustrated in Figure 1. 1 We
summarize our approaches and their performance gains in
1 Our code is available at
https://github.com/JinseongP/DPTrainer.

12236

