This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Navigate Beyond Shortcuts:
Debiased Learning through the Lens of Neural Collapse
Yining Wang, Junjie Sun, Chenyue Wang, Mi Zhang†, Min Yang
School of Computer Science, Fudan University, China
{ynwang22@m.,jjsun22@m.,wangcy23@m.,mi zhang@,m yang@}fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent studies have noted an intriguing phenomenon
termed Neural Collapse, that is, when the neural networks
establish the right correlation between feature spaces and
the training targets, their last-layer features, together with
the classifier weights, will collapse into a stable and symmetric structure. In this paper, we extend the investigation of Neural Collapse to the biased datasets with imbalanced attributes. We observe that models will easily
fall into the pitfall of shortcut learning and form a biased,
non-collapsed feature space at the early period of training, which is hard to reverse and limits the generalization
capability. To tackle the root cause of biased classification, we follow the recent inspiration of prime training, and
propose an avoid-shortcut learning framework without additional training complexity. With well-designed shortcut
primes based on Neural Collapse structure, the models are
encouraged to skip the pursuit of simple shortcuts and naturally capture the intrinsic correlations. Experimental results demonstrate that our method induces better convergence properties during training, and achieves state-of-theart generalization performance on both synthetic and realworld biased datasets.

1. Introduction
When the input-output correlation learned by a neural
network is consistent with its training target, the last-layer
features and classifier weights will attract and reinforce
each other, forming a stable, symmetric and robust structure. Just as the Neural Collapse phenomenon discovered
by Papyan et al. [24], at the terminal phase of training on
balanced datasets, a model will witness its last-layer features of the same class converge towards the class centers,
and the classifier weights align to these class centers correspondingly. The convergence will ultimately lead to the
collapse of feature space into a simplex equiangular tight
† Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. Illustration of (a) Neural Collapse phenomenon on balanced datasets, where the simplex ETF structure maximizes the
class-wise angles, and (b) Biased classification on datasets with
imbalanced attributes, where the model takes the shortcut of attributes to make predictions and fails to collapse into the simplex
ETF. The color of points represents different class labels and the
shape of points represents different attributes.

frame (ETF) structure, as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). The elegant structure has demonstrated its efficacy in enhancing
the generalization, robustness, and interpretability of the
trained models [5, 24]. Therefore, a wave of empirical and
theoretical analysis of Neural Collapse has been proposed
[2, 6, 8, 25, 26, 38, 40], and a series of studies have adopted
the simplex ETF as the optimal geometric structure of the
classifier, to guide the maximized class-wise separation in
class-imbalanced training [20, 35–37, 43].
However, in practical visual recognition tasks, besides
the challenge of inter-class imbalance, we also encounter
intra-class imbalance, where the majority of samples are
dominated by the bias attributes (e.g., some misleading contents such as background, color, texture, etc.). For example, the widely used LFW dataset [12] for facial recognition has been demonstrated severely imbalanced in gender,
age and ethnicity [3]. A biased dataset often contains a
majority of bias-aligned samples and a minority of biasconflicting ones. The prevalent bias-aligned samples exhibit a strong correlation between the ground-truth labels

12322

