This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

As-Plausible-As-Possible: Plausibility-Aware Mesh Deformation
Using 2D Diffusion Priors
Seungwoo Yoo*1

Source

ARAP

Ours

Kunho Kim*1 Vladimir G. Kim2
1
2
KAIST
Adobe Research

Source

ARAP

Ours

Minhyuk Sung1

Source

ARAP

Ours

Figure 1. APAP, our novel shape deformation method, enables plausibility-aware mesh deformation and preservation of fine details of
the original mesh offering an interface that alters geometry by directly displacing a handle (red) along a direction (gray), fixing an anchor
vertex (green). Using a diffusion prior results in smoother geometry around the armchair handle, as seen in the example (middle column).

Abstract
We present As-Plausible-as-Possible (APAP) mesh deformation technique that leverages 2D diffusion priors to
preserve the plausibility of a mesh under user-controlled
deformation. Our framework uses per-face Jacobians to
represent mesh deformations, where mesh vertex coordinates are computed via a differentiable Poisson Solve.
The deformed mesh is rendered, and the resulting 2D image is used in the Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) process, which enables extracting meaningful plausibility priors from a pretrained 2D diffusion model. To better preserve the identity of the edited mesh, we fine-tune our 2D
diffusion model with LoRA. Gradients extracted by SDS
and a user-prescribed handle displacement are then backpropagated to the per-face Jacobians, and we use iterative gradient descent to compute the final deformation
that balances between the user edit and the output plausibility. We evaluate our method with 2D and 3D meshes
and demonstrate qualitative and quantitative improvements
when using plausibility priors over geometry-preservation
or distortion-minimization priors used by previous techniques. Our project page is at: https://as-plausible-aspossible.github.io/
* Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
For 2D and 3D content, mesh is the most prevalent representation, thanks to its efficiency in storage, simplicity
in rendering and also compatibility in common graphics
pipelines, versatility in diverse applications such as design, physical simulation, and 3D printing, and flexibility
in terms of decomposing geometry and appearance information, with widespread adoption in the industry.
For the creation of 2D and 3D meshes, recent breakthroughs in generative models [29, 35, 39, 46, 47, 49, 53,
56] have demonstrated significant advances. These breakthroughs enable users to easily generate content from a text
prompt [35, 39, 47, 53, 56], or from photos [41, 47]. However, visual content creation typically involves numerous
editing processes, deforming the content to satisfy users’
desires through interactions such as mouse clicks and drags.
Facilitating such interactive editing has remained relatively
underexplored in the context of recent generative techniques.
Mesh deformation is a subject that has been researched
for decades in computer graphics. Over time, researchers
have established well-defined methodologies, characterizing mesh deformation as an optimization problem that
aims to preserve specific geometric properties, such as the
Mesh Laplacian [32, 33, 51], local rigidity [16, 50], and

4315

