This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

UnO: Unsupervised Occupancy Fields for Perception and Forecasting
Ben Agro,* Quinlan Sykora∗ , Sergio Casas∗ , Thomas Gilles, Raquel Urtasun
Waabi, University of Toronto
{bagro, qsykora, sergio, tgilles, urtasun}@waabi.ai
(a) Unsupervised 4D Occupancy

(b) Rendered Point Cloud

(c) BEV Semantic Occupancy

Figure 1. We present U N O, a world model that learns to predict 3D occupancy (a) over time from unlabeled data. This model can be
easily and effectively transferred to downstream tasks like point cloud forecasting (b), and bird’s-eye view semantic occupancy (c).

Abstract
Perceiving the world and forecasting its future state is a
critical task for self-driving. Supervised approaches leverage annotated object labels to learn a model of the world —
traditionally with object detections and trajectory predictions, or temporal bird’s-eye-view (BEV) occupancy fields.
However, these annotations are expensive and typically limited to a set of predefined categories that do not cover
everything we might encounter on the road. Instead, we
learn to perceive and forecast a continuous 4D (spatiotemporal) occupancy field with self-supervision from LiDAR data. This unsupervised world model can be easily
and effectively transferred to downstream tasks. We tackle
point cloud forecasting by adding a lightweight learned renderer and achieve state-of-the-art performance in Argoverse 2, nuScenes, and KITTI. To further showcase its transferability, we fine-tune our model for BEV semantic occupancy forecasting and show that it outperforms the fully
supervised state-of-the-art, especially when labeled data is
scarce. Finally, when compared to prior state-of-the-art on
spatio-temporal geometric occupancy prediction, our 4D
world model achieves a much higher recall of objects from
classes relevant to self-driving.

1. Introduction
For a self-driving vehicle (SDV) to plan its actions effectively and safely, it must be able to perceive the environment
and forecast how it will evolve in the future. Two paradigms

have been developed in order to perform these two tasks.
The most common approach is to detect a discrete set of
objects in the scene, then forecast possible future trajectories of each object [5, 7, 10, 18, 19, 22, 30, 32, 34]. More
recently, bird’s-eye view (BEV) semantic occupancy fields
[1, 6, 14, 23, 26, 29] have become popular as they avoid
thresholding confidence scores and better represent uncertainty about future motion.
These approaches leverage supervision from human annotations to learn a model of the world. Unfortunately, their
performance is bounded by the scale and expressiveness of
the human annotations. Due to the high cost of these labels,
the amount of available labeled data is orders of magnitude
smaller than the amount of unlabeled data. Furthermore,
these labels are typically restricted to a predefined set of
object classes and the object shape is approximated with a
3D bounding box, which for many classes is a very crude
approximation. Thus, rare events and infrequent objects are
seldom included in labeled data, limiting the safety of current self-driving systems.
This motivates the development of methods that can
leverage vast amounts of unlabeled sensor data to learn
representations of the world. Prior works proposed to directly predict future point clouds from past point clouds
[24, 31, 33, 35]. However, this makes the task unnecessarily difficult, as the model must learn not only a model
of the world, but also the sensor extrinsics and intrinsics as
well as LiDAR properties such as ray reflectivity, which is a
complex function of materials and incidence angle. To ad-

14487

