This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ViewFusion: Towards Multi-View Consistency via Interpolated Denoising
Xianghui Yang1,2 ,* Yan Zuo1 , Sameera Ramasinghe1 , Loris Bazzani1 , Gil Avraham1 , Anton van den Hengel1,3
1
Amazon, 2 The University of Sydney, 3 The University of Adelaide

Abstract
Novel-view synthesis through diffusion models has
demonstrated remarkable potential for generating diverse
and high-quality images. Yet, the independent process of
image generation in these prevailing methods leads to challenges in maintaining multiple view consistency. To address this, we introduce ViewFusion, a novel, trainingfree algorithm that can be seamlessly integrated into existing pre-trained diffusion models. Our approach adopts
an auto-regressive method that implicitly leverages previously generated views as context for next view generation,
ensuring robust multi-view consistency during the novelview generation process. Through a diffusion process that
fuses known-view information via interpolated denoising,
our framework successfully extends single-view conditioned
models to work in multiple-view conditional settings without any additional fine-tuning. Extensive experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of ViewFusion in generating consistent and detailed novel views.

1. Introduction
Humans have a remarkable capacity for visualizing unseen perspectives from just a single image view – an intuitive process that remains complex to model. Such an
ability is known as Novel View Synthesis (NVS) and necessitates robust geometric priors to accurately infer threedimensional details from flat imagery; lifting from a twodimensional projection to a three-dimensional form involves assumptions and knowledge about the nature of the
object and space. Recently, significant advancements in
NVS have been brought forward by neural networks [14,
15, 30, 41, 60, 64, 65, 72, 75, 76], where novel view generation for downstream reconstruction shows promising potential [34, 69].
Specifically, diffusion models [19, 51] and their ability
to generate high-quality 2D images have garnered significant attention in the 3D domain, where pre-trained, textconditioned 2D diffusion models have been re-purposed for
3D applications via distillation [4, 31, 40, 47, 49, 57, 63,
* Work done during internship at Amazon

View 1

View 2

2nd Denoise 1st Denoise

Condition

(a) Inconsistent generation.

View 2

View 1

2nd Denoise 1st Denoise

Condition

(b) Consistent generation (ours).

Figure 1. The cause of multi-view inconsistency in diffusionbased novel-view synthesis models. (a) Diffusion models incorporate randomness for diversity and better distribution modeling;
this independent generation process produces realistic views under specific instances but may produce different plausible views
for various instances, lacking alignment across adjacent views. (b)
In contrast, ViewFusion incorporates an auto-regressive process
to reduce uncertainty and achieve multi-view consistency, by ensuring a correlated denoising process that ends at the same highdensity area, fostering consistency across views.

68, 73]. Follow-up approaches [34, 69] remove the requirement of text conditioning and instead take an image and target pose as conditions for NVS. However, distillation [63]
is still required as the diffusion model cannot produce the
multi-view consistent outputs that are appropriate for certain downstream tasks (e.g., optimizing Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRFs) [41]).
Under the single-view setting, maintaining multi-view
consistency remains particularly challenging since there
may exist several plausible outputs for a novel view that
are aligned with the given input image. For diffusion-based
approaches which generate novel views in an independent
manner [34, 69], this results in synthesized views containing artifacts of multi-view inconsistency (Fig. 1a). Previous
work [33, 36, 38, 53, 74, 77] focuses on improving the robustness of the downstream reconstruction to address the
inconsistency issue, including feature projection layers in
the NeRF [33] or utilising three-dimensional priors to constrain NeRF optimization [36, 77], yet these techniques require training or fine-tuning to align additional modules to
the original diffusion models.
In this work, we address the multi-view inconsistency
that arises during the process of view synthesis. Rather than

9870

