This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Progressive Divide-and-Conquer via Subsampling Decomposition for
Accelerated MRI
Chong Wang, Lanqing Guo, Yufei Wang, Hao Cheng, Yi Yu, Bihan Wen*
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
{wang1711, lanqing001, yufei001, HAO006, yuyi0010, bihan.wen}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Deep unfolding networks (DUN) have emerged as a popular iterative framework for accelerated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) reconstruction. However, conventional DUN aims to reconstruct all the missing information within the entire null space in each iteration. Thus
it could be challenging when dealing with highly ill-posed
degradation, often resulting in subpar reconstruction. In
this work, we propose a Progressive Divide-And-Conquer
(PDAC) strategy, aiming to break down the subsampling
process in the actual severe degradation and thus perform reconstruction sequentially. Starting from decomposing the original maximum-a-posteriori problem of accelerated MRI, we present a rigorous derivation of the proposed PDAC framework, which could be further unfolded
into an end-to-end trainable network. Each PDAC iteration specifically targets a distinct segment of moderate
degradation, based on the decomposition. Furthermore, as
part of the PDAC iteration, such decomposition is adaptively learned as an auxiliary task through a degradation
predictor which provides an estimation of the decomposed
sampling mask. Following this prediction, the sampling
mask is further integrated via a severity conditioning module to ensure awareness of the degradation severity at each
stage. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed method achieves superior performance on the publicly available fastMRI and Stanford2D FSE datasets in
both multi-coil and single-coil settings. Code is available
at https://github.com/ChongWang1024/PDAC.

1. Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a widely used noninvasive imaging technique that provides detailed visualiza* Bihan Wen is the corresponding author.
This work was done at Rapid-Rich Object Search (ROSE) Lab, Nanyang
Technological University. The research is supported in part by the NTUPKU Joint Research Institute (a collaboration between the Nanyang Technological University and Peking University that is sponsored by a donation
from the Ng Teng Fong Charitable Foundation).

(a) Existing Deep Unfolding Network

Undersampled
-space

Iteration

Iteration

Final
reconstruction

(b) Progressive Divide-and-Conquer (Ours)

Undersampled
-space

Iteration

Iteration

Final
reconstruction

Figure 1. In each iteration: (a) Existing deep unfolding networks
recover the information in the entire null space; (b) Our proposed
method decomposes the entire null space and selectively retrieves
information within specific segments of the null space, progressing
from those that are easier to recover to more challenging ones.

tion of anatomical structures for medical diagnosis. MRI
scanners sequentially collect data in the frequency domain,
commonly referred to as k-space, from which MR images
are reconstructed. One inherent limitation of MRI is the
protracted data acquisition time, which can cause patient
discomfort and result in artifacts in the reconstructed images due to physiological movements during the acquisition. Thus accelerating the data acquisition process has
been a primary focus in the MRI community. Compressed
sensing (CS) [10, 22] is a common approach to accelerate the measurement acquisition process of MRI. These approaches employ undersampled data in k-space and exploit
sparsity and incoherence to achieve accurate reconstructions. Specifically, traditional CS techniques necessitate
that the underlying MR images exhibit sufficient sparsity
in certain transform domains or learned dictionaries [29].
However, these assumptions can be overly restrictive for reconstructing MR images subjected to various degradations,
limiting the performance of these traditional approaches.
Recent advancements in deep learning have demonstrated superior performance in MRI reconstruction by

25128

