This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MindBridge: A Cross-Subject Brain Decoding Framework
Shizun Wang

Songhua Liu Zhenxiong Tan Xinchao Wang†
National University of Singapore

{shizun.wang, songhua.liu, zhenxiong}@u.nus.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg

New Subject Adaptation

Image Stimulus

Vanilla

MindBridge (Ours)

Image Stimulus

Vanilla

MindBridge (Ours)

Image Stimulus

Vanilla

MindBridge (Ours)

500/8859
Data Points

1500/8859
Data Points

4000/8859
Data Points

Figure 1. Image stimuli and images reconstructed from captured brain signals. Given the limited training data from a new subject
(subj07 from the NSD dataset[1]), our proposed MindBridge can faithfully reconstruct natural images using less data, benefiting from
pretrained cross-subject knowledge. In contrast, the Vanilla method, which represents current methods following a per-subject-permodel paradigm, fails to learn effectively from limited data.

Abstract
Brain decoding, a pivotal field in neuroscience, aims
to reconstruct stimuli from acquired brain signals, primarily utilizing functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
Currently, brain decoding is confined to a per-subject-permodel paradigm, limiting its applicability to the same individual for whom the decoding model is trained. This
constraint stems from three key challenges: 1) the inherent
variability in input dimensions across subjects due to differences in brain size; 2) the unique intrinsic neural patterns,
influencing how different individuals perceive and process
sensory information; 3) limited data availability for new
subjects in real-world scenarios hampers the performance
of decoding models.
In this paper, we present a novel approach, MindBridge,
that achieves cross-subject brain decoding by employing
only one model. Our proposed framework establishes a
generic paradigm capable of addressing these challenges
by introducing biological-inspired aggregation function and
novel cyclic fMRI reconstruction mechanism for subjectinvariant representation learning. Notably, by cycle re† Corresponding author.

construction of fMRI, MindBridge can enable novel fMRI
synthesis, which also can serve as pseudo data augmentation. Within the framework, we also devise a novel resettuning method for adapting a pretrained model to a new
subject. Experimental results demonstrate MindBridge’s
ability to reconstruct images for multiple subjects, which
is competitive with dedicated subject-specific models. Furthermore, with limited data for a new subject, we achieve a
high level of decoding accuracy, surpassing that of subjectspecific models. This advancement in cross-subject brain
decoding suggests promising directions for wider applications in neuroscience and indicates potential for more efficient utilization of limited fMRI data in real-world scenarios. Project page: https://littlepure2333.
github.io/MindBridge

1. Introduction
The human brain, an intricate web of neurons, possesses
the remarkable ability to encode the sensory stimuli that
we encounter every day, making sense of our perceptual
world. While the reverse process, known as brain decoding, aims to reconstructs image stimulus from brain signals,
which are primarily captured by functional magnetic reso-

11333

