This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LMDrive: Closed-Loop End-to-End Driving with Large Language Models
Hao Shao1,2
Yuxuan Hu5
Letian Wang4
Guanglu Song2 Steven L. Waslander4 Yu Liu2,3
Hongsheng Li1,3,5
1

CUHK MMLab 2 SenseTime Research
3
Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 4 University of Toronto

Abstract
Despite significant recent progress in the field of autonomous driving, modern methods still struggle and can
incur serious accidents when encountering long-tail unforeseen events and challenging urban scenarios. On the one
hand, large language models (LLM) have shown impressive reasoning capabilities that approach “Artificial General Intelligence”. On the other hand, previous autonomous
driving methods tend to rely on limited-format inputs (e.g.,
sensor data and navigation waypoints), restricting the vehicle’s ability to understand language information and interact with humans. To this end, this paper introduces LMDrive, a novel language-guided, end-to-end, closed-loop
autonomous driving framework. LMDrive uniquely processes and integrates multi-modal sensor data with natural language instructions, enabling interaction with humans
and navigation software in realistic instructional settings.
To facilitate research in language-based closed-loop autonomous driving, we also publicly release the corresponding dataset which includes approximately 64K instructionfollowing data clips, and the LangAuto benchmark that
tests the system’s ability to handle complex instructions
and challenging driving scenarios. Extensive closed-loop
experiments are conducted to demonstrate LMDrive’s effectiveness. To the best of our knowledge, we’re the very
first work to leverage LLMs for closed-loop end-to-end autonomous driving. Code is available on our webpage.

1. Introduction
Remarkable progress in autonomous driving has been witnessed in recent years with an increasing number of commercial autonomous vehicles (AVs) deployed on public
roads. Generally, state-of-the-art autonomous driving systems can be categorized into two primary approaches: 1)
a modular approach where the system is decomposed into
several sub-modules such as perception, prediction, and
planning, and fixed interfaces are designed to integrate them
Corresponding author.

5

CPII under InnoHK

Instruction
Turn right at next
intersection.

LLM

Watch for walkers up
front!

LiDAR

Multi-view camera

Control

Environment

Closed
Loop

Sensor data

Data Flow
Gradient Flow

Figure 1. We present LMDrive, the first language-guided closedloop end-to-end driving framework. LMDrive takes as input the
language instruction and multi-modal multi-view sensor data, and
outputs control signals in real time to drive in complex scenarios.

together [2, 26, 41, 57]; and 2) an end-to-end approach that
directly converts sensor data to control signals via a neural network [18, 39]. While both of these approaches are
widely adopted and constantly making breakthroughs on
challenging benchmarks, both of them share a limitation
in that they solely rely on fixed-format inputs such as the
sensor data, target waypoints, and action commands, which
restricts the agent’s ability to comprehend multi-modal information and to interact with humans and the environment. On the other hand, large language models (LLMs)
have shown an impressive range of capabilities that approach “Artificial General Intelligence.” This encompasses
language comprehension, knowledge retrieval, and reasoning. Such capabilities could greatly enhance the safety, controllability, and explanability of autonomous agents. In this
work, we seek to answer the question for the first time: Can
we build cognitive autonomous driving systems on top of
LLMs, that can interact with human passengers or navigation software simply by natural language?”
Making autonomous systems understand natural language opens profound opportunities for advanced reasoning
in complex scenarios and efficient interaction with humans,
addressing many previously non-trivial problems. To name

15120

