This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TextNeRF: A Novel Scene-Text Image Synthesis Method based on Neural
Radiance Fields

1

Jialei Cui1 , Jianwei Du2 , Wenzhuo Liu1 , Zhouhui Lian1 *
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China, 2 Southeast University, China

Figure 1. We propose a novel method that leverages NeRF to model real-world scenes and emulate the data collection process by rendering
novel views. In addition, detailed annotations including boxes and poses of each text are provided and photo-realistic text editing and
appearance changing are also achieved based on our method’s powerful geometric modeling capabilities.

Abstract
Acquiring large-scale, well-annotated datasets is essential for training robust scene text detectors, yet the process is often resource-intensive and time-consuming. While
some efforts have been made to explore the synthesis of
scene text images, a notable gap remains between synthetic and authentic data. In this paper, we introduce a
novel method that utilizes Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF)
to model real-world scenes and emulate the data collection process by rendering images from diverse camera perspectives, enriching the variability and realism of the synthesized data. A semi-supervised learning framework is
proposed to categorize semantic regions within 3D scenes,
ensuring consistent labeling of text regions across various viewpoints. Our method also models the pose, and
view-dependent appearance of text regions, thereby offering precise control over camera poses and significantly
* Corresponding author. E-mail: lianzhouhui@pku.edu.cn
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China
(Grant No.: 62372015), Center For Chinese Font Design and Research,
and Key Laboratory of Intelligent Press Media Technology.

improving the realism of text insertion and editing within
scenes. Employing our technique on real-world scenes has
led to the creation of a novel scene text image dataset
(https://github.com/cuijl-ai/TextNeRF). Compared to other
existing benchmarks, the proposed dataset is distinctive in
providing not only standard annotations such as bounding
boxes and transcriptions but also the information of 3D
pose attributes for text regions, enabling a more detailed
evaluation of the robustness of text detection algorithms.
Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method in enhancing the performance of scene text detectors.

1. Introduction
The detection of text in natural images are pivotal in advancing numerous computer vision applications, including industrial automation, image retrieval, robot navigation,
and autonomous driving. Despite the remarkable progress
in scene text detection, the inherent complexity of natural
scenes and the diverse manifestations of text present are still

22272

