This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CaDeT: a Causal Disentanglement Approach for Robust Trajectory Prediction in
Autonomous Driving
Mozhgan Pourkeshavarz, Junrui Zhang, Amir Rasouli
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, Canada
firstname.lastname@huawei.com

Abstract
For safe motion planning in real-world, autonomous vehicles require behavior prediction models that are reliable and
robust to distribution shifts. The recent studies suggest that
the existing learning-based trajectory prediction models do not
posses such characteristics and are susceptible to small perturbations that are not present in the training data, largely due to
overfitting to spurious correlations while learning.
In this paper, we propose a causal disentanglement representation learning approach aiming to separate invariant
(causal) and variant (spurious) features for more robust learning. Our method benefits from a novel intervention mechanism in the latent space that estimates potential distribution
shifts resulted from spurious correlations using uncertain feature statistics, hence, maintaining the realism of interventions.
To facilitate learning, we propose a novel invariance objective based on the variances of the distributions over uncertain
statistics to induce the model to focus on invariant representations during training. We conduct extensive experiments on
two large-scale autonomous driving datasets and show that besides achieving state-of-the-art performance, our method can
significantly improve prediction robustness to various distribution shifts in driving scenes. We further conduct ablative studies to evaluate the design choices in our proposed framework.

Agent of interest

History

Causal agent

Expected behavior

Non-causal agent

Causal intervention

Figure 1. Illustration of a driving scenario showing two vehicles surrounding the agent of interest where one represents a causal factor
causing the agent of interest to slow down and the other is non-causal,
hence poses no impact. Here, PS ← PC would open a backdoor (a
non-causal dashed link) creating a spurious correlation. The proposed
approach first separates causal and spurious factors through the spatiotemporal environment of scene G and then cuts the backdoor path
via an uncertainty-driven causal intervention, inducing the model to
focus only on causal patterns PC when predicting future behavior y,
and discard the spurious patterns PS .

trajectory prediction models for autonomous driving are susceptible to distributions that are even slightly different from
their training data. Such lack of generalizability is mainly attributed to the tendency of the models to overfit to spurious correlations in the training data [45]. The difficulties pertaining
generalizability cannot effectively be mitigated by utilization
of large-scale models and data [47]. These issues are intrinsically rooted in statistical learning, which prioritizes the identification of correlations, exclusively for the prediction task,
without the consideration for their robustness and reusability
under distribution shifts that may occur in practice.
To this end, we frame the prediction problem through the
lens of disentangled representation learning. Specifically, we
seek to force the model to learn disentangled representations
that split the underlying sources of variation in the data. This
could pave the way for separating invariant (causal) from variant (spurious) representations (see Figure 1). In turn, the model
can rely on the invariant features when making predictions,
leading to more robust and generalizable inference.
We formulate representation learning from a causal perspective in a dynamic heterogeneous information network

1. Introduction
Vehicle trajectory prediction is one of the main building blocks
of autonomous driving systems. Prediction captures how the
future might unfold based on the road structure and the behavior of the road users. Accurate prediction of nearby traffic
agents, however, is a daunting task due to the complex spatiotemporal interactions between the road users and the environment. Recently, learning-based methods [12, 21, 36, 43,
59, 60, 72] have become increasingly prevalent in the trajectory prediction domain, achieving state-of-the-art performance
on the existing behavior prediction benchmarks [9, 53, 63].
To be deployed in real-world, besides being accurate, prediction models must be robust and reliable under different conditions, i.e. they must be insensitive to spurious features. However, recent evidence [3, 6, 45, 69] suggests that the existing

14874

