This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Self-Training Large Language Models for Improved Visual Program Synthesis
With Visual Reinforcement
Zaid Khan1

Vijay Kumar BG2
1

Samuel Schulter2

Northeastern University

2

Yun Fu1

NEC Laboratories America

Abstract
Visual program synthesis is a promising approach to exploit the reasoning abilities of large language models for
compositional computer vision tasks. Previous work has
used few-shot prompting with frozen LLMs to synthesize
visual programs. Training an LLM to write better visual
programs is an attractive prospect, but it is unclear how to
accomplish this. No dataset of visual programs for training
exists, and acquisition of a visual program dataset cannot
be easily crowdsourced due to the need for expert annotators. To get around the lack of direct supervision, we explore
improving the program synthesis abilities of an LLM using
feedback from interactive experience. We propose a method
where we exploit existing annotations for a vision-language
task to improvise a coarse reward signal for that task, treat
the LLM as a policy, and apply reinforced self-training to
improve the visual program synthesis ability of the LLM
for that task. We describe a series of experiments on object detection, compositional visual question answering, and
image-text retrieval, and show that in each case, the selftrained LLM outperforms or performs on par with few-shot
frozen LLMs that are an order of magnitude larger. Website:
https://zaidkhan.me/ViReP

1. Introduction
Complex visual queries can often be decomposed into simpler subtasks, many of which can be carried out by taskspecific perception modules (e.g. object detection, captioning). For example, consider the problem of finding bounding
boxes for the phrase “white mug to the left of the sink”. This
is a challenging query for single model such as an open vocabulary object detector. However, this query can be solved
by writing a program that composes task-specific perception
modules with logic: use an open vocabulary object detector
to find a sink and white mugs in the scene, then compare the
horizontal center of the sink and the mugs to find white mugs
to the left of the sink. Program synthesis with large language
models [1] is a promising approach to automate this process,
and recent work has shown that proprietary large language

3

Manmohan Chandraker2,3

UC San Diego

0/n-shot Visual Program Synthesis
Query

frozen LLM

execute
Image

🤖

program

Reinforced Self-Training for Visual Program Synthesis

Query

Answer
Result

reward

Image
execute

🤖

train LLM

program

Result
cannot self-improve

learns what works from direct experience

How can we train a LLM to write better visual programs for a task?
Challenges
Solutions
no ground-truth visual
programs to train on

use reinforcement learning to
learn from feedback

Query program

program

🤖

Result
no fine-grained reward model
for human preferences

construct coarse rewards from
existing vision-lang annotations
Image Query Answer

Figure 1. Visual program synthesis with LLMs has been treated as
a 0/n-shot task where the LLM is kept frozen. This limits opportunities for improvement. We ask whether it is possible to train a
LLM to write more accurate programs. Given that there is no large
scale dataset of accurate visual programs available, we propose
improving the LLM using self-training.

models can write programs for visual tasks [9, 27, 28]. Current approaches for visual program synthesis with LLMs
use few-shot prompting and rely on the in-context learning
abilities [32] of frozen, proprietary LLMs. (Fig. 1)
Few-shot prompting with frozen LLMs for visual program synthesis as in ViperGPT [28], VisProg [9], or CodeVQA [27] has several limitations. The LLM needs to understand the competencies of the perception modules it is
using. A open vocabulary object detector may able to locate a common attribute-noun phrase such as “white mug”
without problems, but struggle with a more abstract phrase
such as “microwaveable mug” [24]. A VQA model might
be able to answer “is the car blue?” without problems, but
fail when logical modifiers are introduced, such as “is the
car not blue?” [7]. In many cases, we do not precisely know

14344

