This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing Multimodal Cooperation via Sample-level Modality Valuation
Yake Wei1 , Ruoxuan Feng1 , Zihe Wang1,2 , Di Hu1,2,*
1

2

Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing
{yakewei, fengruoxuan, wang.zihe, dihu}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
One primary topic of multimodal learning is to jointly incorporate heterogeneous information from different modalities. However, most models often suffer from unsatisfactory multimodal cooperation, which cannot jointly utilize
all modalities well. Some methods are proposed to identify and enhance the worse learnt modality, but they are
often hard to provide the fine-grained observation of multimodal cooperation at sample-level with theoretical support. Hence, it is essential to reasonably observe and improve the fine-grained cooperation between modalities, especially when facing realistic scenarios where the modality
discrepancy could vary across different samples. To this
end, we introduce a sample-level modality valuation metric to evaluate the contribution of each modality for each
sample. Via modality valuation, we observe that modality
discrepancy indeed could be different at sample-level, beyond the global contribution discrepancy at dataset-level.
We further analyze this issue and improve cooperation between modalities at sample-level by enhancing the discriminative ability of low-contributing modalities in a targeted
manner. Overall, our methods reasonably observe the finegrained uni-modal contribution and achieve considerable
improvement. The source code and dataset are available
at https://github.com/GeWu- Lab/Valuateand-Enhance-Multimodal-Cooperation.

1. Introduction
Humans are surrounded by messages of multiple senses, including vision, auditory and tactile, bringing us a comprehensive perception. Inspired by this multi-sensory integration phenomenon, learning from multimodal data has raised
attention in recent years. Recent researchers have well summarized the wide range of applications of multimodal learning and looked at its future development [32]. One primary topic in multimodal learning is how to jointly incor* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Accuracy improvement compared with joint training
baseline of imbalanced multimodal learning methods, on Kinetics
Sounds and our proposed MM-Debiased dataset. Other methods:
OGM-GE [21], Greedy [33] and PMR [4].

porate multiple heterogeneous information. In the early, researchers tried to achieve the union of multiple modalities
via different perspectives, like probabilistic theory based
dynamic Bayesian networks [18] and multimodal Restricted
Boltzmann Machines inspired by thermodynamic [19]
As deep learning improves by leaps and bounds, deep
neural networks with the capacity to learn representation
from a large amount of data have been used extensively
in multimodal learning [31]. Although the deep-based
methods have revealed effectiveness, recent studies have
found the imbalanced multimodal learning problem where
most existing models often have unsatisfactory multimodal
cooperation, which cannot jointly utilize all modalities
well [11, 33]. But deep models’ lack of interpretability
makes it hard to observe what role each modality plays in
the final prediction, and then accordingly adjust the unimodal training. Some methods have been proposed to identify and improve the training of worse learnt modality with
the help of output logits or the scale of gradient [21, 33].
These empirical strategies only consider the global modality
discrepancy at dataset-level, and achieve improvement on
the common curated dataset (as Kinetics Sounds dataset in
Figure 1). However, under realistic scenarios, the modality
discrepancy could vary across different samples. For example, Figure 2a and 2b show two audio-visual samples of motorcycling category. The motorcycle in Sample 1 is hard to

27338

