This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the Scalability of Diffusion-based Text-to-Image Generation
Hao Li1,2 , Yang Zou1,2 , Ying Wang1,2 , Orchid Majumder1,2 , Yusheng Xie1,2 , R. Manmatha1 ,
Ashwin Swaminathan1,2 , Zhuowen Tu1 , Stefano Ermon1 , Stefano Soatto1
1
AWS AI Labs, 2 Amazon AGI
{haolimax, yanzo, lyiwang, orchid, yushx, manmatha, swashwin, ztu, ermons, soattos}@amazon.com

Abstract
Scaling up model and data size has been quite successful
for the evolution of LLMs. However, the scaling law for
the diffusion based text-to-image (T2I) models is not fully
explored. It is also unclear how to efficiently scale the model
for better performance at reduced cost. The different training settings and expensive training cost make a fair model
comparison extremely difficult. In this work, we empirically
study the scaling properties of diffusion based T2I models by
performing extensive and rigours ablations on scaling both
denoising backbones and training set, including training
scaled UNet and Transformer variants ranging from 0.4B to
4B parameters on datasets upto 600M images. For model
scaling, we find the location and amount of cross attention
distinguishes the performance of existing UNet designs. And
increasing the transformer blocks is more parameter-efficient
for improving text-image alignment than increasing channel
numbers. We then identify an efficient UNet variant, which is
45% smaller and 28% faster than SDXL’s UNet. On the data
scaling side, we show the quality and diversity of the training set matters more than simply dataset size. Increasing
caption density and diversity improves text-image alignment
performance and the learning efficiency. Finally, we provide
scaling functions to predict the text-image alignment performance as functions of the scale of model size, compute and
dataset size.

1. Introduction
Scaling up model and dataset size has been the key enabling
factor for the success of LLMs [17, 21] and VLMs [6, 32].
The scaling law [4, 21] governs the expectation of performance as a function of dataset, model size and compute
budget. However, the scaling properties for recent diffusion
based Text-to-Image (T2I) models [31, 33–35] are not well
studied. Though there is emerging trend that T2I models can
be improved with larger denoising backbones [9, 31] and
stronger text-encoders [1, 31, 35], it is still not clear how
to effectively and efficiently scale up diffusion models, e.g.,

Figure 1. Pushing the Pareto frontier of the text-image alignment
learning curve by efficiently scaling up both denoising backbones
and training data. Comparing with the baseline SD2 UNet [34], the
combined scaling with both SDXL UNet and enlarged dataset significantly increases the performance and speeds up the convergence
of TIFA score by 6⇥.

how does the design of denoising backbone influence the
image generation and which components are more effective
to scale? How should diffusion model scale when the training data increases? To answer the questions, it is essential
to understand how exactly each new model improves over
previous ones. However, existing diffusion based T2I models are mostly trained with different datasets, input space
(latent space or pixel space) and training settings. Moreover,
the expensive training cost of high resolution models makes
the fair comparison extremely hard, not to mention exploring new ones. Therefore, a fair and controlled comparison
of different denoising backbones is greatly desired, which
can enable seeking of more efficient models with reduced
training and inference cost.
In this paper, we investigate the scaling properties for
training diffusion models, especially on the denoising backbone and dataset. The goal is to understand which dimension

9400

