This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Directional Encoding
for Efficient and Accurate View-Dependent Appearance Modeling
Liwen Wu1 * Sai Bi2 Zexiang Xu2 Fujun Luan2 Kai Zhang2
Iliyan Georgiev2 Kalyan Sunkavalli2 Ravi Ramamoorthi1
1
UC San Diego 2 Adobe Research
NDE (ours)

Abstract
Novel-view synthesis of specular objects like shiny metals or glossy paints remains a significant challenge. Not
only the glossy appearance but also global illumination
effects, including reflections of other objects in the environment, are critical components to faithfully reproduce a
scene. In this paper, we present Neural Directional Encoding (NDE), a view-dependent appearance encoding of
neural radiance fields (NeRF) for rendering specular objects. NDE transfers the concept of feature-grid-based spatial encoding to the angular domain, significantly improving the ability to model high-frequency angular signals. In
contrast to previous methods that use encoding functions
with only angular input, we additionally cone-trace spatial features to obtain a spatially varying directional encoding, which addresses the challenging interreflection effects. Extensive experiments on both synthetic and real
datasets show that a NeRF model with NDE (1) outperforms the state of the art on view synthesis of specular
objects, and (2) works with small networks to allow fast
(real-time) inference. The source code is available at:
https://github.com/lwwu2/nde

1. Introduction
Some of the most compelling appearances in our visual
world arise from specular objects like metals, plastics,
glossy paints, or silken cloth. Faithfully reproducing these
effects from photographs for novel-view synthesis requires
capturing both geometry and view-dependent appearance.
Recent neural radiance field (NeRF) [37] methods have
made impressive progress on efficient geometry representation and encoding using learnable spatial feature grids
[5, 7, 29, 39, 45, 53]. However, modeling high-frequency
view-dependent appearance has achieved much less attention. Efficient encoding of directional information is just
as important, for modeling effects such as specular highlights and glossy interreflections. In this paper, we present
a feature-grid-like neural directional encoding (NDE) that
can accurately model the appearance of shiny objects.

Ground truth

ENVIDR [26] Ref-NeRF [48] NDE (ours)
0.52 FPS
0.02 FPS
75 FPS

Ground truth

Figure 1. Ours vs. analytical encoding. Methods like RefNeRF [48] use an analytical function to encode viewing directions
in large MLPs, failing to model complex reflections (column 1-2
of the insets). Instead, we encode view-dependent effects into feature grids with better interreflection parameterization, successfully
reconstructing the details on the teapot and even multi-bounce reflections of the pink ball (3rd column of the insets) with little computational overhead (75 FPS on an NVIDIA 3090 GPU).

View-dependent colors in NeRFs (e.g. [48]) are commonly obtained by decoding spatial features and encoded
direction. This approach necessitates a large multi-layer
perceptron (MLP) and exhibits slow convergence with analytical directional encoding functions. To that end, we bring
feature-grid-based encoding to the directional domain, representing reflections from distant sources via learnable feature vectors stored on a global environment map (Sec. 4.1).
Features localize signal learning, reducing the MLP size required to model high-frequency far-field reflections.
Besides far-field reflections, spatially varying near-field

* This work was partially done during an internship at Adobe Research.

21157

