This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mean-Shift Feature Transformer
Takumi Kobayashi†‡
†
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Japan
‡
University of Tsukuba, Japan
takumi.kobayashi@aist.go.jp

Abstract
Transformer models developed in NLP make a great impact on computer vision fields, producing promising performance on various tasks. While multi-head attention, a
characteristic mechanism of the transformer, attracts keen
research interest such as for reducing computation cost, we
analyze the transformer model from a viewpoint of feature
transformation based on a distribution of input feature tokens. The analysis inspires us to derive a novel transformation method from mean-shift update which is an effective
gradient ascent to seek a local mode of distinctive representation on the token distribution. We also present an efficient projection approach to reduce parameter size of linear projections constituting the proposed multi-head feature transformation. In the experiments on ImageNet-1K
dataset, the proposed methods embedded into various network models exhibit favorable performance improvement in
place of the transformer module. Codes are available at
https://github.com/tk1980/MSFtransformer .

1. Introduction
After the renaissance of neural networks, deep models
have been attracting keen attention in pattern recognition
fields. While convolutional neural networks (CNNs) provide promising performance especially on computer vision
tasks, transformer [44] revolutionizes the network architecture. The transformer originated from NLP efficiently
encodes (causal) dependency in a sequence by means of
attention mechanism replacing complicated recurrent networks [19]. It is now distributed across various recognition
fields [16] such as for images [14] and videos [3].
Much research effort has been made to improve transformer networks. In computer vision, a vision transformer
(ViT) [14] successfully encodes images by utilizing imagepatch tokens. Transformer modules on the patch tokens
are capable of extracting non-local visual features [47] beyond the local characteristics exploited by convolutions in
CNN. On the other hand, convolutions are incorporated to

exhibit synergy with the transformers [32, 36, 48, 49] such
as for fusing global and local information as well as utilizing convolutional inductive bias that the patch-token approach misses [12]. The original transformer module is directly embedded even to those sophisticated networks due
to its versatile applicability.
The transformer module itself is improved mainly in
terms of attention which manifests a distinctive mechanism
in the module. Attention is an important process for recognition as studied in neuroscience [28] and the transformer
utilizes attention weights (map) among input tokens, the
size of which is quadratic in the number of tokens; specifically, multiple attention weights are extracted by means of
multi-head attention (MHA) in the transformer. Thus, there
are plenty of works to provide efficient computation of attention such as by hashing [23], clustering [34], low-rank
approximation [2, 8, 22, 46, 51] and IO-aware implementation [11]. The attention maps are also enhanced, e.g., by
aggregating multiple maps [18, 62, 63] and exploring effective similarity (kernel) function [43, 58]. A transformer
model leverages the attention weights to transforming input
feature tokens toward discriminative feature representation.
In this paper, we focus on the process to transform feature vectors in the transformer. In contrast to the approaches
which focus only on attention weights, we consider the
whole transformation process that aggregates feature tokens
in MHA to modify the feature representation via a residual connection. Thereby, rather apart from semantic concept of attention, we regard the transformer mechanism as
a feature transformation to explore characteristic points on
a probabilistic distribution composed of input feature tokens. Through the lens of the probabilistic density function,
we can rewrite the transformer model into a gradient-ascent
updating to seek the local maxima, modes, of the distribution. This analysis inspires us to derive a simple yet effective transformation from mean-shift [40] update of efficient
mode seeking on the distribution. In the mean-shift framework utilizing a multi-head approach, linear projection from
an input feature space into subspace representation is a
key process. We also present an efficient grouped projec-

6047

