This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unified Language-driven Zero-shot Domain Adaptation
Senqiao Yang1,2 Zhuotao Tian2 * Li Jiang3 Jiaya Jia1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 3 The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen

1. Introduction
Being robust to the domain shift is a critical concept in machine learning, as it enables models trained on a source domain to be effectively applied to a new target domain [8, 9,
22, 28]. The domain adaptation (DA) task [5, 10, 11, 16, 23]
may assume the availability of target domain data for finetuning the model. However, this assumption may potentially hinder real-world applications [2, 6, 17, 27]. For example, privacy concerns or data scarcity may prevent direct
access to target data. Therefore, the underlying challenges
caused by the absence of direct access to target domain data
in developing the domain-versatile models should be con* Corresponding Author (tianzhuotao@hit.edu.cn).
1 Senqiaoyang.com/project/ULDA

Train

Previous
Night
head

Encoder

Driving in Rain

Domain ID

Description

Test

Driving in Snow

This paper introduces Unified Language-driven Zeroshot Domain Adaptation (ULDA), a novel task setting that
enables a single model to adapt to diverse target domains
without explicit domain-ID knowledge. We identify the constraints in the existing language-driven zero-shot domain
adaptation task, particularly the requirement for domain
IDs and domain-specific models, which may restrict flexibility and scalability. To overcome these issues, we propose a
new framework for ULDA, consisting of Hierarchical Context Alignment (HCA), Domain Consistent Representation
Learning (DCRL), and Text-Driven Rectifier (TDR). These
components work synergistically to align simulated features
with target text across multiple visual levels, retain semantic correlations between different regional representations,
and rectify biases between simulated and real target visual
features, respectively. Our extensive empirical evaluations
demonstrate that this framework achieves competitive performance in both settings, surpassing even the model that
requires domain-ID, showcasing its superiority and generalization ability. The proposed method is not only effective
but also maintains practicality and efficiency, as it does not
introduce additional computational costs during inference.
The code is available on the project website1 .

Target Data

Driving in Night

Abstract

Rain
head

Snow
head

Shared
head

Ours

Figure 1. Our proposed Unified Language-driven Domain Adaptation (ULDA) task focuses on real-world practical scenarios. In
the training phase, ULDA does not allow access to images of the
target domain and only provides source domain images along with
the textual descriptions. During testing, ULDA requires a single
model to adapt to diverse target domains without domain-IDs, instead of using domain-specific heads as in previous methods.

sidered and decently addressed, ensuring the applicability
of DA techniques in practical situations.
Recently, the development of vision-language foundational models [1, 15, 18, 19, 26] has greatly advanced
the alignment of image-text pairs, enabling effective generalization to novel concepts. This has paved the way
for numerous studies that leverage the zero-shot capabilities of these models to tackle domain adaptation challenges [7, 8, 12, 14, 18]. Notably, PØDA [6] stands out for
leveraging language embeddings obtained from CLIP [18]
to simulate target domain visual representations, and PØDA
tunes the model to fit the simulated features, such that the
target images are not needed.
However, while PØDA demonstrates an impressive ability to achieve zero-shot domain adaptation without relying
on target domain images, we observe that it introduces constraints that should be taken into account in practical contexts: prior knowledge, i.e., domain-ID, is required to se-

23407

