This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual-View Visual Contextualization for Web Navigation
Jihyung Kil

Chan Hee Song

Boyuan Zheng Xiang Deng
The Ohio State University

Yu Su

Wei-Lun Chao

{kil.5,song.1855,zheng.2372,deng.595,su.809,chao.209}@osu.edu

HTML
Elements

Abstract

HTML
Document

Webpage
Screenshot

[button] Return location

Automatic web navigation aims to build a web agent that
can follow language instructions to execute complex and diverse tasks on real-world websites. Existing work primarily
takes HTML documents as input, which define the contents
and action spaces (i.e., actionable elements and operations)
of webpages. Nevertheless, HTML documents may not provide a clear task-related context for each element, making it
hard to select the right (sequence of) actions. In this paper,
we propose to contextualize HTML elements through their
“dual views” in webpage screenshots: each HTML element
has its corresponding bounding box and visual content in
the screenshot. We build upon the insight—web developers
tend to arrange task-related elements nearby on webpages
to enhance user experiences—and propose to contextualize
each element with its neighbor elements, using both textual and visual features. The resulting representations of
HTML elements are more informative for the agent to take
action. We validate our method on the recently released
Mind2Web dataset, which features diverse navigation domains and tasks on real-world websites. Our method consistently outperforms the baseline in all the scenarios, including cross-task, cross-website, and cross-domain ones.

1. Introduction
We study automatic web navigation with natural language
instructions [8, 35]. This problem is crucial as it can potentially streamline and automate a wide range of tasks in our
increasingly web-centric world, from online shopping to accessing information. Successfully solving this problem can
also broadly advance artificial intelligence as it requires understanding and executing various tasks by interacting with
dynamic and complex real-world (web) environments.
Existing work primarily takes HTML documents as the
web agent’s input [8, 10, 30], which define the meaning and
layout of webpage content. Written partially in natural language, HTML documents enable the use of large language
models (LLMs) [1, 4–6, 15, 28, 32, 33] to ground language
instructions (e.g., “Find one-way flights from New York to

[button] Pick-up Mar22

[combobox]

[button] Mar23

[searchbox] Code

HTML Elements

{ele}

{ele}

{ele}

{ele}

{ele}

1

2

3

4

5

Visual Features
Positional Embeddings
Dual-VCR
Representation of {ele}

Encoder

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed Dual-View Contextualized
Representation (D UAL -VCR). HTML elements (e.g., “[combobox]”) may not have clear contexts for solving web navigation
tasks (e.g., “Find the lowest rent truck with a pick-up time at 11
am on March 27.”). D UAL -VCR contextualizes each element with
its neighbors in the screenshot (e.g., “[button] Pick-up Mar22”) to
obtain more informative representations for decision-making.

Toronto.”) in web environments. Moreover, elements in
HTML documents directly define the space of actions (e.g.,
element “[button] Search” with operation “click”), preventing the agent from hallucinating infeasible actions.
With that being said, HTML documents may lack a clear
task-related context for each element, impeding the agent
from selecting the right (sequence of) actions to complete a
task. HTML is quite flexible for web developers to arrange
their code. Even semantically related elements, such as an
actionable element (e.g., “drop-down box”) and its label element (e.g., “Number of Passengers”), may not be located
nearby in the document or the DOM tree. This problem also
applies to elements relevant to solving a task. While LLMs
may learn to capture the context, a raw HTML document
of real-world webpages is often quite huge, consisting of
tens of thousands of tokens, making it either infeasible or
cost-prohibitive to be directly fed into LLMs [8, 10, 30].

14445

