This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Quantifying Uncertainty in Motion Prediction with Variational Bayesian Mixture
Juanwu Lu,*

Can Cui,* Yunsheng Ma, Aniket Bera,
Purdue University, West Lafayette, USA

Ziran Wang

{juanwu, cancui, yunsheng, aniketbera, ziran}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Safety and robustness are crucial factors in developing
trustworthy autonomous vehicles. One essential aspect of
addressing these factors is to equip vehicles with the capability to predict future trajectories for all moving objects in the surroundings and quantify prediction uncertainties. In this paper, we propose the Sequential Neural Variational Agent (SeNeVA), a generative model that
describes the distribution of future trajectories for a single moving object. Our approach can distinguish Out-ofDistribution data while quantifying uncertainty and achieving competitive performance compared to state-of-the-art
methods on the Argoverse 2 and INTERACTION datasets.
Specifically, a 0.446 meters minimum Final Displacement
Error, a 0.203 meters minimum Average Displacement Error, and a 5.35% Miss Rate are achieved on the INTERACTION test set. Extensive qualitative and quantitative analysis is also provided to evaluate the proposed model. Our
open-source code is available at https://github.
com/PurdueDigitalTwin/seneva.

1. Introduction
Motion prediction is crucial for the safety and robustness of
autonomous vehicles (AVs). The objective is to anticipate
the potential future movements of the surrounding objects
accurately. For the past few years, motion prediction has received emerging interests [19, 27, 28, 30, 31], and we have
seen significant progress in prediction accuracy on several
benchmarks [4, 40, 44, 45]. However, it remains a challenging task because the behaviors of traffic participants contain
inherent multi-modal intentions and uncertainty. Therefore,
instead of solely focusing on the prediction accuracy, it is
also vital to identify modality and quantify the uncertainty
about each predicted trajectory.
Existing methods account for the multi-modality primarily through generating multiple possible trajectories in parallel. Considering the procedure for generating the predic* Equal Contributions

tions, these methods mainly fall into two categories: sequential models and goal-based models. During inference,
a sequential model directly forecasts a collection of possible
future trajectories [9, 27]. Despite the prediction accuracy,
most models fail to identify intentions and quantify uncertainty about predicted trajectories.
On the contrary, goal-based models generate a set of trajectory endpoint candidates, namely goals, and then complete the intermediate route connecting the object’s current
location to them [10, 12, 32]. They share a common assumption that these sampled goals are multi-modal and account for most uncertainty. Although one can empirically
extrapolate the intention behind each predicted goal, these
models often rely on an expressive latent variable space that
arbitrarily represents the mixture of all modalities without
a specific architecture design that accounts for individual
modality. Meanwhile, most also ignore quantifying prediction uncertainties or require recursive sampling to approximate uncertainty in trajectories [1], sharing a limitation similar to the direct-regression models.
This paper addresses these limitations by explicitly modeling the multi-modal trajectory distributions. Specifically,
we propose a novel Bayesian mixture model, Sequential
Neural Variational Agent (SeNeVA), that treats each observed trajectory in the dataset as being drawn from one
of the generating processes. Each process has its own neural network parameterizing the distribution, and all the processes share a common upstream feature encoder. To improve the expressiveness of each process, we introduce a set
of latent variables and analytically approximate their posteriors using variational inference. Distribution parameters
directly quantify the prediction uncertainties, while the index of the generating process helps identify intention categories. In addition, we train a separate assignment network
as a proxy to estimate the posterior distribution of mixture
coefficients conditioned solely on the traffic condition. It
helps promote generalization ability across different traffic
scenarios. At inference time, we select one of the mixture
components based on the probability determined by the assignment network and then sample trajectories specific to
that particular mode in the scenario. Our experiment re-

15428

