This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Boosting Spike Camera Image Reconstruction from a Perspective of
Dealing with Spike Fluctuations
Rui Zhao1,2 Ruiqin Xiong1,2 * Jing Zhao1,2 Jian Zhang3 Xiaopeng Fan4 Zhaofei Yu1 Tiejun Huang1,2
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University
3
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
ruizhao@stu.pku.edu.cn
{rqxiong, jzhaopku, zhangjian.sz, yuzf12, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn fxp@hit.edu.cn

As a bio-inspired vision sensor with ultra-high speed,
spike cameras exhibit great potential in recording dynamic
scenes with high-speed motion or drastic light changes.
Different from traditional cameras, each pixel in spike cameras records the arrival of photons continuously by firing
binary spikes at an ultra-fine temporal granularity. In this
process, multiple factors impact the imaging, including the
photons’ Poisson arrival, thermal noises from circuits, and
quantization effects in spike readout. These factors introduce fluctuations to spikes, making the recorded spike intervals unstable and unable to reflect accurate light intensities. In this paper, we present an approach to deal with spike
fluctuations and boost spike camera image reconstruction.
We first analyze the quantization effects and reveal the unbiased estimation attribute of the reciprocal of differential of
spike firing time (DSFT). Based on this, we propose a spike
representation module to use DSFT with multiple orders
for fluctuation suppression, where DSFT with higher orders indicates spike integration duration between multiple
spikes. We also propose a module for inter-moment feature
alignment at multiple granularities. The coarser alignment
is based on patch-level cross-attention with a local search
strategy, and the finer alignment is based on deformable
convolution at the pixel level. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on both synthetic and
real-captured data. The source code and dataset are available at https://github.com/ruizhao26/BSF.

1. Introduction
Vision technology has undergone remarkable advancements
recently. Machine vision in scenes with high-speed motion
* Corresponding author.

Reconstructed Frame

SCIR

Abstract

Spk2ImgNet
WGSE
SNM
(TPAMI 2023) (CVPR 2021)♣ (AAAI 2023)♣

Ours

Binary Spikes

Training-free Method
Data-driven Method
♣

Retrained
Highlight

Figure 1. Illustration of spike camera image reconstruction (SCIR)
and comparison among recent methods [58, 64, 77] and ours. On
the top-left, an orange point means a spike. Our method can better
recover the textures. Please zoom in for more details.

or drastic light changes is a key challenge in emerging applications such as autonomous driving [14], unmanned aerial
vehicles [72], and assistant referees in sports [18]. Traditional digital cameras typically record scenes with a frame
rate of 30 Hz ∼ 120 Hz, which is inadequate to fulfill the
demands of these applications.
Neuromorphic cameras (NeurCams) are a new kind of
bio-inspired vision sensor designed to handle the abovementioned challenges. NeurCams record light intensity at
an ultra-high temporal resolution. One kind of NeurCams
are event cameras [22, 29, 35]. They employ a differential
imaging model, in which each pixel records the scene by
outputting events whenever the change in light intensity in
the logarithmic domain surpasses a certain threshold.
Different from event cameras, spike cameras [8, 18]
employ an integral imaging model. Each pixel accumulates photons from scenes independently. Whenever the
accumulation of a pixel reaches a predefined threshold,
it fires a spike and restarts the accumulation. The reading out of spikes is at a high temporal resolution of 40
kHz. Thus, spike cameras can describe light intensities in
a very fine temporal granularity by reporting each pixel’s

24955

