This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ZONE: Zero-Shot Instruction-Guided Local Editing
Shanglin Li1 ,* Bohan Zeng1 ,* Yutang Feng1 ,* Sicheng Gao1 Xiuhui Liu1 , Jiaming Liu2 ,
Lin Li2 , Xu Tang2 , Yao Hu2 , Jianzhuang Liu4 , Baochang Zhang1,3,5†
1
Beihang University 2 Xiaohongshu Inc 3 Nanchang Institute of Technology, China
4
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, China 5 Zhongguancun Laboratory, China
(a) Editing Results

(b) Comparisons

“Make his
tie blue”

Wear the
dog a hat.
(Add)

Undo all
changes.

Original

Instruction

ZONE (Ours)

+ Edited
Layer

ZONE

Make the corgi
red. (Change)

(Remove)

InstructPix2Pix

Null Text Inversion

Get off
his hat.

+ Edited
Layer

+ Edited
Layer
Text2LIVE

Difference Map

Blended Latent Diffusion

Difference Map

Figure 1. We propose ZONE, a zero-shot instruction-guided local editing approach. Our key idea is to edit and locate precise editing
regions in an image with intuitive textual instructions. We demonstrate a multi-turn editing example in (a) and compare the difference
maps between the edited image and the original image in (b) to highlight our method’s ability for local editing.

Abstract
Recent advances in vision-language models like Stable
Diffusion have shown remarkable power in creative image
synthesis and editing. However, most existing text-to-image
editing methods encounter two obstacles: First, the text
prompt needs to be carefully crafted to achieve good results,
which is not intuitive or user-friendly. Second, they are insensitive to local edits and can irreversibly affect non-edited
regions, leaving obvious editing traces. To tackle these
problems, we propose a Zero-shot instructiON-guided local image Editing approach, termed ZONE. We first convert
the editing intent from the user-provided instruction (e.g.,
“make his tie blue”) into specific image editing regions
through InstructPix2Pix. We then propose a Region-IoU
* These authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author: bczhang@buaa.edu.cn

scheme for precise image layer extraction from an off-theshelf segment model. We further develop an edge smoother
based on FFT for seamless blending between the layer and
the image. Our method allows for arbitrary manipulation
of a specific region with a single instruction while preserving the rest. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
ZONE achieves remarkable local editing results and userfriendliness, outperforming state-of-the-art methods. Code
is available at https://github.com/lsl001006/
ZONE.

1. Introduction
Large-scale vision-language models, such as Stable Diffusion [42], DALL·E 2 [41], and Imagen [45], have revolutionized text-guided image editing by bridging the gap between natural language and image content. Trained on vast

6254

