This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MatSynth: A Modern PBR Materials Dataset
Giuseppe Vecchio
University of Catania

Valentin Deschaintre
Adobe Research

giuseppe.vecchio@phd.unict.com

deschain@adobe.com

Figure 1. Samples of materials from the dataset. Our dataset contains 4, 069 high-quality, 4K, tileable materials with permissive licences.
Each material is augmented, rendered and supplemented by metadata containing its origin, tags, categories, method of creation, and more.

Abstract
We introduce MatSynth, a dataset of 4, 000+ CC0 ultrahigh resolution PBR materials. Materials are crucial components of virtual relightable assets, defining the interaction of light at the surface of geometries. Given their importance, significant research effort was dedicated to their
representation, creation, and acquisition. However, in the
past 6 years, most research in material acquisition or generation relied either on the same unique dataset, or on
company-owned huge library of procedural materials. With
this dataset, we propose a significantly larger, more diverse, and higher resolution set of materials than previously
publicly available. We carefully discuss the data collection process and demonstrate the benefits of this dataset
for material acquisition and generation applications. The
complete data further contains metadata with each material’s origin, license, category, tags, creation method, and,
when available, descriptions and physical size, as well as
3M+ renderings of the augmented materials, in 1K, under various environment lightings. The MatSynth dataset
is released through the project page at: https://www.
gvecchio.com/matsynth.

1. Introduction
Materials are a key component of the rendering pipeline, describing the appearance of objects, for example in terms of
colors, shininess or metallicity. The design of high-quality
virtual materials is a complex endeavor, usually requiring
significant artistic expertise [30]. To reproduce existing
objects and surfaces, material acquisition and generation
have been active research fields for decades [14]. More recently, the field turned to Machine Learning to tackle the
ill-posedness of few images (lightweight) material acquisition [5, 23], and to explore new opportunities in material
generation[18, 50]. Since 2018, most of the field has relied on a single dataset [5] or, when possible, on companyowned large material libraries [1, 28, 44, 50]. As company
owned libraries are typically orders of magnitude bigger
than what is publicly available, they enable very high quality results and experiments with higher resolutions. These
materials are, however, not available to the community, underlining the need for larger, more diverse, public datasets
to enable further research. Such material data are also particularly useful for synthetic data generation, for example,
for object acquisition [8, 24], material-based selection [38],
and numerous applications further from material understanding and authoring [34, 40, 42].

22109

