This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GARField: Group Anything with Radiance Fields
Chung Min Kim∗1 Mingxuan Wu∗1 Justin Kerr∗1 Ken Goldberg1
Matthew Tancik2 Angjoo Kanazawa1
∗ Denotes equal contribution
1
2
UC Berkeley
Luma AI
Hierarchical Asset Extraction
NeRF

Multi-Level Masks

Group Anything with Radiance Fields

Multi-Scale Clustering

Scale

larger

smaller

Figure 1. Group Anything with Radiance Fields (GARField): GARField distills multi-level groups represented as masks into a NeRF
to create a scale-conditioned 3D affinity field (top left). Once trained, this affinity field can be clustered at a variety of scales to decompose
the scene at different levels of granularity, like breaking apart the excavator into its subparts (bottom). 3D assets can be extracted from this
hierarchy by extracting every group in the scene automatically or via user clicks, as visualized here (top right).

Abstract
Grouping is inherently ambiguous due to the multiple
levels of granularity in which one can decompose a scene—
should the wheels of an excavator be considered separate or
part of the whole? We propose Group Anything with Radiance Fields (GARField), an approach for decomposing 3D
scenes into a hierarchy of semantically meaningful groups
from posed image inputs. To do this we embrace group
ambiguity through physical scale: by optimizing a scaleconditioned 3D affinity feature field, a point in the world
can belong to different groups of different sizes. We optimize
this field from a set of 2D masks provided by Segment Anything (SAM) in a way that respects coarse-to-fine hierarchy,
using scale to consistently fuse conflicting masks from different viewpoints. From this field we can derive a hierar-

chy of possible groupings via automatic tree construction
or user interaction. We evaluate GARField on a variety of
in-the-wild scenes and find it effectively extracts groups at
many levels: clusters of objects, objects, and various subparts. GARField inherently represents multi-view consistent
groupings and produces higher fidelity groups than the input SAM masks. GARField’s hierarchical grouping could
have exciting downstream applications such as 3D asset
extraction or dynamic scene understanding. Project site:
https://www.garfield.studio/

1. Introduction
Consider the scene in Figure 1. Though recent technologies
like NeRFs [20] can recover photorealistic 3D reconstruc-

21530

