This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GoodSAM: Bridging Domain and Capacity Gaps via Segment Anything Model
for Distortion-aware Panoramic Semantic Segmentation
Weiming Zhang1 Yexin Liu1
1
AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ)

2

Xu Zheng1 Lin Wang1,2 *
Dept. of CSE, HKUST

zweiming996@gmail.com, yliu292@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, zhengxu128@gmail.com, linwang@ust.hk
Project Page: https://vlislab22.github.io/GoodSAM/

Boundary Information
…

🔒

…

Sliding window
patches

Fusion
…

…
…
Teacher Assistant

60

Ensemble
Logits

🔥
TA Predictions

Local
Adaptation

mIoU(%)

Panoramic Image

Segment Anything
Model (SAM)

65

Enhan
ceme
nt

Student

🔥

bal
Glo ation
pt
Ada

(a)

55
50

S

T

M

T

M

T

S
T

SS

5

DPPASS
DATR
GoodSAM
M: Mini
T: Tiny
S: Small

45
40

Tran4PASS

10 15 20 25 30
Param (M)
(b)

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of our GoodSAM, leveraging instance masks and boundary information provided by SAM, coupled with segmentation logits from the teacher assistant, to obtain reliable ensemble logits for knowledge adaptation to our student. (b) Our GoodSAM
outperforms SOTA methods [37, 41, 42] across various model parameter ranges. Notably, GoodSAM-M achieves comparable performance
to the SOTA methods with only 3.7M parameters.

Abstract
This paper tackles a novel yet challenging problem: how
to transfer knowledge from the emerging Segment Anything Model (SAM) – which reveals impressive zero-shot
instance segmentation capacity – to learn a compact
panoramic semantic segmentation model, i.e., student,
without requiring any labeled data. This poses considerable challenges due to SAM’s inability to provide semantic
labels and the large capacity gap between SAM and the
student. To this end, we propose a novel framework, called
GoodSAM, that introduces a teacher assistant (TA) to
provide semantic information, integrated with SAM to
generate ensemble logits to achieve knowledge transfer.
Specifically, we propose a Distortion-Aware Rectification
(DAR) module that first addresses the distortion problem of
panoramic images by imposing prediction-level consistency
and boundary enhancement. This subtly enhances TA’s
prediction capacity on panoramic images. DAR then
incorporates a cross-task complementary fusion block to
adaptively merge the predictions of SAM and TA to obtain
*Corresponding Author

more reliable ensemble logits. Moreover, we introduce
a Multi-level Knowledge Adaptation (MKA) module to
efficiently transfer the multi-level feature knowledge from
TA and ensemble logits to learn a compact student model.
Extensive experiments on two benchmarks show that our
GoodSAM achieves a remarkable +3.75% mIoU improvement over the state-of-the-art (SOTA) domain adaptation
methods, e.g., [41]. Also, our most lightweight model
achieves comparable performance to the SOTA methods
with only 3.7M parameters.

1. Introduction
The burgeoning demand for omnidirectional scene understanding has stimulated the popularity of 360◦ cameras,
making them highly suitable and popular for applications,
such as self-driving [6, 21, 22, 41]. This has inspired intensive recent research endeavors [8, 36, 42] for addressing
scene understanding tasks, especially panoramic semantic
segmentation. Generally, Equirectangular Projection (ERP)
is commonly adopted to represent the 360◦ data in 2D planar representation 1 to align spherical data with the existing
1 In this paper, omnidirectional and panoramic images are interchangeably used, and ERP images often indicate panoramic images.

28264

