This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Non-autoregressive Sequence-to-Sequence Vision-Language Models
Kunyu Shi

Qi Dong

Luis Goncalves Zhuowen Tu
AWS AI Labs

Stefano Soatto

{kunyus, qdon, luisgonc, ztu, soattos}@amazon.com

1. Introduction
Sequence-to-sequence autoregressive Transformers [12, 34,
42] are deep neural network architectures that map a sequence of tokens, each representing a segment of text as
a vector, onto another sequence, typically representing the
same sequence shifted forward by one. Such models can
handle a variety of tasks [24, 33, 34], whereby the input
(query) text could be a sentence in natural language, and
the output (target) the same sentence in a different language
(translation), or the answer to a question expressed in the
input (question-answering, QA), the name of an entity or
class, etc. The Transformer architecture’s versatile and unified design has led to the development of all-in-one (AIO)
models, such that multiple tasks can be approached as a
sequence-to-sequence translation problem.
Vision-Language AIO Models [29, 44, 48], including
sequence-to-sequence, have proven successful at mapping
multimodal inputs, typically images and strings of text, to
textual outputs that encode tasks expressible as a string
of text, such as visual question answering (VQA), visual
grounding (VG), visual entailment (VE), and image captioning (IC). These auto-regressive sequence-to-sequence
models face the inference cost issue, since they tend to be

Time (ms)

Sequence-to-sequence vision-language models are
showing promise, but their applicability is limited by
their inference latency due to their autoregressive way of
generating predictions. We propose a parallel decoding
sequence-to-sequence vision-language model, trained
with a Query-CTC loss, that marginalizes over multiple
inference paths in the decoder. This allows us to model
the joint distribution of tokens, rather than restricting to
conditional distribution as in an autoregressive model. The
resulting model, NARVL, achieves performance on-par
with its state-of-the-art autoregressive counterpart, but is
faster at inference time, reducing from the linear complexity
associated with the sequential generation of tokens to a
paradigm of constant time joint inference.

800
600

AR
NARVL

400
200
0

x7.2
x1.4

100

x12.7

x2.4

VG
VE
IC
VQA
(a) Inference speed comparison

Performance

Abstract

80

AR
NARVL

60
40
20
0

VQA
VG
VE
IC
(b) Performance comparison

Figure 1. Comparison of inference speed and performance between NARVL (non-autoregressive) and its autoregressive counterpart on four vision-language tasks: Visual entailment (VE), Visual grounding (VE), Visual Question Answering (VQA), and Image captioning (IC). From (a), we see that NARVL speeds up the
inference of AR by a factor between 1.4 and 12.7, while achieving
on-par performance.

unwieldy and need to be executed T times to generate an
output sequence of length T .
Non-autoregressive methods are proposed in some recent Visual-language AIO models [22], which formulate sequence-to-sequence mapping as a bipartite matching problem. This approach excels in tasks where visual
information is key, such as object grounding and detection. However, it’s less effective of handling languagefocused tasks like Visual Question Answering and Image
Captioning. This discrepancy may stem from the nature
of the tasks: in object detection/grounding, tokens are orderless and each token correlates to distinct objects or
boxes, leading to a weaker inter-object correlation compared to the stronger inter-word correlation in sentences
where tokens are ordered. Consequently, the set-to-set,
order-independent translation method is more suitable for
visual tasks than for language-oriented ones.
Main hypothesis: We hypothesize that a transformer-based
architecture could leverage the homogeneity of the input
and output spaces, while enabling more flexible output
spaces. In particular, we are interested in the possibility
of performing joint decoding of a sequence in one step,
rather than step-by-step. We test whether such an architecture could achieve performance comparable to the autoregressive baseline at significantly reduced inference cost.

13603

