This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AVID: Any-Length Video Inpainting with Diffusion Model
Zhixing Zhang1 Bichen Wu2 Xiaoyan Wang2 Yaqiao Luo2 Luxin Zhang2
Yinan Zhao 2 Peter Vajda2 Dimitris Metaxas1 Licheng Yu2
1
2
Rutgers University
GenAI, Meta

“A MINI Cooper driving down a road.” (5.3 s)

“A yellow maple leaf.” (2.7 s)

“A train traveling over a bridge in the mountains.” (8.0 s)

Figure 1. Video inpainting. We introduce a video inpainting method versatile across a spectrum of video durations and tasks. Displayed
frames are uniformly selected from videos of different lengths. The first row in the figure contains the source videos and the target regions,
while the bottom row shows the results. The caption in the middle represents the language guidance and duration for each video.

Abstract
Recent advances in diffusion models have successfully
enabled text-guided image inpainting. While it seems
straightforward to extend such editing capability into the
video domain, there have been fewer works regarding textguided video inpainting. Given a video, a masked region at
its initial frame, and an editing prompt, it requires a model
to do infilling at each frame following the editing guidance
while keeping the out-of-mask region intact. There are three
main challenges in text-guided video inpainting: (i) temporal consistency of the edited video, (ii) supporting different
inpainting types at different structural fidelity levels, and

(iii) dealing with variable video length. To address these
challenges, we introduce Any-Length Video Inpainting with
Diffusion Model, dubbed as AVID. At its core, our model
is equipped with effective motion modules and adjustable
structure guidance, for fixed-length video inpainting. Building on top of that, we propose a novel Temporal MultiDiffusion sampling pipeline with a middle-frame attention guidance mechanism, facilitating the generation of videos with
any desired duration. Our comprehensive experiments show
our model can robustly deal with various inpainting types at
different video duration ranges, with high quality1 .
1 More visualization results are made publicly available here.

7162

