This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Fairness-Aware Adversarial Learning
Yanghao Zhang

Tianle Zhang Ronghui Mu Xiaowei Huang
University of Liverpool, UK

Wenjie Ruan*

{yanghao.zhang, tianle.zhang, ronghui.mu, xiaowei.huang}@liverpool.ac.uk, w.ruan@trustai.uk

Abstract
Although adversarial training (AT) has proven effective
in enhancing the model’s robustness, the recently revealed
issue of fairness in robustness has not been well addressed,
i.e. the robust accuracy varies significantly among different
categories. In this paper, instead of uniformly evaluating
the model’s average class performance, we delve into the
issue of robust fairness, by considering the worst-case distribution across various classes. We propose a novel learning paradigm, named Fairness-Aware Adversarial Learning (FAAL). As a generalization of conventional AT, we redefine the problem of adversarial training as a min-maxmax framework, to ensure both robustness and fairness of
the trained model. Specifically, by taking advantage of distributional robust optimization, our method aims to find the
worst distribution among different categories, and the solution is guaranteed to obtain the upper bound performance
with high probability. In particular, FAAL can fine-tune an
unfair robust model to be fair within only two epochs, without compromising the overall clean and robust accuracies.
Extensive experiments on various image datasets validate
the superior performance and efficiency of the proposed
FAAL compared to other state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have undoubtedly achieved remarkable success across various domains, such as computer vision [31, 46] and natural language processing [41]. However, they still remain susceptible to deliberate adversarial
manipulations of input data [15, 19, 20, 44, 48, 49]. Adversarial training techniques [11, 22, 23, 29, 37] have emerged
as a potential solution, aiming to enhance a model’s resilience against such vulnerabilities. These techniques have
demonstrated a promising ability to enhance a model’s overall robustness, yet the intricate connection between robustness and fairness, as revealed by [43], demonstrates that
the robust accuracy of the models can vary considerably
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Class-wise accuracy of the Wide-ResNet34-10 model
on CIFAR-10 dataset, where AA accuracy represents the robust
accuracy against AutoAttack.

across different categories or classes. Consider a scenario
where an autonomous driving system attains commendable
average robust accuracy in recognizing road objects; despite this success, the system might demonstrate robustness
against categories like inanimate objects (with high accuracy) while displaying vulnerability to crucial categories
such as “human” (with low accuracy). This disparity or
unfair robustness could potentially endanger drivers and
pedestrians. Hence, it is vital to ensure consistent, equitable
model performance against adversarial attacks by assessing
worst-case robustness beyond average levels. This provides
a more accurate evaluation than the average performance,
recognizing the model’s limitations while ensuring reliability across diverse categories in real-world applications.
Figure 1 provides an example, displaying the class-wise
clean accuracy and robust accuracy against AutoAttack [12]
using the Wide-ResNet34-10 [45] models on CIFAR-10
dataset, where both models are trained via standard training and adversarial training, respectively. It comes as no
surprise that the model with standard training is vulnerable to adversarial attacks, yet it manages to attain comparable performance across various classes. In contrast, the
adversarially trained model exhibits a noticeable bias, confidently classifying “automobile” but hesitating with “cat”.

24746

