This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

From Isolated Islands to Pangea: Unifying Semantic Space for
Human Action Understanding
Yong-Lu Li*, Xiaoqian Wu*, Xinpeng Liu, Zehao Wang, Yiming Dou, Yikun Ji, Junyi Zhang,
Yixing Li, Xudong Lu, Jingru Tan, Cewu Lu†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yonglu li, enlighten, davidwang200099, douyiming, junyizhang, lyxing0, luxudong2001,
lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn, {xinpengliu0907, jiyikun2002, tanjingru120}@gmail.com

Abstract
Action understanding has attracted long-term attention.
It can be formed as the mapping from the physical space
to the semantic space. Typically, researchers built datasets
according to idiosyncratic choices to define classes and
push the envelope of benchmarks respectively. Datasets are
incompatible with each other like “Isolated Islands” due
to semantic gaps and various class granularities, e.g., do
housework in dataset A and wash plate in dataset B.
We argue that we need a more principled semantic space
to concentrate the community efforts and use all datasets
together to pursue generalizable action learning. To this
end, we design a structured action semantic space in view
of verb taxonomy hierarchy and covering massive actions.
By aligning the classes of previous datasets to our semantic
space, we gather (image/video/skeleton/MoCap) datasets
into a unified database in a unified label system, i.e., bridging “isolated islands” into a “Pangea”. Accordingly, we
propose a novel model mapping from the physical space to
semantic space to fully use Pangea. In extensive experiments, our new system shows significant superiority, especially in transfer learning. Our code and data will be made
public at https://mvig-rhos.com/pangea.

1. Introduction
Visual action understanding is an important direction in
computer vision and matters to various domains [14, 65].
Generally speaking, it can be formulated as the mapping
from the physical space to the semantic space. Here, physical space indicates the visual patterns (information carrier)
and semantic space represents the action semantics (class).
In terms of the physical space, many works were proposed to extract representations from different modalities
* The first two authors contribute equally.
† Corresponding author.

Kinetics playing violin

Babel kick
Stanford40 phoning

HICO DET
sit on bench

HAG wash bowl

HAA CPR
HAG put / pour sth in kettle

Figure 1. “Isolated islands”. The semantic gap brings a great challenge to general action understanding.

to capture action cues, such as image [42], video [5], skeleton [29], MoCap [25], RGBD [62], etc. However, few
efforts have been made to semantic space design. Previous benchmarks [6, 10, 32] are typically designed according to designers’ choice and incompatible with each other
due to semantic gaps. They have three main weaknesses:
(1) Ambiguity. Similar actions may have different class
names, e.g., clean, wipe, scrub. Though this may
strengthen the diversity in visual-language learning [59], it
hinders machines from learning the subtle similarities and
differences of actions. Besides, the same class may represent different actions, e.g., address means either addressing oneself to something or addressing a conference.
This phenomenon brings both generalization possibility and
challenge. (2) Overlooking granularity/hierarchy. The
datasets are constructed independently, thus typically overlooking granularity, e.g., do housework in dataset A
and clean floor in dataset B, sometimes even in one
dataset. (3) Integration/transfer difficulty. Large models
need more data. However, due to the “isolated islands”, it is
hard to integrate datasets and conclude the “few-shotness”
and “zero-shotness” of classes. We do not know which

16582

