This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Rendering: Controllable 4D-Guided Video Generation with 2D
Diffusion Models
Shengqu Cai1,2,△ Duygu Ceylan2∗ Matheus Gadelha2∗
Chun-Hao Paul Huang2 Tuanfeng Yang Wang2 Gordon Wetzstein1
1
Stanford University 2 Adobe Research

...

...

3D Animation
Figure 1. Generative Rendering is a novel diffusion-based approach to render 3D animated but untextured scenes (left) directly to a stylized
animation (right), with styles specified by text prompts. Our approach offers new levels of user control to image generation models.

Abstract
Traditional 3D content creation tools empower users to
bring their imagination to life by giving them direct control
over a scene’s geometry, appearance, motion, and camera
path. Creating computer-generated videos, however, is a
tedious manual process, which can be automated by emerging text-to-video diffusion models. Despite great promise,
video diffusion models are difficult to control, hindering a
user to apply their own creativity rather than amplifying it.
To address this challenge, we present a novel approach that
combines the controllability of dynamic 3D meshes with the
expressivity and editability of emerging diffusion models. For
this purpose, our approach takes an animated, low-fidelity
rendered mesh as input and injects the ground truth correspondence information obtained from the dynamic mesh
into various stages of a pre-trained text-to-image generation model to output high-quality and temporally consistent
frames. We demonstrate our approach on various examples
where motion can be obtained by animating rigged assets or
changing the camera path. Project page: primecai.github.io/
generative rendering.

△: Part of this work was done during an internship at Adobe Research.
* : Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Artists, designers, architects, and other creators rely on
traditional 3D content creation tools to render computergenerated videos. Unfortunately, existing 3D workflows are
laborious, time consuming, and require expertise. Emerging
generative artificial intelligence tools, such as text-to-image
(T2I) and text-to-video (T2V) models, solve these issues by
automating many of the manual steps of traditional workflows. Video generation, however, is difficult to control
in that it is not easily possible to specify scene layout and
motion in a temporally consistent manner.
Recent approaches have attempted to control diffusion
models. For example, ControlNet [39] uses a pre-trained
T2I diffusion model and finetunes an adapter network that
is conditioned on depth, pose, or edge images to control the
layout. This strategy is successful for generating individual
frames, but results in flicker for video generation. Other
approaches aim at learning the complex types of motions
encountered in natural videos directly [3, 9, 11–13, 21, 33,
35, 38, 40]. While successful in generating smooth motions,
these approaches are not easily controllable. Finally, videoto-video diffusion models [6,10,20,37] enable video editing
and stylization, but they require a high-fidelity video as input,
which is not always available.
In this paper, we aim to combine the power of 3D workflows with T2I models for generating 4D-guided stylized

7611

