This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bayesian Exploration of Pre-trained Models for Low-shot Image Classification
Yibo Miao1 , Yu Lei1 , Feng Zhou2 *, Zhijie Deng1 *
1
Qing Yuan Research Institute, SEIEE, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Center for Applied Statistics and School of Statistics, Renmin University of China
{miaoyibo, tony-lei, zhijied}@sjtu.edu.cn, feng.zhou@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Low-shot image classification is a fundamental task in
computer vision, and the emergence of large-scale visionlanguage models such as CLIP has greatly advanced the
forefront of research in this field. However, most existing
CLIP-based methods lack the flexibility to effectively incorporate other pre-trained models that encompass knowledge
distinct from CLIP. To bridge the gap, this work proposes
a simple and effective probabilistic model ensemble framework based on Gaussian processes, which have previously
demonstrated remarkable efficacy in processing small data.
We achieve the integration of prior knowledge by specifying the mean function with CLIP and the kernel function
with an ensemble of deep kernels built upon various pretrained models. By regressing the classification label directly, our framework enables analytical inference, straightforward uncertainty quantification, and principled hyperparameter tuning. Through extensive experiments on standard benchmarks, we demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms competitive ensemble baselines regarding predictive performance. Additionally, we assess the robustness of our method and the quality of the yielded uncertainty estimates on out-of-distribution datasets. We also
illustrate that our method, despite relying on label regression, still enjoys superior model calibration compared to
most deterministic baselines.

1. Introduction
The past few years have witnessed the trend of training
large-scale foundation models to serve as infrastructures for
processing images, texts, and multi-modal data [3, 7, 12,
20, 24, 44]. The increasing availability of off-the-shelf pretrained models is changing the standard practice for solving
specific downstream tasks for AI practitioners. One fundamental application in vision is adapting pre-trained models
for low-shot image classification. This eliminates the need
* Corresponding authors.

for massive labeled data as in traditional cases, helps initiate
the data annotation process, and supports the construction
of complex recognition systems, among other advantages.
Fine-tuning and linear probing are typical approaches
for pre-trained models-based low-shot image classification [5, 7, 8, 27]. Recently, vision-language models, e.g.,
CLIP [44], have significantly advanced zero-shot classification where the image and semantics of interest are projected into a structured hidden space for nearest neighborbased classification. Nevertheless, the few-shot CLIP with
linear probing shows inferior results [44]. To address
this, researchers have put considerable effort into developing novel CLIP-based few-shot learning pipelines involving
techniques such as prompting learning [59], image-guided
prompt generation [43, 58], adapter tuning [15, 56], etc.
Despite relatively good results, existing CLIP-based
methods usually lose the flexibility to incorporate other
pre-trained models that may contain complementary prior
information. CaFo [57] is a seminal work that explores
constructing few-shot predictors using pre-trained models
other than CLIP and demonstrates outperforming effectiveness. However, the ensemble weights in CaFo are determined heuristically, and the learning requires extensive
hyper-parameter tuning. Furthermore, as a deterministic
method, CaFo is likely to overfit the few-shot training data
and cannot provide accurate uncertainty estimates. These
challenges are particularly troublesome in situations with
limited data and high-risk domains.
This paper aims to assemble CLIP and other pre-trained
models in a more principled probabilistic manner. Given
that previous studies usually deploy a linear classification
head on top of the pre-trained models, we focus on its
Bayesian counterpart, i.e., a Gaussian process (GP) [53].
GP is an ideal model for low-shot image classification due
to its effectiveness with small data. To incorporate prior
knowledge from various pre-trained models, we suggest
defining the prior kernel as a combination of deep kernels
associated with various pre-trained models. Noting that the
prior mean implicitly corresponds to a model that makes
predictions without seeing any data, we specify it with the

23849

