This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-Guided Variational Image Generation
for Industrial Anomaly Detection and Segmentation

1

Mingyu Lee1,2
Jongwon Choi1 *
Dept. of Advanced Imaging, GSAIM, Chung-Ang University, Seoul, Korea
2
Generative AI Team, LG CNS, Seoul, Korea
mglee@vilab.cau.ac.kr, choijw@cau.ac.kr

Abstract
We propose a text-guided variational image generation
method to address the challenge of getting clean data for
anomaly detection in industrial manufacturing. Our method
utilizes text information about the target object, learned
from extensive text library documents, to generate nondefective data images resembling the input image. The proposed framework ensures that the generated non-defective
images align with anticipated distributions derived from
textual and image-based knowledge, ensuring stability and
generality. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, surpassing previous methods even
with limited non-defective data. Our approach is validated
through generalization tests across four baseline models
and three distinct datasets. We present an additional analysis to enhance the effectiveness of anomaly detection models
by utilizing the generated images.

1. Introduction
Identifying anomalous components in industrial manufacturing, a task known as anomaly detection, has been a challenging but important problem to solve. Conventional methods for anomaly detection solve this problem by training
the distribution of non-defective data in an attempt to identify defects [8, 21, 24–26, 28]. Recently, it has also been
proposed to train invertible functions with the images to
Gaussian distribution using the probabilistic method without adaptation to the target distribution [14, 22, 23, 29].
The efficacy of anomaly detection depends on the quantity and quality of available non-defective data, as these factors directly impact the model’s ability to encompass the diverse spectra of target object appearances. Most of all, it is
difficult to visually classify industrial defects since errors
can vary from subtle changes as thin scratches to significant structural defects as missing components. Such diffi* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison with state-of-the-art baselines. Our
method generates non-defective images using a text-guided variational image generation method and utilizes the generated images
as additional training data for anomaly detection. Ours outperforms the state-of-the-art methods across various settings, such as
one-shot, few-shot (5 images), and full-shot training images. For
comparison, we use the metal-nut class of MVTecAD dataset [3].

culty naturally falls into the problem of out-of-distribution
detection, in which a model must differentiate the samples
obtained from the training data distribution from those outside of its range. As a result, it is essential to obtain various
non-defective data that effectively represent the data distribution and are distinguished from defective cases.
However, the industrial field suffers from various data
issues. The first is the issue of imbalanced non-defective
data, where the non-defective data itself can present a nearuniformity with only a few images exhibiting minor differences that qualify as acceptable defects. The second issue
is related to the sensitivity of the data, especially in appearance and level of defectiveness, as they can vary significantly due to the type of machine used and the capturing
conditions. The last one is the potential to wrongly label
defective data as non-defective data by mistake during the
excessive collection of non-defective data.

26519

