This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-FOF: Single-view Clothed Human Reconstruction
via Diffusion-based Fourier Occupancy Field
Yuanzhen Li, Fei Luo∗ , Chunxia Xiao*
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
yuanzhen@whu.edu.cn, luofei@whu.edu.cn, cxxiao@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Reconstructing a clothed human from a single-view image has several challenging issues, including flexibly representing various body shapes and poses, estimating complete
3D geometry and consistent texture, and achieving more
fine-grained details. To address them, we propose a new
diffusion-based Fourier occupancy field method to improve
the human representing ability and the geometry generating ability. First, we estimate the back-view image from the
given reference image by incorporating a style consistency
constraint. Then, we extract multi-scale features of the two
images as conditional and design a diffusion model to generate the Fourier occupancy field in the wavelet domain.
We refine the initial estimated Fourier occupancy field with
image features as conditions to improve the geometric accuracy. Finally, the reference and estimated back-view images are mapped onto the human model, creating a textured
clothed human model. Substantial experiments are conducted, and the experimental results show that our method
outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in geometry and
texture reconstruction performance.

1. Introduction
3D human reconstruction has wide applications in education, entertainment, and AR/VR [4, 5, 20]. Traditional
methods can reconstruct a human’s geometry and texture
by extracting adequate information from multi-view images
[10, 23, 41]. However, multiple-view images for a human
are not available in many scenarios. For example, photos
of people in the smartphone’s album are usually shot on the
single-view. Reconstructing a clothed human from a singleview image is a challenging task [24, 27]. Several issues
need to be further dealt with, including flexibly representing
various shapes and poses, robustly estimating complete 3D
geometry and consistent texture appearance, and achieving
more fine-grained details.
* Chunxia Xiao and Fei Luo are co-corresponding authors

Input

Mesh

Mesh with texture

Figure 1. The 3D reconstruction example of our method for a
single-view clothed human image.

Properly representing a human is one important factor,
as it determines the scale of body shapes and poses that
can be reconstructed. The widely used parametric model
SMPL [21] is based on skinning and blend shapes and is
learned from thousands of 3D body scans. Researchers
introduced clothing displacement to SMPL to reconstruct
clothing details [1, 2]. These methods have limitations
in reconstructing loose-fitting clothes such as dresses and
robes. The visual hull [24], the depth [11, 19], and the
voxel [35, 47] have been also explored. They require significant computational resources. Besides explicit representation methods, researchers proposed implicit neural representation methods [27, 28], using the network to predict the
geometry and texture of spatial sample points. Recently,
Feng et al. [9] proposed a novel 3D geometric representation called Fourier occupancy field (FOF), representing 3D
geometry as a multi-channel image. However, FOF directly
utilizes a 2D Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) to estimate the occupancy field and loses high-frequency information. Such weakness may lead to geometric distortion or
overly smoothing.
The powerful generative model is another important
factor in determining how well the reconstruction results
can approximate real humans. Diffusion model [8] has
substantially succeeded in several computer vision tasks

9525

