This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

APISR: Anime Production Inspired Real-World Anime Super-Resolution
Boyang Wang1
1

Fengyu Yang1,2*

University of Michigan

Xihang Yu1
2

Yale University

Chao Zhang3
3

Hanbin Zhao3†

Zhejiang University

Abstract
While real-world anime super-resolution (SR) has
gained increasing attention in the SR community, existing methods still adopt techniques from the photorealistic
domain. In this paper, we analyze the anime production
workflow and rethink how to use characteristics of it for
the sake of the real-world anime SR. First, we argue that
video networks and datasets are not necessary for anime
SR due to the repetition use of hand-drawing frames. Instead, we propose an anime image collection pipeline by
choosing the least compressed and the most informative
frames from the video sources. Based on this pipeline,
we introduce the Anime Production-oriented Image (API)
dataset. In addition, we identify two anime-specific challenges of distorted and faint hand-drawn lines and unwanted color artifacts. We address the first issue by introducing a prediction-oriented compression module in the
image degradation model and a pseudo-ground truth preparation with enhanced hand-drawn lines. In addition, we introduce the balanced twin perceptual loss combining both
anime and photorealistic high-level features to mitigate unwanted color artifacts and increase visual clarity. We evaluate our method through extensive experiments on the public
benchmark, showing our method outperforms state-of-theart anime dataset-trained approaches. The code is available at https://github.com/Kiteretsu77/APISR.

1. Introduction
As an important subdiscipline of real-world superresolution (SR), anime SR focuses on restoring and enhancing low-quality low-resolution (LR) anime visual art images
and videos to high-quality high-resolution (HR) forms. It
has demonstrated significant practical impacts in the fields
of entertainment and commerce [40, 42, 47, 49, 54]. An
emerging line of work has addressed the problem by extending SR networks to capture multi-scale information or
learning an adaptive degradation model [40, 49]. We argue
these methods lack understanding of the anime domain as
† Corresponding author
* works done at University of Michigan

(a) AnimeSR

(b) VQD-SR

(c) APISR (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparisons between proposed APISR and other
SOTA anime SR methods. Ours present clearer and sharper
hand-drawn lines, better restoration with more natural details, and
do not present unwanted color artifacts. Zoom in for best view.

their techniques are directly transplanted from the photorealistic SR approach.
In this paper, we thoroughly analyze the anime production process, exploring ways to leverage its unique aspects for practical applications in anime SR. The production workflow first starts with hand-drawing sketches on
paper, which are then colorized and enhanced by computergenerated imagery (CGI) processing [62]. Then, these processed sketches are concatenated into a video. Due to the
fact that the drawing process is extremely labor-intensive
and human eyes are not sensitive to motions [9, 32], it is
a standard practice to reuse a single image across multiple
consecutive frames when forming the video. This procedure
in production motivates us to rethink whether it is necessary and efficient to use video networks and video datasets
to train SR networks in the anime domain.
To this end, we explore the use of image-based methods and datasets as a unified super-resolution and restoration framework for both anime images and videos. Creating
an image dataset allows us more flexibility to exclusively
choose the least-compressed video frames as our potential

25574

