This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Feature Tracking via Event Camera
Siqi Li1
1

Zhikuan Zhou1

Zhou Xue2

{BNRist, THUIBCS, School of Software}, Tsinghua University
4

Yipeng Li3
2

3

Li Auto

Shaoyi Du4

Yue Gao1 *

Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence, National Engineering Research Center for
Visual Information and Applications, and Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University

{lsq19, zzk22}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, xuezhou08@gmail.com, dushaoyi@xjtu.edu.cn, {liep, gaoyue}@tsinghua.edu.cn

3D Features Trajectories

y
Stereo Event
Cameras

Stereo Event Streams
Camera 1

Camera 2

z

Reference Scene Image

x

High-Speed
Moving Objects

Figure 1. We present the first high-speed 3D feature tracking method via stereo event cameras and the corresponding high-speed 3D feature
tracking dataset. Our proposed method takes high temporal resolution event streams captured from stereo event cameras as input, and could
predict the long-term feature motion trajectories of multiple high-speed moving objects within the scene at a rate of 250 FPS.

Abstract
This paper presents the first 3D feature tracking method
with the corresponding dataset. Our proposed method takes
event streams from stereo event cameras as input to predict 3D trajectories of the target features with high-speed
motion. To achieve this, our method leverages a joint
framework to predict the 2D feature motion offsets and
the 3D feature spatial position simultaneously. A motion
compensation module is leveraged to overcome the feature deformation. A patch matching module based on bipolarity hypergraph modeling is proposed to robustly estimate the feature spatial position. Meanwhile, we collect
the first 3D feature tracking dataset with high-speed moving objects and ground truth 3D feature trajectories at 250
FPS, named E-3DTrack, which can be used as the first
high-speed 3D feature tracking benchmark. Our code and
dataset could be found at: https://github.com/
lisiqi19971013/E-3DTrack.

1. Introduction
Feature tracking aims to predict the long-term trajectories
of target features, which is fundamental in many computer

vision tasks, e.g., object tracking [36, 37], 3D reconstruction [8, 17], and SLAM [20, 41]. Frame-based feature tracking methods [5, 24, 25, 33, 35] have been extensively investigated in the past decades. However, all existing methods
focus on tracking 2D feature trajectories in the image plane.
In real-world scenarios, objects are moving in 3D space,
e.g., cars are racing on the road from near to far. The tracking of features with high-speed 3D motion becomes essential. Consequently, there is an imperative need to investigate
3D feature tracking methods capable of predicting feature
trajectories for objects undergoing high-speed 3D motion.
Such methods hold significant promise for various downstream applications, e.g., VR, AR, and autonomous driving.
To the best of our knowledge, existing literature lacks established high-speed 3D feature tracking methodologies.
For the 3D feature tracking of high-speed moving objects, the main challenges lie in three folds. (1) With the
limited frame rate of traditional frame-based cameras, the
motion of high-speed moving objects may not be consistently captured due to the blind time between consecutive
frames. Therefore, how to continually record valid motion
information of high-speed moving objects is the first chal-

18974

