This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving the Generalization of Segmentation Foundation Model under
Distribution Shift via Weakly Supervised Adaptation
Xun Xu2†
Kui Jia3
Yongyi Su1 *
Haojie Zhang1 *
1
South China University of Technology
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR
3
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen

1. Introduction
The success of large language models is partially attributed
to the strong capability of zero-shot generalization. This
has called for numerous attention into developing foundation model for computer vision tasks where one of the key
concern also lies in the generalization ability [26, 44, 48]. In
particular, as a promptable image segmentation foundation
model with strong zero-shot generalization, the SegmentAnything model (SAM) [27] was developed by training on
billions of annotated masks. Despite the overwhelming size
* Equal contribution.
† Correspondence to Xun Xu: alex.xun.xu@gmail.com.

Web-scale Source Data

The success of large language models has inspired the
computer vision community to explore image segmentation foundation model that is able to zero/few-shot generalize through prompt engineering. Segment-Anything (SAM),
among others, is the state-of-the-art image segmentation
foundation model demonstrating strong zero/few-shot generalization. Despite the success, recent studies reveal the
weakness of SAM under strong distribution shift. In particular, SAM performs awkwardly on corrupted natural images,
camouflaged images, medical images, etc. Motivated by the
observations, we aim to develop a self-training based strategy to adapt SAM to target distribution. Given the unique
challenges of large source dataset, high computation cost
and incorrect pseudo label, we propose a weakly supervised self-training architecture with anchor regularization
and low-rank finetuning to improve the robustness and computation efficiency of adaptation. We validate the effectiveness on 5 types of downstream segmentation tasks including natural clean/corrupted images, medical images, camouflaged images and robotic images. Our proposed method
is task-agnostic in nature and outperforms pre-trained SAM
and state-of-the-art domain adaptation methods on almost
all downstream tasks with the same testing prompt inputs.

SAM Pretraining
Image
Encoder

Mask
Decoder

🔥

🔥

Box
Points
Mask
Initialize SAM Weights

Downstream Data
w/ Weak Supervision

Abstract

Image
Encoder

❄

LoRA Param.🔥

Box
Points
Mask

Prompt
Encoder🔥

SAM Adapta/on
Mask
Decoder

❄

Self-Training
Losses

Prompt

❄Encoder

Figure 1. Segment Anything Model was pre-trained on a largescale dataset but exhibits awkward performance on diverse downstream segmentation tasks. We adapt SAM through weak supervision to enhance its generalization capabilities.

of dataset used for training, SAM was found to behave awkwardly on certain out-of-distribution downstream tasks, including camouflaged segmentation, medical segmentation,
adversarial attacks, visual corruptions, etc. [5, 21]. This is
likely caused by the distribution shift between the training
data, i.e. the SA-1B dataset [27], and the challenging testing
datasets. These observations motivate us to explore tangible
solutions to make SAM more robust against real-world and
more diverse downstream tasks.
Traditional paradigm towards improving model robustness and generalization often involves costly re-training.
Methods are frequently customized to combat specific domain shifts. For example, domain randomization was developed to improve generalization across real testing domains [6], while adversarial training is commonly used to
enhance robustness against attacks [58]. Applying these
techniques to large foundation model is nonetheless impractical due to the enormous computing resources required for
training the model on the web-scale training data. Therefore, instead of re-training the model, we opt for a more
computation friendly paradigm by adapting or finetuning a

23385

