This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

S2 MVTC: a Simple yet Efficient Scalable Multi-View Tensor Clustering
Zhen Long*, Qiyuan Wang*, Yazhou Ren , Yipeng Liu , Ce Zhu†
University of Electronic Science & Technology of China
eczhu@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Anchor-based large-scale multi-view clustering has attracted considerable attention for its effectiveness in handling massive datasets. However, current methods mainly
seek the consensus embedding feature for clustering by exploring global correlations between anchor graphs or projection matrices. In this paper, we propose a simple yet
efficient scalable multi-view tensor clustering (S2 MVTC)
approach, where our focus is on learning correlations
of embedding features within and across views. Specifically, we first construct the embedding feature tensor
by stacking the embedding features of different views
into a tensor and rotating it. Additionally, we build a
novel tensor low-frequency approximation (TLFA) operator, which incorporates graph similarity into embedding
feature learning, efficiently achieving smooth representation of embedding features within different views. Furthermore, consensus constraints are applied to embedding
features to ensure inter-view semantic consistency. Experimental results on six large-scale multi-view datasets
demonstrate that S2 MVTC significantly outperforms stateof-the-art algorithms in terms of clustering performance
and CPU execution time, especially when handling massive data. The code of S2 MVTC is publicly available at
https://github.com/longzhen520/S2MVTC.

1. Introduction
The progress in information collection technology now permits us to gather multi-view data from the same object,
presenting observations with depth and comprehensiveness.
For instance, brain activity can be measured using functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) and Electroencephalography (EEG) [11, 26]. Benefiting from the consensual and complementary information, multi-view data
have attracted a series of multi-view learning tasks [1, 32].
Among them, multi-view clustering, which groups data
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.This work is supported by the National Natural

Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant 62020106011.

into several clusters by integrating information from different views, has been extensively applied in fields including image processing, computer vision, and neuroscience [3, 29, 36, 43].
Current multi-view clustering (MVC) methods, mainly
based on self-representation learning or graph learning, aim
to find the consensus embedding feature and have attained
considerable advancements [4, 22, 24, 31]. However, for
V views and N samples, these methods require updating
V membership graphs (N × N ) to construct the affinity
matrix, which will be then fed into spectral clustering algorithm [34]. Both storage and computational demands for
these methods scale at a complexity of O(V N 3 ), where V
and N represent the numbers of views and samples, respectively. These methods could be infeasible for large-scale
datasets, particularly when N is massive, and such scalability is important in real-world applications.
To address it, many anchor-based scalable MVC methods have been proposed for large-scale data [20, 30, 37, 42],
where V anchor graphs of size M × N are constructed
from M anchors and N samples (M ≪ N ) to approximately represent V memberships between multi-view data.
According to the differences in inter-view processing levels, these methods can be further subdivided into two categories. The first one relies on anchor learning, emphasizing the exploration of anchor graph consistency across
views, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). Subsequently, the fused anchor graph is employed to construct the embedding feature, which will be fed into a k-means algorithm for clustering [12, 24, 39, 42]. The second one relies on provided
anchor graphs and learns the embedding feature using the
projection matrices, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). It explores the
consistency among projection matrices to acquire the compact embedding feature, which is then utilized for learning
clustering structures [35, 44, 45].
The above-mentioned anchor-based methods either explore the global correlations between anchor graphs or projection matrices. However, their ultimate goal is to learn
the consensus embedding feature, which directly impacts
the clustering performance. Therefore, two questions naturally arise: Why not directly explore the correlations be-

26213

