This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GRAM: Global Reasoning for Multi-Page VQA
Tsachi Blau*
Technion, Israel

Sharon Fogel
AWS AI Labs

Elad Ben Avraham
AWS AI Labs

Roi Ronen*
Technion, Israel

Aviad Aberdam
AWS AI Labs

Roy Ganz*
Technion, Israel

Abstract
The increasing use of transformer-based large language models brings forward the challenge of processing
long sequences. In document visual question answering
(DocVQA), leading methods focus on the single-page setting, while documents can span hundreds of pages. We
present GRAM, a method that seamlessly extends pretrained single-page models to the multi-page setting, without requiring computationally-heavy pretraining. To do
so, we leverage a single-page encoder for local page-level
understanding, and enhance it with document-level designated layers and learnable tokens, facilitating the flow of
information across pages for global reasoning. To enforce
our model to utilize the newly introduced document tokens,
we propose a tailored bias adaptation method. For additional computational savings during decoding, we introduce an optional compression stage using our compressiontransformer(C-Former ),reducing the encoded sequence
length, thereby allowing a tradeoff between quality and
latency. Extensive experiments showcase GRAM’s stateof-the-art performance on the benchmarks for multi-page
DocVQA, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
Document understanding, particularly in the context of
DocVQA, has gained substantial research interest [5, 6,
16, 25, 36, 37] and offers a wide array of practical applications, focusing on data extraction and analysis of single page documents. However, Multi-Page DocVQA (MPDocVQA) poses a more realistic challenge, considering that
the majority of documents, including contracts, manuals
* Work conducted during an internship at Amazon.
† Corresponding author: alongolt@amazon.com
‡ Corresponding author: litmanr@amazon.com

Alona Golts†
AWS AI Labs

Shahar Tsiper
AWS AI Labs

Ron Litman‡
AWS AI Labs

Decoder
C-Former

Compression Transformer

Multi Page Encoder
Doc Sub-Layer
Page Sub-Layer

Global-Local Encoder Block
Doc Sub-Layer

Doc
Attention
Page
Attention

Page Sub-Layer

How many
+ diagrams
are there?

Figure 1. An Overview of GRAM. We suggest an interleaved encoder architecture combining page- with document-attention layers, allowing information to propagate between different pages.
An optional compression transformer (C-former) is introduced to
allow a trade-off between quality and latency.

and scientific papers, often extend well beyond a single
page. Despite the practical relevance of MPDocVQA, it
has received limited attention, primarily due to the absence
of suitable datasets. Two recently introduced datasets, MPDocVQA [33] and DUDE [18], have opened up new avenues for MP-DocVQA research.
Recent DocVQA approaches rely on transformers [35],
at the heart of their architecture. While transformers are a
powerful tool, they face challenges when dealing with long
input sequences [4, 7, 10–12, 27, 38]. This difficulty stems
from the self-attention mechanism, which scales quadratically in terms of computation and memory, with respect to
the input sequence length. Addressing this limitation has
attracted significant research efforts, primarily in the field

15598

