This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsigned Orthogonal Distance Fields: An Accurate Neural Implicit
Representation for Diverse 3D Shapes
Yujie Lu† , Long Wan† , Nayu Ding† , Yulong Wang† , Shuhan Shen‡,¶ , Shen Cai†,∗ , Lin Gao§,¶,∗
†
Visual and Geometric Perception Lab, Donghua University
‡
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
§
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
¶
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
∗
Corresponding author: hammer cai@163.com, gaolin@ict.ac.cn
https://github.com/cscvlab/UODFs
Abstract
Neural implicit representation of geometric shapes has
witnessed considerable advancements in recent years.
However, common distance field based implicit representations, specifically signed distance field (SDF) for watertight shapes or unsigned distance field (UDF) for arbitrary
shapes, routinely suffer from degradation of reconstruction accuracy when converting to explicit surface points
and meshes. In this paper, we introduce a novel neural
implicit representation based on unsigned orthogonal distance fields (UODFs). In UODFs, the minimal unsigned
distance from any spatial point to the shape surface is defined solely in one orthogonal direction, contrasting with
the multi-directional determination made by SDF and UDF.
Consequently, every point in the 3D UODFs can directly
access its closest surface points along three orthogonal directions. This distinctive feature leverages the accurate reconstruction of surface points without interpolation errors.
We verify the effectiveness of UODFs through a range of reconstruction examples, extending from simple watertight or
non-watertight shapes to complex shapes that include hollows, internal or assembling structures.

1. Introduction
Neural implicit representation (NIR) of threedimensional (3D) shapes has emerged as a noteworthy area
of research in computer vision and graphics. Currently,
the most prevalent NIR for 3D shapes is based on signed
distance field (SDF), utilized in various applications such
as shape reconstruction [6, 12, 24, 26, 29–32], or new view
synthesis [22, 36, 37, 39, 41]. For any 3D shape, the SDF
value of each spatial point reveals two properties: (1)
whether the point is inside the shape (indicated by the SDF
This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China (Grants 62322210, 62206046 and U2033218), Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (Grant 22ZR1400200), and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. 2232023Y-01).

sign); (2) the minimal distance among all directions from
this point to the shape surface (depicted by its absolute
value). Despite the advantages offered by SDF based
NIR in multiple contexts, there still exist several scenarios
where SDF is not applicable.
The first scenario arises when 3D shapes are not watertight or contain internal structures. In such instances, assigning an SDF sign to 3D points might be challenging or
inaccurate. To address this limitation and cater to different
types of 3D shapes, researchers have proposed the unsigned
distance field (UDF) based NIR [8, 10, 14, 20, 35, 40]. Losing the sign, a point’s UDF value represents the minimal
distance traversing all directions to the shape surface, irrespective of the point being inside or outside the model.
The second scenario to consider is the accurate reconstruction of surface points from the NIR of a 3D shape. A
common approach for reconstructing surface points from
SDF or UDF is the marching cubes (MC) algorithm [23].
This process is illustrated in the upper part in Fig. 1 (a). A
neural network makes a prediction of the SDF or UDF values at grid (cube) corners, affected by fitting errors. The MC
algorithm applicable to SDF then estimates grid edge points
(GEP) through linear interpolation (see the zoom-in grids
for detail). However, this approximation can be inaccurate
for non-linear local shapes due to interpolation errors. As
a result, while employing SDF based NIR, the reconstruction of surface points suffers from these two types of errors.
Similar fitting and interpolation issues are also encountered
in deep UDF methods, such as those detailed in [8, 14, 35],
where the MC algorithm is extended in various ways to incorporate the sign in the UDF at grid corners. Furthermore,
in downstream tasks like 3D object classification and part
segmentation (see [15, 27, 28, 38]), shapes are often represented by 1024 surface points. The implicit representation
and reconstruction of surface points at this scale requires
large grids in the MC algorithm, further amplifying the interpolation error.

20551

