This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bi-level Learning of Task-Specific Decoders for
Joint Registration and One-Shot Medical Image Segmentation
Xin Fan* Xiaolin Wang

Jiaxin Gao

Jia Wang

Zhongxuan Luo

Risheng Liu

School of Software Technology, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian, China
{xin.fan,zxluo,rsliu}@dlut.edu.cn, {wxl1009,wangjia}@mail.dlut.edu.cn,
jiaxinn.gao@outlook.com

Abstract
One-shot medical image segmentation (MIS) aims to
cope with the expensive, time-consuming, and inherent human bias annotations. One prevalent method to address
one-shot MIS is joint registration and segmentation (JRS)
with a shared encoder, which mainly explores the voxel-wise
correspondence between the labeled data and unlabeled
data for better segmentation. However, this method omits
underlying connections between task-specific decoders for
segmentation and registration, leading to unstable training. In this paper, we propose a novel Bi-level Learning
of Task-Specific Decoders for one-shot MIS, employing a
pretrained fixed shared encoder that is proved to be more
quickly adapted to brand-new datasets than existing JRS
without fixed shared encoder paradigm. To be more specific, we introduce a bi-level optimization training strategy
considering registration as a major objective and segmentation as a learnable constraint by leveraging inter-task coupling dependencies. Furthermore, we design an appearance conformity constraint strategy that learns the backward transformations generating the fake labeled data used
to perform data augmentation instead of the labeled image,
to avoid performance degradation caused by inconsistent
styles between unlabeled data and labeled data in previous methods. Extensive experiments on the brain MRI task
across ABIDE, ADNI, and PPMI datasets demonstrate that
the proposed Bi-JROS outperforms state-of-the-art one-shot
MIS methods for both segmentation and registration tasks.
The code will be available at https://github.com/
Coradlut/Bi-JROS.

1. Introduction
Medical image segmentation (MIS), playing a key role in
medical image analysis, is widely used in clinical scenarios, such as tumor detection, atlas construction, and organ
* Corresponding author

quantification analysis [10, 12, 33, 34, 37]. One-shot MIS
has demonstrated considerable potential for alleviating the
need for extensive manual labeling. Zhao et al. [42] employ
registration techniques to learn the spatial transformations
offline between a single annotated template image and all
unannotated images. This approach enables the model to
propagate annotations from one image to multiple unannotated images, thereby reducing the dependency on extensive
manual annotation. Conversely, many registration methods
[3, 13, 25] incorporate segmentation maps as auxiliary information to aid the registration model in aligning anatomical features more accurately, particularly in areas where
these features are less discernible in original images. These
methods consider registration and segmentation as two independent tasks, and how to effectively combine these two
tasks remains a challenge.
Recent methods [18, 23, 36, 41] have introduced a novel
Joint Registration and Segmentation (JRS) paradigm, which
combines medical image registration with segmentation,
fostering a reciprocal enhancement of both tasks. Specifically, the output of registration serves as an input to the
segmentation model, and conversely, the output from segmentation guides and constrains the learning trajectory of
the registration model. This symbiosis enhances the segmentation accuracy through improved spatial consistency
afforded by registration, while precise segmentation yields
additional structured information to direct the registration
model toward a more accurate alignment of anatomical features. However, most JRS methods [18, 39, 41, 44] tend
to build two independent encoder-decoder structures to perform the registration and segmentation tasks, leading to a
large increase in the overall parameters of the model and
structural redundancy. Several methods [1, 11, 43] have
proposed the use of a shared encoder to concurrently learn
both tasks, enabling rapid and accurate registration and segmentation in a single inference.
However, the approach of employing a shared encoder
still encounters two challenges: i) Inadequate use of deformed image features: existing shared encoder meth-

11726

