This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AV-RIR: Audio-Visual Room Impulse Response Estimation
Anton Ratnarajah

Sreyan Ghosh Sonal Kumar Purva Chiniya Dinesh Manocha
University of Maryland, College Park
{jeran,sreyang,sonalkum,pchiniya,dmanocha}@umd.edu
Visual Cues

Abstract
Accurate estimation of Room Impulse Response (RIR),
which captures an environment’s acoustic properties, is important for speech processing and AR/VR applications. We
propose AV-RIR, a novel multi-modal multi-task learning
approach to accurately estimate the RIR from a given reverberant speech signal and the visual cues of its corresponding environment. AV-RIR builds on a novel neural
codec-based architecture that effectively captures environment geometry and materials properties and solves speech
dereverberation as an auxiliary task by using multi-task
learning. We also propose Geo-Mat features that augment
material information into visual cues and CRIP that improves late reverberation components in the estimated RIR
via image-to-RIR retrieval by 86%. Empirical results show
that AV-RIR quantitatively outperforms previous audio-only
and visual-only approaches by achieving 36% - 63% improvement across various acoustic metrics in RIR estimation. Additionally, it also achieves higher preference scores
in human evaluation. As an auxiliary benefit, dereverbed
speech from AV-RIR shows competitive performance with
the state-of-the-art in various spoken language processing
tasks and outperforms reverberation time error score in the
real-world AVSpeech dataset. Qualitative examples of both
synthesized reverberant speech and enhanced speech are
available online1 .

1. Introduction
Reverberation, caused by sound reflecting off surrounding
surfaces, transforms how a listener perceives the sound once
it is released from a sound source. The transformation is influenced by specific properties of the surrounding area, like
spatial geometry, the composition and material properties of
surfaces and objects within the environment, and the positioning of various sound sources in proximity. For example,
someone speaking or playing music in a large auditorium is
perceptually significantly different from someone speaking
1 https://anton-jeran.github.io/AVRIR/

Target Reverberant Speech

Material Properties

Database

Identify Materials

Panoramic Image

Target Clean Speech

AV-RIR
Source Reverberant Speech

Estimated RIR

Figure 1. Overview of AV-RIR: Given a source reverberant speech
in any environment, AV-RIR estimates the RIR from the reverberant speech using additional visual cues. The estimated RIR can be
used to transform any target clean speech as if it is spoken in that
environment.

in a small classroom [6, 73]. The environmental effect that
any sound goes through because of the transformation can
be quantitatively described by the room impulse response
(RIR). RIR is a fundamental concept that characterizes how
an acoustic space affects sound, essentially representing the
transfer function between a sound source and a receiver, encapsulating all the direct and reflective paths that sound can
travel within any indoor or outdoor environment.
RIR estimation, defined as estimating the RIR component from a given reveberant speech signal (see Eq. 1),
finds its major application in augmented reality (AR) and
virtual reality (VR) [2–4, 50]. Usually, when sound effects
do not align acoustically with the visual scene, it can disrupt
the audio-visual human perception. In AR and VR settings,
discrepancies between the acoustics of the real environment
and the virtually simulated space lead to cognitive dissonance. This phenomenon, known as the “room divergence
effect”, can significantly detract from the user experience
[63, 84]. RIR estimation from real-world speech can help
overcome these problems.
Prior work on RIR estimation mainly deals with recorded
audio signals and does not take into account visual cues.
Directly estimating the RIR from source reverberant speech
has been extensively studied using traditional signal processing methods [18, 25, 35, 48]. However, these ap-

27164

