This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

BOTH2Hands: Inferring 3D Hands from Both Text Prompts and Body Dynamics
Wenqian Zhang, Molin Huang, Yuxuan Zhou, Juze Zhang, Jingyi Yu, Jingya Wang, Lan Xu
ShanghaiTech University
{zhangwq2022,huangml,zhouyx2,zhangjz,yujingyi,wangjingya,xulan1}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Local

Global

×N

“The left hand
eventually
extending the
index finger”

Diffusion
Cross-Attn

Diffusion

(a) BOTH57M Dataset

Body

(b) BOTH2Hands Approach

t

Figure 1. (a) Our BOTH57M dataset contains rich gestures and body movements. (b) BOTH2Hands is the only model that can handle text
prompts and body dynamics as input, generating realistic hand motions at present.

Abstract

The recently emerging text-to-motion advances have inspired numerous attempts for convenient and interactive human motion generation. Yet, existing methods are largely
limited to generating body motions only without considering the rich two-hand motions, let alone handling various
conditions like body dynamics or texts. To break the data
bottleneck, we propose BOTH57M, a novel multi-modal
dataset for two-hand motion generation. Our dataset includes accurate motion tracking for the human body and
hands and provides pair-wised finger-level hand annotations and body descriptions. We further provide a strong
baseline method, BOTH2Hands, for the novel task: generating vivid two-hand motions from both implicit body
dynamics and explicit text prompts. We first warm up
two parallel body-to-hand and text-to-hand diffusion models and then utilize the cross-attention transformer for motion blending. Extensive experiments and cross-validations
demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach and dataset
for generating convincing two-hand motions from the hybrid body-and-textual conditions. Our dataset and code
will be released to the community for future research, which
can be found at github.

1. Introduction
The recent years have witnessed the tremendous progress
of human motion generation, especially for the recently
emerging text-to-motion setting [6, 61, 62, 74]. It enables
novices to conveniently generate desired motions in a natural interactive manner. Yet, realistic human motions require
the generation of companion motions of hands. Actually,
we humans tend to incorporate a wide variety of hand motions with body movements in our daily communications.
The recent text-to-motion advances [8, 29, 62, 74]
mostly focus on generating body motions only. In contrast, the convenient generation of two-hand motions from
text prompts has significantly fallen behind, mainly due
to severe data scarcity. The wider adopted text-motion
datasets [14, 38] embrace limited two-hand motions and
corresponding textual annotations. Only recently, the concurrent work Motion-X [30] provides a large-scale dataset
with expressive human motions and paired text prompts.
Yet, it still lacks detailed annotations for the hand motions,
making the fine-grained generation challenging, let alone
enabling explicit finger-level controls. On the other hand,
various methods [43, 50, 51] synthesize two-hand motions
with body motion as extra conditions. Such a body-to-hand
setting implicitly reasons the inherent correlations of human
motions between the body and hands, and hence effectively

2393

