This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CLIPtone: Unsupervised Learning for Text-based Image Tone Adjustment
Hyeongmin Lee1,∗

Kyoungkook Kang2,∗

Jungseul Ok1,2

Sunghyun Cho1,2

POSTECH 1 GSAI & 2 CSE
{hmin970922, kkang831, jungseul, s.cho}@postech.ac.kr

Input Image

Warm

Cold

Bright

High Contrast

Vintage

Neon Light

Romantic

Midnight

Kryptonite

Figure 1. We present CLIPtone, a text-based image tone adjustment framework trained in an unsupervised manner. With its superior
understanding of natural languages, CLIPtone is capable of performing successful adjustments across a range of text descriptions, including
those previously deemed challenging.

Abstract
Recent image tone adjustment (or enhancement) approaches have predominantly adopted supervised learning
for learning human-centric perceptual assessment. However, these approaches are constrained by intrinsic challenges of supervised learning. Primarily, the requirement
for expertly-curated or retouched images escalates the data
acquisition expenses. Moreover, their coverage of target
styles is confined to stylistic variants inferred from the training data. To surmount the above challenges, we propose an
unsupervised learning-based approach for text-based image tone adjustment, CLIPtone, that extends an existing
image enhancement method to accommodate natural language descriptions. Specifically, we design a hyper-network
to adaptively modulate the pretrained parameters of a backbone model based on a text description. To assess whether
an adjusted image aligns with its text description without
a ground-truth image, we utilize CLIP, which is trained on

a vast set of language-image pairs and thus encompasses
the knowledge of human perception. The major advantages
of our approach are threefold: (i) minimal data collection
expenses, (ii) support for a range of adjustments, and (iii)
the ability to handle novel text descriptions unseen in training. The efficacy of the proposed method is demonstrated
through comprehensive experiments including a user study.

1. Introduction
Image tone adjustment aims for the alteration of the tonal
properties of an image, including brightness, contrast, and
color balance. It is also termed image tone enhancement, as
it has primarily been exploited to enhance the image aesthetics. It is essential for various applications ranging from
photography to medical imaging, and the importance of ef∗ Equal contribution

2942

