This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DIRECT-3D: Learning Direct Text-to-3D Generation on Massive Noisy 3D Data
Qihao Liu1
1

Yi Zhang1
2

Johns Hopkins University

(a)

Song Bai2

ByteDance

“A statue of a black dog”

3

Adam Kortylewski3,4

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

(b)

“A biplane with
yellow wings”

“an astronaut
wearing a colorful
spacesuit”

“a Transformed
“a batman mask”
Bumblebee robot with
intricate body details”

“a voxelized cupcake
made with LEGO”
(c)

“a house with a
garden”

4

University of Freiburg

Random samples of “dog” from the training set. They exhibit heterogeneous
quality and data sources, and have different canonical poses.
Ours + DreamFusion

“a Wall-E”

Alan Yuille1

“an french throne
chair”

DreamFusion

“a DSLR photo of a bear dressed in medieval armor”

“a corgi wearing a crown dressed like Henry VIII king of England”
(d)

Figure 1. Different from optimization-based 2D-lifting methods such as DreamFusion [47], DIRECT-3D directly generates 3D contents in
a single forward pass (a). To mitigate the lack of high-quality 3D data, DIRECT-3D enables efficient end-to-end training of 3D generative
models on massive noisy and unaligned ‘in-the-wild’ 3D assets (b). Once trained, DIRECT-3D can generate high-quality 3D objects with
accurate geometric details and various textures in 12 seconds on a single V100, driven by text prompts (c). DIRECT-3D can also be used
as effective 3D geometry prior that significantly alleviates the Janus problem in 2D-lifting methods (d).

Abstract
We present DIRECT-3D, a diffusion-based 3D generative model for creating high-quality 3D assets (represented
by Neural Radiance Fields) from text prompts. Unlike recent 3D generative models that rely on clean and wellaligned 3D data, limiting them to single or few-class generation, our model is directly trained on extensive noisy and
unaligned ‘in-the-wild’ 3D assets, mitigating the key challenge (i.e., data scarcity) in large-scale 3D generation. In
particular, DIRECT-3D is a tri-plane diffusion model that
integrates two innovations: 1) A novel learning framework
where noisy data are filtered and aligned automatically during the training process. Specifically, after an initial warmup phase using a small set of clean data, an iterative optimization is introduced in the diffusion process to explicitly

estimate the 3D pose of objects and select beneficial data
based on conditional density. 2) An efficient 3D representation that is achieved by disentangling object geometry and
color features with two separate conditional diffusion models that are optimized hierarchically. Given a prompt input,
our model generates high-quality, high-resolution, realistic, and complex 3D objects with accurate geometric details in seconds. We achieve state-of-the-art performance
in both single-class generation and text-to-3D generation.
We also demonstrate that DIRECT-3D can serve as a useful
3D geometric prior of objects, for example to alleviate the
well-known Janus problem in 2D-lifting methods such as
DreamFusion. The code and models are available for research purposes at: https://github.com/qihao067/direct3d.

6881

