This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Taming Mode Collapse in Score Distillation for Text-to-3D Generation
Peihao Wang1 ,* Dejia Xu1 , Zhiwen Fan1 , Dilin Wang2 , Sreyas Mohan2 , Forrest Iandola2 ,
Rakesh Ranjan2 , Yilei Li2 , Qiang Liu1 , Zhangyang Wang1 , Vikas Chandra2
1
The University of Texas at Austin, 2 Meta Reality Labs
{peihaowang, dejia, zhiwenfan, atlaswang}@utexas.edu, lqiang@cs.utexas.edu
{wdilin, sreyasmohan, fni, rakeshr, yileil, vchandra}@meta.com
vita-group.github.io/3D-Mode-Collapse/

Abstract
Despite the remarkable performance of score distillation
in text-to-3D generation, such techniques notoriously suffer from view inconsistency issues, also known as “Janus”
artifact, where the generated objects fake each view with
multiple front faces. Although empirically effective methods have approached this problem via score debiasing or
prompt engineering, a more rigorous perspective to explain
and tackle this problem remains elusive. In this paper, we
reveal that the existing score distillation-based text-to-3D
generation frameworks degenerate to maximal likelihood
seeking on each view independently and thus suffer from the
mode collapse problem, manifesting as the Janus artifact in
practice. To tame mode collapse, we improve score distillation by re-establishing the entropy term in the corresponding
variational objective, which is applied to the distribution of
rendered images. Maximizing the entropy encourages diversity among different views in generated 3D assets, thereby
mitigating the Janus problem. Based on this new objective, we derive a new update rule for 3D score distillation,
dubbed Entropic Score Distillation (ESD). We theoretically
reveal that ESD can be simplified and implemented by just
adopting the classifier-free guidance trick upon variational
score distillation. Although embarrassingly straightforward,
our extensive experiments demonstrate that ESD can be an
effective treatment for Janus artifacts in score distillation.

1. Introduction
Recent advancements in text-to-3D technology have attracted considerable attention, particularly for its pivotal role
in automating high-quality 3D content. This is especially
crucial in fields such as virtual reality and gaming, where
3D content forms the bedrock. While numerous techniques
are available, the prevailing text-to-3D approach is based on
* Work done during an internship with Meta.

score distillation [31], popularized by DreamFusion and its
follow-up works [4, 19, 26, 50, 54, 56].
Score distillation leverages a pre-trained 2D diffusion
model to sample over the 3D parameter space (i.e. Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [27]) such that views rendered from
a random angle satisfy the statistics of the image distribution. This algorithm is implemented by backpropagating
the estimated score of each view via the chain rule. Despite
the notable progress achieved with score distillation-based
approaches, it is widely observed that 3D content generated
using score distillation suffers from the Janus problem [12],
referring to the artifacts that generated 3D objects contain
multiple canonical views (see Fig. 1).
To understand this drawback of score distillation, we draw
the theoretical connection between the Janus problem and
mode collapse, a statistical term describing a distribution concentrating on the high-density area while losing information
about the probability tail. We first uncover that the optimization of existing score distillation-based text-to-3D generation
degenerates to a maximum likelihood objective, making it
susceptible to model collapse. As pre-trained diffusion models are biased to frequently encountered views [12]1 , this
oversight leads all views opt to convergence toward the point
with the highest likelihood, manifesting as the Janus artifact in practical applications. The main limitation of current
methods is that their distillation objectives solely maximize
the likelihood of each view independently, without considering the diversity between different views.
To address the aforementioned issue, we propose a principled approach Entropic Score Distillation (ESD), which regularizes the score distillation process by entropy maximization of the rendered image distribution, thereby enhancing
the diversity of views in generated 3D assets and alleviating
the Janus problem. Our derived ESD update admits a simple
form as a weighted combination of scores for pre-trained
image distribution and rendered image distribution. Com1 For example, it is common that a frontal view of a cat is more likely to
be sampled from latent diffusion models than the back view.

9037

