This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WorDepth: Variational Language Prior for Monocular Depth Estimation
Ziyao Zeng1 Daniel Wang1 Fengyu Yang1 Hyoungseob Park1
Stefano Soatto2 Dong Lao2 Alex Wong1
1
1

Yale University

2

University of California, Los Angeles

{ziyao.zeng, daniel.wang.dhw33, fengyu.yang, hyoungseob.park, alex.wong}@yale.edu
2

{soatto,lao}@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
Three-dimensional (3D) reconstruction from a single image is an ill-posed problem with inherent ambiguities, i.e.
scale. Predicting a 3D scene from text description(s) is
similarly ill-posed, i.e. spatial arrangements of objects described. We investigate the question of whether two inherently ambiguous modalities can be used in conjunction to
produce metric-scaled reconstructions. To test this, we focus on monocular depth estimation, the problem of predicting a dense depth map from a single image, but with an
additional text caption describing the scene. To this end,
we begin by encoding the text caption as a mean and standard deviation; using a variational framework, we learn the
distribution of the plausible metric reconstructions of 3D
scenes corresponding to the text captions as a prior. To
“select” a specific reconstruction or depth map, we encode
the given image through a conditional sampler that samples
from the latent space of the variational text encoder, which
is then decoded to the output depth map. Our approach is
trained alternatingly between the text and image branches:
in one optimization step, we predict the mean and standard
deviation from the text description and sample from a standard Gaussian, and in the other, we sample using a (image) conditional sampler. Once trained, we directly predict
depth from the encoded text using the conditional sampler.
We demonstrate our approach on indoor (NYUv2) and outdoor (KITTI) scenarios, where we show that language can
consistently improve performance in both. Code: https:
//github.com/Adonis-galaxy/WorDepth.

1. Introduction
The process of imaging is a surjection from a 3D scene
to the 2D image domain, where infinitely many 3D scenes
can map to the same image. Its inverse problem, estimating
the 3D scene structure from a single image, i.e., monocular
depth estimation, is therefore ill-posed with inherent ambi-

Infinitely many 3D scenes

Metric-scale depth map

Infinitely many 3D scenes

Figure 1. Language as a prior for depth estimation. Depth
estimation from a single image is an ill-posed problem (i.e., scale),
and likewise from text captions (i.e., layout). Can two inherently
ambiguous modalities resolve metric-scaled depth estimates?

guity, such as the scale of the reconstruction. Consequently,
induction is necessary, and depth estimation becomes drawing a scene with maximum likelihood from the distribution of all possible scenes, conditioned on the image. This
conditional scene distribution is learned by a deep neural
network on a chosen training set. While an ideal training
set should accurately reflect this distribution, practical challenges arise due to the scarcity of well-established largescale depth datasets. A crucial question arises: Can any
priors, other than the training set, be leveraged to calibrate
the learned scene distribution to true real-world statistics?
These priors may come in many forms, from generic priors such as local smoothness and connectivity [19, 22, 66,
98] or object orientation [15] that may be imposed as a part
of the training objective (regularizer) to specific inductive
biases realized as architectural designs (layers) [65] or a collection object shapes [14]. While generic priors are suitable
for a wide variety of scenes, they typically lack specificity,
i.e., size or shape of objects within a specific 3D scene. On

9708

