This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

In Search of a Data Transformation That Accelerates Neural Field Training
Junwon Seo* Sangyoon Lee∗ Kwang In Kim Jaeho Lee
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH)
{junwon.seo, sangyoon.lee, kimkin, jaeho.lee}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Neural field is an emerging paradigm in data representation that trains a neural network to approximate the given
signal. A key obstacle that prevents its widespread adoption
is the encoding speed—generating neural fields requires an
overfitting of a neural network, which can take a significant
number of SGD steps to reach the desired fidelity level. In
this paper, we delve into the impacts of data transformations
on the speed of neural field training, specifically focusing
on how permuting pixel locations affect the convergence
speed of SGD. Counterintuitively, we find that randomly
permuting the pixel locations can considerably accelerate
the training. To explain this phenomenon, we examine the
neural field training through the lens of PSNR curves, loss
landscapes, and error patterns. Our analyses suggest that
the random pixel permutations remove the easy-to-fit patterns, which facilitate easy optimization in the early stage
but hinder capturing fine details of the signal.1

1. Introduction
Neural field is a form of data representation that parameterizes each target signal as a neural network that maps spatiotemporal coordinates to the signal values [33]. For example, a colored image can be represented by a model that
maps (X,Y) pixel coordinates to the corresponding (R,G,B)
values. This parameterization enjoys many advantages in
faithfully and efficiently representing high-dimensional signals with fine detail, and thus is being widely used for modeling signals of various modalities, such as image [4], video
[10], 3D scene [19], or spherical data [8].
A key obstacle that prevents the widespread adoption of
neural fields is their training cost. To represent each datum as a neural field, one must train a neural network using
many SGD iterations. For instance, NeRF requires at least
12 hours of training time on GPUs to represent a single 3D
scene [19]. Representing a set of data thus requires a considerable amount of computation and time, making it very
* equal contribution
1 code: https://github.com/effl-lab/DT4Neural-Field

difficult to develop practical applications of neural fields.
Many prior works view the “optimization bias” as a major cause behind the long training time of neural fields [29].
In particular, the spectral bias of the SGD-based training is
known to bias the neural network to prioritize fitting the
low-frequency components of the target signal and leave
high-frequency components for the late stage of training
[22]. It has been observed that such a tendency greatly hinders the neural fields from expressing natural data (e.g., images) with fine, high-frequency details [29, 37].
The prevailing strategy to mitigate such bias is to introduce a useful prior (or inductive bias) that can help neutralize the negative effects of the bias. One popular approach is
to develop new network components that bring a favorable
architectural prior, such as the Fourier features [19], sinusoidal activation [27], or spatial encoding [18, 20]. Other
works also attempt to introduce the prior in the form of initial parameters that have been meta-learned from a large set
of signals [26, 30]. Such meta-learned initializations tend
to have rich high-frequency spectra, which can help fitting
natural signals within a small number of SGD steps [30].
In this paper, we approach the problem from a different
angle. In particular, we ask the following question:
“Can we exploit the optimization bias of SGD,
instead of fighting against it?”
Precisely, we ask whether we can transform the datum in a
way that the optimization bias acts favorably in fitting the
transformed data with a neural field. If there exists such a
transformation, and if it admits an efficiently computable
inverse, we may be able to use the following strategy to
reduce the neural field training cost: we train a neural field
that expresses the transformed signal, and the original signal
can be recovered from the model by applying an inverse
transformation to the signal generated by the model (Fig. 1).
Contribution. As a first step to answer this question, we
conduct an extensive empirical study on how applying simple data transformations affect the computational cost of
training the corresponding neural field. In particular, we
compare the number of SGD steps needed to fit the transformed data to a certain fidelity level (e.g., PSNR 50 for
images), with the steps to fit the original data. We try to-

4830

