This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V IT-L ENS: Towards Omni-modal Representations
Weixian Lei1,2 Yixiao Ge2,3† Kun Yi2 Jianfeng Zhang1 Difei Gao1
Dylan Sun2 Yuying Ge3 Ying Shan2,3 Mike Zheng Shou1†
†

1

Corresponding authors

Show Lab, National University of Singapore

2

ARC Lab, Tencent PCG

MN40 ZS
O-LVIS ZS

Image

IN-EEG

O-LVIS ZS

TAG LP

(No LVIS Train)

EEG

Point Cloud

VGGS ZS
Sofa

Tactile

SUN-D

Clotho Ret
ZS
NYU-D ZS

Audio

Tencent AI Lab

Describe this
object in detail.

A potted plant sitting in a
ceramic pot on a table. It
appears to be a bamboolike species…

Describe what
you perceive.

A cute dog is sitting on the
chair, enjoying the fireworks
outside.

Fireworks

SONN ZS

Depth

3

Audioset
ViT-Lens

ESC ZS
Dog

Waves

Generate a real
image based on
what you perceive.

Here is the
image.

Add Halloween
atmosphere.

Here is the
image.

Generate an image
to combine these.

Here is the
image.

Previous methods

Figure 1. V IT-L ENS for omni-modal representation learning. A) V IT-L ENS consistently enhances the performance of understanding
tasks, such as classification, zero-shot classification (ZS) and linear probing (LP), across 3D point cloud([48]), depth([28]), audio([28]),
tactile([82]), and EEG([4]) modalities. The citations represent the compared previous methods. Further details in Sec. 4. B) By plugging
V IT-L ENS into multimodal foundation models, it enables emergent applications “out-of-the-box”, including Any-modality Captioning/QA,
Any-modality-to-Image Generation and text-guided Any-modality-to-Image editing, to name a few.

Abstract
Aiming to advance AI agents, large foundation models
significantly improve reasoning and instruction execution,
yet the current focus on vision and language neglects the
potential of perceiving diverse modalities in open-world environments. However, the success of data-driven vision and
language models is costly or even infeasible to be reproduced
for rare modalities. In this paper, we present V IT-L ENS that
facilitates efficient omni-modal representation learning by
perceiving novel modalities with a pretrained-ViT and aligning them to a pre-defined space. Specifically, the modalityspecific lens is tuned to project any-modal signals to an
intermediate embedding space, which are then processed
by a strong ViT with pre-trained visual knowledge. The encoded representations are optimized toward aligning with
the modal-independent space, pre-defined by off-the-shelf
foundation models. V IT-L ENS provides a unified solution
for representation learning of increasing modalities with two
appealing advantages: (i) Unlocking the great potential of
pretrained-ViTs to novel modalities effectively with efficient

parameters and data regime; (ii) Enabling emergent downstream capabilities through modality alignment and shared
ViT parameters. We tailor V IT-L ENS to learn representations for 3D point cloud, depth, audio, tactile and EEG, and
set new state-of-the-art results across various understanding tasks, such as zero-shot classification. By seamlessly
integrating V IT-L ENS into Multimodal Foundation Models, we enable Any-modality to Text and Image Generation
in a zero-shot manner. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/TencentARC/ViT-Lens.

1. Introduction
Humans interact with the world through various sensory
systems like vision, audition, touch, smell, and taste. To
advance versatile AI agents, deep learning models need to
replicate these human-like multi-sensory abilities and tackle
varied user-specified tasks. For instance, visually interpreting road signs to ensure our safe driving, listening to sirens
to respond to emergency vehicles, and tactually assessing
clothing fabric quality to offer shopping guidance. Among

26647

