This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-IF: Leveraging Semantic Text Guidance for Degradation-Aware and
Interactive Image Fusion
Xunpeng Yi, Han Xu, Hao Zhang, Linfeng Tang, Jiayi Ma*
Electronic Information School, Wuhan University, Wuhan 430072, China
{yixunpeng, xu han}@whu.edu.cn, {zhpersonalbox, linfeng0419, jyma2010}@gmail.com

Abstract
Image fusion aims to combine information from different source images to create a comprehensively representative image. Existing fusion methods are typically helpless in
dealing with degradations in low-quality source images and
non-interactive to multiple subjective and objective needs.
To solve them, we introduce a novel approach that leverages
semantic text guidance image fusion model for degradationaware and interactive image fusion task, termed as TextIF. It innovatively extends the classical image fusion to the
text guided image fusion along with the ability to harmoniously address the degradation and interaction issues during fusion. Through the text semantic encoder and semantic
interaction fusion decoder, Text-IF is accessible to the allin-one infrared and visible image degradation-aware processing and the interactive flexible fusion outcomes. In this
way, Text-IF achieves not only multi-modal image fusion,
but also multi-modal information fusion. Extensive experiments prove that our proposed text guided image fusion
strategy has obvious advantages over SOTA methods in the
image fusion performance and degradation treatment. The
code is available at https://github.com/XunpengYi/Text-IF.

1. Introduction
Image fusion is a prominent field within the domain of digital image processing [15, 27, 35]. Single-modal images
can only capture partial representation of the scene. Multimodal images allow for the effective acquisition of more
comprehensive representation. As an important representative, visible images provide the reflectance-based visual
information, akin to human vision. Infrared images provide
thermal radiation-based information, more valuable for detecting thermal targets and observing nighttime activities.
The infrared and visible image fusion focuses on fusing the
complementary information of infrared and visible images,
yielding high-quality fusion images [18–20, 28, 38, 39, 43].
* Corresponding author

complex scenes,
degradation

low-quality infrared
and visible images

Fusion
Network

helpless
and
non-interactive

not well-done,
tedious and
non-interactive

low-quality
fusion image

fusion image

(a) Simple fusion approach

low-quality infrared
and visible images

SOTA Image
Restoration Model
Fusion
Network

predefined
fusion loss

Text

low-quality infrared
and visible images

(b) Separated approach

semantic guidance
great and interactive!

Text-Image Fusion
Network (all in one)

user-required
fusion image

(c) Proposed text guided image fusion approach

Figure 1. Fusion approaches for complex scenes with degradations. (a) simple fusion approach: treating image fusion with
predefined fusion loss and not applicable to complex scenes with
degradations. (b) separated approach: requiring frequent restoration methods switching according to the type of degradations,
which is troublesome and not well-done. (c) proposed text guided
image fusion approach: achieving interactive and high-quality fusion image without tedious replacement of models.

Limited by the conditions of environments, the originally acquired infrared and visible images may suffer from
degradations and show low fusion image quality. The visible images are susceptible to degradation issues, e.g., low
light, over exposure, etc. The infrared images are inevitably
affected by noise (including thermal, electronic, and environmental noise), diminished contrast, and other associated
effects. Current fusion methods lack the capability to adaptively solve the degradations, leading to the low-quality fusion image. Furthermore, relying on manual pre-processing
to enhance the image has the problems of flexibility and efficiency [29]. Therefore, it is of practical interest to study
a model that harmonises degradation-aware processing and
interactive fusion.
Designing a model for individualized degradation to
achieve image enhancement and fusion is feasible. However, most of image fusion tasks need to be carried out in
various complex conditions around the clock. As shown in

27026

