This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MonoCD: Monocular 3D Object Detection with Complementary Depths
Longfei Yan1
Pei Yan1
Shengzhou Xiong1
Xuanyu Xiang1
Yihua Tan1 *
𝑍
1
Hubei Engineering Research Center of Machine Vision and𝑍 Intelligent 𝑍
Systems,
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China
∗

∗

{longfeiyan, yanpei}@hust.edu.cn, xiongshengzhou@126.com, {xuanyuxiang, yhtan}@hust.edu.cn
𝑍

𝑍∗

𝑍∗

𝑍

Abstract

Monocular 3D object detection has attracted widespread
attention due to its potential to accurately obtain object 3D
𝑍∗ 𝑍
𝑍
𝑍 𝑍 𝑍∗
localization from a single image at a low cost. Depth escoup.
comp.
timation is an essential but challenging subtask of monoc(a)
𝑧
ular 3D object detection due to the ill-posedness of 2D to
axis
𝑦
3D mapping. Many methods explore multiple local depth
𝑦
𝐻
clues such as object heights and keypoints and then formu𝐻
𝑦
late the object depth estimation as an ensemble of multi𝐻∗
ple depth predictions to mitigate the insufficiency of singleGround
depth information. However, the errors of existing multi𝑍
𝑍∗
ple depths tend to have the same sign, which hinders them
𝑍
from neutralizing each other and limits the overall accu(b)
racy of combined depth. To alleviate this problem, we propose to increase the complementarity of depths with two
Figure 1. (a) Comparison of 𝑧coupling(coup) and complemennovel designs. First, we add a new depth prediction branch
tary(comp) multi-depth with two
depth branches Z1 and Z2 , where
𝑦
named complementary depth that utilizes global and effi- 𝑍 Z ∗ and Zsof t represents the ground truth of the depth and the final
𝑦
cient depth clues from the entire image rather than the locombined depth respectively. (b) A complementary 𝐻
demonstration
𝐻∗
of the two depth branches with the help of geometrical relations
cal clues to reduce the similarity of depth predictions. Secwhen
considering
only
the
inaccurate
estimation
of
the
object
3D
ond, we propose to fully exploit the geometric relations be∗
𝑍
𝑍Z1 𝑍 ∗ 𝑍
𝑍 𝑍 𝑍
height
H.
Both
generated
by
the
widely
used
local
height
clue
tween multiple depth clues to achieve complementarity in
𝑍∗
and
global clue yglo are
coup. Z2 generated by
comp.our newly introduced 𝑍
form. Benefiting from these designs, our method achieves
related to (a)
H. H ∗ and Ĥ denote the ground truth of(b)H and the
higher complementarity. Experiments on the KITTI benchunderestimated H respectively.
mark demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-theart performance without introducing extra data. In addifiguration [15, 24]. However, its 3D localization accuracy is
tion, complementary depth can also be a lightweight and
significantly lower than those based on LiDAR and stereo.
plug-and-play module to boost multiple existing monocuTo advance and promote automation technologies, such as
lar 3d object detectors. Code is available at https:
autonomous driving and robotics, it is essential to enhance
//github.com/elvintanhust/MonoCD.
the 3D localization precision of monocular 3D object detec-

1. Introduction
As a significant research topic in both academia and industry, 3D object detection can empower non-human intelligences to perceive the 3D world. Compared with LiDARbased [11, 27, 28, 34] and stereo-based [12, 13, 23, 30]
approaches, monocular 3D object detection has attracted
widespread attention due to its lower price and simpler con* Corresponding author.

tion.
Recently, many monocular 3D object detection algorithms have realized that the main reason limiting the 3D
localization precision of monocular 3D object detection is
inaccurate depth estimation [15, 22, 25, 40, 45]. Following mainstream CenterNet paradigm [42], they explore multiple local depth clues and formulate depth estimation as
an ensemble of multiple depth predictions to mitigate the
insufficiency of single-depth information. For instance,
MonoFlex [40] explores local depth clues from direct es-

10248

axis
𝐻
𝑦

Ground

