This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Vk D : Improving Knowledge Distillation using Orthogonal Projections
Roy Miles Ismail Elezi Jiankang Deng
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success across a
wide variety of tasks in computer vision [38], audio [58],
and language [17] domains. However, its adoption is often coupled with increasing computational costs which has
limited its application on resource constrained devices such
as mobile phones. Fortunately, there have been many techniques proposed to train fast and efficient networks, such
as weight pruning [24, 39, 41], quantisation [6, 88], and
knowledge distillation [9, 34, 47, 69].
Knowledge distillation (KD) in particular has shown
great success [4, 20, 45, 50, 69]. Its main idea is to utilise
the pre-trained knowledge of a much larger (teacher) model
to supervise the training of a much smaller (student) model.
Traditional KD [3, 34] methods have focused on image classification by using the softmax predictions of the teacher as
ground-truth labels for the student. However, doing so has
made them limited and only applicable to specific modalities, or tasks. Although feature distillation [8, 69] can relax this constraint on the downstream task or modality, its
1 https://github.com/roymiles/vkd

Teacher

Ours-S

82

DeiT-S

Top-1 Accuracy (%)

Knowledge distillation is an effective method for training small and efficient deep learning models. However, the
efficacy of a single method can degenerate when transferring to other tasks, modalities, or even other architectures.
To address this limitation, we propose a novel constrained
feature distillation method. This method is derived from a
small set of core principles, which results in two emerging
components: an orthogonal projection and a task-specific
normalisation. Equipped with both of these components,
our transformer models can outperform all previous methods on ImageNet and reach up to a 4.4% relative improvement over the previous state-of-the-art methods. To further
demonstrate the generality of our method, we apply it to
object detection and image generation, whereby we obtain
consistent and substantial performance improvements over
state-of-the-art. Code and models are publicly available1 .

Top-1 Accuracy on ImageNet

80

DeiT-S
Ours-Ti

78
76
74

DeiT-Ti

DeiT
DeiT with KD
Ours

DeiT-Ti
72
5

10

15

20

25

Model Size (M)

Figure 1. Comparison to both DeiT and DeiT⚗ [71] on ImageNet1K, where DeiT⚗ is a distilled DeiT model using a distillation
token. Our proposed distillation method achieves significant improvements over DeiT-Ti, while effectively bridging the gap between the teacher and student performance for DeiT-S.

adoption can incur significant computational costs due to
the construction of expensive relational objects [49, 50, 53]
and memory banks [69]. Most feature distillation pipelines
can be described as using some projection [64], alignment [12], or fusion module [9]. These components, though
widely used, tend to rely on heuristic design choices. Such
heuristic-driven approaches often fall short in delivering
new insights into the underlying mechanics of distillation
and struggle to adapt to diverse tasks without the introduction of several auxiliary losses. [9, 16, 44, 85]. Furthermore,
these additional losses introduce additional hyperparameters which will require tuning for specific tasks or settings.
In this work, we propose a novel projection layer that is
derived from a principal concept. Our approach focuses on
one key idea: Preserving the intra-batch feature similarity.
We highlight that if the similarity between features is preserved, then the projection layer will not change or alter the
underlying student representation. This constraint is important since it will maximise the amount of knowledge being
distilled to the student backbone. For example, if the projector is too expressive it may shortcut the distillation objective
by learning some complex non-linear mapping between the

15720

