This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HalluciDoctor: Mitigating Hallucinatory Toxicity in Visual Instruction Data
Qifan Yu1
1

Juncheng Li1† Longhui Wei2 Liang Pang3 Wentao Ye1
Siliang Tang1
Qi Tian2
Yueting Zhuang1

Bosheng Qin1

Zhejiang University, 2 Huawei Cloud, 3 Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yuqifan, junchengli, bsqin, siliang, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn
{weilonghui1, tian.qi1}@huawei.com, pangliang@ict.ac.cn

Abstract

Human Input: Write a detailed description of the given image.
GPT Response: In the image, a group of people are gathered in a park

Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) tuned on
machine-generated instruction-following data have demonstrated remarkable performance in various multi-modal understanding and generation tasks. However, the hallucinations inherent in machine-generated data, which could lead
to hallucinatory outputs in MLLMs, remain under-explored.
This work aims to investigate various hallucinations (i.e.,
object, relation, attribute hallucinations) and mitigate those
hallucinatory toxicities in large-scale machine-generated
visual instruction datasets. Drawing on the human ability to
identify factual errors, we present a novel hallucination detection and elimination framework, HalluciDoctor, based
on the cross-checking paradigm. We use our framework to
identify and eliminate hallucinations in the training data
automatically. Interestingly, HalluciDoctor also indicates
that spurious correlations arising from long-tail object cooccurrences contribute to hallucinations. Based on that,
we execute counterfactual visual instruction expansion to
balance data distribution, thereby enhancing MLLMs’ resistance to hallucinations. Comprehensive experiments on
hallucination evaluation benchmarks show that our method
successfully mitigates 44.6% hallucinations relatively and
maintains competitive performance compared to LLaVA.
The data and code for this paper are publicly available.1

1. Introduction
Recently, Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs)
have made promising progress on multi-modal tasks, such
as image captioning, visual question-answering, and visual
conversations [1, 12, 13, 31]. Additionally, inspired by
the impressive instruction-following capability of LLMs [4,
28, 30], several more powerful MLLMs [5, 14, 21, 36, 44]
have recently emerged, extending instruction-tuning to the
† Juncheng Li is the corresponding author.
1 https://github.com/Yuqifan1117/HalluciDoctor

flying kites. … two people are prominently seen flying a red kite. The audience
of onlookers is spread out in the park, Some chairs are placed around the park
for people to sit and relax. Additionally, there are a few traffic lights visible,
indicating that the park is situated near a road.
Object Hallucination: There is no traffic lights, while the Response mentions they are visible.
Relation Hallucination: A group of people are sitting and watching activities while the Response
mentions that they are gathered for flying kites.
Attribute Hallucination: The kite is a mix of red and black and there is no visible road, while the
Response mentions that the kite is only red and the park is near the road .
(a) Example of visual instruction data and various hallucinations within it
Hallucination
Visual Instruction
With LLaVA
With LLaVA+
Original MiniGPT-4 Instruction
With LLaVA++
Tuning
Expansion
MME: 1148.93↑ Elimination MME: 1207.18↑
MME: 539.13
MME: 1275.99↑
𝐶𝐻𝐴𝐼𝑅: 13.75%↓
𝐶𝐻𝐴𝐼𝑅: 21.73%↑
𝐶𝐻𝐴𝐼𝑅: 9.23%
𝐶𝐻𝐴𝐼𝑅: 12.03%↓

(b) The MLLM performance (MME score ↑) and the hallucinations in MLLMs (𝐶𝐻𝐴𝐼𝑅 ↓)

Figure 1. (a) On the top, we show an example of visual instruction
and various hallucinatory toxicities within it. (b) At the bottom,
we show that refined LLaVA++ from HalluciDoctor can alleviate
hallucinatory toxicity to MLLM and improve its performance.

multi-modal space. Due to the scarcity of visual-language
instruction-following data, recent research[21, 44] presents
a data reformation approach, which leverages text-only
LLMs conditioned on image captions and bounding boxes
to create instruction-following data involving visual content. However, these visual instructions might include hallucinatory responses incongruent with the image content, as
they are produced by text-only large language models. For
instance, as shown in Figure 1 (a), the response in the visual instruction data includes object hallucinations such as
“a few traffic lights” and relation hallucinations like “people gathered for flying kites” instead of “sitting and watching”. These hallucinatory responses may compromise the
MLLM’s ability to perceive the real world accurately.
Motivated by this insight, we systematically definite various kinds of hallucinations (i.e., object, relation, attribute
hallucinations) and investigate them in visual instruction
datasets. Using the widely used dataset LLaVA-Instruction158K [21], we construct extended CHAIR metrics to comprehensively evaluate the impact of these visual instructions
on modern MLLMs, considering both performance and hallucination issues. While instruction-tuning on LLaVA data

12944

