This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Layout Composer: Image-Vector Dual Diffusion Model
for Design Layout Generation
Mohammad Amin Shabani1 * Zhaowen Wang2 Difan Liu2
Jimei Yang2 Yasutaka Furukawa1
1

2

Simon Fraser University

𝑧!

𝑥!

Image
Diffusion

Vector
Diffusion

Attn

Concat

Nanxuan Zhao2

Adobe Research

Render

𝑧 !"#

𝑥 !"#

Input Elements
Attention Maps

Composed Vector Design
with Editable Layers

Image Only

Image & Vector (Ours)

Vector Only

Figure 1. Overview of our method. Left: our image-vector dual diffusion model architecture where both image and vector diffusion are
conditioned on input elements and exchanging information with attention maps. Right: a comparison showing the advantage of dualdomain (image and vector) over traditional single-domain approaches.

Abstract
This paper proposes an image-vector dual diffusion
model for generative layout design. Distinct from prior
efforts that mostly ignores visual information of elements
and the whole canvas, our approach integrates the power
of a pre-trained large image diffusion model to guide
layout composition in a vector diffusion model by providing enhanced salient region understanding and highlevel inter-element relationship reasoning. Our proposed
model simultaneously operates in two domains: it generates the overall design appearance in the image domain while optimizing the size and position of each design element in the vector domain. The proposed method
achieves the state-of-the-art results on several datasets and
enables new layout design applications. Project webpage:
https://aminshabani.github.io/visual layout composer.

1. Introduction
Layout design is essential in creative tasks, determining the
spatial arrangement of texts, images, and other visual elements, which are composed into a visual design, such as
* This work was done during the first author’s internship at Adobe.

book and magazine covers, posters showcasing new products, or invitation cards for holiday parties. Graphic designers rely on their keen artistic sensibility in meticulously
optimizing the arrangements of the visual elements while
ensuring that the composited image conveys the intended
message with aesthetic appeals.
Machine learning techniques have been successful in
directly regressing the layout vector parameters, i.e., the
bounding box coordinates of elements. Both transformerbased models [1] and more recent diffusion-based models [18] have achieved promising results that capture basic geometrical properties such as alignment and symmetry. However, most of these models ignore the visual information from the input elements, including image content,
text typeface, and color/shape of vector arts. This leads
to unsatisfactory designs as illustrated by the Vector Only
results in Figure 1. The lack of layout datasets with associated images also contributes to the negligence of visual
information. The most commonly used RICO [8] and PubLayNet [45] datasets only contain box representation of design elements. The Crello [40] dataset provides elementlevel image rendering for over 23K design templates, whose
visual features are used in the FlexDM [18] model. However, the interplay of element appearance when rendered on

9222

