This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PredToken: Predicting Unknown Tokens and Beyond with
Coarse-to-Fine Iterative Decoding
Xuesong Nie1 * Haoyuan Jin1 * Yunfeng Yan1† Xi Chen2† Zhihang Zhu1
1
Zhejiang University 2 The University of Hong Kong
xuesongnie@zju.edu.cn

* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

High-quality codes

Detokenizer

Tokenizer

…
VQ Framework

Mask tokens

Low-quality codes

codes

Correct decoding

(a) Illustration of overall motivation

…

With human cognition evolving, granting us greater foresight, equipping machines with this foresight remains a significant challenge due to the world’s inherent chaos. Predictive learning, an unsupervised method focused on predicting future events based on past observations, plays a critical
role in the world models [11, 17, 47]. This approach, unlike

Codebook

Iterative
Decoding

…

1. Introduction

…

prob.

Incorrect decoding

ε

CGT

Shared Codebook

…
FGT

VQGAN Detokenizer

Coarse-level dynamic decoding

VQGAN Tokenizer

Predictive learning models, which aim to predict future
frames based on past observations, are crucial to constructing world models. These models need to maintain low-level
consistency and capture high-level dynamics in unannotated spatiotemporal data. Transitioning from frame-wise
to token-wise prediction presents a viable strategy for addressing these needs. How to improve token representation and optimize token decoding presents significant challenges. This paper introduces PredToken, a novel predictive framework that addresses these issues by decoupling
space-time tokens into distinct components for iterative cascaded decoding. Concretely, we first design a “decomposition, quantization, and reconstruction” schema based on
VQGAN to improve the token representation. This scheme
disentangles low- and high-frequency representations and
employs a dimension-aware quantization model, allowing
more low-level details to be preserved. Building on this,
we present a “coarse-to-fine iterative decoding” method.
It leverages dynamic soft decoding to refine coarse tokens
and static soft decoding for fine tokens, enabling more highlevel dynamics to be captured. These designs make PredToken produce high-quality predictions. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our method on various real-world spatiotemporal predictive benchmarks. Furthermore, PredToken can also be extended to other visual
generative tasks to yield realistic outcomes.

How to optimize token decoding?

How to improve token representation?

Transformer

Abstract

Donglian Qi1

Fine-level static decoding

(b) Illustration of our overall pipeline

Figure 1. (a) The illustration of our motivation highlights the critical importance of improving token representation and decoding
mechanisms for high-quality predictive learning. (b) The illustration of our pipeline includes the DQR-based VQ framework and
the coarse-to-fine iterative decoding method, ensuring low-level
consistency and high-level dynamics in spatiotemporal data.

supervised models that depend on annotated data, leverages
unannotated data to autonomously uncover complex spatial
and temporal patterns, holding the promise to revolutionize
domains where labeled data is scarce [16, 22, 33, 34].
Benefiting from the token-wise learning paradigm, recent endeavors have provided valuable insight into predictive learning. They attempt to simplify the issue by decomposing frame-level prediction into token-level prediction.
Walker et al. [38] leverage a vector quantized variational
autoencoder [37] (VQVAE) for compressing video into discrete latent tokens, subsequently decoding via a prior model
PixelCNN [36] with an autoregressive manner. Gupta et al.

18143

