This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Differentiable Point-based Inverse Rendering
Hoon-Gyu Chung

Seokjun Choi
POSTECH

Abstract
We present differentiable point-based inverse rendering,
DPIR, an analysis-by-synthesis method that processes images captured under diverse illuminations to estimate shape
and spatially-varying BRDF. To this end, we adopt pointbased rendering, eliminating the need for multiple samplings per ray, typical of volumetric rendering, thus significantly enhancing the speed of inverse rendering. To realize this idea, we devise a hybrid point-volumetric representation for geometry and a regularized basis-BRDF representation for reflectance. The hybrid geometric representation enables fast rendering through point-based splatting
while retaining the geometric details and stability inherent
to SDF-based representations. The regularized basis-BRDF
mitigates the ill-posedness of inverse rendering stemming
from limited light-view angular samples. We also propose
an efficient shadow detection method using point-based
shadow map rendering. Our extensive evaluations demonstrate that DPIR outperforms prior works in terms of reconstruction accuracy, computational efficiency, and memory footprint. Furthermore, our explicit point-based representation and rendering enables intuitive geometry and
reflectance editing.

1. Introduction
Inverse rendering aims to estimate geometry and reflectance
of real-world objects from a set of images, with applications
including relighting, augmented and virtual reality, and object digitization. While it has been a longstanding challenge in computer vision and graphics, inverse rendering
is still notoriously difficult. A common approach to solve
inverse rendering is to take the analysis-by-synthesis principle. That is, synthesized images using forward rendering
are compared to input captured images, and through the iterative minimization of the difference between these images,
geometry and reflectance are updated. Hence, the forward
rendering plays a critical role in the analysis-by-synthesis
inverse rendering framework.
Mesh-based rendering methods combined with path tracing are prevalent for photo-realistic forward rendering.
However, they often struggle in inverse rendering due to

Seung-Hwan Baek

discontinuity issues [24]. Volumetric rendering has recently been recognized for view synthesis, particularly in
variants of NeRFs [26, 39, 40]. Inspired by such success, many state-of-the-art inverse rendering methods have
adopted volumetric rendering as a forward-rendering engine, demonstrating compelling reconstruction of geometry
and reflectance [11, 37, 46, 50, 53]. However, challenges
remain, such as the excessive computational costs due to
multiple sampling for each ray, and ambiguities in BRDF
and normal reconstructions given limited light-view angular samples.
Point-based rendering has been extensively studied for
forward rendering, where points serve as compact scene
representations [12, 14, 33, 42]. Point-based forward rendering involves splatting these points onto a viewpoint using circular disks, ellipsoids, or surfels [30, 59–61]. Pointbased rendering, especially in the analysis-by-synthesis
framework, have recently gained renewed interest [14, 15,
33, 42, 52, 54]: compared to volumetric rendering, pointbased rendering is more efficient since it avoids the need for
multiple samplings per ray. Recent methods proposed by
Kopanas et al.[13, 14], Point-NeRF[45], Zhang et al.[52],
and Kerbl et al.[12] have shown the effectiveness of pointbased rendering in modeling radiance fields for novel-view
synthesis.
Inspired by this success, we present differentiable pointbased inverse rendering, DPIR, that exploits point-based
forward rendering for inverse rendering. DPIR processes
either multi-view multi-light images or photometric images
captured by multi-view photometric setups [19] and flash
photography, respectively. Using point-based forward rendering confronts several challenges critical for inverse rendering: (1) The discrete point representation hinders the reconstruction of both smooth and detailed surface. (2) The
inherent difficulty in jointly reconstructing geometry and
spatially-varying BRDF from limited light-view samples remains. (3) There is a need for efficient shadow consideration to ensure precise inverse rendering.
To address these challenges, we develop a hybrid pointvolumetric geometry representation and a regularized basisBRDF representation. The hybrid geometric representation enjoys the benefits of both point-based and volumet-

4399

