This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Transcending Forgery Specificity with Latent Space Augmentation
for Generalizable Deepfake Detection
Zhiyuan Yan1 Yuhao Luo1 Siwei Lyu2 Qingshan Liu3 Baoyuan Wu1,†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen (CUHK-Shenzhen), China
2
University at Buffalo, State University of New York, USA
3
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, China
yanzhiyuan1114@gmail.com, luo7502@gmail.com
siweilyu@buffalo.edu, qsliu@nuist.edu.cn, wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn

Abstract
Deepfake detection faces a critical generalization hurdle, with performance deteriorating when there is a mismatch between the distributions of training and testing data.
A broadly received explanation is the tendency of these detectors to be overfitted to forgery-specific artifacts, rather
than learning features that are widely applicable across
various forgeries. To address this issue, we propose a simple yet effective detector called LSDA (Latent Space Data
Augmentation), which is based on a heuristic idea: representations with a wider variety of forgeries should be able
to learn a more generalizable decision boundary, thereby
mitigating the overfitting of method-specific features (see
Fig. 1). Following this idea, we propose to enlarge the
forgery space by constructing and simulating variations
within and across forgery features in the latent space. This
approach encompasses the acquisition of enriched, domainspecific features and the facilitation of smoother transitions
between different forgery types, effectively bridging domain
gaps. Our approach culminates in refining a binary classifier that leverages the distilled knowledge from the enhanced features, striving for a generalizable deepfake detector. Comprehensive experiments show that our proposed
method is surprisingly effective and transcends state-of-theart detectors across several widely used benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Deepfake technology has rapidly gained prominence due
to its capacity to produce strikingly realistic visual content. Unfortunately, this technology can also be used for
malicious purposes, e.g., infringing upon personal privacy,
† Corresponding Author

Baseline Method:
Learn forgery-specific features

Ours (LSDA):
Enlarge the whole forgery space

❌

❌

Decision Boundary
Real Data
Unseen Forgery

Decision Boundary
Forgery A
Augmented Data

Forgery B
❌

Wrongly Classified

Figure 1. Toy examples for intuitively illustrating our proposed
latent space augmentation strategy. The baseline can be overfitted to forgery-specific features and thus cannot generalize well for
unseen forgeries. In contrast, our proposed method avoids overfitting to specific forgery features by enlarging the forgery space
through latent space augmentation. This approach aims to equip
our method with the capability to effectively adjust and adapt to
new and previously unseen forgeries.

spreading misinformation, and eroding trust in digital media. Given these implications, there is an exigent need to
devise a reliable deepfake detection system.
The majority of previous deepfake detectors [29, 37, 39,
40, 57, 59, 63] exhibit effectiveness on the within-dataset
scenario, but they often struggle on the cross-dataset scenario where there is a disparity between the distribution
of the training and testing data. In real-world situations
characterized by unpredictability and complexity, one of the
most critical measures for a reliable and efficient detector is
the generalization ability. However, given that each forgery
method typically possesses its specific characteristics, the

8984

