This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Promptable Behaviors:
Personalizing Multi-Objective Rewards from Human Preferences
Minyoung Hwang1 , Luca Weihs1 , Chanwoo Park2 , Kimin Lee3 ,
Aniruddha Kembhavi1 , Kiana Ehsani1
1
PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI, 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
3
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
Human
Demonstrations

Abstract
Customizing robotic behaviors to be aligned with diverse human preferences is an underexplored challenge in
the field of embodied AI. In this paper, we present Promptable Behaviors, a novel framework that facilitates efficient
personalization of robotic agents to diverse human preferences in complex environments. We use multi-objective reinforcement learning to train a single policy adaptable to a
broad spectrum of preferences. We introduce three distinct
methods to infer human preferences by leveraging different
types of interactions: (1) human demonstrations, (2) preference feedback on trajectory comparisons, and (3) language
instructions. We evaluate the proposed method in personalized object-goal navigation and flee navigation tasks in
ProcTHOR [18] and RoboTHOR [17], demonstrating the
ability to prompt agent behaviors to satisfy human preferences in various scenarios.
Project page: https://promptable-behaviors.github.io

1. Introduction
Imagine a robot navigating in a house at midnight, asked to
find an object without disturbing a child who just fell asleep.
The robot is required to explore the house thoroughly in order to find the target object, but not collide with any objects
to avoid making unnecessary noise. In contrast to this Quiet
Operation scenario, in the Urgent scenario, a user is in a
hurry and expects a robot to find the target object quickly
rather than avoiding collisions. These contrasting scenarios
highlight the need for customizing robot policies to adapt to
diverse and specific human preferences.
Although learning-based approaches [57, 68] have significantly advanced the capability of robots to solve numerous tasks successfully, using these methods to customize robots for diverse human preferences remains a challenge [28]. Common practices in embodied AI [17, 18] use
reinforcement learning with a reward function designed for
specific agent behaviors. However, hand-crafting a reward
function by human experts is time-consuming and difficult
for agents with complex dynamics and large state and ac-

Preference
Feedback

𝜏!!
𝜏"!

𝜏!"
𝜏""

𝜏#!

𝜏#"

Language
Instructions

“My kid is asleep.
Navigate to an apple in
the kitchen without
making any noise.”

Human Preference 𝑤
Image
Observation

𝐼!

action

Multi-Objective Policy

𝑎!

Figure 1. Overview. Promptable Behaviors captures human preferences across multiple objectives. We first train a multi-objective
policy conditioned on the reward weight vector. After training, we
freeze the policy and humans can provide their preferences with a
wide range of options: (1) human demonstrations, (2) preference
feedback on trajectory comparisons, and (3) language instructions.

tion spaces. To simplify the reward design process for nonexpert users, recent methods [27, 30, 41] intuitively acquire
reward models from human feedback. Yet, they have shortcomings in dealing with diverse preferences, since the agent
has to be re-trained for each unique human preference.
We propose Promptable Behaviors, a novel personalization framework that deals with diverse human preferences
without re-training the agent. The key idea of our method
is to use multi-objective reinforcement learning (MORL) as
the backbone of personalizing a reward model. We take a
modular approach: (1) training a policy conditioned on a
reward weight vector across multiple objectives and (2) inferring the reward weight vector that aligns with the user’s
preference. Using MORL, agent behaviors become promptable through adjustments in the reward weight vector during
inference, without any policy fine-tuning. This significantly
simplifies customizing robot behaviors to inferring a lowdimensional reward weight vector.

16216

