This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PRDP: Proximal Reward Difference Prediction
for Large-Scale Reward Finetuning of Diffusion Models
Fei Deng1,2 *, Qifei Wang1 , Wei Wei3†, Tingbo Hou1 , Matthias Grundmann1
1

Google, 2 Rutgers University, 3 Accenture

https://fdeng18.github.io/prdp

a close up of a cat
wearing a pikachu
hat, reddit, gif, real
life charmander,
very aesthetic!!!!!!,
soft!!

rural house with
a garden and a
swimming pool

A night scene of a lavender
ﬁeld with a town and
church in the background,
reminiscent of Vincent van
Gogh's style.

An abandoned
Segway in the forest

cinematic still of
an adorable
walking robot in
the desert, at
sunset

A corgi dressed as a
bee costume.

PRDP

Stable Diffusion v1.4

A painting of a girl standing
on a mountain looking out
at an approaching storm
over the ocean, with wind
blowing and ocean mist,
surrounded by lightning.

Figure 1. Generation samples on complex, unseen prompts. Our proposed method, PRDP, achieves stable black-box reward finetuning
for diffusion models for the first time on large-scale prompt datasets, leading to superior generation quality on complex, unseen prompts.
Here, PRDP is finetuned from Stable Diffusion v1.4 on the training set prompts of Pick-a-Pic v1 dataset, using a weighted combination of
rewards: PickScore = 10, HPSv2 = 2, Aesthetic = 0.05. The images within each column are generated using the same random seed.

Abstract
Reward finetuning has emerged as a promising approach
to aligning foundation models with downstream objectives.
Remarkable success has been achieved in the language domain by using reinforcement learning (RL) to maximize rewards that reflect human preference. However, in the vision domain, existing RL-based reward finetuning methods
are limited by their instability in large-scale training, rendering them incapable of generalizing to complex, unseen
prompts. In this paper, we propose Proximal Reward Difference Prediction (PRDP), enabling stable black-box reward finetuning for diffusion models for the first time on
large-scale prompt datasets with over 100K prompts. Our
key innovation is the Reward Difference Prediction (RDP)
objective that has the same optimal solution as the RL ob-

jective while enjoying better training stability. Specifically,
the RDP objective is a supervised regression objective that
tasks the diffusion model with predicting the reward difference of generated image pairs from their denoising trajectories. We theoretically prove that the diffusion model that
obtains perfect reward difference prediction is exactly the
maximizer of the RL objective. We further develop an online
algorithm with proximal updates to stably optimize the RDP
objective. In experiments, we demonstrate that PRDP can
match the reward maximization ability of well-established
RL-based methods in small-scale training. Furthermore,
through large-scale training on text prompts from the Human Preference Dataset v2 and the Pick-a-Pic v1 dataset,
PRDP achieves superior generation quality on a diverse
set of complex, unseen prompts whereas RL-based methods
completely fail.

* Work done during an internship at Google.
† Work done while working at Google.

7423

