This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

IQ-VFI: Implicit Quadratic Motion Estimation for Video Frame Interpolation
Mengshun Hu1,2

Kui Jiang3

Zhihang Zhong4

Zheng Wang1,2† Yinqiang Zheng5

1

National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, School of
Computer Science, Wuhan University 2 Hubei Key Laboratory of Multimedia and Network Communication Engineering
3
Harbin Institute of Technology 4 Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory 5 The University of Tokyo

Abstract
Advanced video frame interpolation (VFI) algorithms
approximate intermediate motions between two input
frames to synthesize intermediate frame. However, they
struggle to handle complex scenarios with curvilinear motions since they overlook the latent acceleration information between the input frames. Moreover, the supervision
of predicted motions is tricky because ground-truth motions
are not available. To this end, we propose a novel framework for implicit quadratic video frame interpolation (IQVFI), which explores latent acceleration information and
accurate intermediate motions via knowledge distillation.
Specifically, the proposed IQ-VFI consists of an implicit
acceleration estimation network (IANet) and a VFI backbone, the former fully leverages spatio-temporal information to explore latent acceleration priors between two input
frames, which is then used to progressively modulate linear
motions from the latter into quadratic motions in coarseto-fine manner. Furthermore, to encourage both components to distill more acceleration and motion cues oriented
towards VFI, we propose a knowledge distillation strategy
in which implicit acceleration distillation loss and implicit
motion distillation loss are employed to adaptively guide latent acceleration priors and intermediate motions learning,
respectively. Extensive experiments show that our proposed
IQ-VFI can achieve state-of-the-art performances on various benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation (VFI) aims to generate intermediate frames between the input frames [4, 13, 19, 21, 24, 33],
The key to this task is to find correspondences between two
consecutive frames to synthesize intermediate frame via
warping operator [28]. Naturally, motion estimation (e.g.,
optical flow) is the most critical step in the well-established
paradigms of VFI networks [1, 8, 9, 12, 18, 29, 39].

𝒕𝟎

𝒕𝟎.𝟓

Time step

(a)

𝒕𝟏

𝒕𝟎

𝒕𝟎.𝟓

Time step

𝒕𝟏

(b)

Figure 1. (a) linear methods: synthesizing the intermediate frame
by fitting the linearly approximate intermediate flow (see orange
trajectory). (b) our method: exploring latent acceleration prior (see
yellow dotted line) to promote (a), which can model the complex
scenario, like curvilinear motion (see dark green trajectory).

To predict accurate optical flows, a sort of pioneering
approach is linear methods (see Figure 2(a)) [12, 23, 24].
This scheme typically utilizes an off-the-shelf motion estimator (ME) [14, 35, 36] to predict bidirectional flows fˆ01
and fˆ10 between input frames I0 and I1 , and then approximates intermediate flows fˆ0t and fˆ1t using linear multiplication. The aforementioned procedures can be depicted as:
fˆ01 , fˆ10 = M E(I0 , I1 ), M E(I1 , I0 ),
fˆ0t , fˆ1t = t · fˆ01 , (1 − t) · fˆ10 .

(1)

However, these methods rely on specific assumptions (e.g.,
linear motion assumption) and thus are less effective on
complex scenarios (e.g., curvilinear trajectory) when the
assumption does not hold (see Figure 1(a)).
Unlike linear methods, task-oriented methods (see Figure 2(b)) [18, 21] attempt to train ME to directly predict
bidirectional task-oriented flows fe0t and fe1t for fitting complex motions. This process is described as:
fe0t , fe1t = M E(I0 , I1 ).

(2)

Contemporaneously, two-stage methods (see Figure 2(c)) [13] introduce an additional RefineNet to
further refine linear flows fˆ0t and fˆ1t from linear methods
to obtain task-oriented flows fe0t and fe1t , depicted as:
fe0t , fe1t = Ref ineN et(fˆ0t , fˆ1t , I0 , I1 ).

† Corresponding Author

6410

(3)

