This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LidaRF: Delving into Lidar for Neural Radiance Field on Street Scenes
Shanlin Sun1 Bingbing Zhuang3 Ziyu Jiang3 Buyu Liu3
Xiaohui Xie1 Manmohan Chandraker2,3
1
University of California, Irvine 2 University of California, San Diego 3 NEC Labs America

Abstract

NeRF

Input

Loss

1. Introduction
Photorealistic simulation is needed in many applications like
autonomous driving, where it is hard to ensure the diversity
and coverage of real data. More critically, extensive verification has to be carried out in simulated environment before
road testing, in order to ensure safety. Traditional simulation
pipeline typically requires graphic artists to manually create
3D assets and compose into virtual environment of interest.
However, the demand on human efforts and expertise has
prevented it from being scalable in practice.
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF [22]) has recently emerged
as a promising way to approach simulation. NeRF has
proven an effective implicit representation of scene radiance, with remarkable abilities to capture and interpolate
appearances. However, such good performance often requires dense view coverage in training data, in order for

Temporal Lidar
aggregation

Lidar encoding
Lidar

Lidar

3D
CNN

Lidar

Lidar

LidaRF (Ours)

View augmentation
with Lidar rendering

UniSim

Photorealistic simulation plays a crucial role in applications such as autonomous driving, where advances in neural
radiance fields (NeRFs) may allow better scalability through
the automatic creation of digital 3D assets. However, reconstruction quality suffers on street scenes due to largely
collinear camera motions and sparser samplings at higher
speeds. On the other hand, the application often demands
rendering from camera views that deviate from the inputs to
accurately simulate behaviors like lane changes. In this paper, we propose several insights that allow a better utilization
of Lidar data to improve NeRF quality on street scenes. First,
our framework learns a geometric scene representation from
Lidar, which are fused with the implicit grid-based representation for radiance decoding, thereby supplying stronger
geometric information offered by explicit point cloud. Second, we put forth a robust occlusion-aware depth supervision
scheme, which allows utilizing densified Lidar points by accumulation. Third, we generate augmented training views
from Lidar points for further improvement. Our insights
translate to largely improved novel view synthesis under real
driving scenes.

Overview

Occlusion-aware robust
depth supervision

Figure 1. Our framework leverages Lidar to a deep extent to unlock
its potential for neural rendering on street scenes, leading to stateof-the-art performance in comparison to UniSim [43].

sufficient constraints to learn accurately the underlying geometry, material properties and illumination. While dense
view coverage is not much of a problem in controlled environments, it poses challenges on street scenes – the data
collection vehicle typically drives forward along lanes at a
potentially high speed, leading to sparse and nearly collinear
camera paths. Besides sparsity, forward camera trajectories
are well-known [31] to be challenging for 3D reconstruction
as it provides much weaker multi-view geometric constraints.
Furthermore, road surface is typically low-texture, further
introducing ambiguity in scene reconstruction.
To address these challenges, and in view of the implicit
representation of NeRF lacking explicit geometric constraint,
our key idea lies in leveraging Lidar as an explicit complementary to NeRF. Despite Lidar being used in existing
works [27, 40, 43] for street scenes, high-quality rendering
remains challenging. Our work delves into Lidar (dubbed
LidaRF) and reaps its benefits to a greater extent, yielding
largely improved view synthesis quality as shown in Fig. 1.
Our contributions are three-fold. (i) Fusing Lidar en-

19563

