This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-World Semantic Segmentation Including Class Similarity
Matteo Sodano1

Federico Magistri1

1 Center for Robotics, University of Bonn

Lucas Nunes1

Jens Behley1

Cyrill Stachniss1,2

2 Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence

{firstname.lastname}@igg.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Interpreting camera data is key for autonomously acting systems, such as autonomous vehicles. Vision systems
that operate in real-world environments must be able to understand their surroundings and need the ability to deal
with novel situations. This paper tackles open-world semantic segmentation, i.e., the variant of interpreting image
data in which objects occur that have not been seen during
training. We propose a novel approach that performs accurate closed-world semantic segmentation and, at the same
time, can identify new categories without requiring any additional training data. Our approach1 additionally provides
a similarity measure for every newly discovered class in an
image to a known category, which can be useful information
in downstream tasks such as planning or mapping. Through
extensive experiments, we show that our model achieves
state-of-the-art results on classes known from training data
as well as for anomaly segmentation and can distinguish
between different unknown classes.

Input RGB

Closed-World Prediction

Open-World Prediction
road

1. Introduction
Autonomous systems need to understand their surroundings
to operate robustly. To this end, semantic scene understanding based on sensor data is key and numerous variants exist,
such as object detection [17, 49], semantic and instance segmentation [37, 39, 64], and panoptic segmentation [27, 28].
Over the last decade, we witnessed tremendous progress in
scene interpretation for autonomous vehicles using machine
learning. A central challenge for most learning-based systems is scenes in which novel and previously unseen objects
occur. Such open-world settings, i.e., the fact that not everything can be covered in the training data, have to be considered when building vision systems for human-centered
environments and real-world settings. For example, autonomous cars in cities will eventually experience situations
or objects they have not seen before. They should be able to
identify them, for example, to change into a more conservative mode of operation.
Today, high-quality datasets such as Cityscapes [13] or
1 Code: https://github.com/PRBonn/ContMAV

vegetation

sky

truck

traffic sign

unknown

Figure 1. Given an image containing a previously-unseen object
(top), closed-world methods for semantic segmentation classify
the pixels belonging to that object as one of the known classes
(center, red circle). Our goal is to segment the unknown object and
identify it as a semantic class different to the previously-known
ones (bottom, green circle).

MS COCO [32] allow deep learning methods to achieve
outstanding performance in closed-world scene understanding tasks. A prominent task is semantic segmentation [18],
which aims to assign a semantic category to each pixel in an
image. Systems operating under the closed-world assumption [53] typically cannot correctly recognize an object that
belongs to none of the known categories. Often, they tend
to be overconfident and assign such an object to one of
the known classes. We believe that for applications targeting reliability and robustness under varying conditions, the
closed-world assumption has to be relaxed, and we need to
move towards open-world setups. Additionally, a measure
of class similarity can help downstream tasks. For example,
predicting that an area of the image is unknown but similar
to the class car or another type of moving vehicle can be

3184

