This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

On the test-time zero-shot generalization of vision-language models:
Do we really need prompt learning?
Maxime Zanella*
UCLouvain UMons
code:

Ismail Ben Ayed
ÉTS Montréal

https://github.com/MaxZanella/MTA

Abstract
The development of large vision-language models, notably CLIP, has catalyzed research into effective adaptation
techniques, with a particular focus on soft prompt tuning.
Conjointly, test-time augmentation, which utilizes multiple
augmented views of a single image to enhance zero-shot
generalization, is emerging as a significant area of interest. This has predominantly directed research efforts toward test-time prompt tuning. In contrast, we introduce a
robust MeanShift for Test-time Augmentation (MTA), which
surpasses prompt-based methods without requiring this intensive training procedure. This positions MTA as an ideal
solution for both standalone and API-based applications.
Additionally, our method does not rely on ad hoc rules (e.g.,
confidence threshold) used in some previous test-time augmentation techniques to filter the augmented views. Instead,
MTA incorporates a quality assessment variable for each
view directly into its optimization process, termed as the
inlierness score. This score is jointly optimized with a density mode seeking process, leading to an efficient trainingand hyperparameter-free approach. We extensively benchmark our method on 15 datasets and demonstrate MTA’s
superiority and computational efficiency. Deployed easily
as plug-and-play module on top of zero-shot models and
state-of-the-art few-shot methods, MTA shows systematic
and consistent improvements.

1. Introduction
Vision-language models, pretrained on vast sets of imagetext pairs, have emerged as powerful tools for learning
cross-modal representations [25, 30, 46, 60, 62, 63]. The
joint feature space of visual and textual features enables
zero-shot recognition, without any task-specific data. For
* Corresponding author: maxime.zanella@uclouvain.be
This work was partly supported by the Walloon Region (Service Public de
Wallonie Recherche, Belgium) under grant n°2010235 (ARIAC by DigitalWallonia4.ai).

instance, given a set of candidate classes, one can create textual descriptions, with the so-called prompt [34], pk = ‘’a
photo of a [classk ]”, and get its corresponding embedding representation tk = θt (pk ) with the language
encoder. Similarly, an image x is projected in the same
embedding space f = θv (x) using the visual encoder.
Then, one can classify this image by measuring the similarity between these two encoded modalities and predicting the class corresponding to the most similar embedding,
k̂ = arg maxk f t tk .
Despite their impressive capabilities, these models still
encounter substantial challenges and may yield unsatisfactory responses in complex situations [17, 46]. These issues
are particularly pronounced when confronted with the pragmatic constraints of real-world scenarios, where labeled
data can be scarce (i.e., few-shot scenarios [52]) or completely absent (i.e., zero-shot scenarios [28]), thus limiting
their broader usage. Consequently, there has been a growing interest in enhancing the test-time generalization faculties of these vision-language models [14, 16, 36, 38, 40, 45].
Empirical findings indicating that improved textual descriptions can positively impact zero-shot predictions [46] have
sparked interest in refining prompt quality for downstream
tasks. Originating in the NLP community [23, 26, 49],
soft prompt learning, which utilizes learnable continuous
tokens as input [29], has rapidly gained popularity. Building on this momentum, CoOp [68] stands out as the seminal work for prompt tuning in vision-language models.
Since then, prompt tuning has appeared as the prominent approach for adapting vision-language models [63]
across both unsupervised [14, 24, 38] and few-shot scenarios [3, 5, 12, 35, 59, 67–69].
In parallel, test-time augmentation, which has been extensively used in the computer vision community [32, 50,
64], is now emerging in the vision-language field, with a
focus on prompt tuning [14, 36, 38]. Instead of exploiting a
single image x, test-time prompt tuning techniques leverage
multiple embeddings (fp )1≤p≤N , each derived from a different augmented view (xp )1≤p≤N of the same original im-

23783

