This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOI-M3 : Capture Multiple Humans and Objects Interaction within Contextual
Environment
Juze Zhang 1,2,* , Jingyan Zhang 1,* , Zining Song 1 , Zhanhe Shi 1 , Chengfeng Zhao 1 , Ye Shi 1 ,
Jingyi Yu 1 , Lan Xu 1 , Jingya Wang 1,†
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zhangjz,zhangjy7,songzn,shizhh,zhaochf2022,shiye,yujingyi,xulan1,wangjingya}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Figure 1. We meticulously collect a dataset capturing interactions involving multiple humans and multiple objects, named HOI-M3 . This
extensive dataset comprises 181 million video frames recorded from 42 diverse viewpoints, covering a wide range of daily scenarios. It is
intended to facilitate various tasks related to human-object interaction perception and generation.

Abstract
Humans naturally interact with both others and the surrounding multiple objects, engaging in various social activities. However, recent advances in modeling human-object
interactions mostly focus on perceiving isolated individuals
and objects, due to fundamental data scarcity. In this paper, we introduce HOI-M3 , a novel large-scale dataset for
modeling the interactions of Multiple huMans and Multiple
objects. Notably, it provides accurate 3D tracking for both
humans and objects from dense RGB and object-mounted
IMU inputs, covering 199 sequences and 181M frames of
diverse humans and objects under rich activities. With the
unique HOI-M3 dataset, we introduce two novel data-driven
tasks with companion strong baselines: monocular capture
and unstructured generation of multiple human-object inter* These authors contributed equally.
†Corresponding author.

actions. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our dataset
is challenging and worthy of further research about multiple
human-object interactions and behavior analysis. Our HOIM3 dataset, corresponding codes, and pre-trained models
will be disseminated to the community for future research,
which can be found at https://juzezhang.github.
io/HOIM3_ProjectPage/

1. Introduction
Modeling human behaviors with surrounding objects within
contextual environments is a fundamental task in the vision
community, enabling numerous applications for gaming,
embodied AI, robotics, and VR/AR. Capturing such humanobject interactions recently received substantive attention.
With the aid of a wide range of available datasets [20, 34],
these years have witnessed the huge progress of data-driven
human motion modeling, from motion capture (MoCap) [27–

516

