This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Localization Is All You Evaluate:
Data Leakage in Online Mapping Datasets and How to Fix It
Adam Lilja1,2

Junsheng Fu2
1

Erik Stenborg2

Chalmers University of Technology

Lars Hammarstrand1
2

Zenseact

{firstname.lastname}@{chalmers.se, zenseact.com}

Abstract
The task of online mapping is to predict a local map using current sensor observations, e.g. from lidar and camera, without relying on a pre-built map. State-of-the-art
methods are based on supervised learning and are trained
predominantly using two datasets: nuScenes and Argoverse
2. However, these datasets revisit the same geographic locations across training, validation, and test sets. Specifically, over 80% of nuScenes and 40% of Argoverse 2 validation and test samples are less than 5 m from a training sample. At test time, the methods are thus evaluated
more on how well they localize within a memorized implicit map built from the training data than on extrapolating to unseen locations. Naturally, this data leakage
causes inflated performance numbers and we propose geographically disjoint data splits to reveal the true performance in unseen environments. Experimental results
show that methods perform considerably worse, some dropping more than 45 mAP, when trained and evaluated on
proper data splits. Additionally, a reassessment of prior
design choices reveals diverging conclusions from those
based on the original split. Notably, the impact of lifting methods and the support from auxiliary tasks (e.g.,
depth supervision) on performance appears less substantial
or follows a different trajectory than previously perceived.
https://github.com/LiljaAdam/geographical-splits

1. Introduction
A core capability for an autonomous vehicle is to estimate
the road in its vicinity. There are two complementary approaches for this task: retrieving the information from a
pre-built map using localization [5], and directly predicting the online map using onboard sensors like camera and
lidar [19]. The former, Online Map Retrieval (OMR), assumes there exists a map over the deployment area, while
the latter, Online Map Estimation (OME) assumes no such
map exists. A pre-built map provides detailed information
but also requires robust localization and continuous map updates to be useful. OME sidesteps this and instead relies

Train

Validation

Test

Figure 1. Example of substantial geographical overlap between
train, val, and test sets for in nuScenes’. Green circle, Orange
cross, and Red plus are training, validation, and test samples.

solely on onboard sensors and algorithms. It is thus independent of variations in current surroundings compared to
mapped data. The challenge with OME instead lies in generalizing to new locations, beyond the places captured in the
training data.
The current state-of-the-art methods for online mapping
are based on supervised learning. While there exist large
public datasets [1, 2, 6, 12, 33, 36, 38] that support training
of perception and planning models for many of the crucial
tasks of an autonomous vehicle, only a few of these provide the HD maps needed to train online mapping models,
see Tab. 1. Moreover, as these datasets are mainly constructed to support object detection, object tracking, and
motion forecasting tasks, we argue that they, in their original form, are not ideal for training online mapping models
for two reasons: (1) The training, validation, and test sets
are constructed by splitting the data temporally. This is an
easy way to ensure that, e.g., the same vehicle is not present
in the same position in the training and test sets yielding fair
evaluation of object detection methods. However, since the

22150

