This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Empirical Study of the Generalization Ability
of Lidar 3D Object Detectors to Unseen Domains
George Eskandar*
University of Stuttgart, Germany
Abstract
3D Object Detectors (3D-OD) are crucial for understanding the environment in many robotic tasks, especially
autonomous driving. Including 3D information via Lidar
sensors improves accuracy greatly. However, such detectors
perform poorly on domains they were not trained on, i.e.
different locations, sensors, weather, etc., limiting their reliability in safety-critical applications. There exist methods
to adapt 3D-ODs to these domains; however, these methods
treat 3D-ODs as a black box, neglecting underlying architectural decisions and source-domain training strategies.
Instead, we dive deep into the details of 3D-ODs, focusing
our efforts on fundamental factors that influence robustness
prior to domain adaptation.
We systematically investigate four design choices (and
the interplay between them) often overlooked in 3D-OD robustness and domain adaptation: architecture, voxel encoding, data augmentations, and anchor strategies. We assess
their impact on the robustness of nine state-of-the-art 3DODs across six benchmarks encompassing three types of domain gaps - sensor type, weather, and location.
Our main findings are: (1) transformer backbones with
local point features are more robust than 3D CNNs, (2)
test-time anchor size adjustment is crucial for adaptation
across geographical locations, significantly boosting scores
without retraining, (3) source-domain augmentations allow
the model to generalize to low-resolution sensors, and (4)
surprisingly, robustness to bad weather is improved when
training directly on more clean weather data than on training with bad weather data. We outline our main conclusions
and findings to provide practical guidance on developing
more robust 3D-ODs.

1. Introduction
The key objective of 3D object detection (3D-OD) is to accurately localize and identify objects of different classes
in the 3D environment using sensor data such as point
clouds [35, 36, 45] or images [25, 40, 46]. Lidar sensors
* We extend our profound gratitude to Chongzhe Zhang and Abhishek
Kaushik, from the University of Stuttgart, Karim Guirguis from KIT, Mohamed Sayed, from Niantic, and Bin Yang, from the University of Stuttgart
for their invaluable contributions to this work.

Figure 1. An overview of the three main domain gaps under study.
We show the main shift types for each domain gap along with the
underlying design choices that influence model robustness.

have played a pivotal role in this endeavor, as they can provide dense and highly precise point clouds using a long
scanning range. While 3D object detection models reliant
on Lidar point clouds have achieved remarkable results on
demanding benchmarks such as KITTI [13], Waymo [37],
and NuScenes [3], they face a significant performance drop
when deployed in unfamiliar settings. This decline in performance might arise from migrating to a different sensor,
owing to changes in point sparsity levels and scanning patterns, or from changes in the perceived 3D shapes of objects due to adverse weather conditions like rain, fog, or
snow. Other changes can stem from deployment in a new
geographical location that exhibits different statistical properties like smaller or bigger object sizes. All these scenarios
pose a considerable threat to the safety and reliability of autonomous driving.
Domain Adaptation (DA) promises to address these issues by adapting models trained on a source domain to a
target domain, achieving strong results on some domain
gaps [9, 11, 16, 17, 26, 27, 41–44, 47–49, 53]. However,
these methods often treat detection models as black-boxes
relying heavily on the availability of target domain data.
This leaves a gap in understanding: how do architectural
choices and training strategies affect generalization to target domains? Furthermore, not all DA methods develop
their techniques using the same architectures, making it

23815

