This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G3DR: Generative 3D Reconstruction in ImageNet
Pradyumna Reddy* Ismail Elezi* Jiankang Deng
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab UK

1. Introduction
Generating 3D assets is becoming increasingly vital for
applications such as VR/AR, film production, and video
games. Traditionally, 3D modeling is done by devoted
artists and content creators, however, nowadays it is desirable to use machine learning solutions to automate the
process. The seminal work of NeRF [27] made a large
step in 3D novel view synthesis, by posing the problem as
learning an implicit radiance field solely from calibrated images. However, the method requires many different views
of the same object/scene with known camera transformations to perform an accurate reconstruction. Furthermore,
NeRF can only reconstruct a scene but not generate plausible similar-looking scenes.
Several methods [6, 32, 44] modified NeRF to have generative capabilities. While these methods show impressive
3D generative capabilities, they primarily cater to wellcurated and aligned datasets featuring similar object categories and structures, necessitating domain-specific 3D
* Authors contributed equally.

Text

Condition

Generations

Cartoon Corgi

Color

We introduce a novel 3D generative method, Generative 3D Reconstruction (G3DR) in ImageNet, capable of
generating diverse and high-quality 3D objects from single images, addressing the limitations of existing methods. At the heart of our framework is a novel depth regularization technique that enables the generation of scenes
with high-geometric fidelity. G3DR also leverages a pretrained language-vision model, such as CLIP, to enable
reconstruction in novel views and improve the visual realism of generations. Additionally, G3DR designs a simple but effective sampling procedure to further improve the
quality of generations. G3DR offers diverse and efficient
3D asset generation based on class or text conditioning.
Despite its simplicity, G3DR is able to beat state-of-theart methods, improving over them by up to 22% in perceptual metrics and 90% in geometry scores, while needing only half of the training time. Code is available at
https://github.com/preddy5/G3DR.

Unconditional

Abstract

Figure 1. Our method is able to generate 3D images conditioned
on latents (such as class), text, or images. All the training has been
done in ImageNet dataset, that contain only single-view images.

knowledge of the category at hand. This knowledge enables
the inference of underlying 3D key points, camera transformation, object scale, and precise cropping. However, this
knowledge required for alignment becomes impractical for
extensive multi-category datasets such as ImageNet.
In this work, we propose a novel Generative 3D Reconstruction (G3DR) method that learns from a diverse unaligned 2D dataset such as ImageNet [7]. We combine a
latent diffusion model along with a conditional triplane generator to generate highly detailed 3D scenes. Training a triplane generator to reconstruct the scene in the input view
is a trivial task, and can be done by simply enforcing a reconstruction loss between it and the ground truth. However,
training the model to generate plausible novel views is much
more challenging since the ImageNet dataset contains only
a single image for each scene. We tackle this by employing
a pre-trained language-vision model [36] to give the necessary supervision for the novel views.
The framework mentioned so far only considers the visual quality of the images and does not ensure plausible geometry. We use a generic off-the-shelf monocular depth estimation model [26] to estimate the depth map of images
in the dataset. These depth maps are used to supervise the
geometry of the input view. We do so using a depth recon-

9655

