This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Siamese Learning with Joint Alignment and Regression for
Weakly-Supervised Video Paragraph Grounding
Chaolei Tan1
Jianhuang Lai1,2,3
Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3
Jian-Fang Hu1,2,3 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Guangdong Province Key Laboratory of Information Security Technology, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
tanchlei@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, stsljh@mail.sysu.edu.cn, wszheng@ieee.org, hujf5@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Video Paragraph Grounding (VPG) is an emerging task
in video-language understanding, which aims at localizing
multiple sentences with semantic relations and temporal order from an untrimmed video. However, existing VPG approaches are heavily reliant on a considerable number of
temporal labels that are laborious and time-consuming to
acquire. In this work, we introduce and explore WeaklySupervised Video Paragraph Grounding (WSVPG) to eliminate the need of temporal annotations. Different from previous weakly-supervised grounding frameworks based on
multiple instance learning or reconstruction learning for
two-stage candidate ranking, we propose a novel siamese
learning framework that jointly learns the cross-modal feature alignment and temporal coordinate regression without
timestamp labels to achieve concise one-stage localization
for WSVPG. Specifically, we devise a Siamese Grounding
TRansformer (SiamGTR) consisting of two weight-sharing
branches for learning complementary supervision. An Augmentation Branch is utilized for directly regressing the temporal boundaries of a complete paragraph within a pseudo
video, and an Inference Branch is designed to capture the
order-guided feature correspondence for localizing multiple sentences in a normal video. We demonstrate by extensive experiments that our paradigm has superior practicability and flexibility to achieve efficient weakly-supervised
or semi-supervised learning, outperforming state-of-the-art
methods trained with the same or stronger supervision.

1. Introduction
Natural Language Video Grounding (NLVG) is an essential
area in vision-language understanding, which has received
increasing attention due to its wide range of real-world applications such as video retrieval [3, 17, 21, 23, 80, 94],
video summarization [50, 55, 59, 60, 83, 99], action segmentation [19, 27, 35, 37, 45, 72], video question answering [30, 36, 38, 41, 82, 89], etc. Most previous works focus
* Corresponding author

Sentence ①

Sentence ②

Sentence ③

A disc is dropped onto the ground.

A man falls down onto the shuffleboard.

A disc is dropped onto the ground.

𝓥𝓥
(a)

Paragraph
A disc is dropped onto the ground. A man falls down onto the shuffleboard. A disc is dropped onto the ground.

𝓥𝓥𝐛𝐛𝐛𝐛

𝓥𝓥𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂𝒂
(b)

𝓥𝓥

𝓥𝓥𝐛𝐛𝐛𝐛

Figure 1. (a) Chronological cross-modal alignment in a video and
its paired sentences. (b) Pseudo boundary supervision for regressing paragraph timestamps in a composed pseudo video.

on tackling Video Sentence Grounding (VSG) proposed in
[1, 22], which targets at localizing the temporal boundaries
of an individual sentence from an untrimmed video. However, localizing single sentences can be ambiguous because
the contextual information conveyed by multiple sentences
is necessary to uniquely determine the temporal locations
of input queries. To alleviate such issue, Bao et al. [4] proposed to contextualize video grounding into localizing multiple events indicated by sentences of a paragraph from the
video, which is called Video Paragraph Grounding (VPG).
Although remarkable progress has been attained in tackling VSG and VPG problems under a fully-supervised setting, the extremely prohibitive overheads of manually annotating temporal boundaries for language queries limit these
methods to utilize large-scale video-text data. In addition,
the subjectivity of annotators inevitably brings label noises
that may adversely affect model training. Recently, weaklysupervised methods free of temporal annotations have become increasingly popular in the area of video grounding,
aiming to address the above limitations. These approaches
can be mainly categorized into multiple instance learning
methods and reconstruction learning methods and are typ-

13569

