This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DiffAssemble: A Unified Graph-Diffusion Model for 2D and 3D Reassembly
Gianluca Scarpellini∗

Stefano Fiorini* Francesco Giuliari* Pietro Morerio
Pattern Analysis and Computer Vision (PAVIS)
Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia (IIT)
∗ Equal contributions

Alessio Del Bue

Abstract
Reassembly tasks play a fundamental role in many fields
and multiple approaches exist to solve specific reassembly
problems. In this context, we posit that a general unified
model can effectively address them all, irrespective of the input data type (images, 3D, etc.). We introduce DiffAssemble,
a Graph Neural Network (GNN)-based architecture that
learns to solve reassembly tasks using a diffusion model formulation. Our method treats the elements of a set, whether
pieces of 2D patch or 3D object fragments, as nodes of a
spatial graph. Training is performed by introducing noise
into the position and rotation of the elements and iteratively denoising them to reconstruct the coherent initial
pose. DiffAssemble achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) results in most 2D and 3D reassembly tasks and is the first
learning-based approach that solves 2D puzzles for both
rotation and translation. Furthermore, we highlight its remarkable reduction in run-time, performing 11 times faster
than the quickest optimization-based method for puzzle solving. Code available at https://github.com/IITPAVIS/DiffAssemble.

1. Introduction
Spatial Intelligence is the ability to perceive the visual-spatial
world accurately and to perform transformations upon the
perceived space [15]. This skill is commonly assessed with
reassembly tasks, which involve arranging and connecting individual components to form a coherent and functional entity.
Examples of such tasks include solving 2D jigsaw puzzles
or assembling 3D objects with LEGO blocks. Since the proposal of the first puzzle solver [12], Spatial Intelligence has
challenged the Machine Learning (ML) community with its
intrinsic combinatorial complexity and its numerous applications, such as genomics [30], assistive technologies [47],
fresco reconstruction [2, 43] and molecular docking [7].
Reassembling a set involves placing each element in its
correct position and orientation to form a coherent structure,
that being a 2D jigsaw puzzle or a 3D object, as in Figure 1.

Figure 1. We propose DiffAssemble as a unified approach to deal
with reassembly tasks in two and three dimensions. DiffAssemble
processes the elements to reassemble as a graph and infer their
correct position and orientation in 2D and 3D space.

Despite the similarities between the tasks, the literature addresses reassembly tasks in different dimensions separately.
In the 2D dimension, the most common reassembly problem is related to the resolution of puzzles, particularly those
with pieces that are translated and rotated and have a regular
shape, i.e., square pieces of the same dimension. Due to
the regularity of the pieces, the problem can be treated as
a permutation problem and solved via optimization-based
approaches [14, 21, 46]. These solutions are effective but
lack robustness, showing a massive drop in performance
when dealing with non-standard scenarios, such as eroded
or missing pieces [40]. On the other hand, recent learningbased solutions are robust to distortion in the visual aspect of
the pieces by working in the feature space but cannot handle
rotations and perform worse than greedy approaches in the
standard scenario.

28098

