This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MMVP: A Multimodal MoCap Dataset with Vision and Pressure Sensors
He Zhang∗1 , Shenghao Ren∗3 , Haolei Yuan∗1 ,
Jianhui Zhao1 , Fan Li1 , Shuangpeng Sun2 , Zhenghao Liang4 ,
Tao Yu†2 , Qiu Shen†3 , Xun Cao†3
1
Beihang University, 2 Tsinghua University, 3 Nanjing University, 4 Beijing Weilan Technology Co., Ltd.

Abstract
Foot contact is an important cue for human motion capture, understanding, and generation. Existing datasets tend
to annotate dense foot contact using visual matching with
thresholding or incorporating pressure signals. However,
these approaches either suffer from low accuracy or are
only designed for small-range and slow motion. There is
still a lack of a vision-pressure multimodal dataset with
large-range and fast human motion, as well as accurate and
dense foot-contact annotation. To fill this gap, we propose a
Multimodal MoCap Dataset with Vision and Pressure sensors, named MMVP. MMVP provides accurate and dense
plantar pressure signals synchronized with RGBD observations, which is especially useful for both plausible shape
estimation, robust pose fitting without foot drifting, and accurate global translation tracking. To validate the dataset,
we propose an RGBD-P SMPL fitting method and also
a monocular-video-based baseline framework, VP-MoCap,
for human motion capture. Experiments demonstrate that
our RGBD-P SMPL Fitting results significantly outperform
pure visual motion capture. Moreover, VP-MoCap outperforms SOTA methods in foot-contact and global translation
estimation accuracy. We believe the configuration of the
dataset and the baseline frameworks will stimulate the research in this direction and also provide a good reference
for MoCap applications in various domains. Project page:
https://metaverse-ai-lab-thu.github.io/MMVP-Dataset/

1. Introduction
Human motion capture is an important foundation for motion analysis, behavior understanding, and pose generation,
with a wide range of applications in AR/VR, disease diagnosis, robot manipulation, sports training, etc. In recent years, human motion capture based on computer vision
technology has been developing rapidly, which has mainly
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. MMVP is a multimodal dataset that provides monocular
RGBD video and accurate foot pressure (contact) of large-range
and fast human motion.

benefited from the development of deep learning technology as well as, more importantly, the release of a large number of human motion capture datasets. Most of the existing
datasets focus on human shape and pose annotations. Given
pairs of image and shape and pose annotations for training,
learning-based methods can infer plausible human motion
from visual signals alone [5, 12, 23–26, 30, 37, 45, 56].
However, there are still many limitations when only using
pose and shape annotations for supervision, resulting in artifacts such as foot drifting and erroneous global translation&rotation, etc.
To solve the above problem, recent datasets introduce additional annotations, mainly contacts, such as foot-contact,
body-scene contact [15, 18] or self-contact [10, 34], to enhance additional physical constraints for visual motion capture. Among these contact annotations, the most classical
one is the foot-contact annotation. With foot contact annotation, Rempe et al. [40] has inferred the 0-1 foot-contact
label for the foot joints from an image, which successfully
restricts the foot drifting artifacts and realizes much more
accurate global translation results. It is worth mentioning
that the labeled contact information can not only improve
the accuracy of motion capture but also be used as important cues to directly improve the rationality of motion analysis [43, 44, 52] and even motion generation [16].

21842

