This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Coherent Temporal Synthesis for Incremental Action Segmentation
Guodong Ding, Hans Golong and Angela Yao
National University of Singapore
{dinggd, hgolong, ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Data replay is a successful incremental learning technique for images. It prevents catastrophic forgetting by
keeping a reservoir of previous data, original or synthesized, to ensure the model retains past knowledge while
adapting to novel concepts. However, its application in the
video domain is rudimentary, as it simply stores frame exemplars for action recognition. This paper presents the first
exploration of video data replay techniques for incremental action segmentation, focusing on action temporal modeling. We propose a Temporally Coherent Action (TCA)
model, which represents actions using a generative model
instead of storing individual frames. The integration of a
conditioning variable that captures temporal coherence allows our model to understand the evolution of action features over time. Therefore, action segments generated by
TCA for replay are diverse and temporally coherent. In a
10-task incremental setup on the Breakfast dataset, our approach achieves significant increases in accuracy for up to
22% compared to the baselines.

videos has brought about the application of data replay into
the video domain [3, 36, 50]. However, this transition has
been limited to direct implementations, with less emphasis
on videos’ unique temporal properties.

1. Introduction

Action recognition [23], as the hallmark task of video
understanding, was the initial focus for incremental learning for videos [3, 36, 37, 50]. Many works create replay
data by storing frames for each video clip. Storing frameexemplars for videos requires a balance between dense temporal sampling and memory diversity [3, 50]. It is a tradeoff between storing fewer complete videos or more incomplete ones within a given memory budget. Because existing
recognition models accept sparse frames as input, like 8 or
16 frames for TSN [51] and TSM [33], keeping an exemplar
set for each action clip does not overly strain the memory
allocation. Also, there is a strong static bias towards scene
context [30] in standard action recognition datasets like Kinetics [7] and UCF101 [46]. It is, therefore, possible to
achieve comparable performance storing either entire segments, a few frames [50], or even a single frame [3], all
without the need for explicit temporal modeling. As a result, most techniques save exemplar frames and mirror the
practices from the image domain while giving less attention
to developing video-specific data replay techniques.

Ensuring that intelligent systems can continually adapt
and accumulate knowledge in our rapidly evolving world is
essential. This concept is embodied in incremental learning [8]. A key challenge is to acquire new knowledge
gradually without catastrophic forgetting [15] of previously
learned information. There have been numerous efforts to
tackle the problem in the machine learning community, including data replay [39], regularization techniques [21], and
knowledge distillation [32].
Data replay is an effective and commonly used technique
in image incremental learning [2,4,43,52]. Data replay mitigates catastrophic forgetting by re-exposing the model to
previously encountered data samples. Previous works either
retain a subset of the original training samples [18,34,39] or
learn a generative model on previous training data to later
generate surrogate training samples [17, 28, 43]. A recent
shift of incremental learning from static images to dynamic

We advocate exploring data replay strategies in incremental video understanding with temporal action segmentation (TAS) [9]. TAS is akin to semantic image segmentation [35] but from a one-dimensional temporal basis. Instead of 2D pixel-wise semantic labels, TAS assigns framelevel action labels. For instance, given a procedural video
of “making coffee”, a TAS model classifies each frame as
a step such as ‘take cup’, ‘pour coffee’, ‘pour milk’, etc.
In TAS, a procedural task is usually called an “activity”
and the steps ‘actions’. The necessity of temporal modeling in TAS makes it more suitable for investigating videospecific replay strategies. First, static bias is less prominent
in TAS since different actions within a sequence often share
a common background, emphasising the importance of temporal modeling for video data replay. Second, TAS operates with full-resolution frame-by-frame inputs and produces outputs at the same level of temporal granularity. The

28485

