This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mirasol3B: A Multimodal Autoregressive Model for Time-Aligned and
Contextual Modalities
AJ Piergiovanni
Google DeepMind

Isaac Noble
Google Research
Victor Gomes
Google Research

Dahun Kim
Google DeepMind

Michael S. Ryoo
Google DeepMind

Anelia Angelova
Google DeepMind

Abstract
One of the main challenges of multimodal learning is
combining multiple heterogeneous modalities, e.g., video,
audio, and text. Video and audio are obtained at much
higher rates than text and are roughly aligned in time. They
are often not synchronized with text, which comes as a
global context, e.g. a title, or a description. Furthermore,
video and audio inputs are of much larger volumes, and
grow as the video length increases, which naturally requires
more compute dedicated to these modalities, and makes
modeling of long-range dependencies harder. We here decouple the multimodal modeling, dividing it into separate
autoregressive models, processing the inputs according to
the characteristics of the modalities. We propose a multimodal model, consisting of an autoregressive component for
the time-synchronized modalities (audio and video), and an
autoregressive component for the context modalities which
are not necessarily aligned in time but are still sequential.
To address the long-sequences of the video-audio inputs, we
further partition the video and audio sequences in consecutive snippets and autoregressively process their representations. To that end, we propose a Combiner mechanism,
which models the audio-video information jointly, producing compact but expressive representations. This allows us
to scale to 512 input video frames without increase in model
parameters. Our approach achieves the state-of-the-art on
multiple well established multimodal benchmarks. It effectively addresses the high computational demand of media
inputs by learning compact representations, controlling the
sequence length of the audio-video feature representations,
and modeling their dependencies in time.

1. Introduction
Multimodal models aim to combine the signals from multiple varied sources, which makes them both universal and

Figure 1. Autoregressive learning of time-aligned video and audio
modalities, in time, and decoupling from the autoregressive text
modeling allows for more effective multimodal models at smaller
sizes and leads to scaling to longer videos.

useful for practical applications. However, these modalities
have diverse characteristics and are challenging to combine
uniformly by a single model. For example, video and text
have disparate sampling rates: a video has many frames
per second, but text or other similar types of global context, e.g., a description or title, can be provided once per
video, or asynchronously to the video. Video also takes
a larger portion of the input. At the same time, video
and audio are naturally co-occurring and appear (almost)
synchronously. They are roughly aligned and complementary. This co-occurrence in time can contribute to their joint
learning and serve as a rich self-supervisory learning signal,
applied more frequently than global text signals. So, ideally, these modalities need to be processed by differentlysynchronized model components, which process more ad-

26804

