This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scalable 3D Registration via Truncated Entry-wise Absolute Residuals
René Vidal2
Yun-Hui Liu1
2
University of Pennsylvania

Liangzu Peng2 *
Tianyu Huang1 *
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
1

2

tyhuang, yhliu@mae.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Given an input set of 3D point pairs, the goal of outlierrobust 3D registration is to compute some rotation and
translation that align as many point pairs as possible. This
is an important problem in computer vision, for which many
highly accurate approaches have been recently proposed.
Despite their impressive performance, these approaches
lack scalability, often overflowing the 16GB of memory of
a standard laptop to handle roughly 30, 000 point pairs.
In this paper, we propose a 3D registration approach that
can process more than ten million (107 ) point pairs with
over 99% random outliers. Moreover, our method is efficient, entails low memory costs, and maintains high accuracy at the same time. We call our method TEAR 1 , as
it involves minimizing an outlier-robust loss that computes
Truncated Entry-wise Absolute Residuals. To minimize this
loss, we decompose the original 6-dimensional problem into
two subproblems of dimensions 3 and 2, respectively, solved
in succession to global optimality via a customized branchand-bound method. While branch-and-bound is often slow
and unscalable, this does not apply to TEAR as we propose
novel bounding functions that are tight and computationally
efficient. Experiments on various datasets are conducted to
validate the scalability and efficiency of our method.

1. Introduction
The 3D registration problem aims to find a rotation and
translation that best align an input set of 3D point pairs.
Ideally, the alignment errors for all point pairs are small,
and we call them inliers. In practice, the inliers are contaminated by other point pairs, called outliers, that induce
significant alignment errors. Given a set of inlier and outlier
point pairs, outlier-robust 3D registration aims to align the
3D inlier point pairs via some rotation and translation.
In this paper, we tackle the 3D registration problem with
extremely many outliers, via the proposed method that we
* Equal contribution
1 https://github.com/tyhuang98/TEAR-release

lpenn, vidalr@seas.upenn.edu

call Truncated Entry-wise Absolute Residuals (TEAR). Numerically, TEAR can handle more than 107 point pairs with
99.8% random outliers, a setting in which no existing methods have been shown to succeed: They are either unscalable, inefficient, or inaccurate. In Sec. 1.1, we review prior
3D registration methods. In Sec. 1.2, we further highlight
the TEAR approach and overview our contributions.

1.1. Prior Art
In this section, we briefly review several families of 3D robust registration methods that are relevant to our work.
First, observe that the outlier-robust 3D registration
problem can be decoupled into two subproblems: (1) if the
outliers are known, one can easily estimate a rotation and
translation by SVD [2, 25, 26], and (2) if the true rotation
and translation are given, one can easily remove the outliers.
These observations turn immediately into an efficient alternating minimization method, which lies at the heart of classical approaches including iterative closest point [7, 55], iteratively reweighted least-squares [1, 6, 18, 43, 48, 50, 52],
and graduated non-convexity [8, 29, 58, 67, 73, 78]. Such
an alternating minimization scheme is shown to be convergent in [1, 52] under very general conditions, but it might
not converge to a desired solution if the outlier ratio is high.
The RANSAC method [21] proceeds as follows: randomly sample a minimum number of point pairs (typically
3 pairs), compute a rotation and translation that aligns them,
measure the alignment error for all pairs, repeat these steps
until a termination criterion is reached, and output the rotation and translation that give the smallest alignment error.
RANSAC could terminate with a correct estimation as soon
as all pairs sampled in an iteration are inliers, but the probability of achieving so diminishes as the outlier ratio grows,
suggesting that RANSAC, or its variants [4, 5, 54, 62], can
be inefficient in the presence of extremely many outliers.
Alternatively, one could formulate some non-convex objective (e.g., consensus maximization) for outlier-robust
registration, and solve it via the branch-and-bound algorithm [57]. Branch-and-bound guarantees global optimality
by design, so it has served well in recent years as a validation tool [11–13, 33–35, 37, 39, 40, 44, 47, 63, 70, 75].

27477

