This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Vocabulary Video Anomaly Detection
Peng Wu1 , Xuerong Zhou1 , Guansong Pang2 ,* Yujia Sun3 , Jing Liu3 , Peng Wang1∗ , Yanning Zhang1
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, 2 Singapore Management University, 3 Xidian University
{xdwupeng, zxr2333}@gmail.com, gspang@smu.edu.sg, yjsun@stu.xidian.edu.cn
neouma@163.com, {peng.wang, ynzhang}@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Current video anomaly detection (VAD) approaches with
weak supervisions are inherently limited to a closed-set setting and may struggle in open-world applications where
there can be anomaly categories in the test data unseen
during training. A few recent studies attempt to tackle a
more realistic setting, open-set VAD, which aims to detect unseen anomalies given seen anomalies and normal
videos. However, such a setting focuses on predicting frame
anomaly scores, having no ability to recognize the specific
categories of anomalies, despite the fact that this ability is
essential for building more informed video surveillance systems. This paper takes a step further and explores openvocabulary video anomaly detection (OVVAD), in which we
aim to leverage pre-trained large models to detect and categorize seen and unseen anomalies. To this end, we propose
a model that decouples OVVAD into two mutually complementary tasks – class-agnostic detection and class-specific
classification – and jointly optimizes both tasks. Particularly, we devise a semantic knowledge injection module to
introduce semantic knowledge from large language models
for the detection task, and design a novel anomaly synthesis
module to generate pseudo unseen anomaly videos with the
help of large vision generation models for the classification
task. These semantic knowledge and synthesis anomalies
substantially extend our model’s capability in detecting and
categorizing a variety of seen and unseen anomalies. Extensive experiments on three widely-used benchmarks demonstrate our model achieves state-of-the-art performance on
OVVAD task.

1. Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD), which aims at detecting
unusual events that do not conform to expected patterns,
has become a growing concern in both academia and industry communities due to its promising application prospects
* Corresponding Authors

in, such as, intelligent video surveillance and video content
review. Through several years of vigorous development,
VAD has made significant progress with many works continuously emerging.
Traditional VAD can be broadly classified into two
types based on the supervised mode, i.e., semi-supervised
VAD [17] and weakly supervised VAD [38]. The main difference between them lies in the availability of abnormal
training samples. Although they are different in terms of
supervised mode and model design, both can be roughly
regarded as classification tasks. In the case of semisupervised VAD, it falls under the category of one-class
classification, while weakly supervised VAD pertains to binary classification. Specifically, semi-supervised VAD assumes that only normal samples are available during the
training stage, and the test samples which do not conform
to these normal training samples are identified as anomalies,
as shown in Fig. 1(a). Most existing methods essentially endeavor to learn the one-class pattern, i.e., normal pattern, by
means of one-class classifiers [50] or self-supervised learning technique, e.g. frame reconstruction [9], frame prediction [17], jigsaw puzzles [44], etc. Similarly, as illustrated
in Fig. 1(b), weakly supervised VAD can be seen as a binary
classification task with the assumption that both normal and
abnormal samples are available during the training phase
but the precise temporal annotation of abnormal events are
unknown. Previous approaches widely adopt a binary classifier with the multiple instance learning (MIL) [38] or TopK mechanism [27] to discriminate between normal and abnormal events. In general, existing approaches of both
semi-supervised and weakly supervision VAD restricts their
focus to classification and use corresponding discriminator
to categorize each video frame. While these practices have
achieved significant success on several widely-used benchmarks, they are limited to detecting a closed set of anomaly
categories and are unable to handle arbitrary unseen anomalies. This limitation restricts their application in open-world
scenarios and poses a risk of increasing missing reports,
as many real-world anomalies in actual deployment are not
present in the training data.

18297

