This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cinematic Behavior Transfer via NeRF-based Differentiable Filming
Xuekun Jiang1 * Anyi Rao2 * Jingbo Wang1 Dahua Lin1,3 Bo Dai1
1
Shanghai AI Lab 2 Stanford University 3 Chinese University of Hong Kong
* denotes equal contribution
anyirao@stanford.edu {jiangxuekun, wangjingbo, daibo}@pjlab.org.cn

Figure 1. Given a film shot, a series of visual continuous frames, containing complex camera movement and character motion, we present an
approach that estimates the camera trajectory and character motion in world coordinates. The extracted camera and characters’ behavior can
be applied to new 2D/3D content through our cinematic transfer pipeline. 2D cinematic transfer aims to substitute the characters in the
original shot with new 3D characters while preserving the identical character motion and camera movements. 3D cinematic transfer can
apply the movements of characters and cameras to new characters and scenes, providing more flexibility to modify various properties, such
as lighting, character motion, and camera trajectory.

Abstract
In the evolving landscape of digital media and video production, the precise manipulation and reproduction of visual
elements like camera movements and character actions are
highly desired. Existing SLAM methods face limitations in
dynamic scenes and human pose estimation often focuses on
2D projections, neglecting 3D statuses. To address these issues, we first introduce a reverse filming behavior estimation
technique. It optimizes camera trajectories by leveraging
NeRF as a differentiable renderer and refining SMPL tracks.
We then introduce a cinematic transfer pipeline that is able
to transfer various shot types to a new 2D video or a 3D virtual environment. The incorporation of 3D engine workflow
enables superior rendering and control abilities, which also
achieves a higher rating in the user study.

1. Introduction
With the ongoing increase in media consumption, creators
are consistently exploring innovative techniques to enhance

the viewing experience, reduce production costs, and create
compelling narratives. Thus, the ability to manipulate and
reproduce specific visual elements, such as camera movements and character behaviors, has long been a sought-after
capability in the realm of digital media and video production,
as it helps maintain continuity and transfer a particular style
or a unique mood from one scene to another.
It is challenging to replicate specific camera and character
behaviors across different video clips. Manually achieving
it can be both time-consuming and prone to inconsistencies.
Alternatively, one can adopt SLAM [4, 23, 24] and SMPL
estimation [13] to respectively recover camera poses and
human poses, yet they struggle to handle complex scenarios
with both camera and character behaviors. Although SLAM
and SMPL estimation can be used together [7, 18, 31] to infer
both camera and character behaviors, it still has problems of
mismatch with the original shot due to the noise caused by
dynamic content. Recently, some researchers [28, 32] took
advantage of NeRF [15] to inverse-optimize camera poses
with fewer effects from dynamic content. Nevertheless, they

6723

