This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LP++: A Surprisingly Strong Linear Probe for Few-Shot CLIP

Jose Dolz1

Yunshi Huang1 *
Malik Boudiaf1
1

Fereshteh Shakeri1∗
Houda Bahig2
Ismail Ben Ayed1

ÉTS Montréal, 2 Université de Montréal

In a recent, strongly emergent literature on few-shot
CLIP adaptation, Linear Probe (LP) has been often reported as a weak baseline. This has motivated intensive
research building convoluted prompt learning or feature
adaptation strategies. In this work, we propose and examine from convex-optimization perspectives a generalization
of the standard LP baseline, in which the linear classifier
weights are learnable functions of the text embedding, with
class-wise multipliers blending image and text knowledge.
As our objective function depends on two types of variables,
i.e., the class visual prototypes and the learnable blending
parameters, we propose a computationally efficient block
coordinate Majorize-Minimize (MM) descent algorithm. In
our full-batch MM optimizer, which we coin LP++, step
sizes are implicit, unlike standard gradient descent practices where learning rates are intensively searched over validation sets. By examining the mathematical properties of
our loss (e.g., Lipschitz gradient continuity), we build majorizing functions yielding data-driven learning rates and
derive approximations of the loss’s minima, which provide
data-informed initialization of the variables. Our imagelanguage objective function, along with these non-trivial
optimization insights and ingredients, yields, surprisingly,
highly competitive few-shot CLIP performances. Furthermore, LP++ operates in black-box, relaxes intensive validation searches for the optimization hyper-parameters, and
runs orders-of-magnitudes faster than state-of-the-art fewshot CLIP adaptation methods. Our code is available
at: https://github.com/FereshteShakeri/
FewShot-CLIP-Strong-Baseline.git.

1. Introduction
Recently, there has been a growing popularity in multimodal learning methods, which process and merge information from diverse modalities. In particular, large* Equal contribution.
Correspondence to yunshi.huang@etsmtl.ca,
fereshteh.shakeri.1@etsmtl.net

Accuracy (%)

Abstract

65
64
63
62
61
60
59
58
57
56 0
10

CoOp
Tip-Adapter-F*
Tip-Adapter-F
Clip-Adapter
PLOT
KgCoOp
ProGrad
LP++
101

Time (sec)

102

103

Figure 1. Comparison of LP++ with state-of-the-art few-shot
CLIP methods in the 1-shot setting across 11 datasets. We compute the mean accuracy and standard deviation using 10 random
tasks for each dataset. The error bars indicate the average standard deviation over all 11 datasets. The x-axis represents the run
time for one task, averaged over the 11 datasets. Tip-Adapter-F
and Tip-Adapter-F∗ are two re-implementations of Tip-AdapterF [28], with fixed and grid-search hyper-parameters, respectively
(implementation details provided in Sec. 3.2).

scale vision-language models (VLMs), such as CLIP [23]
and ALIGN [15], have attracted wide attention and made
substantial progress in computer vision, showing promising generalization capabilities in various downstream tasks.
Unlike conventional task-specific models that are trained
with a predetermined set of labels, these so-called foundation models learn to align images with text, in an openvocabulary fashion. They train, via contrastive learning, vision and text embeddings jointly using a large-scale amount
of image-text pairs collected over the internet, thereby
leveraging the rich semantic knowledge inherent to language (e.g., concept hierarchies). For a given downstream
image classification task, vision-language embeddings enable zero-shot predictions, without re-training, using textual descriptions of the classes (a.k.a prompts). For instance, for a given class k, a textual description of the class,

23773

