This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Fitting Flats to Flats
Gabriel Dogadov
Ugo Finnendahl
Marc Alexa
TU Berlin, Computer Graphics Group
cg.tu-berlin.de

Abstract
Affine subspaces of Euclidean spaces are also referred
to as flats. A standard task in computer vision, or more
generally in engineering and applied sciences, is fitting a
flat to a set of points, which is commonly solved using the
PCA. We generalize this technique to enable fitting a flat to
a set of other flats, possibly of varying dimensions, based
on representing the flats as squared distance fields. Compared to previous approaches such as Riemannian centers
of mass in the manifold of affine Grassmannians, our approach is conceptually much simpler and computationally
more efficient, yet offers desirable properties such as respecting symmetries and being equivariant to rigid transformations, leading to more intuitive and useful results in
practice. We demonstrate these claims in a number of synthetic experiments and a multi-view reconstruction task of
line-like objects.

1. Introduction
Affine subspaces of Euclidean spaces, also called flats,
are the basic entities in affine geometry, and are foundational building blocks for computations in computer vision, computer graphics, and generally all engineering disciplines. To motivate this work with a concrete example,
notice that a point observed in a calibrated camera gives
rise to a line in 3-space. Observing the same point in several
cameras allows recovering its position by fitting a point to
the collection of lines. Minimizing the squared distances to
the lines only requires solving a linear system. Now imagine the features observed in the images are lines, giving rise
to planes in each camera view. We would like to fit a line to
the set of observed planes. Surprisingly, despite the problem appearing almost identical, there is no established ’standard’ solution to this problem.
Conversely, we often have to work with samples (observations) in some Euclidean space. The PCA [29] is arguably
the standard way to fit a line or plane to the observation if
they are points in space – but what do we do if the observations are lines or planes?

Approaching these problems in a systematic way commonly leads to Grassmannians, the manifold of linear subspaces. Similar to how homogeneous coordinates of Euclidean space lead to a representation of projective space,
Grassmannians can be projectivized and then represent
flats. The first and likely best-known example are Plücker
coordinates for affine lines in R3 [5, 16, 27]. One may argue
that the resulting spaces are not strictly representing flats, as
they also contain ideal elements, i.e., flats ’at infinity’. This
is rectified in the explicit construction of a Grassmannian
of affine subspaces [23]. While the manifold of the former construction is represented by the Klein quadric (and
its generalizations), the latter is described by orthogonality
conditions, a so-called Stiefel manifold (we review several
representations of flats in Sec. 2). It has been argued [22]
that computation on Stiefel manifolds is more convenient
and better established [1, 2, 8]. Still, the mathematical sophistication and complexity of necessary computations for
something as mundane as the mean of a set of affine lines
or planes in 3D, let alone fitting flats to flats of different dimensions, is baffling when one compares it to the simplicity
of fitting a point or fitting to points.
In this work, we provide a simple framework, based on
representing flats as squared distance fields (see Sec. 2 for
details on the representation and the relation to other representations). As we derive in Sec. 4, it allows fitting a flat of
desired dimension k to a given set of flats of arbitrary and
possibly varying dimension. Importantly, we show that it
is equivariant under rigid transformations, the isometries of
affine space. Unlike Plücker coordinates and related representations, the representation is unoriented, which together
with equivariance immediately implies that both angles as
well as distances are bisected by least-squares fits to two
flats. To our knowledge, this is the first method with these
very natural properties. In addition, the necessary computations are similar to fitting flats to points with the PCA,
with the most complex operation being the eigendecomposition of a symmetric PSD matrix. An interpretation of the
procedure as projected means in ambient space leads to extensions to Lp means, enabling more robust fitting in the
presence of outliers using the L1 -norm.

5439

