This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOISDF: Constraining 3D Hand-Object Pose Estimation with Global Signed
Distance Fields
Haozhe Qi
Chen Zhao
Mathieu Salzmann
Alexander Mathis
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Switzerland
[first name].[surname]@epfl.ch

Abstract
Human hands are highly articulated and versatile at
handling objects. Jointly estimating the 3D poses of a hand
and the object it manipulates from a monocular camera
is challenging due to frequent occlusions. Thus, existing
methods often rely on intermediate 3D shape representations to increase performance. These representations are
typically explicit, such as 3D point clouds or meshes, and
thus provide information in the direct surroundings of the
intermediate hand pose estimate. To address this, we introduce HOISDF, a Signed Distance Field (SDF) guided
hand-object pose estimation network, which jointly exploits
hand and object SDFs to provide a global, implicit representation over the complete reconstruction volume. Specifically, the role of the SDFs is threefold: equip the visual
encoder with implicit shape information, help to encode
hand-object interactions, and guide the hand and object
pose regression via SDF-based sampling and by augmenting the feature representations. We show that HOISDF
achieves state-of-the-art results on hand-object pose estimation benchmarks (DexYCB and HO3Dv2). Code is available at https://github.com/amathislab/HOISDF.

1. Introduction
Pose estimation during hand-object interaction from a single monocular view can contribute to widespread applications, e.g., in augmented reality [10], robotics [2, 15],
human-computer interaction [42], and neuroscience [36].
Many excellent 3D hand [32, 45, 51, 58] and object [8, 25,
41] pose estimation algorithms have been developed. However, due to severe occlusion, they can easily fail during
hand-object interactions. This has led to the emergence of
dedicated hand-object interaction datasets [7, 18, 20, 35],
and subsequently joint hand-object pose estimation has
drawn increasing attention. Despite much progress, most
methods still struggle when the hand or object is heavily
occluded [11, 19, 22, 30, 39, 47, 49]. We argue that this
limitation is rooted in the way 3D shape information is embedded in these algorithms.

In essence, existing methods can be classified into two
approaches: Direct lifting and coarse-to-fine methods (see
Figure 1). Direct lifting methods first filter 2D image features according to the pixel positions of the hand and object and then use the remaining features to make predictions [11, 19, 30, 33, 39]. These methods do not utilize
explicit 3D intermediate representations and rely entirely
on the network to learn the mapping from 2D image to
3D pose. Coarse-to-fine techniques make an initial prediction from the 2D image and improve upon it with a refinement network [12, 13, 22, 47, 49]. The intermediate representations can either be hand joints [12, 13] or hand vertices [22, 47, 49], which can be interpreted as explicit shape
representations. Although these representations can incorporate 3D shape information, we argue that implicit shape
representations in the form of signed distance fields (SDFs)
offer more effective 3D shape information for subsequent
computations.
To achieve this, we introduce HOISDF (a Hand-Object
Interaction pose estimation network with Signed-Distance
Fields), which uses SDFs to guide the 3D hand-object pose
estimation in a global manner (Figure 1). HOISDF consists
of two sequential components: a module learning to predict the signed distance field, and a module that performs
pose regression that is field-guided (Figure 2). The signed
distance field learning module regresses the hand and object signed distance fields based on the image features. The
module is encouraged to focus on capturing global information (e.g., rough hand/object shape, global rotation and
translation) by regressing signed distances in the original
camera space, since we believe global plausibility is more
important in the intermediate stage, while fine-grained details can be recovered in the later stages. To effectively
leverage the dense field information, our field-guided pose
regression module effectively uses the learned field information to (i) sample informative query points, (ii) augment
the image features for those points, (iii) gather cross-target
(i.e., hand-to-object or object-to-hand) cues to reduce the
influence of mutual occlusion, and (iv) combine the point
features together to estimate the hand and object poses.

10392

