This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Towards Robust Event-guided Low-Light Image Enhancement: A Large-Scale
Real-World Event-Image Dataset and Novel Approach
Guoqiang Liang1
1

Kanghao Chen1

AI Thrust, HKUST(GZ)

2

Hangyu Li1

Yunfan Lu1

Lin Wang1,2 *

Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST

{gliang041,kchen879,hli886,ylu066}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn, linwang@ust.hk
Project Page: https://vlislab22.github.io/eg-lowlight/

Abstract
Event camera has recently received much attention for
low-light image enhancement (LIE) thanks to their distinct
advantages, such as high dynamic range. However, current research is prohibitively restricted by the lack of largescale, real-world, and spatial-temporally aligned eventimage datasets. To this end, we propose a real-world (indoor and outdoor) dataset comprising over 30K pairs of
images and events under both low and normal illumination conditions. To achieve this, we utilize a robotic arm
that traces a consistent non-linear trajectory to curate the
dataset with spatial alignment precision under 0.03mm. We
then introduce a matching alignment strategy, rendering
90% of our dataset with errors less than 0.01s. Based on
the dataset, we propose a novel event-guided LIE approach,
called EvLight, towards robust performance in real-world
low-light scenes. Specifically, we first design the multiscale holistic fusion branch to extract holistic structural and
textural information from both events and images. To ensure robustness against variations in the regional illumination and noise, we then introduce a Signal-to-Noise-Ratio
(SNR)-guided regional feature selection to selectively fuse
features of images from regions with high SNR and enhance
those with low SNR by extracting regional structure information from events. Extensive experiments on our dataset
and the synthetic SDSD dataset demonstrate our EvLight
significantly surpasses the frame-based methods, e.g., [4]
by 1.14 dB and 2.62 dB, respectively.

1. Introduction
Images captured under sub-optimal lighting conditions often exhibit various types of degradation such as poor visibility, noise, and inaccurate color [23]. For this reason,
low-light image enhancement (LIE) serves as an essential
* Corresponding author

(a) Input low-light image

(b) Input event

(c) Retinexformer [4]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. A challenging example of our dataset containing an extremely low-light image (a) and sparse events (b). Compared with
the result from a SOTA frame-based method Retinexformer [4]
(c), our EvLight (d) not only recovers the structure details (e.g.,
the pipe on the ceiling) but also avoids over-enhancement and saturation in the bright regions (e.g., the lights).

task in ameliorating low-light image quality. LIE is crucial for downstream tasks, e.g., face detection [27, 50] and
nighttime semantic segmentation [29]. Recently, with the
emergence of deep learning, abundant frame-based methods
have been proposed, ranging from enhancing contrast [54],
removing noise [47] to correcting color [38]. Although the
performance has been remarkably boosted, these methods
often suffer from unbalanced exposure and color distortion
when the visual details, e.g., edges, provided by framebased cameras are less distinctive, as shown in Fig. 1 (c).
Event cameras are bio-inspired sensors that generate
event streams with high dynamic range (HDR), high temporal resolution, etc. [33, 55]. However, few research efforts
have been made in combining both frame-based and event

23

