This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Backpropagation-free Network for 3D Test-time Adaptation
Yanshuo Wang1,2 , Ali Cheraghian2 , Zeeshan Hayder2 , Jie Hong1,2 ,* Sameera Ramasinghe5 ,
Shafin Rahman3 , David Ahmedt-Aristizabal2 , Xuesong Li1,2 , Lars Petersson2 , Mehrtash Harandi2,4
1
Australian National University, 2 Data61-CSIRO, Australia
3
North South University, Bangladesh, 4 Monash University, Australia
5
Amazon, Australia
{yanshuo.wang, jie.hong, xuesong.li}@anu.edu.au,
{ali.cheraghian, zeeshan.hayder, david.ahmedtaristizabal, lars.petersson}@data61.csiro.au,
shafin.rahman@northsouth.edu, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu, ramasisa@amazon.com

Abstract
Real-world systems often encounter new data over time,
which leads to experiencing target domain shifts. Existing Test-Time Adaptation (TTA) methods tend to apply computationally heavy and memory-intensive backpropagationbased approaches to handle this. Here, we propose a
novel method that uses a backpropagation-free approach
for TTA for the specific case of 3D data. Our model uses
a two-stream architecture to maintain knowledge about the
source domain as well as complementary target-domainspecific information. The backpropagation-free property of
our model helps address the well-known forgetting problem and mitigates the error accumulation issue. The proposed method also eliminates the need for the usually noisy
process of pseudo-labeling and reliance on costly selfsupervised training. Moreover, our method leverages subspace learning, effectively reducing the distribution variance between the two domains. Furthermore, the sourcedomain-specific and the target-domain-specific streams are
aligned using a novel entropy-based adaptive fusion strategy. Extensive experiments on popular benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. The code will
be available at https:// github.com/ abie- e/
BFTT3D.

1. Introduction
In recent years, 3D point cloud processing has experienced
significant growth [32, 33, 47, 51], driven largely by advances in deep learning techniques. While researchers have
made commendable contributions in these areas, their focus
has predominantly been on controlled environments. A notable real-world scenario is Test-Time Adaptation (TTA),
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. (a) Baseline. When faced with new point cloud samples at test time t, most existing methods generate the pseudolabels and train the source model in a self-supervised manner. (b)
Backpropagation-free test-time 3D model (BFTT3D). BFTT3D
adopts a backpropagation-free adaptation module to output the
target-specific logit, which fuses with the logit from the source
model for prediction. Compared to the baseline, BFTT3D does
not require any pseudo-labeling process and backpropagation.

which has recently gained substantial attention from researchers [9, 10, 18, 23, 24, 28, 37, 43, 54], owing to its
critical applications in practical settings. In TTA, the model
must rapidly adapt to new test samples during testing to
provide accurate final predictions. For example, consider
a self-driving car equipped with a lidar object detector designed to locate humans and cars on the street. Although
this detector may have been trained exclusively under ideal
weather conditions, it must swiftly adapt to new environments during test time, such as snowy or rainy weather conditions. This highlights the pressing need to adopt TTA to
ensure the car can adapt swiftly to these dynamic environments without extensive retraining. In this paper, we endeavor to propose an innovative and efficient method for

23231

