This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AllSpark: Reborn Labeled Features from Unlabeled in Transformer for
Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Haonan Wang*, Qixiang Zhang*, Yi Li, Xiaomeng LiB
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{hwanggr, qzhangcq, ylini}@connect.ust.hk, eexmli@ust.hk

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a dense prediction task that aims
to enable deep learning models to have class awareness [5,
30, 33, 48]. However, the success of such approaches
heavily relies on labor-intensive manual labeling. SemiSupervised Semantic Segmentation (SSSS) methods [6, 36,
* Equal contribution.
B Corresponding author.
1 The AllSpark is a powerful Cybertronian artifact in the film of Transformers: Revenge of the Fallen, which can be used to reborn the Transformers. It aligns well with our core idea.

Labeled data flow

GT
(Precise)

…
Separated

…
Intervene

Dominance of labeled flow

…
Unlabeled data flow

(a) Previous
Error Rate (%)

Semi-supervised semantic segmentation (SSSS) has been
proposed to alleviate the burden of time-consuming pixellevel manual labeling, which leverages limited labeled data
along with larger amounts of unlabeled data. Current
state-of-the-art methods train the labeled data with ground
truths and unlabeled data with pseudo labels. However,
the two training flows are separate, which allows labeled
data to dominate the training process, resulting in lowquality pseudo labels and, consequently, sub-optimal results. To alleviate this issue, we present AllSpark 1 , which
reborns the labeled features from unlabeled ones with the
channel-wise cross-attention mechanism. We further introduce a Semantic Memory along with a Channel Semantic Grouping strategy to ensure that unlabeled features adequately represent labeled features. The AllSpark
shed new light on the architecture level designs of SSSS
rather than framework level, which avoids increasingly
complicated training pipeline designs. It can also be regarded as a flexible bottleneck module that can be seamlessly integrated into a general transformer-based segmentation model. The proposed AllSpark outperforms existing methods across all evaluation protocols on Pascal, Cityscapes and COCO benchmarks without bellsand-whistles. Code and model weights are available at:
https://github.com/xmed-lab/AllSpark.

Labeled data flow

…
Pseudo label
(Coarse)

Unlabeled data flow

(b) Ours

12.46

Labeled Set
Unlabeled Set
Validation Set

9.32
5.44
Label-Unlabeled
margin
0.11

SupOnly

5.54

Label-Val
margin

4.63

0.25

Previous

5.11

0.80

Ours

(c) Illustration of the dominance of labeled data issue

Figure 1. (a)(b) Comparison between the training data flows of
previous methods and ours. Previous methods separate the labeled
and unlabeled data training flows thus leading to dominance of the
labeled data. (c) Dominance of labeled data issue of the previous
method (e.g., UniMatch [50]). The red margin denotes how the labeled data overwhelm the unlabeled; Larger gray margin indicates
the model may over-fit to labeled data.

40, 41, 45, 50, 59], which are built upon the principles of
semi-supervised learning [1, 22, 34, 54], are well-studied
to train models using a limited amount of labeled data in
conjunction with a larger amount of unlabeled data.
Most state-of-the-art SSSS methods [23, 24, 26, 31, 50]
are based on the pseudo labeling [22, 34] scheme, where the
unlabeled data is assigned pseudo labels based on model
predictions. The model is then iteratively trained using
these pseudo labeled data as if they were labeled examples.
Based on the training flows of the labeled and unlabeled
data, the current state-of-the-arts can be mainly divided into
two categories: (1) successive, the most representative one
is the teacher-student-based framework [17, 20, 36, 44, 45,
56], where a student model is first trained with labeled data,
then a teacher model updated by the exponential moving av-

3627

