This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MobileCLIP: Fast Image-Text Models through Multi-Modal Reinforced Training
Pavan Kumar Anasosalu Vasu*

Hadi Pouransari⇤
Fartash Faghri⇤
Oncel Tuzel
Apple

Raviteja Vemulapalli

{panasosaluvasu,mpouransari,fartash,r_vemulapalli,otuzel}@apple.com

Abstract
Contrastive pretraining of image-text foundation models, such as CLIP, demonstrated excellent zero-shot performance and improved robustness on a wide range of
downstream tasks. However, these models utilize large
transformer-based encoders with significant memory and
latency overhead which pose challenges for deployment on
mobile devices. In this work, we introduce MobileCLIP –
a new family of efficient image-text models optimized for
runtime performance along with a novel and efficient training approach, namely multi-modal reinforced training. The
proposed training approach leverages knowledge transfer
from an image captioning model and an ensemble of strong
CLIP encoders to improve the accuracy of efficient models. Our approach avoids train-time compute overhead by
storing the additional knowledge in a reinforced dataset.
MobileCLIP sets a new state-of-the-art latency-accuracy
tradeoff for zero-shot classification and retrieval tasks on
several datasets. Our MobileCLIP-S2 variant is 2.3⇥ faster
while more accurate compared to previous best CLIP model
based on ViT-B/16. We further demonstrate the effectiveness of our multi-modal reinforced training by training a
CLIP model based on ViT-B/16 image backbone and achieving +2.9% average performance improvement on 38 evaluation benchmarks compared to the previous best. Moreover,
we show that the proposed approach achieves 10⇥-1000⇥
improved learning efficiency when compared with nonreinforced CLIP training. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/apple/ml-mobileclip

1. Introduction
Large image-text foundation models, such as CLIP [47],
have demonstrated excellent zero-shot performance and improved robustness [15] across a wide range of downstream
tasks [30]. However, deploying these models on mobile devices is challenging due to their large size and high latency.
* Equal contribution.

Figure 1. MobileCLIP models are fast and accurate. Comparison
of publicly available CLIP models with MobileCLIP trained on our
DataCompDR dataset. Latency is measured on iPhone12 Pro Max.
65.2
65.6

62.3

62.3

59.7
56.8

76.2

76.8

84.4
81.9

57.3

61.2

54.6
62.2
58.7

50.4
55.5

68.4

Figure 2. DataCompDR dataset improves all metrics. Zero-shot
performance of CLIP models with ViT-B/16 image encoder.

Our goal is to design a new family of aligned imagetext encoders suitable for mobile devices. There are two
main challenges towards realizing this goal. First, there is a
tradeoff between runtime performance (e.g., latency) and the
accuracy of different architectures, therefore we should be
able to quickly and thoroughly analyze different architectural
designs. Large-scale training of CLIP models is computation-

15963

