This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

V ISTA -LL A MA: Reducing Hallucination in Video Language Models via Equal
Distance to Visual Tokens
Fan Ma1 , Xiaojie Jin2∗ , Heng Wang2 , Yuchen Xian1 , Jiashi Feng2 , Yi Yang1∗
1
Zhejiang University 2 ByteDance Inc.

Abstract
Recent advances in large video-language models have displayed promising outcomes in video comprehension. Current
approaches straightforwardly convert video into language
tokens and employ large language models for multi-modal
tasks. However, this method often leads to the generation
of irrelevant content, commonly known as “hallucination”,
as the length of the text increases and the impact of the
video diminishes. To address this problem, we propose
V ISTA -LL A MA, a novel framework that maintains the consistent distance between all visual tokens and any language
tokens, irrespective of the generated text length. V ISTA LL A MA omits relative position encoding when determining
attention weights between visual and text tokens, retaining
the position encoding for text and text tokens. This amplifies
the effect of visual tokens on text generation, especially when
the relative distance is longer between visual and text tokens.
The proposed attention mechanism significantly reduces the
chance of producing irrelevant text related to the video content. Furthermore, we present a sequential visual projector
that projects the current video frame into tokens of language
space with the assistance of the previous frame. This approach not only captures the temporal relationship within
the video, but also allows less visual tokens to encompass
the entire video. Our approach significantly outperforms
various previous methods (e.g., Video-ChatGPT, MovieChat)
on four challenging open-ended video question answering
benchmarks. We reach an accuracy of 60.7 on the zero-shot
NExT-QA and 60.5 on the zero-shot MSRVTT-QA, setting a
new state-of-the-art performance. This project is available
at https://jinxxian.github.io/Vista-LLaMA.

1. Introduction
The surge in multi-modal vision-and-language models [1,
12, 14], capable of comprehending both visual (e.g., image/video) and language data, can be attributed to the recent
∗ Corresponding author

LLaMA

[Answer 1]
A cat.

[Video Frames]
[Question]
What animal
is shown in
the video？

Vanilla Attention
Vista-LLaMA

[Answer 2]
A dog.

Visual Tokens
Text Tokens

EDVT Attention

Figure 1. Video language processing with LLaMA [26] and our
V ISTA -LL A MA. The vanilla LLaMA treats visual tokens ( )
the same as other language tokens ( ), weakening the impact for
tokens in long distance. Our model retains the same mechanism
for language tokens and strengthens the impact of the visual tokens.
The intensity of the impact of each token is conveyed through the
depth of the line color ( ). Our model provides the accurate
response for the presented scenario.

achievements of large language models (LLMs) such as
GPT [8], GLM [38], and LLaMA [40]. Video-language
models (video-LMs) pose greater challenges in scaling due
to increased computational and annotation costs compared
to image-language models (image-LMs). Recent research
has therefore focused on effectively training video-LMs by
utilizing pre-trained image-LMs [22, 40].
Video-LMs benefit from this warm-start approach to enhance visual representation learning by projecting video
frames into language space and treating videos as several
prompt language tokens [18, 34]. However, this diminishes
the visual impact of videos on text generation and lacks explicit temporal modeling in videos. The generated text is
often not related to the video content, as depicted in Figure 1, a phenomenon known as hallucination in language
processing [6]. The distance between the generated text
token and the visual tokens in large language models may

13151

