This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EVC AP: Retrieval-Augmented Image Captioning
with External Visual–Name Memory for Open-World Comprehension

1

Jiaxuan Li1∗ , Duc Minh Vo1∗ , Akihiro Sugimoto2 , Hideki Nakayama1
The University of Tokyo, Japan 2 National Institute of Informatics, Japan

{li,vmduc}@nlab.ci.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

sugimoto@nii.ac.jp

● GT: A person wearing ice skates on a wood floor.

Abstract

1. Introduction
Advanced image captioning based on large language models (LLMs) [3, 8, 9, 25] has focused on the approach using
big-scale models trained on ever-increasingly large-scale
datasets, which is no longer viable. This is because the computational cost to train the models increases exponentially
and, more importantly, updating training data is almost impossible to keep pace with the growth of novel objects in
our daily lives. Sustaining ever-changing object knowledge
with a reasonable cost is a pressing concern in LLMs-based
models to truly unlock open-world comprehension.
Retrieval-augmented image captioning [20, 35] is
*Equal contributions. Code is available at https://jiaxuan-li.github.io/EVCap.

● SmallCap: A person riding a skateboard on top of a
wooden floor. ✕
● BLIP-2: A person is skating on an ice rink. ✕
● EVCap: A pair of ice skates on top of a wooden floor. ✓
PaLI
OSCAR
ClipCap

CogVLM
ViECap
SmallCap

REVEAL
RCA-NOC
MiniGPT4

105

125

BLIP-2
VinVL
EVCap (Ours)

145

CIDEr Score on NoCaps

Large language models (LLMs)-based image captioning
has the capability of describing objects not explicitly observed in training data; yet novel objects occur frequently,
necessitating the requirement of sustaining up-to-date object knowledge for open-world comprehension. Instead of
relying on large amounts of data and/or scaling up network parameters, we introduce a highly effective retrievalaugmented image captioning method that prompts LLMs
with object names retrieved from External Visual–name
memory (EVC AP). We build ever-changing object knowledge memory using objects’ visuals and names, enabling us
to (i) update the memory at a minimal cost and (ii) effortlessly augment LLMs with retrieved object names by utilizing a lightweight and fast-to-train model. Our model,
which was trained only on the COCO dataset, can adapt
to out-of-domain without requiring additional fine-tuning
or re-training. Our experiments conducted on benchmarks
and synthetic commonsense-violating data show that EVC AP, with only 3.97M trainable parameters, exhibits superior performance compared to other methods based on
frozen pre-trained LLMs. Its performance is also competitive to specialist SOTAs that require extensive training.

nakayama@ci.i.u-tokyo.ac.jp

135
125
115
105
95
85
75
65
55
85

95

115

135

145

155

CIDEr Score on COCO

Figure 1. Overall comparison of our EVC AP and SOTAs. (Upper)
Generated captions by SmallCap, BLIP-2, and our EVC AP for a
commonsense-violating image from the WHOOPS dataset.  \times  and
 \checkmark  indicate incorrect and correct predictions, respectively. Incorrect objects in captions are highlighted in red , while correct ones
are in blue . SmallCap and BLIP-2 give incorrect predictions for
“ice skates” and “wood floor”, respectively, while our EVC AP
utilizes an external visual–name memory to enhance attention to
objects within the image, leading to superior performance for image captioning. (Lower) Comparison of the number of trainable
parameters, CIDEr score on COCO and NoCaps datasets. The
size of each circle reflects the log number of trainable parameters.
EVC AP (3.97M) has less trainable parameters than others while
achieving comparable results with SOTAs at scale.

emerging as an alternative since it considerably reduces
training costs in both time and data while producing encouraging results. Nonetheless, with their huge datastore,
it is obvious that LLMs would imitate the given texts, limiting their ability to describe open-world objects properly.
For instance, SmallCap [35] considers the words “skateboard” and “wooden floor” to be a pair regardless of visual appearances containing a commonsense-violating pair

13733

