This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generalizable Face Landmarking Guided by Conditional Face Warping
Jiayi Liang1 Haotian Liu1 * Hongteng Xu2,3 Dixin Luo1,4†
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods, Beijing
4
Key Laboratory of Artificial Intelligence, Ministry of Education, Shanghai
{jiayi.liang, haotianliu, dixin.luo}@bit.edu.cn, hongtengxu@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
As a significant step for human face modeling, editing,
and generation, face landmarking aims at extracting facial
keypoints from images. A generalizable face landmarker is
required in practice because real-world facial images, e.g.,
the avatars in animations and games, are often stylized in
various ways. However, achieving generalizable face landmarking is challenging due to the diversity of facial styles
and the scarcity of labeled stylized faces. In this study, we
propose a simple but effective paradigm to learn a generalizable face landmarker based on labeled real human faces
and unlabeled stylized faces. Our method learns the face
landmarker as the key module of a conditional face warper.
Given a pair of real and stylized facial images, the conditional face warper predicts a warping field from the real
face to the stylized one, in which the face landmarker predicts the ending points of the warping field and provides us
with high-quality pseudo landmarks for the corresponding
stylized facial images. Applying an alternating optimization
strategy, we learn the face landmarker to minimize i) the
discrepancy between the stylized faces and the warped real
ones and ii) the prediction errors of both real and pseudo
landmarks. Experiments on various datasets show that our
method outperforms existing state-of-the-art domain adaptation methods in face landmarking tasks, leading to a face
landmarker with better generalizability. Code is available
at https://plustwo0.github.io/project-face-landmarker.

1. Introduction
Face landmarking seeks to extract human facial keypoints
(e.g., eyes, nose, facial contour, and so on) from facial images. This task is important for many applications in the
field of computer vision and graphics, such as face recogni* The first two authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Both commercial software like Face++ and open-source
method like SLPT [52] work well on landmarking real faces (e.g.,
those in 300W [38]) while achieving suboptimal performance
when landmarking stylized faces (e.g., those in CariFace [4] and
ArtiFace [55]). While existing domain adaptation method does not
improve the performance significantly, our method achieves a generalizable face landmarker for various facial images.

tion [1, 28, 33, 43, 53], face stylization [5], and 3D face reconstruction [11, 26, 37]. Currently, many open-source and
commercial face landmarkers [19, 51, 58] have been developed and achieved encouraging performance in this task.
Most existing face landmarkers are designed and trained
for landmarking real human faces, while the rapid development of AIGC applications, such as artistic character
creation and cartoon generation [2, 15], leads to a massive increase in demands for landmarking stylized facial
images. Unfortunately, as shown in Fig. 1, existing face
landmarkers often fail to landmark stylized facial images.
Even if applying state-of-the-art domain adaptation strategies [12, 25, 27, 59, 61], the generalizability of the learned
landmarkers in the stylized facial image domain is still unsatisfactory. Essentially, traditional face landmarkers work

2425

