This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PEM: Prototype-based Efficient MaskFormer for Image Segmentation
Niccolò Cavagnero*,1 , Gabriele Rosi*,1,2 , Claudia Cuttano1 , Francesca Pistilli1 ,
Marco Ciccone1 , Giuseppe Averta1,2 , Fabio Cermelli2
1
Politecnico di Torino, 2 Focoos AI
1
name.surname@polito.it, 2 name.surname@focoos.ai
Abstract
Recent transformer-based architectures have shown impressive results in the field of image segmentation. Thanks
to their flexibility, they obtain outstanding performance in
multiple segmentation tasks, such as semantic and panoptic,
under a single unified framework. To achieve such impressive performance, these architectures employ intensive operations and require substantial computational resources,
which are often not available, especially on edge devices.
To fill this gap, we propose Prototype-based Efficient MaskFormer (PEM), an efficient transformer-based architecture
that can operate in multiple segmentation tasks. PEM proposes a novel prototype-based cross-attention which leverages the redundancy of visual features to restrict the computation and improve the efficiency without harming the performance. In addition, PEM introduces an efficient multiscale feature pyramid network, capable of extracting features that have high semantic content in an efficient way,
thanks to the combination of deformable convolutions and
context-based self-modulation. We benchmark the proposed
PEM architecture on two tasks, semantic and panoptic segmentation, evaluated on two different datasets, Cityscapes
and ADE20K. PEM demonstrates outstanding performance
on every task and dataset, outperforming task-specific architectures while being comparable and even better than
computationally expensive baselines. Code is available at
https://github.com/NiccoloCavagnero/PEM.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation stands as a cornerstone within the
realm of computer vision and image processing, playing
a pivotal role in the extraction of meaningful information
from digital images. At its core, it involves partitioning an
image into distinct regions, or segments, each representing
a significant object or component within the visual scene.
One of the recent and noteworthy developments in this
domain is the emergence of transformer-based approaches
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. PEM delivers comparable or superior performance in
comparison to existing methods while being the fastest multi-task
architecture for image segmentation.

[4, 5, 20, 37], which offer a unified framework for the various flavors of image segmentation, such as semantic and
panoptic segmentation. These architectures rely on an endto-end set prediction objective, inspired by DETR [2], and
they employ an encoder-decoder architecture to generate
high-resolution visual features and a transformer decoder
to yield a representation for each object. By leveraging
the same architecture, loss function and training pipeline
for different segmentation tasks, these methods obtain outstanding results, outperforming task-specific architectures
while streamlining the segmentation process as a whole.
To achieve their remarkable performance and appealing properties, however, these models require expensive architectural components, resulting in slow and cumbersome
architectures. The overly inefficient inference of existing
methods leads to two important consequences: i) the deployment and inference cost, as well as the carbon footprint
[12, 27], is not negligible, especially when offering cloud
services to millions of users; ii) the computational demand
makes the deployment on edge devices unfeasible, preventing the use on resource-constrained downstream tasks.
In this paper, we rethink their approach with the goal
of doing more with less. We propose a novel image seg-

15804

