This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Neural Underwater Scene Representation
Yunkai Tang1,2†
1
2

Chengxuan Zhu3†

Renjie Wan4∗

Chao Xu3

Boxin Shi1,2∗

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3

National Key Lab of General AI, School of Intelligence Science and Technology, Peking University
4

Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University

tangyunkai@stu.pku.edu.cn, peterzhu@pku.edu.cn, renjiewan@hkbu.edu.hk,
xuchao@cis.pku.edu.cn, shiboxin@pku.edu.cn
https://freebutuselesssoul.github.io/uwnerf
(a) Underwater imaging process

(b) Underwater images with dynamics
(d) Proposed

Object

Unstable in-scattering

Attenuation

Camera

Moving objects
(c)

(e) SeaThru-NeRF

Figure 1. The underwater image capturing process is shown in (a), where an underwater camera captures 3 exemplar images in (b), demonstrating the attenuation, unstable in-scattering and moving objects during light transport as depicted in (c). We then show a comparison of
underwater scene modeling in (d) and (e), between the proposed method and SeaThru-NeRF [15].

Abstract
Among the numerous efforts towards digitally recovering
the physical world, Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) have
proved effective in most cases. However, underwater scene
introduces unique challenges due to the absorbing water
medium, the local change in lighting and the dynamic contents in the scene. We aim at developing a neural underwater scene representation for these challenges, modeling
the complex process of attenuation, unstable in-scattering
and moving objects during light transport. The proposed
method can reconstruct the scenes from both established
datasets and in-the-wild videos with outstanding fidelity.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) achieves promising performance in representing the scenes above the surface of the
water [23, 25]. Can NeRF still model the scenes under water properly?
The answer is negative, due to the widespread “dynamic”
† Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding authors.

phenomena underwater, while vanilla NeRF [23] is tailored
for static scenes only. First, an object becomes more and
more difficult to be observed as its distance to the camera
increases, due to the absorbing property of water. This leads
to the foremost dynamic factor in underwater scenes, that is
1 distance-dependent visibility. Next, the scattering effect of water and the changeable lighting condition introduce another dynamic factor. The illumination observed
from different views are thus time-varying, leading to 2
unstable illumination. Moreover, the underwater ecosystem, teeming with marine life, leads to the third dynamic.
The 3 moving objects such as marine plants and animals
challenge the static assumptions inherent to standard NeRF
models. The synergy of the aforementioned dynamic factors creates an intricate and multifaceted environment that
is difficult for the current NeRF models to comprehend and
represent accurately. Thus, finding a way to manage such
an environment is crucial for the neural representation of
underwater scenes.
Existing underwater image processing methods [1, 7, 14]
aim at removing the effects of water blending, and simplify
the underwater imaging model with priors, such as the dark

11780

