This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Person in Place: Generating Associative Skeleton-Guidance Maps for
Human-Object Interaction Image Editing
ChangHee Yang∗1,2
ChanHee Kang∗1
Kyeongbo Kong∗3
1
Sogang University
AI Lab, CTO Division, LG Electronics2

Hanni Oh1
Suk-Ju Kang†1
Pusan National University3

{yangchanghee2251,kkb4723,hannixxxoh}@gmail.com, jasper695@icloud.com, sjkang@sogang.ac.kr

Figure 1. Human-object interaction (HOI) image editing using generated skeleton: We synthesize human interacting with objects
for an initial image using the automated object-interactive diffuser. (a) an initial image to edit. (b) the sequential process of synthesizing
human image with object-interactive skeletons using textual conditions. Given human bounding box and object bounding box our objectinteractive diffuser generate a skeleton interacting with the object. Then a skeleton guided image editing model edit the image with the
generated skeleton. (c) a final result image with the skeleton map. Our method generates the high quality object interactive skeleton map,
and it can easily plug in to the skeleton guided generative model for HOI image editing.

Abstract
Recently, there were remarkable advances in image editing tasks in various ways. Nevertheless, existing image editing models are not designed for Human-Object Interaction
(HOI) image editing. One of these approaches (e.g. ControlNet) employs the skeleton guidance to offer precise representations of human, showing better results in HOI image
editing. However, using conventional methods, manually
creating HOI skeleton guidance is necessary. This paper
proposes the object interactive diffuser with associative attention that considers both the interaction with objects and
the joint graph structure, automating the generation of HOI
skeleton guidance. Additionally, we propose the HOI loss
with novel scaling parameter, demonstrating its effectiveness in generating skeletons that interact better. To evaluate generated object-interactive skeletons, we propose two
metrics, top-N accuracy and skeleton probabilistic distance.
Our framework integrates object interactive diffuser that
* These authors contributed equally to this work
† Corresponding author

generates object-interactive skeletons with previous methods, demonstrating the outstanding results in HOI image
editing. Finally, we present potentials of our framework
beyond HOI image editing, as applications to human-tohuman interaction, skeleton editing, and 3D mesh optimization. The code is available at https://github.com/
YangChangHee/CVPR2024_Person- In- Place_
RELEASE

1. Introduction
Look at a photograph of a room like Fig. 1 (a), without any human presence. While being inherently fancy, the
scene gains vivacity when people are added. The addition of
people should not be arbitrary, as only plausible person-inplace placements can enhance the scene’s natural dynamics.
For instance, in this case, a woman sitting on the bed, a man
leaning against the bed, a boy sitting on the sofa and a child
looking at the flowerpot would be candidates. Is it possible to synthesize these people altogether with initial image
naturally? This is Human-Object Interaction (HOI) image
editing that we want to solve.
Specifically, an image to edit, person bounding boxes

8164

