This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Describing Differences in Image Sets with Natural Language
Lisa Dunlap∗
UC Berkeley

Yuhui Zhang∗
Stanford

Xiaohan Wang
Stanford

Ruiqi Zhong
UC Berkeley

lisabdunlap@berkeley.edu

yuhuiz@stanford.edu

xhanwang@stanford.edu

ruiqi-zhong@berkeley.edu

Trevor Darrell†
UC Berkeley

Jacob Steinhardt†
UC Berkeley

Joseph E. Gonzalez†
UC Berkeley

Serena Yeung-Levy†
Stanford

trevordarrell@berkeley.edu

jsteinhardt@berkeley.edu

jegonzal@berkeley.edu

syyeung@stanford.edu

…

!!

Output

!! contains more...
"People posing for a picture”

…

!"

Figure 1. Set difference captioning. Given two sets of images DA and DB , output natural language descriptions of concepts which are
more true for DA . In this example, DA and DB are images from the “Dining Table” class in ImageNetV2 and ImageNet, respectively.

Abstract
How do two sets of images differ? Discerning set-level
differences is crucial for understanding model behaviors
and analyzing datasets, yet manually sifting through thousands of images is impractical. To aid in this discovery process, we explore the task of automatically describing the
differences between two sets of images, which we term Set
Difference Captioning. This task takes in image sets DA
and DB , and outputs a description that is more often true
on DA than DB . We outline a two-stage approach that first
proposes candidate difference descriptions from image sets
and then re-ranks the candidates by checking how well they
can differentiate the two sets. We introduce VisDiff, which
first captions the images and prompts a language model
to propose candidate descriptions, then re-ranks these descriptions using CLIP. To evaluate VisDiff, we collect VisDiffBench, a dataset with 187 paired image sets with ground
truth difference descriptions. We apply VisDiff to various
domains, such as comparing datasets (e.g., ImageNet vs.
ImageNetV2), comparing classification models (e.g., zeroshot CLIP vs. supervised ResNet), characterizing differences between generative models (e.g., StableDiffusionV1
and V2), and discovering what makes images memorable.
Using VisDiff, we are able to find interesting and previously
unknown differences in datasets and models, demonstrating
* Equal contribution. † Equal advising. Both orders decided by coin flip.

its utility in revealing nuanced insights.1

1. Introduction
What kinds of images are more likely to cause errors in one
classifier versus another [11, 18]? How do visual concepts
shift from a decade ago to now [20, 33, 53]? What types
of images are more or less memorable for humans [17]?
Answering these questions can help us audit and improve
machine learning systems, understand cultural changes, and
gain insights into human cognition.
Although these questions have been independently studied in prior works, they all share a common desideratum: discovering differences between two sets of images.
However, discovering differences in many, potentially very
large, sets of images is a daunting task for humans. For
example, one could gain insights into human memory by
discovering systematic differences between memorable images and forgettable ones, but finding these differences may
require scanning through thousands of images. An automated solution would be more scalable.
In this work, we explore the task of describing differences between image sets, which we term Set Difference
Captioning (Figure 1). Specifically, given two sets of im1 Project page available at https://understanding-visualdatasets.github.io/VisDiff-website/.

24199

