This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HDQMF: Holographic Feature Decomposition Using Quantum Algorithms
Prathyush Poduval
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92617

Zhuowen Zou
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92617

ppoduval@uci.edu

zhuowez1@uci.edu

Mohsen Imani
University of California, Irvine
Irvine, CA 92617
m.imani@uci.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the decomposition of holographic
feature vectors in Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC)
aka Vector Symbolic Architectures (VSA). HDC uses highdimensional vectors with brain-like properties to represent
symbolic information, and leverages efficient operators to
construct and manipulate complexly structured data in a
cognitive fashion. Existing models face challenges in decomposing these structures, a process crucial for understanding and interpreting a composite hypervector. We address this challenge by proposing the HDC MemorizedFactorization Problem that captures the common patterns
of construction in HDC models. To solve this problem
efficiently, we introduce HDQMF, a HyperDimensional
Quantum Memorized-Factorization algorithm. HDQMF is
unique in its approach, utilizing quantum computing to offer efficient solutions. It modifies crucial steps in Grover’s
algorithm to achieve hypervector decomposition, achieving
quadratic speed-up.

1. Introduction
Hyperdimensional Computing (HDC), synonymously Vector Symbolic Architecture (VSA), has gained much popularity as a framework that provides a natural implementation of cognitive data structure [17]. It represents information using hypervectors, a type of holographic and
high-dimensional vector that satisfies brain-inspired properties [14]. It leverages simple and efficient operations bundle, bind, and permute - that support the three patterns
of combinations that cognitive scientists deemed essential
in a cognitive data structure: variable binding, sequential
structures, and hierarchy [3, 5]. This allows HDC models to
represent and manipulate complex and hierarchically struc-

tured data interpretably, where the similarity between the
hypervectors reflects their structural similarity and componential similarity in a well-defined manner, providing a direct foundation for symbolic logical reasoning.
Recent work has shown great advantages of HDC in enhancing the cognitive capability of neural networks. [10]
proposes a neural-vector-symbolic architecture that tackles
the binding problem in neural networks by training an encoder network to generate HDC-like representation for subsequence symbolic logic processing, significantly outperforming state-of-the-art pure DNN and neuro-symbolic AI
on Raven’s progressive matrices task in both accuracy and
efficiency scaling. Pioneering the development of a neuralvector-symbolic architecture that addresses the limitations
of both neural networks and symbolic methods in accomplishing cognitive tasks, [10] has pointed out many limitations of the current model, one of which is the decomposition problem that recurs in the general usage of HDC.
This paper focuses on the ability of HDC to provide decomposition over a composite data structure. Fundamental to both perception and cognition, the decomposition
problem has been argued to manifest itself in various domains, including visual scene analysis and analogical reasoning [1, 2, 5, 18]. Under the HDC framework, this problem was first modeled as the high-dimensional vector factorization problem [5, 15]: given a hypervector that is the
binding of multiple atomic hypervectors, we want to find
all its constituents with only the codebooks, i.e. the list of
elementary hypervectors. Because the product of binding
does not preserve similarity with its components, this problem traditionally requires an exhaustive search over all possible combinations of the elementary hypervectors to solve
the factorization. The combinatorial nature of this problem makes the search size prohibitively large for exhaustive
searches in practice, limiting the utilization of HDC in prac-

10978

