This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PeLK: Parameter-efficient Large Kernel ConvNets with Peripheral Convolution
Honghao Chen1,2 * Xiangxiang Chu3 Yongjian Ren1,2 Xin Zhao1,2 Kaiqi Huang1,2,4†
1

Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Meituan 4 CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
2

Abstract
Recently, some large kernel convnets strike back with
appealing performance and efficiency. However, given
the square complexity of convolution, scaling up kernels
can bring about an enormous amount of parameters and
the proliferated parameters can induce severe optimization
problem. Due to these issues, current CNNs compromise
to scale up to 51 × 51 in the form of stripe convolution
(i.e., 51 × 5 + 5 × 51) and start to saturate as the kernel size continues growing. In this paper, we delve into
addressing these vital issues and explore whether we can
continue scaling up kernels for more performance gains.
Inspired by human vision, we propose a human-like peripheral convolution that efficiently reduces over 90% parameter count of dense grid convolution through parameter sharing, and manage to scale up kernel size to extremely large.
Our peripheral convolution behaves highly similar to human, reducing the complexity of convolution from O(K 2 ) to
O(log K) without backfiring performance. Built on this, we
propose Parameter-efficient Large Kernel Network (PeLK).
Our PeLK outperforms modern vision Transformers and
ConvNet architectures like Swin, ConvNeXt, RepLKNet and
SLaK on various vision tasks including ImageNet classification, semantic segmentation on ADE20K and object detection on MS COCO. For the first time, we successfully scale
up the kernel size of CNNs to an unprecedented 101 × 101
and demonstrate consistent improvements.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have played a pivotal role in machine learning for decades [16, 19, 20, 35].
However, their dominance has been greatly challenged by
Vision Transformers (ViTs) [6, 12, 24, 42, 47] over recent years. Some works [32, 44] attribute the powerful
performance of ViTs to their large receptive fields: Facil* Work done during internship at Meituan Inc.
† Corresponding author.

itated by self-attention mechanism, ViTs can capture context information from a large spatial scope and model longrange dependencies. Inspired by this, recent advances in
CNNs [11, 23, 25] have revealed that when equipped with
large kernel size (e.g., 31 × 31), pure CNN architecture can
perform on par with or even better than state-of-the-art ViTs
on various vision tasks.
Although large kernel convnets exhibit strong performance and appealing efficiency, a fatal problem exists: the
square complexity O(K 2 ) with respect to kernel size K.
Due to this problem, directly scaling up kernels will bring
about a huge amount of parameters. For instance, the parameter of a 31 × 31 kernel is more than 100× larger than
that of a typical 3 × 3 counterpart in ResNet [16] and about
20× as many as that of the 7 × 7 kernel used in ConvNeXt [25]. The proliferated parameters subsequently induce severe optimization problem, making it useless or even
harmful to directly scale up kernel size [11, 23, 25]. To
solve, RepLKNet [11] re-parameterize a 5×5 kernel parallel to the large one to make up the optimization issue,
SLaK [23] compromise to use stripe convolution to reduce
the complexity to linear and scales up to 51 × 51 (i.e.,
51 × 5 + 5 × 51). However, this is still a limited interaction range for the resolution of downstream tasks (e.g.,
2048 × 512 on ADE20K) and more importantly, stripe convolution lacks the range perception of dense convolution,
thus we conjecture it may undermine the model’s spatial
perception capacity.
In this paper, we first conduct a comprehensive dissection of convolution forms under a unified modern framework (i.e., SLaK [23]). We empirically verify our conjecture that dense grid convolution outperforms stripe convolution with consistent improvements across multiple kernel
sizes. This phenomenon holds not only for classification
task, but even more pronounced for downstream tasks, indicating the essential advantage of dense convolution over
stripe form. Nevertheless, as mentioned above, the square
complexity of large dense convolution leads to the proliferated parameters, causing rapidly increasing model size,
greater optimization difficulty and thus preventing it from

5557

