This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Estimating Noisy Class Posterior with Part-level Labels for Noisy Label Learning
Jianfei Ruan1
Tianze Pan2
Bo Dong3
Rui Zhao1
Bin Shi1 *
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
2
School of Physics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
3
School of Distance Education, Xi’an Jiaotong University, China
rayn z@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, shibin@xjtu.edu.cn
jianfei.ruan@hotmail.com, terryptz@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, dong.bo@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In noisy label learning, estimating noisy class posteriors
plays a fundamental role for developing consistent classifiers, as it forms the basis for estimating clean class posteriors and the transition matrix. Existing methods typically learn noisy class posteriors by training a classification
model with noisy labels. However, when labels are incorrect, these models may be misled to overemphasize the feature parts that do not reflect the instance characteristics, resulting in significant errors in estimating noisy class posteriors. To address this issue, this paper proposes to augment
the supervised information with part-level labels, encouraging the model to focus on and integrate richer information
from various parts. Specifically, our method first partitions
features into distinct parts by cropping instances, yielding
part-level labels associated with these various parts. Subsequently, we introduce a novel single-to-multiple transition matrix to model the relationship between the noisy and
part-level labels, which incorporates part-level labels into
a classifier-consistent framework. Utilizing this framework
with part-level labels, we can learn the noisy class posteriors more precisely by guiding the model to integrate information from various parts, ultimately improving the classification performance. Our method is theoretically sound,
while experiments show that it is empirically effective in
synthetic and real-world noisy benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The increase in model capacity has enabled deep artificial
neural networks to fit almost any data, which unfortunately
makes them prone to memorizing even the mislabeled instances [45, 54]. Thus, to train an effective neural network, a large amount of accurately labeled data is required.
However, obtaining accurate labeling in real-world tasks
* Corresponding author

typically involves manual labeling, which is often timeconsuming and costly [46]. In contrast, massive amounts
of noisy labels are readily available through web crawlers,
questionnaires and crowdsourcing [22].
To reduce the negative impact of noisy labels, various
heuristic strategies are applied to Noisy Label Learning
(NLL), such as selecting reliable samples [6, 15, 17, 22, 43,
48, 53] and correcting labels [23, 40, 44]. Although these
methods can train classifiers that perform well empirically,
they do not guarantee a consistent classifier, meaning that
the classifiers learned from noise-labeled data will not necessarily converge to the optimal one learned from clean data
[46, 54].
To overcome this problem, various classifier-consistent
methods have been proposed, with the most successful
methods employing loss correction procedures [3, 13, 27,
37, 46, 47, 49, 52, 54]. The basic idea of these methods is
that, the clean class posterior P (Y |x) can be inferred from
noisy class posterior P (Ỹ |x) and transition matrix T (x),
from the equation P (Ỹ |x) = T (x)⊤ P (Y |x) 1 . The noisy
class posteriors estimation plays a fundamental role in this
process, directly affecting the calculation of clean class posteriors while also being critical for the accurate transition
matrix estimation [4].
Considering that the ground-truth noisy class posterior
is typically unavailable, existing methods often learn it
through the classification tasks supervised by noisy labels
[3, 13, 27, 37, 46, 47, 49, 52, 54]. In classification, labels
will encourage the model to focus on label-related feature
part to minimize the classification loss. However, when labels are incorrect, models will be misled into overemphasizing the erroneous parts that do not reflect the instance
characteristics. As illustrated in Figure 1a, for an instance
of a ”feathered monkey” labeled as ”bird”, the noisy la1 We define P (Y |x) = [P (Y

= 1|X = x), ..., P (Y = c|X =
x)]⊤ and Tij (x) = P (Ỹ = j|Y = i, X = x), where c denotes the
number of classes, X and Y represents the variable for clean labels and
instances, respectively.

22809

