This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Entangled View-Epipolar Information Aggregation for
Generalizable Neural Radiance Fields

1

Wei Yang2
Yuesong Wang2
Yi Yang1
Zhiyuan Min1
Yawei Luo1, *
2
Zhejiang University, China
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China

{minzhiyuan, yaweiluo, yangyics}@zju.edu.cn

{weiyangcs, yuesongwang}@hust.edu.cn

Figure 1. Given the sampling points along a target ray that are re-projected on the epipolar lines in each source view, existing approaches [43,
49] employ attention mechanism to aggregate the cross-view features for each sampling point and perform epipolar aggregation of sampling
points along the epipolar lines within individual views, either sequentially or circularly. However, our investigation reveals the limitations in
existing strategies: exclusively aggregating cross-view information results in rendering artifacts, stemming from the absence of appearance
continuity between adjacent depth provided by epipolar cues. Conversely, relying solely on epipolar information leads to depth map
discontinuities due to the absence of geometry consistency across multiple views. Our proposed EVE-NeRF harnesses both cross-view and
along-epipolar information in an entangled manner and effectively addresses the above issues.

Abstract
Generalizable NeRF can directly synthesize novel views
across new scenes, eliminating the need for scene-specific
re-training in vanilla NeRF. A critical enabling factor in
these approaches is the extraction of a generalizable 3D
representation by aggregating source-view features. In this
paper, we propose an Entangled View-Epipolar Information
Aggregation method dubbed EVE-NeRF. Different from existing methods that consider cross-view and along-epipolar
information independently, EVE-NeRF conducts the viewepipolar feature aggregation in an entangled manner by
injecting the scene-invariant appearance continuity and geometry consistency priors to the aggregation process. Our
approach effectively mitigates the potential lack of inherent geometric and appearance constraints resulting from
one-dimensional interactions, thus further boosting the 3D
* Corresponding author

representation generalizability. EVE-NeRF attains state-ofthe-art performance across various evaluation scenarios.
Extensive experiments demonstrate that, compared to prevailing single-dimensional aggregation, the entangled network excels in the accuracy of 3D scene geometry and appearance reconstruction. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/tatakai1/EVENeRF.

1. Introduction
The neural radiance fields (NeRF) [35], along with its subsequent refinements [1, 2, 62], have exhibited remarkable efficacy in the domain of novel view synthesis [26, 27, 54, 55],
showcasing immense potential for applications in smart education [28, 33], medical treatment [16, 36], and automatic
driving [29–32]. Despite these advancements, the methods
along this vein often pertain to the training scene thus necessitating re-training for synthesizing new scenes. Such

4906

