This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HiLo: Detailed and Robust 3D Clothed Human Reconstruction with
High-and Low-Frequency Information of Parametric Models
Yifan Yang1,2 * Dong Liu1 * Shuhai Zhang1,2 Zeshuai Deng1 Zixiong Huang1 Mingkui Tan1,2,3†
1
South China University of Technology 2 Pazhou Lab
3
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
{seyoungyif, sesmildong, mszhangshuhai, sedengzeshuai, sesmilhzx}@mail.scut.edu.cn
mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Reconstructing 3D clothed human involves creating a
detailed geometry of individuals in clothing, with applications ranging from virtual try-on, movies, to games. To
enable practical and widespread applications, recent advances propose to generate a clothed human from an RGB
image. However, they struggle to reconstruct detailed and
robust avatars simultaneously. We empirically find that the
high-frequency (HF) and low-frequency (LF) information
from a parametric model has the potential to enhance geometry details and improve robustness to noise, respectively.
Based on this, we propose HiLo, namely clothed human
reconstruction with high- and low-frequency information,
which contains two components. 1) To recover detailed geometry using HF information, we propose a progressive HF
Signed Distance Function to enhance the detailed 3D geometry of a clothed human. We analyze that our progressive learning manner alleviates large gradients that hinder model convergence. 2) To achieve robust reconstruction against inaccurate estimation of the parametric model
by using LF information, we propose a spatial interaction
implicit function. This function effectively exploits the complementary spatial information from a low-resolution voxel
grid of the parametric model. Experimental results demonstrate that HiLo outperforms the state-of-the-art methods
by 10.43% and 9.54% in terms of Chamfer distance on the
Thuman2.0 and CAPE datasets, respectively. Additionally,
HiLo demonstrates robustness to noise from the parametric
model, challenging poses, and various clothing styles. 1

1. Introduction
The creation of 3D realistic digital human plays a pivotal
role in the realm of mixed reality [24, 36, 57], remote pre† Corresponding author, *Equal contribution.
1 Code link: https://github.com/YifYang993/HiLo.git

Figure 1. Visualization comparisons on in-the-wild images, our
HiLo achieves more accurate and detailed reconstruction on challenging poses and diverse clothes.

sentation [5, 57], film [16, 49], and gaming [51]. Traditional
methods often require expensive and specialized equipment
combined with complex artistic efforts to customize the
avatars[17, 46, 62], which limits the ability of individuals
to create personalized avatars easily. To address the limitation, recent approaches [1, 2, 27, 30, 34, 44, 45, 53–55, 64]
capture a 3D avatar from an RGB image of a clothed human, thus eliminating the need for costly scanning equip-

10671

