This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Aligning Logits Generatively for Principled Black-Box Knowledge Distillation
Jing Ma*, Xiang Xiang∗†
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation,
Huazhong University of Science and Tech, Wuhan, China

Ke Wang, Yuchuan Wu, Yongbin Li
Alibaba Damo Academy
Hangzhou, China

Abstract
Black-Box Knowledge Distillation (B2KD) is a formulated problem for cloud-to-edge model compression with invisible data and models hosted on the server. B2KD faces
challenges such as limited Internet exchange and edgecloud disparity of data distributions. In this paper, we formalize a two-step workflow consisting of deprivatization
and distillation, and theoretically provide a new optimization direction from logits to cell boundary different from
direct logits alignment. With its guidance, we propose a
new method Mapping-Emulation KD (MEKD) that distills
a black-box cumbersome model into a lightweight one. Our
method does not differentiate between treating soft or hard
responses, and consists of: 1) deprivatization: emulating
the inverse mapping of the teacher function with a generator, and 2) distillation: aligning low-dimensional logits of
the teacher and student models by reducing the distance
of high-dimensional image points. For different teacherstudent pairs, our method yields inspiring distillation performance on various benchmarks, and outperforms the previous state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD) is a widely accepted approach
to the problem of model compression and acceleration,
which has received sustained attention from both the academic and industrial research communities [14, 16, 35, 44].
The goal of KD is to extract knowledge from a cumbersome
model or an ensemble of models, known as the teacher, and
use it as supervision to guide the training of lightweight
models, known as the student [1, 5, 36]. In the application
of KD, privacy protection has always been a very concerning issue for researchers and users, which not only refers to
the privacy of user data but also includes the model copyright of cloud service providers.
Black-Box Knowledge Distillation (B2KD) is a problem posed in the process of cloud-to-edge model compres* Equal contribution, co-first author; also with Nat. Key Lab of MSIIPT.
† Correspondence to xex@hust.edu.cn; also with Peng Cheng Lab.

Figure 1. Schematic process of cloud-to-edge model compression.
A cumbersome black-box model is deployed on a cloud server,
trained with millions of samples and tags. The cloud server only
provides APIs to receive query data and return inference responses
of either soft or hard type. The edge device needs to distill a
lightweight model using unlabeled local data.

sion [34, 46, 49]. The cloud server hosts a teacher model
whose internal structure and composition, connections between layers, model parameters, and gradients used for
back-propagation are all invisible and unavailable to edge
devices, as shown in Fig. 1. Due to resource limitations, the
edge device can only host a lightweight student model. At
the same time, low-quality and unlabeled local data cannot
be used to train a reliable deep neural network. As a result,
it must rely on sending query samples to the APIs of cloud
servers for heavy inference [45].
In practice, B2KD faces some key challenges. (a) Cloud
servers and edge devices should maintain limited data exchange due to Internet latency and bandwidth constraints, as
well as charges for the amount of queried data or API usage
time. (b) In some cases, for query samples, these APIs only
provide indexes or semantic tags for the category with the
highest probability (i.e., hard responses), rather than probability vectors for all possible classes (i.e., soft responses).
(c) Because users refuse to send sensitive data to cloud
servers, the distribution gap between local and cloud data
is difficult to measure, making the distilled student model
inaccurate in the application.
Adversarial learning has been shown to be effective in
generating pseudo samples, which is widely used in data
augmentation and low-shot learning [8, 49]. A well-trained

23148

