This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Multi-view Aggregation Network for Dichotomous Image Segmentation
Qian Yu† , Xiaoqi Zhao† , Youwei Pang†
{ms.yuqian, zxq, lartpang}@mail.dlut.edu.cn

Lihe Zhang∗ , Huchuan Lu
{zhanglihe, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

Dalian University of Technology

Dista

Abstract
Dichotomous Image Segmentation (DIS) has recently
emerged towards high-precision object segmentation from
high-resolution natural images. When designing an effective DIS model, the main challenge is how to balance the
semantic dispersion of high-resolution targets in the small
receptive field and the loss of high-precision details in the
large receptive field. Existing methods rely on tedious multiple encoder-decoder streams and stages to gradually complete the global localization and local refinement. Human
visual system captures regions of interest by observing them
from multiple views. Inspired by it, we model DIS as a
multi-view object perception problem and provide a parsimonious multi-view aggregation network (MVANet), which
unifies the feature fusion of the distant view and close-up
view into a single stream with one encoder-decoder structure. With the help of the proposed multi-view complementary localization and refinement modules, our approach established long-range, profound visual interactions across
multiple views, allowing the features of the detailed closeup view to focus on highly slender structures. Experiments
on the popular DIS-5K dataset show that our MVANet significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in both accuracy and speed. The source code and datasets will be
publicly available at MVANet.

1. Introduction
High-accuracy dichotomous image segmentation (DIS) [31]
aims to accurately identify category-agnostic foreground
objects within natural scenes, which is fundamental for a
wide range of scene understanding applications, including
AR/VR applications [30, 35], image editing [9], and 3D
shape reconstruction [22]. Different from existing segmen† Equal contribution.
∗ Corresponding author.

w
nt Vie

Multi-view Patch Sequence

Close-up V
iew

Figure 1. Process of decomposing high-resolution image into
multi-view patch sequence.

tation tasks, DIS focuses on challenging high-resolution
(HR) fine-grained object segmentation. The segmentation
scope encompasses a wide range of content with varying structural complexities, regardless of their characteristics. When confronted with the task of accurately segmenting HR objects, two primary challenges arise: 1) The
higher demand for segmentation capability. Due to a
larger amount of intricate details in high-accuracy HR images, accurately segmenting those objects of interest requires a more complex processing pipeline and more powerful feature modelling. And when dealing with occlusion
interference, complex lighting conditions, and variable object poses, the processing of HR data also requires better adaptability and robustness compared to low-resolution
(LR) data. 2) The more need for processing efficiency.
The much larger size of HR images can result in slower processing speeds and more memory constraints. This restriction hinders the further application of existing approaches to
real-world scenarios such as autonomous driving [15, 26] or
real-time video processing [1, 20]. As a result, this field has
higher expectations for inference efficiency in addition to
ensuring algorithmic effectiveness.
Many efforts [28, 31, 47] have been made to tailor
for the DIS task. Despite existing methods have demonstrated impressive performance, their reliance on CNN may
pose limitations when tackling the HR image. It is be-

3921

