This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image Sculpting: Precise Object Editing with 3D Geometry Control
Jiraphon Yenphraphai1

Xichen Pan1
1



Sainan Liu2

New York University

Daniele Panozzo1
2

Saining Xie1

Intel Labs


Δ = 65°
Δy = -60°
Δz = -23°

Δα = 37°
Δ = -43°
Δy = -60°
Δz = -20°

(a) Precise Pose Editing

(b) Precise Rotation
Compose





Δ =4m

(d) Precise 3D Composition

(c) Precise Translation





#4
#3
#2

#1

Boolean Op

(e) Precise Carving

(f) Serial Addition

Figure 1. Achieving precise control in image editing tasks can be challenging with standard 2D generative pipelines. Our Image Sculpting
framework offers the ability to interact with 3D geometry starting with a single image. This enables users to perform detailed, quantifiable,
and physically-plausible edits, including precise pose editing, rotation, translation, 3D composition, carving, and serial addition.

Abstract
We present Image Sculpting, a new framework for editing 2D images by incorporating tools from 3D geometry
and graphics. This approach differs markedly from existing methods, which are confined to 2D spaces and typically
rely on textual instructions, leading to ambiguity and limited control. Image Sculpting converts 2D objects into 3D,
enabling direct interaction with their 3D geometry. Postediting, these objects are re-rendered into 2D, merging into
the original image to produce high-fidelity results through
a coarse-to-fine enhancement process. The framework supports precise, quantifiable, and physically-plausible editing
options such as pose editing, rotation, translation, 3D composition, carving, and serial addition. It marks an initial
step towards combining the creative freedom of generative
models with the precision of graphics pipelines.
Code and project page available at this https URL

1. Introduction
Recent developments in the field of image generative modeling [63, 66, 68, 89] have unlocked new potentials in creative content creation, offering unprecedented opportunities for the generation of diverse visual content by materializing ideas and concepts articulated through language
prompts. However, the integration of these models into
real-world content creation workflows still poses significant
challenges. Among the most critical is the need for users to
have detailed control over various aspects of generated objects, including their pose, shape, location, layout, and spatial compositions. The precision extends to quantifiable manipulations, such as rotating an object by a specific angle or
making physically-realistic modifications, such as positioning a character in a way that conforms to basic anatomical
and physical principles. Interestingly, such a quest for precision and controllability aligns closely with the core principles of computer graphics, which strive to generate pho-

4241

