This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

AvatarGPT: All-in-One Framework for Motion Understanding, Planning,
Generation and Beyond
Zixiang Zhou

Yu Wan

Baoyuan Wang

zhouzixiang@xiaobing.ai

wanyu@xiaobing.ai

wangbaoyuan@xiaobing.ai

Xiaobing.AI
I want you to generate some
human motion for me.
It is about someone
exploring and preparing an
office space for a meeting,
while leaving a professional
impression.

Sure! I’ll plan some tasks
first, then I’ll generate detail
action descriptions to
execute each task, finally, I’ll
synthesize human motion
corresponding to these
actions.

[Task] The person first walks around the office, then
bends down to pick up items from the floor, stands
upright while holding a white folder or folder, leans
down to place a folder or folder on a table, and finally
walks towards the office entrance to observe the
whiteboard and other items.

[Task] The person starts by walking around the office
space with a suitcase, then holds it with one hand while
walking and interacting with colleagues. They move
around the office, observing people working and
organizing papers and documents, and finally sit down on
a couch at the end of the video, possibly taking off or
adjusting their clothing.

[Step] Walking around
the office, exploring
different areas and
objects.

[Step] Walking around
the office space with a
suitcase.

[Step] Bending down to
pick up items from the
floor.

[Step] Moving around
the office, observing
people working and
organizing papers and
documents.

[Step] Leaning down to
place a folder or folder
on a table.

[Step] Possibly taking off
or adjusting clothing at
the end of the video.

[Motion] The final motion about someone
exploring and preparing an office space for a
meeting, while leaving a professional
impression

Task Planning

Task Decomposition
Motion Generation
Motion-in-Between

Figure 1. An example of long human motion generation based on high-level user instructions, powered by the traversal of a few key
modules within our proposed framework, including motion task planning, decomposition, generation, and motion in-between synthesis.

Abstract
Large Language Models(LLMs) have shown remarkable
emergent abilities in unifying almost all (if not every) NLP
tasks. In the human motion-related realm, however, researchers still develop siloed models for each task. Inspired by InstuctGPT[16], and the generalist concept behind Gato [27], we introduce AvatarGPT, an All-in-One
framework for motion understanding, planning, generations as well as other tasks such as motion in-between
synthesis. AvatarGPT treats each task as one type of instruction fine-tuned on the shared LLM. All the tasks are
seamlessly interconnected with language as the universal interface, constituting a closed-loop within the framework. To achieve this, human motion sequences are first
encoded as discrete tokens, which serve as the extended vocabulary of LLM. Then, an unsupervised pipeline to generate natural language descriptions of human action sequences from in-the-wild videos is developed. Finally, all
tasks are jointly trained. Extensive experiments show that
AvatarGPT achieves SOTA on low-level tasks, and promising results on high-level tasks, demonstrating the effectiveness of our proposed All-in-One framework. Moreover, for
the first time, AvatarGPT enables a principled approach by
iterative traversal of the tasks within the closed-loop for unlimited long-motion synthesis.

1. Introduction
Text-based human motion generation has made significant
progress in recent years[2, 7, 21, 22, 31, 39, 42]. These varied methods fundamentally aim to learn a direct mapping
from natural language descriptions to human motions. Despite their impressive generative performance, they exhibit
two limitations when viewed from an end-to-end perspective. Firstly, their efficacy predominantly lies in generating short motion sequences, and extending these methods
to longer durations presents substantial challenges. Secondly, the dependency on manually crafted, detailed textual inputs for each motion sequence constrains their utility in real-world scenarios. Consider, for instance, the context of video game environments where non-player characters (NPCs) are required to perform multifaceted, high-level
tasks, which need to be broken down into smaller, sequentially ordered sub-tasks, each demanding specific textual
descriptions to guide the associated movements. Additionally, the need for post-processing to ensure seamless transitions between motions further complicates the application.
Therefore, there is a pressing need to develop a comprehensive end-to-end framework. This framework should not
only automate the process of motion planning but also proficiently handle task decomposition and motion generation,
all while understanding the contextual subtleties and conforming to broad user-defined instructions.

1357

