This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Robust Image Denoising through Adversarial Frequency Mixup
Donghun Ryou2
Inju Ha1
Hyewon Yoo2
Dongwan Kim1
Bohyung Han1,2
Computer Vision Laboratory, 1 ECE & 2 IPAI, Seoul National University
{dhryou, hij1112, yoohyewony, dongwan123, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Image denoising approaches based on deep neural networks often struggle with overfitting to specific noise distributions present in training data. This challenge persists in existing real-world denoising networks, which are
trained using a limited spectrum of real noise distributions,
and thus, show poor robustness to out-of-distribution real
noise types. To alleviate this issue, we develop a novel
training framework called Adversarial Frequency Mixup
(AFM). AFM leverages mixup in the frequency domain
to generate noisy images with distinctive and challenging
noise characteristics, all the while preserving the properties
of authentic real-world noise. Subsequently, incorporating these noisy images into the training pipeline enhances
the denoising network’s robustness to variations in noise
distributions. Extensive experiments and analyses, conducted on a wide range of real noise benchmarks demonstrate that denoising networks trained with our proposed
framework exhibit significant improvements in robustness
to unseen noise distributions. The code is available at
https://github.com/dhryougit/AFM.

1. Introduction
Image denoising based on deep neural networks [5, 6, 22,
26–28, 30, 31] has witnessed unprecedented success benefiting from the simplicity of the problem formulation and
the construction of new datasets. Traditionally, denoising
networks have been trained using synthetic noise models,
such as Gaussian or Poisson noise, which are artificially
added to images for training and evaluation purposes. However, real-world noise, influenced by various factors within
the Image Signal Processing (ISP) pipeline such as demosaicing and gamma correction, exhibits a distinct signal dependency and often follows distributions that differ from
synthetic counterparts. This divergence between synthetic
and real-world noise distributions raises significant generalization issues when applying denoising models to real noisy
images.
While efforts have been devoted to creating datasets with

SIDD Noisy

Restormer 39.26 dB

Ours 38.16 dB

CC Noisy

Restormer 31.95 dB

Ours 33.79 dB

Poly Noisy

Restormer 38.37 dB

Ours 39.13 dB

Figure 1. The difference in real-world denoising results for indistribution and out-of-distribution samples. While the state-ofthe-art Restormer [28] performs well on in-distribution samples
from SIDD [1], its performance is degraded on out-of-distribution
examples from CC [16] and Poly [23]. In contrast, a DnCNN [30]
model trained with our AFM exhibits robustness for both samples.

clean and noisy image pairs in the real-world, collecting
these datasets poses a significant challenge. Thus, various self-supervised approaches [10, 12, 18] have emerged
as promising solutions for image denoising, aiming to reduce the dependence on paired noisy-clean image datasets.
Nevertheless, these methods often fall short in performance
when compared to supervised learning approaches. As a
result, supervision on real noise datasets still remains favorable in practical scenarios.
Image denoisers trained with supervision on real noise
datasets, however, come with their own set of flaws. Most

2723

