This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PixelRNN: In-pixel Recurrent Neural Networks
for End-to-end–optimized Perception with Neural Sensors
Haley M. So1 , Laurie Bose2 , Piotr Dudek2 , Gordon Wetzstein1
1
Stanford University, 2 The University of Manchester
https://www.computationalimaging.org/publications/pixelrnn/

Abstract
Conventional image sensors digitize high-resolution images at fast frame rates, producing a large amount of
data that needs to be transmitted off the sensor for further processing. This is challenging for perception systems operating on edge devices, because communication is
power inefficient and induces latency. Fueled by innovations in stacked image sensor fabrication, emerging sensor–
processors offer programmability and processing capabilities directly on the sensor. We exploit these capabilities by
developing an efficient recurrent neural network architecture, PixelRNN, that encodes spatio-temporal features on
the sensor using purely binary operations. PixelRNN reduces the amount of data to be transmitted off the sensor
by factors up to 256 compared to the raw sensor data while
offering competitive accuracy for hand gesture recognition
and lip reading tasks. We experimentally validate PixelRNN
using a prototype implementation on the SCAMP-5 sensor–
processor platform.

1. Introduction
Increasingly, cameras on edge devices are being used for
enabling computer vision perception tasks rather than for
capturing images that will be looked at by humans. Applications include various tasks in virtual and augmented reality headsets, wearable computing systems, drones, robotics,
and the internet of things, among many others. For such
edge devices, low-power operation is crucial, making it
challenging to deploy large neural network architectures
which traditionally leverage modern graphics processing
units for inference.
A plethora of approaches have been developed in the
“TinyML” community to address these challenges. Broadly
speaking, these efforts focus on developing smaller [34] or
more efficient network architectures, often by pruning or
quantizing larger models [19]. Platforms like TensorFlow
Lite Micro [23] enable application developers to deploy

their models directly to power-efficient microcontrollers
which process data closer to the sensor. Specialized artificial intelligence (AI) accelerators [1–3] further reduce the
power consumption. While these approaches can optimize
the processing component of a perception system, they do
not reduce the large amount of digitized sensor data that
needs to be transmitted to the processor in the first place,
via power-hungry interfaces like standard MIPI (Mobile
Industry Processor Interface), and stored in the memory.
This is highly significant as data transmission and memory access are among the biggest power sinks in these systems [31]. Power-constrained systems, like mixed reality
headsets, which require numerous sensors for perception
tasks make it even more vital to minimize the communication overhead.
Recent advancements in 3D wafer stacking and highdensity interconnects between these wafers create the opportunity for designing more efficient sensing and perception systems. Stacked CMOS image sensors contain layers with light-sensitive photodiodes as well as transistor circuitry that can turn a sensor into a parallel processor [28].
Data movement on these sensor–processors uses significantly less energy, and offers several orders of magnitude
more bandwidth than conventional off-sensor communication protocols like MIPI [31, 70, 72]. This raises the question of how to design perception systems where sensing,
data communication, and processing components are optimized end to end.
Efficient perception systems could be designed such that
important task-specific image and video features are encoded directly on the imaging sensor using in-pixel processing, resulting in the sensor’s output being significantly
reduced to only these sparse features. This form of inpixel feature encoding mechanism could significantly reduce the required bandwidth, thus reducing power consumption of data communication, memory management,
and downstream processing. Event sensors [30] and emerging sensor–processors [76] are promising hardware platforms for such perception systems because they can directly
extract either temporal information or spatial features, re-

25233

