This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mask Grounding for Referring Image Segmentation
Yong Xien Chng1,2 Henry Zheng1 Yizeng Han1 Xuchong Qiu2† Gao Huang1B
1
Department of Automation, BNRist, Tsinghua University 2 Bosch Corporate Research

Abstract
Referring Image Segmentation (RIS) is a challenging
task that requires an algorithm to segment objects referred
by free-form language expressions. Despite significant
progress in recent years, most state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods still suffer from considerable language-image modality
gap at the pixel and word level. These methods generally
1) rely on sentence-level language features for languageimage alignment and 2) lack explicit training supervision
for fine-grained visual grounding. Consequently, they exhibit weak object-level correspondence between visual and
language features. Without well-grounded features, prior
methods struggle to understand complex expressions that
require strong reasoning over relationships among multiple
objects, especially when dealing with rarely used or ambiguous clauses. To tackle this challenge, we introduce a
novel Mask Grounding auxiliary task that significantly improves visual grounding within language features, by explicitly teaching the model to learn fine-grained correspondence between masked textual tokens and their matching
visual objects. Mask Grounding can be directly used on
prior RIS methods and consistently bring improvements.
Furthermore, to holistically address the modality gap, we
also design a cross-modal alignment loss and an accompanying alignment module. These additions work synergistically with Mask Grounding. With all these techniques,
our comprehensive approach culminates in MagNet (Maskgrounded Network), an architecture that significantly outperforms prior arts on three key benchmarks (RefCOCO,
RefCOCO+ and G-Ref), demonstrating our method’s effectiveness in addressing current limitations of RIS algorithms.
Our code and pre-trained weights will be released.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has greatly improved the performance of vision algorithms on many image segmentation tasks, such
as semantic segmentation [5, 48], instance segmentation
[2, 12, 24, 42] and panoptic segmentation [8, 36]. These
† Project lead.
B Corresponding author.

Correct

Wrong

Wrong

third remote from the left

third remote from the left

third remote from the left

(a) Fine-grained visual grounding is required to reason over
complicated relationships among multiple objects.
Correct

Correct

Wrong

diving man

diving man

diving man

(b) Fine-grained visual grounding is required to understand
expressions used in uncommon or ambiguous contexts.

Figure 1. Importance of Fine-grained Visual Grounding for RIS.
Most RIS algorithms lack well-grounded text features. As a result,
they struggle in difficult cases illustrated in (a) and (b). Red mask
are predictions of LAVT, one of the recent SOTA RIS methods.
Yellow dotted boxes are the ground truths.

tasks require grouping of image pixels under a fixed set of
pre-defined categories and mainly differ in the granularity
of grouping semantics required. In contrast to these unimodal segmentation tasks, Referring Image Segmentation
(RIS) [9, 28] is a challenging multi-modal task that requires
an algorithm to simultaneously understand fine-grained human language expression and make correct pixel-level correspondence to the referred object. Recently, it has gained
widespread research attention due to its potential to improve human-robot interaction [1], interactive image editing
[43, 52] and advanced driver-assistance systems [29].
The key challenge in RIS lies in how to reduce the
modality gap between language and image features [14, 64,
71]. To tackle this challenge, we need to have an effective
alignment between a given language expression and the corresponding image pixels for highlighting the referred target.
Ideally, with robust pixel-wise language-image alignment,
language and image features should have high feature similarity when referring to the same object and low feature sim-

26573

