This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProS: Prompting-to-simulate Generalized knowledge for Universal
Cross-Domain Retrieval
Kaipeng Fang1

Jingkuan Song2 *

Lianli Gao2

Xiyao Li4
1

Pengpeng Zeng2

Zhi-Qi Cheng3

Heng Tao Shen5

School of Computer Science and Enginnering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
2
Shenzhen Institute for Advanced Study, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
3
4
5
Carnegie Mellon University
Kuaishou Technology
Tongji University
fangkaipeng@126.com, jingkuan.song@gmail.com

(a) CDR vs UCDR

Abstract

Training

CDR: Seen class and Seen Domain

Domain 1: Real

1. Introduction
Cross-Domain Retrieval (CDR) [11, 51] is an important
task in Information Retrieval (IR) systems that utilizes data
from one domain (e.g. Infograph, Sketch) as a query to
* Corresponding author

Domain 1: Real

Bird
Bird

Apple

Retrieval

Apple

Domain 2: Sketchy

Extend to open-set scenarios
UCDR: Unseen class and Unseen Domain

Bird

Apple

…

The goal of Universal Cross-Domain Retrieval (UCDR)
is to achieve robust performance in generalized test scenarios, wherein data may belong to strictly unknown domains and categories during training. Recently, pre-trained
models with prompt tuning have shown strong generalization capabilities and attained noteworthy achievements in
various downstream tasks, such as few-shot learning and
video-text retrieval. However, applying them directly to
UCDR may not be sufficient to handle both domain shift
(i.e., adapting to unfamiliar domains) and semantic shift
(i.e., transferring to unknown categories). To this end,
we propose Prompting-to-Simulate (ProS), the first method
to apply prompt tuning for UCDR. ProS employs a twostep process to simulate Content-aware Dynamic Prompts
(CaDP) which can impact models to produce generalized
features for UCDR. Concretely, in Prompt Units Learning
stage, we introduce two Prompt Units to individually capture domain and semantic knowledge in a mask-and-align
way. Then, in Context-aware Simulator Learning stage, we
train a Content-aware Prompt Simulator under a simulated
test scenario to produce the corresponding CaDP. Extensive
experiments conducted on three benchmark datasets show
that our method achieves new state-of-the-art performance
without bringing excessive parameters. Code is available
at https://github.com/fangkaipeng/ProS.

Domain 1-M

Domain M: Painting

Cup
Apple

Domain 1: Real

Domain M+1
Car

Retrieval

Bird

(b) Performance Comparison

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of Cross-Domain Retrieval (CDR) and
its generalized version (UCDR). (b) Comparison of our ProS ✩
with different backbones ⃝ and various prompt-based methods
△ under UCDR protocol. All prompt-based methods use CLIP as
the backbone. Our method yields solid improvement and achieves
a better trade-off between performance and trainable parameters
usage against state-of-the art.

search semantically similar examples in another domain
(e.g. natural image). Despite achieving promising results,
existing methods [2, 4, 11, 38] heavily follow a closeset learning setting, where domains and categories in both
training and testing data are pre-defined. Such evaluation limits the model to the training samples and unable

17292

