This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRF Director: Revisiting View Selection in Neural Volume Rendering
Wenhui Xiao1,2 , Rodrigo Santa Cruz1,2 , David Ahmedt-Aristizabal1,2 ,
Olivier Salvado1,2 , Clinton Fookes1 , Leo Lebrat1,2
Queensland University of Technology1 , CSIRO Data612
wenhui.xiao@hdr.qut.edu.au, {rodrigo.santacruz, leo.lebrat}@csiro.au
https://wenwhx.github.io/nerfdirector

Original

View coverage

high

FVS (80 v)

RS (110 v)

(b)

low
Rot 90◦
(c)

(a)

Figure 1. Overview of NeRF Director. (a) Different test camera selections result in different error measurements on the target object, which
ultimately can result in SOTA ranking inversion. (b) In a synthetic setting and for InstantNGP [25], a better view selection algorithm such
as farthest view sampling (FVS) can reach 33 dB of PSNR using only 70 training views, whereas the traditional random sampling (RS)
would require 150 views to achieve similar performances. (c) With fewer views, our view selection method outperforms traditional random
view selection.

Abstract
Neural Rendering representations have significantly
contributed to the field of 3D computer vision. Given their
potential, considerable efforts have been invested to improve their performance. Nonetheless, the essential question of selecting training views is yet to be thoroughly investigated. This key aspect plays a vital role in achieving highquality results and aligns with the well-known tenet of deep
learning: “garbage in, garbage out”. In this paper, we first
illustrate the importance of view selection by demonstrating how a simple rotation of the test views within the most

pervasive NeRF dataset can lead to consequential shifts in
the performance rankings of state-of-the-art techniques. To
address this challenge, we introduce a unified framework
for view selection methods and devise a thorough benchmark to assess its impact. Significant improvements can
be achieved without leveraging error or uncertainty estimation but focusing on uniform view coverage of the reconstructed object, resulting in a training-free approach.
Using this technique, we show that high-quality renderings
can be achieved faster by using fewer views. We conduct
extensive experiments on both synthetic datasets and real-

20742

