This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Style Aligned Image Generation via Shared Attention
Amir Hertz* 1 , Andrey Voynov* 1 , Shlomi Fruchter† 1 , and Daniel Cohen-Or† 1,2
1
2

Google Research
Tel Aviv University

“Toy train...”

Abstract
Large-scale Text-to-Image (T2I) models have rapidly
gained prominence across creative fields, generating visually compelling outputs from textual prompts. However,
controlling these models to ensure consistent style remains
challenging, with existing methods necessitating fine-tuning
and manual intervention to disentangle content and style. In
this paper, we introduce StyleAligned, a novel technique designed to establish style alignment among a series of generated images. By employing minimal ‘attention sharing’ during the diffusion process, our method maintains style consistency across images within T2I models. This approach
allows for the creation of style-consistent images using a
reference style through a straightforward inversion operation. Our method’s evaluation across diverse styles and text
prompts demonstrates high-quality synthesis and fidelity,
underscoring its efficacy in achieving consistent style across
various inputs.

“ Toy airplane...”

“ Toy bicycle...”

“ Toy car...”

“...BW logo, high contrast.”

“...poster, ilustration.”

1. Introduction
Large-scale Text-to-Image (T2I) generative models [37,
39, 45] have emerged as an essential tool across creative
disciplines, such as art, graphic design, animation, architecture, gaming and more. These models show tremendous
capabilities of translating an input text into an appealing visual result that is aligned with the input description.
An envisioned application of T2I models revolves
around the rendition of various concepts in a way that shares
a consistent style and character, as though all were created
by the same artist and method (see Fig. 1). While proficient in aligning with the textual description of the style,
state-of-the-art T2I models often create images that diverge
significantly in their interpretations of the same stylistic descriptor, as depicted in Fig. 2.
Recent methods mitigate this by fine-tuning the T2I
model over a set of images that share the same style [13,49].
This optimization is computationally expensive and usually
* Equal contribution.
† Equal Advising.

Figure 1. Style aligned image set generation. By fusing the features of the toy train image (left) during the diffusion process, we
can generate an image set of different content that shares the style.

requires human input in order to find a plausible subset of
images and texts that enables the disentanglement of content and style.
We introduce StyleAligned, a method that enables consistent style interpretation across a set of generated images
(Fig. 1). Our method requires no optimization and can
be applied to any attention-based text-to-image diffusion
model. We show that adding minimal attention sharing operations along the diffusion process, from each generated
image to the first one in a batch, leads to a style-consistent
set. Moreover, using diffusion inversion, our method can
be applied to generate style-consistent images given a reference style image, with no optimization or fine-tuning.

4775

