This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unveiling the Power of Audio-Visual Early Fusion Transformers with Dense
Interactions through Masked Modeling
Shentong Mo
Carnegie Mellon University
shentong.mo@sv.cmu.edu

Pedro Morgado
University of Wisconsin-Madison
pmorgado@wisc.edu

https://github.com/stoneMo/DeepAVFusion
Abstract
Humans possess a remarkable ability to integrate auditory and visual information, enabling a deeper understanding of the surrounding environment. This early fusion of
audio and visual cues, demonstrated through cognitive psychology and neuroscience research, offers promising potential for developing multimodal perception models. However,
training early fusion architectures poses significant challenges, as the increased model expressivity requires robust
learning frameworks to harness their enhanced capabilities. In this paper, we address this challenge by leveraging
the masked reconstruction framework, previously successful
in unimodal settings, to train audio-visual encoders with
early fusion. Additionally, we propose an attention-based
fusion module that captures interactions between local audio
and visual representations, enhancing the model’s ability
to capture fine-grained interactions. While effective, this
procedure can become computationally intractable, as the
number of local representations increases. Thus, to address
the computational complexity, we propose an alternative
procedure that factorizes the local representations before
representing audio-visual interactions. Extensive evaluations on a variety of datasets demonstrate the superiority of
our approach in audio-event classification, visual sound localization, sound separation, and audio-visual segmentation.
These contributions enable the efficient training of deeply
integrated audio-visual models and significantly advance the
usefulness of early fusion architectures.

1. Introduction
Humans naturally integrate audio-visual information to perceive and understand the environment. Several studies in
cognitive psychology and neuroscience, as well as classic
perceptual illusions such as the McGurk effect, demonstrate

that such audio-visual fusion can occur early on in the perceptual stack, enabling deeper integration of the two modalities.
Early fusion models aim to emulate this human-like perception. Specifically, it refers to the process of integrating
auditory and visual cues at an early stage of a multi-modal
perception model, in order to leverage the synergistic effects of both modalities. This can be especially powerful if
the fusion process can attend to and establish connections
between local components of the visual and audio signal
(e.g., the frequencies of someone’s voice with the pixels of
their lips). In sum, early fusion of local audio-visual interactions holds the promise of a deeper and more sophisticated
understanding of audio-visual content, critical for many realworld applications such as visually guided source separation,
localization/segmentation, and multi-modal recognition.
Despite the potential, audio-visual early fusion architectures have remained under-explored, with the majority of
the recent literature focusing on late fusion or no fusion at
all. One recent prominent research direction [1, 47] seeks to
learn independent uni-modal encoders through contrastive
learning by requiring the representations of associated audiovisual pairs to be synchronized in latent space. However,
contrastive learning is not compatible with early fusion, as
the connections between uni-modal representations lead to
trivial solutions to the contrastive learning problem. Another
line of recent work [20, 27] learns encoders with late audiovisual fusion through a combination of contrastive learning
and masked reconstruction, focusing on downstream tasks
that require shallow integration of audio-visual features, such
as audio-visual action recognition.
One potential reason is that early fusion architectures
pose a significant training challenge due to the substantial
increase in model expressivity it offers. As a result, robust
learning frameworks are required to ensure the creation of
high-quality models and effectively harness their enhanced
capabilities. In this work, we demonstrate the effectiveness
of a masked reconstruction framework for training audio-

27186

