This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DEADiff: An Efficient Stylization Diffusion Model with Disentangled
Representations
Tianhao Qi1,2

Shancheng Fang1 Yanze Wu2 Hongtao Xie1* Jiawei Liu2 Lang Chen2
Qian He2 Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 ByteDance Inc.
qth@mail.ustc.edu.cn

{fangsc, htxie, zyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

{wuyanze.cs, liujiawei.cc22, chenlang.cl, heqian}@bytedance.com
“A motorcycle”

Reference

“A puppy sitting on
a sofa”

“A zebra to the right
of a fire hydrant”

“A motorcycle”

(a) T2I-Adapter

“A puppy sitting on
a sofa”

“A zebra to the right
of a fire hydrant”

(b) DEADiff

Figure 1. Given a style reference image, DEADiff is capable of synthesizing new images that resemble the style and are faithful to text
prompts simultaneously. However, previous encoder-based methods (i.e., T2I-Adapter [17]) significantly impair the text controllability of
the diffusion-based text-to-image models.

Abstract
The diffusion-based text-to-image model harbors immense potential in transferring reference style. However,
current encoder-based approaches significantly impair the
text controllability of text-to-image models while transferring styles. In this paper, we introduce DEADiff to address
this issue using the following two strategies: 1) a mechanism to decouple the style and semantics of reference images. The decoupled feature representations are first extracted by Q-Formers which are instructed by different text
descriptions. Then they are injected into mutually exclusive
subsets of cross-attention layers for better disentanglement.
2) A non-reconstructive learning method. The Q-Formers
are trained using paired images rather than the identical
target, in which the reference image and the ground-truth
image are with the same style or semantics. We show that
DEADiff attains the best visual stylization results and optimal balance between the text controllability inherent in the
text-to-image model and style similarity to the reference image, as demonstrated both quantitatively and qualitatively.
Our project page is https://tianhao-qi.github.io/DEADiff/.
*Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Recently, Diffusion models [21, 22, 25] in text-to-image
generation have sparked widespread research due to their
astounding performance. As Diffusion models are notoriously known for lacking enhanced controllability, how to
stably and reliably guide them to adhere to a predetermined
style defined by a reference image becomes intractable.
Taking into account both effectiveness and efficiency, a
prevalent method for style transferring is the approach centered around an additional encoder [10, 14, 17, 32, 34, 38].
The encoder-based methods typically train an encoder to
encode a reference image to informative features, which are
then injected into the Diffusion model as its guided condition. Note that the encoder-based methods are quite efficient due to a single-pass computation, compared with the
optimization-based methods that require multiple-iteration
learning [5, 9, 13, 24, 27, 37]. Through such an encoder,
highly abstract features can be extracted to effectively describe the style of the reference image. These rich style
features enable the Diffusion model to accurately understand the style of the reference image it needs to synthesize, as shown on the left side of Fig. 1 where a typical

8693

