This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FlowerFormer: Empowering Neural Architecture Encoding
using a Flow-aware Graph Transformer
Dongyeong Hwang Hyunju Kim Sunwoo Kim Kijung Shin
Kim Jaechul Graduate School of AI, KAIST, Seoul, Republic of Korea
{dy.hwang, hyunju.kim, kswoo97, kijungs}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The success of a specific neural network architecture is
closely tied to the dataset and task it tackles; there is no onesize-fits-all solution. Thus, considerable efforts have been
made to quickly and accurately estimate the performances
of neural architectures, without full training or evaluation,
for given tasks and datasets. Neural architecture encoding has played a crucial role in the estimation, and graphbased methods, which treat an architecture as a graph,
have shown prominent performance. For enhanced representation learning of neural architectures, we introduce
F LOWER F ORMER, a powerful graph transformer that incorporates the information flows within a neural architecture. F LOWER F ORMER consists of two key components: (a)
bidirectional asynchronous message passing, inspired by
the flows; (b) global attention built on flow-based masking.
Our extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of
F LOWER F ORMER over existing neural encoding methods,
and its effectiveness extends beyond computer vision models
to include graph neural networks and auto speech recognition models. Our code is available at http://github
.com/y0ngjaenius/CVPR2024_FLOW ERFormer.

1. Introduction
While deep learning models have demonstrated their efficacy across various applications, the performance of a specific neural architecture heavily depends on specific downstream tasks and datasets employed. As a result, numerous
neural architectures have been developed [11, 12].
In response to this dependency, significant efforts have
been made to rapidly and accurately predict the performances of neural architectures for given tasks and datasets.
This endeavor is crucial because exhaustively training
and/or evaluating many candidate neural architectures is an
expensive process. To this end, researchers have primarily
employed machine learning techniques [6, 19].
Especially, various neural architecture encoding methods

have been proposed since obtaining an accurate representation of each architecture plays a crucial role in the estimation process. Their focus has mainly revolved around (a)
transforming input neural architectures to appropriate data
structures [20, 41] and (b) applying representation-learning
models to the transformed structures [5, 42].
Some have treated neural architectures as graphs and applied graph representation learning. They, however, share
some limitations. For instance, their basic message-passing
mechanisms oversimplify neural-architecture characteristics [35, 40] and may suffer from over-smoothing [29], oversquashing [2], or limited expressiveness [32].
Graph Transformers (GTs), when incorporated with adequate information, are recognized for enhancing basic message passing, making them effective in various graph classification [13, 46] and regression [7, 22] tasks. One strength
of GTs lies in their global attention mechanisms [38], where
all nodes in an input graph contribute directly to forming the
representation for each individual node.
However, without integrating relevant topological or external information of input graphs, the relevance of attention scores, and thus the effectiveness of GTs, might be impaired. For example, Niu et al. [28] showed the essentiality
of using motif-based spatial embedding to incorporate the
characteristics of molecule graphs into GTs.
In this work, we propose F LOWER F ORMER (Flowaware graph transformer), a GT model specialized in capturing information flows within neural architectures, as illustrated in Fig. 1. The information flows of a neural architecture contain the characteristics of both forward and backward propagations of the architecture, and thus describe
its fundamental properties. F LOWER F ORMER includes two
core modules: the flow encode module and the flow-aware
global attention module. The former conducts bidirectional
asynchronous message passing, imitating the forward and
backward propagations within the input neural architecture.
The latter applies global attention with masking schemes
based on the flow-based dependencies between nodes.
Our extensive experiments on neural architecture performance prediction, conducted using five benchmark datasets,

6128

