This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning Intra-view and Cross-view Geometric Knowledge for Stereo Matching
Rui Gong* 1 , Weide Liu2 , Zaiwang Gu2 , Xulei Yang2 , and Jun Cheng†2
1

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR

Abstract
Geometric knowledge has been shown to be beneficial
for the stereo matching task. However, prior attempts to integrate geometric insights into stereo matching algorithms
have largely focused on geometric knowledge from single
images while crucial cross-view factors such as occlusion
and matching uniqueness have been overlooked. To address
this gap, we propose a novel Intra-view and Cross-view Geometric knowledge learning Network (ICGNet), specifically
crafted to assimilate both intra-view and cross-view geometric knowledge. ICGNet harnesses the power of interest points to serve as a channel for intra-view geometric
understanding. Simultaneously, it employs the correspondences among these points to capture cross-view geometric
relationships. This dual incorporation empowers the proposed ICGNet to leverage both intra-view and cross-view
geometric knowledge in its learning process, substantially
improving its ability to estimate disparities. Our extensive
experiments demonstrate the superiority of the ICGNet over
contemporary leading models. The code will be available at
https://github.com/DFSDDDDD1199/ICGNet.

1. Introduction
Stereo matching is the task of estimating a disparity
map from a pair of rectified images. It stands as one
of the cornerstone challenges in a range of computer vision tasks, including augmented reality, autonomous driving, and robotics [18]. With the rapid development of
deep learning techniques and network structures in computer vision scenarios, deep stereo matching networks have
achieved great success in stereo matching.
Geometric knowledge plays a crucial role in the overall
performance of stereo matching networks [21, 45, 55, 69]
due to the existence of repeated patterns, textureless ar* The work was done during an internship at I2 R, A*STAR.
† cheng jun@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Figure 1. An illustration of our overall framework using synthetic
shapes. We leverage intra-view geometric knowledge which is the
knowledge of extracting geometric structures, and cross-view geometric knowledge which is the knowledge of the correspondences
of these structures, to aid the stereo matching task. Note that the
dotted lines are used for illustration and are not used in the method.

eas, and reflective surfaces, which make simple texturebased matching methods ineffective. Consequently, several
methods were proposed to introduce geometric knowledge
into stereo matching networks through kinds of geometric
structures. EdgeStereo [45] proposed a learning network
that incorporates edges and edge-disparity relations into the
stereo matching network. Normal assisted stereo matching
[21, 69] leverages surface normal as geometric constraints
to reduce the matching ambiguity for textureless regions.
However, the geometric knowledge employed in these studies is mainly intra-view, lacking the cross-view geometric
knowledge such as matching uniqueness and occlusion.
To address the absence of cross-view geometric knowledge, we have identified that the local feature matching task
[12, 34, 40] can serve as a suitable source of cross-view
geometric knowledge for stereo matching. Local feature
matching involves the identification of correspondences between two images, typically achieved by initially detecting sparse, geometrically meaningful interest points within
each view and then extracting descriptors for these interest points encoded with their visual attributes [12]. Subsequently, cross-view matching is carried out by comparing the interest points between the two images [40]. This
matching process solves a partial assignment problem be-

20752

