This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Transformers Pre-training for Multi-Spectral Satellite Imagery
Mubashir Noman1
1

Muzammal Naseer1 Hisham Cholakkal1 Rao Muhammad Anwar1
Salman Khan1,2 Fahad Shahbaz Khan1,3

Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI 2 Australian National University
3
Linköping University

Abstract
Recent advances in unsupervised learning have demonstrated the ability of large vision models to achieve promising results on downstream tasks by pre-training on large
amount of unlabelled data. Such pre-training techniques
have also been explored recently in the remote sensing domain due to the availability of large amount of unlabelled
data. Different from standard natural image datasets, remote sensing data is acquired from various sensor technologies and exhibit diverse range of scale variations as well
as modalities. Existing satellite image pre-training methods either ignore the scale information present in the remote sensing imagery or restrict themselves to use only a
single type of data modality. In this paper, we re-visit transformers pre-training and leverage multi-scale information
that is effectively utilized with multiple modalities. Our
proposed approach, named SatMAE++, performs multiscale pre-training and utilizes convolution based upsampling blocks to reconstruct the image at higher scales making it extensible to include more scales. Compared to
existing works, the proposed SatMAE++ with multi-scale
pre-training is equally effective for both optical as well
as multi-spectral imagery. Extensive experiments on six
datasets reveal the merits of proposed contributions, leading to state-of-the-art performance on all datasets. SatMAE++ achieves mean average precision (mAP) gain of
2.5% for multi-label classification task on BigEarthNet
dataset. Our code and pre-trained models are available at
https://github.com/techmn/satmae_pp.

1. Introduction
Remote sensing employs a wide range of sensor technologies to acquire data for earth observation and monitoring
through satellites and aircrafts. The acquired data may differ in terms of Ground Sample Distance (GSD) based on
sensor technology and altitude. GSD refers to the distance
between the two adjacent pixels measured on ground i.e.,

GSD of 0.3 meter in an image means adjacent pixels in the
image are 0.3 meter apart on the ground. Accordingly, an
image with size of 10 × 10 pixels may span over the city
depending on the GSD of the image. Therefore, scale of the
objects may vary considerably within a single image. In addition, multi-spectral (Sentinel-2) data captured from satellite utilize different sensors to acquire data. Consequently,
multi-spectral data may possess different GSDs within the
single image. Various bands combination in multi-spectral
data can be used to highlight different information. For example, short wave and near infrared bands combination may
be used for crop and agriculture monitoring. Therefore, it is
desired to utilize the multi-scale information from various
sensor’s data for remote sensing tasks.
Even though the utilization of pre-trained models on
large volume of data for remote sensing applications are increasingly popular, multi-scale information in remote sensing data is scarcely exploited by the vision community.
Recently, self supervised learning on remote sensing data
is widely explored [2, 16–18]. SatMAE [5] demonstrate
the effectiveness of pre-training the transformers on large
amount of data for various downstream remote sensing
tasks. However, SatMAE [5] does not exploit the multiscale information present in the remote sensing satellite imagery and is not able to generalize over domains having images with multiple scales. ScaleMAE [20] is a newly introduced framework that proposes a strategy to encode the
multi-scale information present in optical remote sensing
data. The authors propose a GSD based positional encoding (GSDPE) to inform the model about the position and
scale of the patch tokens. However, the proposed GSDPE
is constrained to be utilized with the RGB (optical) images
only. As multi-spectral (Sentinel-2) images have different
GSD resolutions for different channels (see Tab. 1 for more
description) and ScaleMAE requires image channels to be
stacked together [20], therefore, GSDPE cannot be utilized
with multi-spectral data. Additionally, ScaleMAE introduced a sophisticated Laplacian pyramid based decoder enabling the model to learn multi-scale representations. Alternatively, SatMAE shows that the standard sinusoidal po-

27811

