This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DNGaussian: Optimizing Sparse-View 3D Gaussian Radiance Fields
with Global-Local Depth Normalization
Jiahe Li1 , Jiawei Zhang1 , Xiao Bai1 *, Jin Zheng1 , Xin Ning2 , Jun Zhou3 , Lin Gu4,5
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of
Complex & Critical Software Environment, Jiangxi Research Institute, Beihang University
2
Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Information and Communication Technology, Griffith University
4
RIKEN AIP 5 The University of Tokyo

Figure 1. Comparison of the state-of-the-arts FreeNeRF [51] and SparseNeRF [41] with our DNGaussian utilizing three views for training.
DNGaussian stands out by delivering comparably high-quality synthesized views and superior details with a remarkable 25× reduction in
time and significantly lower memory overhead during training, while attaining the fastest and the only real-time rendering speed of 300
FPS. The point cloud of Gaussians illustrates the detailed and explainable spatial representation learned through our method.

Abstract
Radiance fields have demonstrated impressive performance in synthesizing novel views from sparse input views,
yet prevailing methods suffer from high training costs and
slow inference speed. This paper introduces DNGaussian, a depth-regularized framework based on 3D Gaussian radiance fields, offering real-time and high-quality
few-shot novel view synthesis at low costs. Our motivation
stems from the highly efficient representation and surprising quality of the recent 3D Gaussian Splatting, despite it
will encounter a geometry degradation when input views
decrease. In the Gaussian radiance fields, we find this
degradation in scene geometry primarily lined to the positioning of Gaussian primitives and can be mitigated by
depth constraint. Consequently, we propose a Hard and
∗ Corresponding author: Xiao Bai (baixiao@buaa.edu.cn).

Soft Depth Regularization to restore accurate scene geometry under coarse monocular depth supervision while
maintaining a fine-grained color appearance. To further
refine detailed geometry reshaping, we introduce GlobalLocal Depth Normalization, enhancing the focus on small
local depth changes. Extensive experiments on LLFF, DTU,
and Blender datasets demonstrate that DNGaussian outperforms state-of-the-art methods, achieving comparable or
better results with significantly reduced memory cost, a 25×
reduction in training time, and over 3000× faster rendering
speed. Code is available at: https://github.com/
Fictionarry/DNGaussian .

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis with sparse inputs poses a challenge
for radiance fields. Recent advances in neural radiance
fields (NeRF) have excelled in reconstructing photorealis-

20775

