This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learning to Count without Annotations
Lukas Knobel
University of Amsterdam

Tengda Han*
University of Oxford

Yuki M. Asano∗
University of Amsterdam

lukasknbl@gmail.com

htd@robots.ox.ac.uk

y.m.asano@uva.nl

Supervised topline

Abstract

1. Introduction
Cognitive neuroscientists speculate that visual counting, especially for a small number of objects, is a pre-attentive and
parallel process [12, 55], which can help humans and animals make prompt decisions [43]. Accumulating evidence
shows that infants and certain species of animals can differentiate between small numbers of items [11, 12, 41] and
as young as 18-month-old infants have been shown to develop counting abilities [53]. These findings indicate that
the ability of visual counting may emerge very early or even
be inborn in humans and animals.
On the non-biological side, recent developments in computer vision have been tremendous. The state-of-the-art
computer vision models can classify thousands of image
classes [19, 27], detect various objects [66], or segment almost anything from an image [26]. Partially inspired by
* Equal senior contribution.
1 Code: https://github.com/lukasknobel/SelfCollages

Ours (unsupervised)
ground-truth

103
prediction

103
prediction

While recent supervised methods for reference-based
object counting continue to improve the performance on
benchmark datasets, they have to rely on small datasets due
to the cost associated with manually annotating dozens of
objects in images. We propose UnCounTR, a model that
can learn this task without requiring any manual annotations. To this end, we construct “Self-Collages”, images
with various pasted objects as training samples, that provide a rich learning signal covering arbitrary object types
and counts. Our method builds on existing unsupervised
representations and segmentation techniques to successfully
demonstrate for the first time the ability of reference-based
counting without manual supervision. Our experiments
show that our method not only outperforms simple baselines and generic models such as FasterRCNN and DETR,
but also matches the performance of supervised counting
models in some domains.1

ground-truth

102

102

101

101
101

102
103
annotated count

101

102
103
annotated count

Figure 1. CounTR vs. our proposed UnCounTRv2. Our counting model, UnCounTRv2, is trained without any labels and manual counting annotations. It generalizes well from its up to 19
pseudo-counts encountered during training to the significantly
higher numbers in the FSC-147 test set. This demonstrates that
learning to count is possible without annotations.

how babies learn to see the world [54], some of the recent
well-performing models are trained with self-supervised
learning methods, whereby a learning signal for neural networks is constructed without the need for manual annotations [15, 20]. The pretrained visual representations from
such methods have demonstrated superior performances
on various downstream visual tasks, like image classification and object detection [7, 20, 21]. Moreover, selfsupervised learning signals have been shown to be sufficient for successfully learning image groupings [57, 59] and
even object and semantic segmentations without any annotations [7, 62]. Motivated by these, we ask in this paper
whether visual counting might also be solvable without relying on human annotations.
The current state-of-the-art visual counting methods, e.g. CounTR [31], typically adapt pretrained visual representations to the counting task by using a considerable
size of human annotations. However, we conjecture that the
existing visual representations are already strong enough to
perform counting, even without any manual annotations.
In this paper, we design a straightforward self-supervised
training scheme to teach the model ‘how to count’, by pasting a number of objects on a background image, to make a
Self-Collage. Our experiments show that when construct-

22924

