This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open-Vocabulary Segmentation with Semantic-Assisted Calibration
Yong Liu1 *, Sule Bai1 *, Guanbin Li2 , Yitong Wang3 , Yansong Tang1†
1
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Ubiquitous Data Enabling, Shenzhen International
Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China 2 Sun Yat-sen University 3 ByteDance Inc.
{liuyong23, bsl23}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, tang.yansong@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper studies open-vocabulary segmentation (OVS)
through calibrating in-vocabulary and domain-biased embedding space with generalized contextual prior of CLIP.
As the core of open-vocabulary understanding, alignment
of visual content with the semantics of unbounded text has
become the bottleneck of this field. To address this challenge, recent works propose to utilize CLIP as an additional classifier and aggregate model predictions with CLIP
classification results. Despite their remarkable progress,
performance of OVS methods in relevant scenarios is still
unsatisfactory compared with supervised counterparts. We
attribute this to the in-vocabulary embedding and domainbiased CLIP prediction. To this end, we present a Semanticassisted CAlibration Network (SCAN). In SCAN, we incorporate generalized semantic prior of CLIP into proposal
embedding to avoid collapsing on known categories. Besides, a contextual shift strategy is applied to mitigate the
lack of global context and unnatural background noise.
With above designs, SCAN achieves state-of-the-art performance on all popular open-vocabulary segmentation
benchmarks. Furthermore, we also focus on the problem
of existing evaluation system that ignores semantic duplication across categories, and propose a new metric called
Semantic-Guided IoU (SG-IoU). Code is available here.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is one of the most fundamental
tasks in computer vision, which targets at assigning semantic category to pixels in an image. Despite achieving excellent performance in recent years [2, 11, 13, 17,
29, 30, 37, 40, 46], traditional semantic segmentation approaches rely on predefined sets of training categories. Consequently, these methods falter when encountering categories absent during the training phase, significantly im1 Equal contribution
2 Corresponding author

Image

Crop & Mask

Original
CLIP

Domain-biased
Classification

Seg. Model

Proposal
Embedding

In-vocabulary
Classification

(a) existing two-stage methods
Image

Image

Original
CLIP

Contextual
Shift

Domain-adapted
Classification

Seg. Model

Proposal
Embedding

Generalized
Classification

(b) our semantic-assisted calibration network

Figure 1. Illustration of existing two-stage methods and our
SCAN. Limited by domain-biased CLIP classification and invocabulary model classification, existing methods struggle to align
visual content with unbounded text. By incorporating generalized
semantic guidance of CLIP to proposal embedding and perform
contextual shift, our SCAN achieves excellent OVS performance.

peding their real-world applicability. Such challenge has
inspired the exploration of Open-Vocabulary Segmentation
(OVS) setting [8, 12, 14, 16, 22, 31, 45, 53]. Different from
traditional closed-set segmentation, OVS methods can segment arbitrary categories given only text inputs as guidance,
which has many potential applications such as autonomous
navigation for UAV [4, 42] and UGV [20], mobile crowdsensing [5, 26], large scale robot swarm collaborations [39].
It is extremely challenging to accurately identify unseen categories without the intervention of external knowledge. Therefore, an intuitive idea is to introduce largescale vision-language model [19, 38] trained with numerous
sources to extend the semantic space of segmentation models. Motivated by this, some studies [8, 12, 48, 49] adopt
a two-stage pipeline. This approach first generates classagnostic mask proposals with segmentation models, following which the pre-trained CLIP [38] serves as an additional
classifier to execute mask-level visual-linguistic alignment.
The objective is to recognize open-vocabulary concepts by
combining the prior knowledge of both CLIP and segmentation models. Despite advancements under this paradigm,
its capacity to align visual content with unbounded text

3491

