This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Language-Driven Anchors for Zero-Shot Adversarial Robustness
Xiao Li1 Wei Zhang1 Yining Liu2 Zhanhao Hu1 Bo Zhang1 Xiaolin Hu1,3 *
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, BNRist, Institute for Artificial Intelligence,
IDG/McGovern Institute for Brain Research, Tsinghua Laboratory of Brain and Intelligence,
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Harbin Institute of Technology, Weihai, China
3
Chinese Institute for Brain Research (CIBR), Beijing, China
{lixiao20, zhang-w19, huzhanha17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
22s030184@stu.hit.edu.cn

{dcszb, xlhu}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are known to be susceptible to adversarial attacks. Previous researches mainly focus on improving adversarial robustness in the fully supervised setting, leaving the challenging domain of zero-shot
adversarial robustness an open question. In this work, we
investigate this domain by leveraging the recent advances
in large vision-language models, such as CLIP, to introduce zero-shot adversarial robustness to DNNs. We propose LAAT, a Language-driven, Anchor-based Adversarial
Training strategy. LAAT utilizes the features of a text encoder for each category as fixed anchors (normalized feature embeddings) for each category, which are then employed for adversarial training. By leveraging the semantic
consistency of the text encoders, LAAT aims to enhance the
adversarial robustness of the image model on novel categories. However, naively using text encoders leads to poor
results. Through analysis, we identified the issue to be
the high cosine similarity between text encoders. We then
design an expansion algorithm and an alignment crossentropy loss to alleviate the problem. Our experimental results demonstrated that LAAT significantly improves zeroshot adversarial robustness over state-of-the-art methods.
LAAT has the potential to enhance adversarial robustness
by large-scale multimodal models, especially when labeled
data is unavailable during training. Code is available at
https://github.com/LixiaoTHU/LAAT.

1. Introduction
Adversarial attacks [42], by adding deliberately designed
perturbations to inputs, have posed a significant threat to
* Corresponding author.

Image features
Table

Lion

Text anchors
Boundary w/ AT

Chair

Tiger

Figure 1. The illustration of zero-shot ability with LAAT. Different
colors of the marks indicate different categories. When a model is
adversarially trained with the text anchors of table and lion (seen
categories), it can recognize adversarial examples of the two categories (grey and green). Then due to the text anchors of chair and
tiger (novel categories) being close to those of table and lion, respectively, the model can also recognize the two novel categories.

the application of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) [16, 57].
In response to the threats, various techniques have been proposed to enhance adversarial robustness of DNNs. Among
these, Adversarial Training (AT) and its variants [32, 36, 37,
52] have shown to be highly effective [16, 42, 57]. However,
applying AT from scratch to novel datasets or categories can
be time-consuming. In real-world scenarios, it is common
for models to encounter examples from novel categories,
known as zero-shot learning (ZSL) setting [27]. If adversarially trained models possess zero-shot capability, it can
significantly enhance the scalability and practical utility of
adversarially robust models.
Adversarial robustness in the ZSL setting is challenging.
Earlier attempts [51, 55] try to combine attribute-based ZSL
methods with AT. However, these methods yielded modest improvements and lacked scalability due to the practical difficulties in obtaining attributes. Recently, large-scale

24686

