This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

360+x: A Panoptic Multi-modal Scene Understanding Dataset
Hao Chen

Yuqi Hou

Chenyuan Qu

Irene Testini

Xiaohan Hong

Jianbo Jiao

The Machine Intelligence + x Group, University of Birmingham, UK
Project page: https://x360dataset.github.io/

Abstract
Human perception of the world is shaped by a multitude
of viewpoints and modalities. While many existing datasets
focus on scene understanding from a certain perspective
(e.g. egocentric or third-person views), our dataset offers a
panoptic perspective (i.e. multiple viewpoints with multiple
data modalities). Specifically, we encapsulate third-person
panoramic and front views, as well as egocentric monocular/binocular views with rich modalities including video,
multi-channel audio, directional binaural delay, location
data and textual scene descriptions within each scene captured, presenting comprehensive observation of the world.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first database that
covers multiple viewpoints with multiple data modalities to
mimic how daily information is accessed in the real world.
Through our benchmark analysis, we presented 5 different
scene understanding tasks on the proposed 360+x dataset
to evaluate the impact and benefit of each data modality
and perspective in panoptic scene understanding. We hope
this unique dataset could broaden the scope of comprehensive scene understanding and encourage the community to
approach these problems from more diverse perspectives.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding is crucial for robotics and artificial intelligent systems to perceive the environment around them.
As humans, we intuitively understand the world through
primarily visual inputs, as well as auditory and other sensory inputs (e.g. touch and smell). The community has
made remarkable progress in mimicking human perception with contributions from various datasets and benchmarks [4, 5, 7, 9, 13, 15, 23]. These efforts have approached
scene understanding from a diverse range of perspectives,
such as normal frontal-view vision [5, 13, 23], panoramic
view [22, 28], binocular/stereo view [20, 30], egocentric
monocular view [4, 9], and audio [2, 7].
While there has been exciting progress in understanding
scenes from a limited number of perspectives, it is notable

that humans understand the world by incorporating a combination of viewpoints, in a holistic manner. This includes
an egocentric view for activities we are involved in and a
third-person view for activities we are observing. In addition to visual cues, we also rely on a range of modalities, including hearing and binaural delay, to fully comprehend our
surroundings and track movements. Our prior knowledge
of the scene, such as localisation information and scene descriptions, has also supported our understanding of the environment (e.g. the cafe in the city centre may be different
from a similar cafe on a university campus).
Taking the above observations into consideration, a new
dataset covering all these aforementioned aspects is presented in this work, to provide a panoptic scene understanding, termed 360+x dataset. This new dataset offers a diverse
selection of perspectives, including a 360◦ panoramic view
providing a complete panoptic view of the environment, and
a third-person front view that highlights the region of interest that has the most movements in front of the camera.
Additionally, we have included egocentric monocular and
binocular videos to capture the first-person perspective of
individuals in the environment. These viewpoints are complemented by aligned multi-channel audio with directional
binaural delay information, as well as location information
and scene descriptions as metadata. An illustration of the
presented dataset collection system is shown in Figure 1.
Based on this newly collected dataset, we perform 5
visual-audio scene understanding tasks to analyse the contribution and effectiveness of each data viewpoint and
modality. Particularly, we look at video classification,
temporal action localisation, self-supervised representation
learning, cross-modality retrieval and pre-training model
migration for dataset adaptation, with interesting findings
and insights from extensive experimental analysis. The
main contributions of this work are summarised as follows:
• We propose to our knowledge the first and probably the
most authentic panoptic scene understanding dataset covering multiple viewpoints and data modalities in the wild.
• We perform extensive experimental analysis to validate
the effectiveness of the proposed dataset on different tasks

19373

