This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hierarchical Spatio-temporal Decoupling for Text-to-Video Generation
Zhiwu Qing1 Shiwei Zhang2∗ Jiayu Wang2 Xiang Wang1
Yujie Wei3 Yingya Zhang2 Changxin Gao1∗ Nong Sang1
1
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Alibaba Group 3 Fudan University
{qzw, wxiang, cgao, nsang}@hust.edu.cn
{zhangjin.zsw, wangjiayu.wjy, yingya.zyy}@alibaba-inc.com
yjwei22@m.fudan.edu.cn
Prompt: Batman turns his head from right to left.

1. Introduction
The purpose of text-to-video generation (T2V) is to generate corresponding photorealistic videos based on input text
prompts. These generated videos possess tremendous potential in revolutionizing video content creation, particularly in movies, games, entertainment short videos, and be∗ Corresponding authors.

Project page: https://higen-t2v.github.io/.

Gen-2
HiGen
Gen-2

ModelScope

Prompt: Tiny plant sprout coming out of the ground.

HiGen

Despite diffusion models having shown powerful abilities to generate photorealistic images, generating videos
that are realistic and diverse still remains in its infancy.
One of the key reasons is that current methods intertwine
spatial content and temporal dynamics together, leading to
a notably increased complexity of text-to-video generation
(T2V). In this work, we propose HiGen, a diffusion modelbased method that improves performance by decoupling the
spatial and temporal factors of videos from two perspectives, i.e., structure level and content level. At the structure
level, we decompose the T2V task into two steps, including
spatial reasoning and temporal reasoning, using a unified
denoiser. Specifically, we generate spatially coherent priors using text during spatial reasoning and then generate
temporally coherent motions from these priors during temporal reasoning. At the content level, we extract two subtle
cues from the content of the input video that can express
motion and appearance changes, respectively. These two
cues then guide the model’s training for generating videos,
enabling flexible content variations and enhancing temporal stability. Through the decoupled paradigm, HiGen can
effectively reduce the complexity of this task and generate
realistic videos with semantics accuracy and motion stability. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superior performance of HiGen over the state-of-the-art T2V methods. We
have released our source code and models.

ModelScope

Abstract

Figure 1. Visual comparison with ModelScopeT2V [53] and Gen2 [10]. The videos generated by ModelScopeT2V exhibit noticeable motion but suffer from lower spatial quality. However, while
Gen-2 produces realistic frames, they are mostly static with minimal motion. In contrast, the results of our HiGen demonstrate
both realistic frames and rich temporal variations.

yond, where their application possibilities are vast. Existing
methods primarily tackle the T2V task by leveraging powerful diffusion models, leading to substantial advancements
in this domain.
Typically, mainstream approaches [5, 8, 17, 53, 55] attempt to generate videos by extending text-to-image (T2I)
models by designing suitable 3D-UNet architectures. How-

6635

