This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Focus on Hiders: Exploring Hidden Threats for Enhancing Adversarial Training
Qian Li1,2 , Yuxiao Hu2,3 , Yinpeng Dong4 , Dongxiao Zhang2 , Yuntian Chen2 *
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Ningbo Institute of Digital Twin, Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo, China
3
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, HongKong, China
4
Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab, BNRist
Center, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
qianl01205@sjtu.edu.cn, huyuxiao20@mails.ucas.ac.cn
dongyinpeng@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, {dzhang, ychen}@eitech.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial training is often formulated as a min-max
problem, however, concentrating only on the worst adversarial examples causes alternating repetitive confusion of
the model, i.e., previously defended or correctly classified
samples are not defensible or accurately classifiable in subsequent adversarial training. We characterize such nonignorable samples as “hiders”, which reveal the hidden
high-risk regions within the secure area obtained through
adversarial training and prevent the model from finding the
real worst cases. We demand the model to prevent hiders
when defending against adversarial examples for improving accuracy and robustness simultaneously. By rethinking and redefining the min-max optimization problem for
adversarial training, we propose a generalized adversarial training algorithm called Hider-Focused Adversarial
Training (HFAT). HFAT introduces the iterative evolution
optimization strategy to simplify the optimization problem
and employs an auxiliary model to reveal hiders, effectively
combining the optimization directions of standard adversarial training and prevention hiders. Furthermore, we introduce an adaptive weighting mechanism that facilitates the
model in adaptively adjusting its focus between adversarial
examples and hiders during different training periods. We
demonstrate the effectiveness of our method based on extensive experiments, and ensure that HFAT can provide higher
robustness and accuracy.

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have made significant progress in recent years [6, 11, 28], they are easily
fooled by adversarial examples to make incorrect predictions [7, 9, 16, 18]. These malicious attacks pose a threat
* Corresponding author

(a) Original

(b) AT

(c) HFAT

Natural Sample / Hiders
Adversarial Example
Hiders
Original Boundary
AT Boundary
Auxiliary Boundary
Adaptive Weight
(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. Illustration of our core idea. Previous adversarial training methods have single-mindedly concentrated on worst-case adversarial examples, aiming to accurate classification of such examples. However, these methods fail to protect hidden high-risk
regions. We refer to these regions’ samples as hiders (blue-filled
triangles) which are correctly classified in the original model but
misclassified after adversarial training due to excessive accommodation of adversarial examples (blue-filled triangles within original boundary and outside of AT boundary, as depicted in (b), (d)).
It is noteworthy to mention that this phenomenon of diminished
accuracy also affects natural samples (blue-filled circle), which
can be considered as a special type of hiders. By introducing an
auxiliary model that exposes the hidden high-risk regions where
hiders are located (blue-filled triangles outside of auxiliary boundary, as depicted in (e)), we can obtain the optimization direction to
prevent hiders. Our core idea is to adaptively defend against both
adversarial examples and hiders simultaneously, which promises a
defense mechanism that ensures superior robustness and accuracy.

to the security and well-being of individuals, which highlights the importance of adversarial defense efforts. Among
them, adversarial training is proven to be the most effective
defense method against adversarial attacks [14, 18].

24442

