This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

R-Cyclic Diffuser: Reductive and Cyclic Latent Diffusion for 3D Clothed Human
Digitalization
Kennard Yanting Chan
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR

Fayao Liu
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR
liu fayao@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

kenn0042@e.ntu.edu.sg

Guosheng Lin
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Chuan Sheng Foo
Centre for Frontier AI Research, A*STAR
Institute for Infocomm Research, A*STAR

gslin@ntu.edu.sg

foo chuan sheng@i2r.a-star.edu.sg

Weisi Lin
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
wslin@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Recently, the authors of Zero-1-to-3 demonstrated that a
latent diffusion model, pretrained with Internet-scale data,
can not only address the single-view 3D object reconstruction task but can even attain SOTA results in it. However,
when applied to the task of single-view 3D clothed human
reconstruction, Zero-1-to-3 (and related models) are unable
to compete with the corresponding SOTA methods in this
field despite being trained on clothed human data.
In this work, we aim to tailor Zero-1-to-3’s approach
to the single-view 3D clothed human reconstruction task
in a much more principled and structured manner. To this
end, we propose R-Cyclic Diffuser, a framework that adapts
Zero-1-to-3’s novel approach to clothed human data by fusing it with a pixel-aligned implicit model.
R-Cyclic Diffuser offers a total of three new contributions. The first and primary contribution is R-Cyclic Diffuser’s cyclical conditioning mechanism for novel view synthesis. This mechanism directly addresses the view inconsistency problem faced by Zero-1-to-3 and related models.
Secondly, we further enhance this mechanism with two key
features - Lateral Inversion Constraint and Cyclic Noise Selection. Both features are designed to regularize and restrict the randomness of outputs generated by a latent diffusion model. Thirdly, we show how SMPL-X body priors
can be incorporated in a latent diffusion model such that
novel views of clothed human bodies can be generated much
more accurately. Our experiments show that R-Cyclic Diffuser is able to outperform current SOTA methods in single-

(a) Groundtruth (b) Zero-1-to-3 (c) One-1-2-3-45 (d) IntegratedPIFu

Figure 1. Results of Zero-1-to-3 [7], One-2-3-45 [6], and IntegratedPIFu [2] when trained and tested on clothed human subjects.

view 3D clothed human reconstruction both qualitatively
and quantitatively. Our code is made publicly available at
https://github.com/kcyt/r-cyclic-diffuser.

1. Introduction
Recently, Zero-1-to-3 [7] demonstrated that a latent diffusion model, which has been pre-trained on Internet-scale
image data, can be controlled to synthesize a novel view of
a subject of interest from any specified viewpoint. To do so,
the pretrained model has to be finetuned with an input RGB
view of a subject, a relative camera transformation, and a
transformed RGB view of the same subject. Once finetuned,
the model, when given an input view of a subject, will be
able to generate a large number of novel views of that subject. These novel views are then used to reconstruct a 3D
mesh of that subject using Score Jacobian Chaining (SJC)
[19]. Zero-1-to-3 showed that it is able to outperform SOTA
results in 3D object reconstruction. This is significant because Zero-1-to-3 shows how the massive internet image
data can be leveraged on to solve a 3D reconstruction task.
One-2-3-45 [6] builds on Zero-1-to-3 by estimating the

10304

