This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Contextual Augmented Global Contrast for Multimodal Intent Recognition
Kaili Sun1 , Zhiwen Xie2 , Mang Ye1 ,* Huyin Zhang1∗
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
2
School of Computer Science, Central China Normal University, Wuhan, China
{kailisun, yemang, zhy2536}@whu.edu.cn, zwxie@ccnu.edu.cn

Cross video

Abstract
Multimodal intent recognition (MIR) aims to perceive
the human intent polarity via language, visual, and acoustic modalities. The inherent intent ambiguity makes it challenging to recognize in multimodal scenarios. Existing MIR
methods tend to model the individual video independently,
ignoring global contextual information across videos. This
learning manner inevitably introduces perception biases,
exacerbated by the inconsistencies of the multimodal representation, amplifying the intent uncertainty. This challenge motivates us to explore effective global context modeling. Thus, we propose a context-augmented global contrast (CAGC) method to capture rich global context features by mining both intra-and cross-video context interactions for MIR. Concretely, we design a context-augmented
transformer module to extract global context dependencies
across videos. To further alleviate error accumulation and
interference, we develop a cross-video bank that retrieves
effective video sources by considering both intentional tendency and video similarity. Furthermore, we introduce
a global context-guided contrastive learning scheme, designed to mitigate inconsistencies arising from global context and individual modalities in different feature spaces.
This scheme incorporates global cues as the supervision to
capture robust the multimodal intent representation. Experiments demonstrate CAGC obtains superior performance
than state-of-the-art MIR methods. We also generalize our
approach to a closely related task, multimodal sentiment
analysis, achieving the comparable performance.

1. Introduction
Intent recognition (IR) techniques [6, 38] have exhibited
remarkable performance in text [6, 26, 63] and visual intent
[1, 23, 42]. However, these techniques are primarily tailored for single-modal scenarios and not effectively tackle
the challenges of real-world multimodal language.
* Corresponding Authors

Video

Cross video

…

Local visual
feature

CAT
Global cross-video visual
feature
Acoustic

Language

you guys, i am dying
right now.
Intent ?

Intent tendency

Excited context
cues

Excited context
cues

Complain

Joke (positive)

Intent tendency

Multimodal fusion

Figure 1. Illustration of multimodal intent recognition for the
video sample. Absorbing global context information from videos
that share highly similar scenes, as depicted cross-video in the figure, is essential to mitigate perception biases caused by the intentional ambiguity and improve the precise intent recognition.

Multimodal intent recognition (MIR) [61], an emerging
research area, aims to solve this challenge by aligning intent cues from both the natural language and the non-verbal
data. Related cross-modality reasoning studies [15, 40, 43]
have been explored to tackle the modality discrepancies in
MIR. Nevertheless, these methods struggle to handle the
distributional discrepancies arising from the heterogeneity
of modality signals. As an alternative, Hazarika et al. [15]
propose the projection of two complementary distinct subspaces to reduce the distributional discrepancies. However,
these methods model the individual video independently,
neglecting the contextual information across the videos.
Models are inevitably prone to introducing the perception
biases in the intent understanding, intensifying the uncertainty in the intent recognition.
Inspired by the global inter-video representation learning in object segmentation [31], the approaches [13, 27, 29,

26963

