This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spherical Mask: Coarse-to-Fine 3D Point Cloud Instance Segmentation with
Spherical Representation
Sangyun Shin

Kaichen Zhou Madhu Vankadari Andrew Markham
Department of Computer Science
University of Oxford

Niki Trigoni

firstname.lastname@cs.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Coarse-to-fine 3D instance segmentation methods show
weak performances compared to recent Grouping-based,
Kernel-based and Transformer-based methods. We argue
that this is due to two limitations: 1) Instance size overestimation by axis-aligned bounding box(AABB) 2) False
negative error accumulation from inaccurate box to the refinement phase. In this work, we introduce Spherical Mask,
a novel coarse-to-fine approach based on spherical representation, overcoming those two limitations with several
benefits. Specifically, our coarse detection estimates each instance with a 3D polygon using a center and radial distance
predictions, which avoids excessive size estimation of AABB.
To cut the error propagation in the existing coarse-to-fine approaches, we virtually migrate points based on the polygon,
allowing all foreground points, including false negatives, to
be refined. During inference, the proposal and point migration modules run in parallel and are assembled to form
binary masks of instances. We also introduce two marginbased losses for the point migration to enforce corrections
for the false positives/negatives and cohesion of foreground
points, significantly improving the performance. Experimental results from three datasets, such as ScanNetV2, S3DIS,
and STPLS3D, show that our proposed method outperforms
existing works, demonstrating the effectiveness of the new instance representation with spherical coordinates. The code
is available at: https://github.com/yunshin/SphericalMask

1. Introduction
3D instance segmentation has gained immense attention
with its wide range of applications for Indoor Scanning[38],
Augmented Reality(AR)[18], and Autonomous Driving[22].
Similar to 2D instance segmentation, the goal of the task is to
identify each object along with its class label. Nevertheless,
the sparse and unordered nature of point clouds has led
to the development of methods different from 2D image
segmentation.

Figure 1. Pipeline of Spherical Mask with coarse-to-fine framework. Given point cloud, instances are detected with 3D polygons
defined in spherical coordinates. In the refinement phase, the points
virtually migrate based on the polygon to estimate fine instance
masks.

Existing approaches for 3D instance segmentation are
broadly categorized into coarse-to-fine based[12, 14, 20, 33,
34], grouping-based[4, 13, 19, 30, 36], kernel-based[10, 11,
13, 29, 31], and Transformer-based[1, 15, 21, 27, 28] approaches. Recent progress in clustering techniques and attention mechanisms have driven the performances of the
last three approaches to state-of-the-art. Compared to these
three approaches, the coarse-to-fine approach has received
relatively less attention due to a low accuracy, caused by
two limitations: 1) False negative error propagation from the
coarse detection to the refinement stage. 2) Overestimation
of instance size.
Coarse-to-fine instance segmentation first performs
coarse detection, followed by refinement using the coarse
detection as hard reference. The basic assumption of the
approach is that the coarse detection stage always provides
a neat detection for refinement. However, this assumption
is often violated as the coarse detection stage cannot always produce neat outputs, which causes an issue of upper bound accuracy. For example, if the first coarse detection does not include all foreground points, the following

4060

