This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Amodal Ground Truth and Completion in the Wild
Guanqi Zhan1 , Chuanxia Zheng1 , Weidi Xie1,2 , Andrew Zisserman1
1
VGG, University of Oxford, 2 CMIC, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{guanqi,cxzheng,weidi,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper studies amodal image segmentation: predicting entire object segmentation masks including both visible
and invisible (occluded) parts. In previous work, the amodal
segmentation ground truth on real images is usually predicted by manual annotaton and thus is subjective. In contrast, we use 3D data to establish an automatic pipeline to
determine authentic ground truth amodal masks for partially
occluded objects in real images. This pipeline is used to construct an amodal completion evaluation benchmark, MP3DAmodal, consisting of a variety of object categories and labels. To better handle the amodal completion task in the wild,
we explore two architecture variants: a two-stage model that
first infers the occluder, followed by amodal mask completion; and a one-stage model that exploits the representation
power of Stable Diffusion for amodal segmentation across
many categories. Without bells and whistles, our method
achieves a new state-of-the-art performance on Amodal segmentation datasets that cover a large variety of objects, including COCOA and our new MP3D-Amodal dataset. The
dataset, model, and code are available at https://www.
robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/research/amodal/.

Original Image

Amodal Completion

Occluder Mask 𝐹!

1. Introduction
The vision community has rapidly improved instance segmentation performance over the last few years with a succession of powerful models, such as Mask-RCNN [13],
Mask2Former [5], and Seg-Anything (SAM) [23]. However, despite this remarkable progress, these models only
provide pixel-level modal segmentations for objects in the
images, i.e., the instance masks are for the visible pixels.
The models lack the human ability to infer the full extent of
the object in an image, when it is partially occluded. The
prediction of amodal masks, which covers the full extent
of the object, can assist several downstream tasks including object detection [48], smart image editing [29, 47, 51],
3D reconstruction from a single image [17, 18, 34, 44, 55],
object permanence in video segmentation [14, 41, 46], predicting support relationships between objects [38, 54], and

Modal Segmentation 𝑀!

Amodal Segmentation 𝐴!

3D Model and Projection

Figure 1. Amodal Ground Truth and Completion in the Wild.
Top: The task of amodal completion is to predict the amodal mask
Ai for an object ‘i’ in the image specified by the modal mask Mi
(here the object is the rear motorbike). Previous methods [31, 51]
require the mask of the occluder Fi to be also provided to do the
task; but our goal is to predict the amodal mask when the occluder
mask is not provided and the occluded object is of any category.
Bottom: We propose a novel method for generating amodal masks
for real images: using 3D structure to produce ground truth modal
and amodal masks for object instances. The method is used to
generate a ground truth evaluation dataset for real images.

28003

