This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learned Trajectory Embedding for Subspace Clustering
Yaroslava Lochman1
1

Carl Olsson1,2

Chalmers University of Technology

Abstract
1

Clustering multiple motions from observed point trajectories is a fundamental task in understanding dynamic
scenes. Most motion models require multiple tracks to estimate their parameters, hence identifying clusters when multiple motions are observed is a very challenging task. This is
even aggravated for high-dimensional motion models. The
starting point of our work is that this high-dimensionality
of motion model can actually be leveraged to our advantage as sufficiently long trajectories identify the underlying motion uniquely in practice. Consequently, we propose
to learn a mapping from trajectories to embedding vectors
that represent the generating motion. The obtained trajectory embeddings are useful for clustering multiple observed motions, but are also trained to contain sufficient information to recover the parameters of the underlying motion by utilizing a geometric loss. We therefore are able
to use only weak supervision from given motion segmentation to train this mapping. The entire algorithm consisting
of trajectory embedding, clustering and motion parameter
estimation is highly efficient. We conduct experiments on
the Hopkins155, Hopkins12, and KT3DMoSeg datasets and
show state-of-the-art performance of our proposed method
for trajectory-based motion segmentation on full sequences
and its competitiveness on the occluded sequences. Project
page: https://ylochman.github.io/trajectory-embedding.

1. Introduction
Multi-model fitting is a classical problem in computer vision, and a typical example is the task of estimating individual motions from point trajectories observed in images
containing multiple moving (and potentially deforming) objects. A trajectory is a sequence of tracked point coordinates
extracted in different frames and is therefore also a point in
a high-dimensional space. The commonly used union-ofsubspace models [61] assume that point trajectories originating from the same object/motion are samples from the
1 This work was supported by the Wallenberg Artificial Intelligence,
Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP), funded by Knut and
Alice Wallenberg Foundation.

Christopher Zach1
2

Lund University

same (unknown) low dimensional subspace. The inference
problem thus becomes that of simultaneously determining
the parameters of underlying subspaces, the trajectory assignments to subspaces, and in practice also denoising of
the data. Specifically, given an observation matrix M2F ⇥P
of point trajectories
0
1
|
|
M2F ⇥P = @x1 . . . xP A ,
(1)
|
|

where F is the number of frames and P is the number of
points, the goal is to find a P ⇥ P permutation matrix P⇡
that orders the trajectories into sub-matrices {Xi }ci=1 corresponding to different motions. Each motion is represented
by a 2F ⇥ ki basis matrix Bi whose columns span the subspace and therefore Xi = Bi CTi , where Ci is a ki ⇥ Pi shape
matrix. Hence
⇥
⇤
... Bc C>
M2F ⇥P P⇡ ⇡ B1 C>
(2)
c ,
1
Pc
where i=1 Pi = P , and ranks ki are assumed to be small.
In this work we assume that the ranks {k1 , . . . , kc } are
known which is a common scenario under multiple rigid
motions [49]. While estimating a single motion model Bi
from a cluster of trajectories belonging to the same motion
is relatively easy, the combination of cluster assignment and
model estimation turns inference into a complicated chicken
and egg problem. Further complications arise due to occlusion and partial observations which make it unlikely that we
can observe all the full trajectories in all cases.
In this work we seek to learn a feature representation that
allows us to solve the clustering problem separately from
the motion estimation. For this purpose we train a simple
feed forward network (with the overall structure depicted in
Fig. 1) taking a trajectory as input and returning a corresponding feature embedding. Using a metric learning loss
we ensure that the features are close if and only if corresponding trajectories belong to the same motions. Our approach allows us to input trajectories of varying lengths and
different starting and ending times, making it possible to
cluster trajectories using their features without completing
any missing data. In summary our main contributions are:

19092

