This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Point, Segment and Count: A Generalized Framework for Object Counting
Zhizhong Huang1
Mingliang Dai1
Yi Zhang2
Junping Zhang1
Hongming Shan3†
1
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
2
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China
3
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-inspired Intelligence & MOE Frontiers Center for
Brain Science & Key Laboratory of Computational Neuroscience and Brain-Inspired Intelligence,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
{zzhuang19, mldai21, jpzhang, hmshan}@fudan.edu.cn, yzhang@scu.edu.cn
Code: https://github.com/Hzzone/PseCo

Abstract
Class-agnostic object counting aims to count all objects
in an image with respect to example boxes or class names,
a.k.a few-shot and zero-shot counting. In this paper, we
propose a generalized framework for both few-shot and zeroshot object counting based on detection. Our framework
combines the superior advantages of two foundation models
without compromising their zero-shot capability: (i) SAM
to segment all possible objects as mask proposals, and (ii)
CLIP to classify proposals to obtain accurate object counts.
However, this strategy meets the obstacles of efficiency overhead and the small crowded objects that cannot be localized
and distinguished. To address these issues, our framework,
termed PseCo, follows three steps: point, segment, and count.
Specifically, we first propose a class-agnostic object localization to provide accurate but least point prompts for SAM,
which consequently not only reduces computation costs but
also avoids missing small objects. Furthermore, we propose a generalized object classification that leverages CLIP
image/text embeddings as the classifier, following a hierarchical knowledge distillation to obtain discriminative classifications among hierarchical mask proposals. Extensive
experimental results on FSC-147, COCO, and LVIS demonstrate that PseCo achieves state-of-the-art performance in
both few-shot/zero-shot object counting/detection.

1. Introduction
Object counting has attracted growing research interest in recent years. It aims to estimate the specific object counts in an
† Corresponding author.

Hot air balloons

Apples

Sheep

Ground Truth

SAM + CLIP

Ours

Figure 1. Sample results of vanilla SAM + CLIP and the proposed
method. Given the class name (zero-shot) or example boxes (fewshot), our method can detect all objects in the image for counting.

image, especially in extremely crowded scenes that cannot be
distinguished or counted one-by-one by humans. Traditional
object counting methods typically focus on specific categories such as humans [4], animals, or cars. One well-known
direction is crowd counting which counts all presented persons in an image. However, it requires a labor-intensive
amount of training data with point annotations and is limited to the pre-defined category once the model is trained.
Therefore, the recent efforts in object counting resort to classagnostic counting, which counts arbitrary categories with a
few guidance from example images [5, 10, 24, 25, 28, 31, 33]
and class names [30, 34, 38]. It achieves satisfactory performance even though the categories are unseen during training,
which thus reduces the burden of data starvation.

17067

