This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GLOW: Global Layout Aware Attacks on Object Detection
Jun Bao * 1 , Buyu Liu∗2 , Kui Ren2 , and Jun Yu †3,4
1

The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security 2 Zhejiang University
3
Hangzhou Dianzi University 4 Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
{baojun, buyu.liu, kuiren}@zju.edu.cn, yujun@hdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Adversarial attacks aim to perturb images such that a predictor outputs incorrect results. Due to the limited research
in structured attacks, imposing consistency checks on natural
multi-object scenes is a practical defense against conventional adversarial attacks. More desired attacks should be
able to fool defenses with such consistency checks. Therefore,
we present the first approach GLOW that copes with various
attack requests by generating global layout-aware adversarial attacks, in which both categorical and geometric layout
constraints are explicitly established. Specifically, we focus
on object detection tasks and given a victim image, GLOW
first localizes victim objects according to target labels. And
then it generates multiple attack plans, together with their
context-consistency scores. GLOW, on the one hand, is capable of handling various types of requests, including single
or multiple victim objects, with or without specified victim
objects. On the other hand, it produces a consistency score
for each attack plan, reflecting the overall contextual consistency that both semantic category and global scene layout
are considered. We conduct our experiments on MS COCO
and Pascal. Extensive experimental results demonstrate that
we can achieve about 30% average relative improvement
compared to state-of-the-art methods in conventional single
object attack request; Moreover, such superiority is also
valid across more generic attack requests, under both whitebox and zero-query black-box settings. Finally, we conduct
comprehensive human analysis, which not only validates
our claim further but also provides strong evidence that our
evaluation metrics reflect human reviews well.

1. Introduction
Object detection aims to localize and recognise multiple
objects in given images with their 2D bounding boxes and
corresponding semantic categories [14, 19]. Due to the physical commonsense and viewpoint preferences [16], detected
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. We propose a novel attack generation algorithm GLOW
that manages both conventional single targeted object (R1) and our
generic attack requests (R2,R3). Specifically, GLOW consists of
two steps. The first step localizes victim objects, if not provided.
The second step generates various attack plans with their consistency scores. Then the one with the highest score is our final attack
plan and parsed to attackers. Best viewed in color.

bounding boxes in natural images are not only semantically
labeled but also placed relative to each other within a coherent scene geometry, reflecting the underlying 3D scene
structure. Such bounding box representation allows us to
derive a notion of both semantic and geometric constraints.
For example, co-occurrence matrix is a commonly exploited
semantic constraint where certain object categories are more
likely to co-occur, e.g., bed and pillow [20]. Geometric
constraints, on the other hand, leverage the inductive bias
of scene layout [11], such as when oc-occurring in a scene,
traffic light is more likely to be appeared on the upper region
with a smaller bounding box compared to car.
Adversarial attacks on object detectors mainly focus on
targeted victim setting [7, 45] where the goal is to perturb a
specific victim object to target class. In this case, the location,
ground truth and target class of the victim object are assumed
to be known to attackers. Naturally, contextual cues are leveraged in attack and defense mechanisms [6, 7, 48] on detectors to enhance or detect holistic context (in)consistency [6].
Though being well-motivated and demonstrating good performances in conventional setting, the state-of-the-art meth-

12057

