This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Intrinsic Image Diffusion for Indoor Single-view Material Estimation
Peter Kocsis
Technical University of Munich

Vincent Sitzmann
MIT EECS

Matthias Nießner
Technical University of Munich

peter-kocsis.github.io/IntrinsicImageDiffusion/

Figure 1. Intrinsic Image Diffusion. We present Intrinsic Image Diffusion for single-view material estimation of indoor scenes. Since
appearance decomposition is a highly ambiguous task, we propose to use a conditional generative model to predict multiple solutions and
utilize the strong prior of recent diffusion models [36]. Our approach gives detailed and consistent material estimations on complex indoor
scenes, outperforming recent state-of-the-art methods and allows for high-quality controllable lighting optimization.

Abstract

We present Intrinsic Image Diffusion, a generative model
for appearance decomposition of indoor scenes. Given a
single input view, we sample multiple possible material explanations represented as albedo, roughness, and metallic maps. Appearance decomposition poses a considerable
challenge in computer vision due to the inherent ambiguity between lighting and material properties and the lack
of real datasets. To address this issue, we advocate for
a probabilistic formulation, where instead of attempting
to directly predict the true material properties, we employ
a conditional generative model to sample from the solution space. Furthermore, we show that utilizing the strong
learned prior of recent diffusion models trained on largescale real-world images can be adapted to material estimation and highly improves the generalization to real images.
Our method produces significantly sharper, more consistent, and more detailed materials, outperforming state-ofthe-art methods by 1.5dB on PSNR and by 45% better FID
score on albedo prediction. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach through experiments on both synthetic
and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Intrinsic image decomposition is a long-standing challenge
in computer vision. The goal is to predict geometric, material, and lighting properties from a single image, enabling
numerous downstream applications, such as content editing by changing material or lighting conditions. However,
the fundamental difficulty comes from the fact that we can
only observe the visual appearance of objects as a result of
a complex interplay of lighting and material, making the
decomposition inherently ambiguous.
Recent data-driven algorithms [27, 48, 50] show significant improvement by utilizing large-scale synthetic datasets
[27] rendered photo-realistically [48]. They achieve impressive results in predicting the overall material properties of
objects in the scene; however, accurately capturing highfrequency details continues to pose a challenge.
We believe the limitations observed in existing methods can be attributed to their deterministic treatment of the
appearance decomposition problem. Decomposing the appearance into lighting and material properties is a highly
ambiguous task since lighting properties can be baked into
materials and vice versa. By imposing the constraint of providing a single solution, deterministic models tend to predict the local or global average of the solution space, resulting in the aforementioned issues. We propose embracing the probabilistic nature of the problem, enabling a more

5198

