This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Motion-adaptive Separable Collaborative Filters for Blind Motion Deblurring
Chengxu Liu1,4
Xuan Wang2
Xiangyu Xu1
Ruhao Tian1
Shuai Li2
Xueming Qian1,4
Ming-Hsuan Yang3
1
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University
MEGVII Technology 3 University of California, Merced
4
Shaanxi Yulan Jiuzhou Intelligent Optoelectronic Technology Co., Ltd

Abstract
Eliminating image blur produced by various kinds of motion has been a challenging problem. Dominant approaches
rely heavily on model capacity to remove blurring by reconstructing residual from blurry observation in feature space.
These practices not only prevent the capture of spatially
variable motion in the real world but also ignore the tailored handling of various motions in image space. In this
paper, we propose a novel real-world deblurring filtering
model called the Motion-adaptive Separable Collaborative
(MISC) Filter. In particular, we use a motion estimation network to capture motion information from neighborhoods,
thereby adaptively estimating spatially-variant motion flow,
mask, kernels, weights, and offsets to obtain the MISC Filter. The MISC Filter first aligns the motion-induced blurring patterns to the motion middle along the predicted flow
direction, and then collaboratively filters the aligned image through the predicted kernels, weights, and offsets to
generate the output. This design can handle more generalized and complex motion in a spatially differentiated manner. Furthermore, we analyze the relationships between the
motion estimation network and the residual reconstruction
network. Extensive experiments on four widely used benchmarks demonstrate that our method provides an effective
solution for real-world motion blur removal and achieves
state-of-the-art performance. Code is available at https:
//github.com/ChengxuLiu/MISCFilter.

1. Introduction
Blind motion deblurring aims at recovering high-quality images from the counterparts of blurred images containing
real-world motions. From the perspective of the imaging
process, real-world motions that produce blur are diverse
and spatially varying, which introduces significant challenges for the corresponding solutions.
To tackle these issues, recent years have witnessed a
growing number of image deblurring approaches, which
can be categorized into two paradigms. The former attempts

(a) Vanilla Filter

(b) Deformable Filter

(c) Spatially-Variant Filter

(d) MISC Filter (Ours)

Figure 1. Illustration of other classical filters and our method. Red
part is the center point of the filter in the image, and the green part
is the reference point for generating it. Violet and orange parts are
the weights and offsets in the filter, respectively, Blue part of our
method indicates the motion-guided alignment along the motion
direction (best viewed in color).

to strengthen the model capacity and directly reconstruct the
residuals used to obtain sharp image [7, 12, 26–28, 40, 57,
59, 62, 65, 66]. These methods use multi-scale learning
and supervision [7, 12, 65], high efficiency attention mechanism [57, 59, 62, 66], generative adversarial learning [27,
28], and frequency domain learning [26, 33, 40] to optimize the model capability. Unfortunately, due to the shiftinvariant of popularly used “black box” convolution networks, nearly all of these methods either lack interpretability to remove motion blur or the ability to handle spatially
variable and large-scale motion. The latter attempts to learn
the motion blur kernel or prior first, which then guides the
reconstruction of residuals [2, 4, 8, 19, 49, 54]. These
methods focus on designing different types of mathematical models to estimate motion prior, such as probabilistic
distribution of motion blur [54], blur-field [2], latent representation of motion [8], and motion kernel [4, 19, 49].

25595

