This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Editable Scene Simulation for Autonomous Driving via Collaborative LLM-Agents
Yuxi Wei1,5 * Zi Wang3,5 * Yifan Lu1,5 * Chenxin Xu1,5 *
Changxing Liu1,5 Hao Zhao4 Siheng Chen1,2,5† Yanfeng Wang1,2
1
3

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Shanghai Jiao Tong University
4

Tsinghua University

5

Shanghai AI Laboratory

Multi-Agent Governance & Intelligence Crew (MAGIC)

{wyx3590236732, yifan_lu, xcxwakaka, cx-liu}@sjtu.edu.cn
{sihengc, wangyanfeng}@sjtu.edu.cn
ziwang2@andrew.cmu.edu zhaohao@air.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Scene simulation in autonomous driving has gained significant attention because of its huge potential for generating customized data. However, existing editable scene
simulation approaches face limitations in terms of user interaction efficiency, multi-camera photo-realistic rendering
and external digital assets integration. To address these
challenges, this paper introduces ChatSim, the first system that enables editable photo-realistic 3D driving scene
simulations via natural language commands with external
digital assets. To enable editing with high command flexibility, ChatSim leverages a large language model (LLM)
agent collaboration framework. To generate photo-realistic
outcomes, ChatSim employs a novel multi-camera neural
radiance field method. Furthermore, to unleash the potential of extensive high-quality digital assets, ChatSim employs a novel multi-camera lighting estimation method to
achieve scene-consistent assets’ rendering. Our experiments
on Waymo Open Dataset demonstrate that ChatSim can handle complex language commands and generate corresponding photo-realistic scene videos. Code can be accessed at:
https://github.com/yifanlu0227/ChatSim.

1. Introduction
Perception [12, 15–17, 38, 66] is the window of an autonomous vehicle into the external environment. To ensure
the robustness of the vehicle’s perceptual capabilities during
both training and testing phases, it necessitates the collection of high-quality perception data in substantial volumes
[13, 58]. However, the operation of a fleet for the acquisition of real-world data often incurs prohibitive expenses,
particularly for specialized or customized requirements. For
instance, in the aftermath of an accident or intervention in* Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. ChatSim enables the editing of photo-realistic 3D driving
scene simulations via language commands.

volving an autonomous vehicle, it is imperative to test the
vehicle’s perception system across a spectrum of similar scenarios. While replicating such scenario data from real-world
instances is nearly impossible due to the uncontrollability of
actual scenes [9, 52], customized scene simulation emerges
as a vital and feasible alternative. It enables the precise modeling of specific conditions without high costs and logistical
complexities of real-world data collection [4, 72].
To effectively simulate customized driving scenes, we
identify three key properties as fundamental. First, the simulation should be capable of following sophisticated or abstract demands, thereby facilitating the production. Second, the simulation should generate photo-realistic, viewconsistent outcomes, which allow for the closest approximation to vehicle observations in real-world scenarios. Third,
it should allow for the integration of external digital assets
[6, 44] with their photo-realistic textures and materials while
fitting the lighting conditions. This capability would unlock
the potential for data expansion by incorporating a wide
array of external digital assets, satisfying customized needs.
A vast array of significant works have been proposed
for scene simulation, yet they fail to meet all three of

15077

