This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Exploring Region-Word Alignment in Built-in Detector for
Open-Vocabulary Object Detection
Heng Zhang1 * Qiuyu Zhao1 * Linyu Zheng1† Hao Zeng1
Zhiwei Ge1
Tianhao Li1
Sulong Xu1
1
JD.com
{zhangheng291, zhaoqiuyu3, zhenglinyu1, zenghao30, gezhiwei, litianhao5, xusulong}@jd.com
Abstract
Open-vocabulary object detection aims to detect novel
categories that are independent from the base categories
used during training. Most modern methods adhere to the
paradigm of learning vision-language space from a largescale multi-modal corpus and subsequently transferring the
acquired knowledge to off-the-shelf detectors like FasterRCNN. However, information attenuation or destruction
may occur during the process of knowledge transfer due
to the domain gap, hampering the generalization ability on
novel categories. To mitigate this predicament, in this paper, we present a novel framework named BIND, standing
for Bulit-IN Detector, to eliminate the need for module replacement or knowledge transfer to off-the-shelf detectors.
Specically, we design a two-stage training framework with
an Encoder-Decoder structure. In the rst stage, an imagetext dual encoder is trained to learn region-word alignment
from a corpus of image-text pairs. In the second stage, a
DETR-style decoder is trained to perform detection on annotated object detection datasets. In contrast to conventional manually designed non-adaptive anchors, which generate numerous redundant proposals, we develop an anchor
proposal network that generates anchor proposals with high
likelihood based on candidates adaptively, thereby substantially improving detection efciency. Experimental results
on two public benchmarks, COCO and LVIS, demonstrate
that our method stands as a state-of-the-art approach for
open-vocabulary object detection.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision that involves object recognition and localization in images [16]. Traditional object detection methods, such as
RCNN [7], Faster-RCNN [24] and DETR [1], are primar* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison with the transfer-based framework and our
built-in detector framework. (a) Transfer-based methods learn
from VLM and information attenuation may occur during the process of knowledge transfer. (b) Our built-in detector learns regionword alignment directly where an anchor proposal network is developed for region localization, i.e., reliable positional recommendations for efcient training and inference.

ily designed for close set scenarios, where the target categories to be detected remain consistent throughout both
the training and inference phases. When applying them in
real-world scenarios, the challenge arises of detecting novel
classes that have not been seen during the training phase. To
tackle this issue, a new paradigm, open vocabulary object
detection (OVD) [28, 32], has been proposed recently and
received much attention in the research community. The
core of this paradigm is to acquire semantic understand-

16975

