This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Video Domain Adaptation with Masked Pre-Training and
Collaborative Self-Training
Arun Reddy1,2 , William Paul1 , Corban Rivera1 , Ketul Shah2 , Celso M. de Melo3 , Rama Chellappa2
1
2

Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory

Johns Hopkins University, Department of Electrical & Computer Engineering
3

DEVCOM U.S. Army Research Laboratory

Abstract
In this work, we tackle the problem of unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) for video action recognition. Our
approach, which we call UNITE, uses an image teacher
model to adapt a video student model to the target domain. UNITE first employs self-supervised pre-training to
promote discriminative feature learning on target domain
videos using a teacher-guided masked distillation objective.
We then perform self-training on masked target data, using the video student model and image teacher model together to generate improved pseudolabels for unlabeled target videos. Our self-training process successfully leverages
the strengths of both models to achieve strong transfer performance across domains. We evaluate our approach on
multiple video domain adaptation benchmarks and observe
significant improvements upon previously reported results.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the field of video action recognition has
undergone significant advancement, largely driven by deep
learning-based techniques. These include approaches based
on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [6, 14, 15, 47, 51,
53] and vision transformers (ViTs) [1, 5, 13, 33, 39, 42].
Further enriching this landscape, models integrating video
and language data have emerged [36, 55, 57], which effectively leverage large collections of captioned videos to
achieve impressive video understanding capabilities.
Despite increasing performance on benchmark datasets,
deep networks for video action recognition suffer from
the same fundamental challenges as other machine learning models in the presence of distribution shift. This phenomenon, where a model’s performance degrades when applied to data distributions different from those it was trained
on, remains a critical obstacle in deploying the models in
varied real-world scenarios.
Domain adaptation (DA) seeks to mitigate the effects of

Target Videos

Source Videos

Unsupervised
Pre-Training

Supervised
Fine-Tuning

Masked
Distillation

Target Videos

Source Videos

Collaborative
Self-Training

Pseudolabel
Refinement

Teacher Model
(CLIP)

Figure 1. Overview of the UNITE pipeline for video UDA. A
teacher model is used to guide the self-supervised learning process
in the first stage, and is again used to improve pseudolabeling of
target videos during self-training in the third stage.

distribution shift and has been a major research area within
the computer vision community for years [41]. A subproblem within DA is unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA),
which tries to make use of unlabeled data from the target
domain to improve transfer performance. UDA approaches
specific to video have also been developed, with many focusing on explicit alignment of the source and target domains using adversarial techniques or domain discrepancy
measures. In contrast, we present here a method for video
UDA that relies on self-supervised masked pre-training and
self-training, both aided by a powerful image-based teacher
model (CLIP [44] ). The authors of DALL-V [67] demonstrate the effectiveness of CLIP in the source-free video
domain adaptation setting by directly adapting it to action
recognition tasks despite fundamentally being an imagebased technique. Instead, we leverage CLIP as a spatial
teacher for training a spatiotemporal student model that can
better operate on target domain videos.
This paper presents, to the best of our knowledge, the
first exploration of self-supervised masked distillation

18919

