This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spike-guided Motion Deblurring with Unknown Modal Spatiotemporal
Alignment
Jiyuan Zhang1,2 Shiyan Chen1,2 Yajing Zheng1,2 * Zhaofei Yu1,2,3 * Tiejun Huang1,2,3
1
School of Computer Science, Peking University
2
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, Peking University
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University
{jyzhang,2301112005}@stu.pku.edu.cn, {yj.zheng,yuzf12,tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
The imaging principle of conventional frame-based cameras
is based on the concept of exposure time windows. During the continuous imaging process, the time between the
exposure windows of adjacent frames is unused. Due to
the presence of exposure windows, when the camera is in
high-speed motion or there are fast-moving objects in the
scene, images may exhibit a blur effect. In recent years,
* Corresponding author.

Spatial Axis

Spike Camera

Unknown
Spatial Offset!
RGB Camera

Temporal Axis

The traditional frame-based cameras that rely on exposure windows for imaging experience motion blur in highspeed scenarios. Frame-based deblurring methods lack reliable motion cues to restore sharp images under extreme
blur conditions. The spike camera is a novel neuromorphic
visual sensor that outputs spike streams with ultra-high temporal resolution. It can supplement the temporal information lost in traditional cameras and guide motion deblurring. However, in real-world scenarios, aligning discrete
RGB images and continuous spike streams along both temporal and spatial axes is challenging due to the complexity of calibrating their coordinates, device displacements
in vibrations, and time deviations. Misalignment of pixels
leads to severe degradation of deblurring. We introduce the
first framework for spike-guided motion deblurring without
knowing the spatiotemporal alignment between spikes and
images. To address the problem, we first propose a novel
three-stage network containing a basic deblurring net, a
carefully designed bi-directional deformable aligning module, and a flow-based multi-scale fusion net. Experimental
results demonstrate that our approach can effectively guide
the image deblurring with unknown alignment, surpassing
the performance of other methods. Public project page:
https://github.com/Leozhangjiyuan/UaSDN.

RGB Camera

Exposure
Window
T
No precise
synchronization!

T

Spike Camera
Ideal Data

Time offset!

Time offset!

Figure 1. Illustration of unknown spatiotemporal alignment between a spike camera and an RGB camera.

many studies have focused on addressing the challenging
task of recovering clear images from blurry ones utilizing
deep-learning routes [4, 5, 16]. However, the texture or
structural information in blurry images is partially lost during the exposure, making it difficult to infer clear textures
directly from blurry images, as in Fig. 2 (Orange Box).
Introducing spike cameras as clues of deblurring. Bioinspired neuromorphic vision sensors have attracted increasing attention and achieved significant development.
They possess advantages such as ultra-high temporal resolution, low latency, and high dynamic range. Due to
the continuous recording of light intensity, neuromorphic
cameras can be used to compensate for the lack of temporal information in image deblurring. Based on different sampling principles, they can be classified into event
cameras [1, 21, 23] and spike cameras [12]. Event cameras asynchronously detect changes in light intensity and
are highly sensitive to moving edges. Studies utilize events
for image deblurring [28, 32]. Spike cameras accumulates

25047

