This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Egocentric Whole-Body Motion Capture with FisheyeViT and Diffusion-Based
Motion Refinement
Jian Wang1,4
Zhe Cao2
Diogo Luvizon1,4
Lingjie Liu3
2
2
2
Kripasindhu Sarkar
Danhang Tang
Thabo Beeler
Christian Theobalt1,4
1
MPI Informatics & Saarland Informatics Campus 2 Google 3 University of Pennsylvania
4
Saarbrücken Research Center for Visual Computing, Interaction and Artificial Intelligence
Project Page: https://jianwang-mpi.github.io/egowholemocap

Figure 1. From an image sequence captured by a single head-mounted fisheye camera, our method can predict accurate and temporally
coherent whole-body motion, including human body and hand poses. The SMPL-X parameters are obtained using inverse kinematics.

Abstract
In this work, we explore egocentric whole-body motion
capture using a single fisheye camera, which simultaneously estimates human body and hand motion. This task
presents significant challenges due to three factors: the lack
of high-quality datasets, fisheye camera distortion, and human body self-occlusion. To address these challenges, we
propose a novel approach that leverages FisheyeViT to extract fisheye image features, which are subsequently converted into pixel-aligned 3D heatmap representations for
3D human body pose prediction. For hand tracking, we
incorporate dedicated hand detection and hand pose estimation networks for regressing 3D hand poses. Finally, we
develop a diffusion-based whole-body motion prior model
to refine the estimated whole-body motion while accounting for joint uncertainties. To train these networks, we collect a large synthetic dataset, EgoWholeBody, comprising
840,000 high-quality egocentric images captured across a
diverse range of whole-body motion sequences. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in producing high-quality whole-body
motion estimates from a single egocentric camera.

1. Introduction
Egocentric 3D human motion estimation using headmounted devices [47, 54] has garnered significant traction

in recent years, driven by its diverse applications in VR/AR.
Immersed in a virtual world, we can traverse virtual environments, interact with virtual objects, and even simulate
real-world interactions. To fully capture the intricacies of
human motion during such interaction, understanding both
body and hand movements is essential. While existing egocentric motion capture methods [30, 47, 50–52, 54] focus
solely on body motion, neglecting the hands, this work proposes the task of egocentric whole-body motion capture, i.e.
simultaneous estimation of the body motion and hand motion from a single head-mounted fisheye camera (shown in
Fig. 1). This task is extremely challenging due to three factors: First, the fisheye image introduces significant distortion, making it difficult for existing networks, which are
designed for non-distorted images, to extract features. Second, the egocentric camera perspective frequently leads to
the occlusion of body parts, such as the feet and hands, further complicating the task of whole-body motion capture.
Lastly, large-scale training data with ground truth annotations for both body and hand poses is absent in existing
datasets [4, 29, 47, 51, 54].
In this work, we propose a novel egocentric whole-body
motion capture method to address the aforementioned challenges. To effectively address fisheye distortion, we propose FisheyeViT for extracting image features, along with
a joint regressor employing pixel-aligned 3D heatmap for
predicting 3D body poses. Instead of attempting to undis-

777

