This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Flattening the Parent Bias:
Hierarchical Semantic Segmentation in the Poincaré Ball
Simon Weber1,2
1

Barış Zöngür1

Technical University of Munich

Nikita Araslanov1,2
2

Daniel Cremers1,2

Munich Center for Machine Learning

hyperplane
dA
E

dA
H
dB
E

gyroplane

dB
H

(a) Embeddings in Euclidean space

(b) Embeddings in Poincaré ball

Figure 1. Core idea. Class embeddings in the Euclidean space (a) exhibit non-uniform properties of the separation margin: the average
B
distance of a pixel embedding of one class to the decision boundaries of the other classes varies substantially (e.g. dA
E > dE ). This creates
an implicit parent bias in hierarchical segmentation, which prefers grouping one set of classes over the other, in terms of the parent-level
segmentation accuracy. In contrast, in hyperbolic space characterized by the Poincaré ball (b), the separation margins between the class
embeddings are more uniform, e.g. the hyperbolic distance of embeddings A and B of two different classes to the decision boundary (a
B
gyroplane) of another class is approximately equal, dA
H ≈ dH . This may explain the strong generalization of the parent-level predictions,
observed in practice, in terms of the segmentation accuracy and calibration quality.

Abstract
Hierarchy is a natural representation of semantic taxonomies, including the ones routinely used in image segmentation. Indeed, recent work on semantic segmentation
reports improved accuracy from supervised training leveraging hierarchical label structures. Encouraged by these
results, we revisit the fundamental assumptions behind that
work. We postulate and then empirically verify that the reasons for the observed improvement in segmentation accuracy may be entirely unrelated to the use of the semantic
hierarchy. To demonstrate this, we design a range of crossdomain experiments with a representative hierarchical approach. We find that on the new testing domains, a flat (nonhierarchical) segmentation network, in which the parents
are inferred from the children, has superior segmentation
accuracy to the hierarchical approach across the board.
Complementing these findings and inspired by the intrinsic
properties of hyperbolic spaces, we study a more principled
approach to hierarchical segmentation using the Poincaré

ball model. The hyperbolic representation largely outperforms the previous (Euclidean) hierarchical approach as
well and is on par with our flat Euclidean baseline in terms
of segmentation accuracy. However, it additionally exhibits
surprisingly strong calibration quality of the parent nodes
in the semantic hierarchy, especially on the more challenging domains. Our combined analysis suggests that the established practice of hierarchical segmentation may be limited to in-domain settings, whereas flat classifiers generalize substantially better, especially if they are modeled in the
hyperbolic space.

1. Introduction
Semantic knowledge is inherently structured, and organizing it in a hierarchy is both natural and expressive. Unsurprisingly, hierarchical representations play an important
role in computer vision [36, 37, 39, 59, 60, 62]. For inProject code: https://github.com/tum-vision/hierahyp

28223

