This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CricaVPR: Cross-image Correlation-aware Representation Learning for Visual
Place Recognition
Feng Lu1,2 , Xiangyuan Lan2∗ , Lijun Zhang3 , Dongmei Jiang2 , Yaowei Wang2 , Chun Yuan1 *
1
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{lf22@mails,yuanc@sz}.tsinghua.edu.cn lanxy@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract

https://github.com/Lu-Feng/CricaVPR.

1. Introduction
Visual place recognition (VPR), also known as visual geolocalization [8, 9], aims at getting the coarse geographical
location of an input query image by retrieving the most similar place image from a geo-tagged database. VPR has wide
applications in augmented reality [45], mobile robot localization [64], and so on. However, there are three key challenges in VPR: condition (e.g., lighting, weather, and season) variations, viewpoint variations, and perceptual aliasing [40] (difficult to distinguish highly similar images taken
from different places). Addressing these challenges at the
* Corresponding authors.

Recall@1 (%)

Over the past decade, most methods in visual place
recognition (VPR) have used neural networks to produce
feature representations. These networks typically produce
a global representation of a place image using only this
image itself and neglect the cross-image variations (e.g.
viewpoint and illumination), which limits their robustness
in challenging scenes. In this paper, we propose a robust global representation method with cross-image correlation awareness for VPR, named CricaVPR. Our method
uses the attention mechanism to correlate multiple images
within a batch. These images can be taken in the same
place with different conditions or viewpoints, or even captured from different places. Therefore, our method can utilize the cross-image variations as a cue to guide the representation learning, which ensures more robust features are
produced. To further facilitate the robustness, we propose
a multi-scale convolution-enhanced adaptation method to
adapt pre-trained visual foundation models to the VPR task,
which introduces the multi-scale local information to further enhance the cross-image correlation-aware representation. Experimental results show that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a large margin with
significantly less training time. The code is released at

94.0

CricaVPR (Ours)

EigenPlaces

92.0

MixVPR

90.0

SFRS
CosPlace

88.0
82.0

NetVLAD
GCL

80.0

500

2000
Descriptors Dimensionality

4000

Figure 1. The Recall@1 and descriptors dimensionality comparison of different methods on Pitts30k. The GCL, NetVLAD, SFRS,
and CricaVPR (Ours) all use PCA for dimensionality reduction.
Our method can achieve significantly higher Recall@1 than other
methods with 512-dim compact global features.

same time is a hard nut to crack, especially for methods that
use only global features.
VPR is typically addressed as an image retrieval problem
[12]. The place images are represented using global features and the similarity search is implemented in this feature
space to return the matched place image. The global features are usually derived through the aggregation (pooling)
of local features, employing methods such as NetVLAD [5]
or GeM [52] pooling. Such compact features are suitable
for large-scale VPR. However, they lack robustness in challenging environments and are often susceptible to perceptual aliasing. A way to improve robustness is to perform
re-ranking by matching local features [26, 59], which incurs huge overhead in runtime and memory footprint, making it difficult to achieve large-scale VPR. One problem
that has been neglected is that existing methods produce
the feature of an image only using this image itself (without cross-image interaction), which does not explicitly consider cross-image variations. To address this, our method
attempts to use the cross-image variations as a cue to guide
the representation learning and harvest useful information
from other images when producing the feature of an image,

16772

