This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Leveraging Frame Affinity for sRGB-to-RAW Video De-rendering
Chen Zhang1∗ , Wencheng Han2∗ , Yang Zhou1 , Jianbing Shen2† , Cheng-zhong Xu2 , Wentao Liu1†
1
SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI, 2 SKL-IOTSC, CIS, University of Macau.
zhangchen2@tetras.ai {wencheng256, shenjiangbingcg}@gmail.com
{zhouyang, liuwentao}@sensetime.com

czxu@um.edu.mo

1 GB

Abstract
Unprocessed RAW video has shown distinct advantages
over sRGB video in video editing and computer vision tasks.
However, capturing RAW video is challenging due to limitations in bandwidth and storage. Various methods have
been proposed to address similar issues in single image
RAW capture through de-rendering. These methods utilize
both the metadata and the sRGB image to perform sRGBto-RAW de-rendering and recover high-quality single-frame
RAW data. However, metadata-based methods always require additional computation for online metadata generation, imposing severe burden on mobile camera device
for high frame rate RAW video capture. To address this
issue, we propose a framework that utilizes frame affinity to achieve high-quality sRGB-to-RAW video reconstruction. Our approach consists of two main steps. The first
step, temporal affinity prior extraction, uses motion information between adjacent frames to obtain a reference RAW
image. The second step, spatial feature fusion and mapping, learns a pixel-level mapping function using scenespecific and position-specific features provided by the previous frame. Our method can be easily applied to current
mobile camera equipment without complicated adaptations
or added burden. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach, we introduce the first RAW Video De-rendering
Benchmark. In this benchmark, our method outperforms
state-of-the-art RAW image reconstruction methods, even
without image-level metadata.

1. Introduction
In recent years, RAW videos have become increasingly popular among professional videographers due to their ability
to capture unprocessed signals from the camera at a 10-16
∗ Equal contribution.

† Corresponding author.

This work was supported in part by the FDCT grants 0154/2022/A3, 0002/2023/AKP,
0102/2023/RIA2, and 001/2024/SKL, the MYRG-CRG2022-00013IOTSC-ICI grant and the SRG2022-00023-IOTSC grant.

ISP

sRGB

sRGB-sequence

10 GB

RAW

High IO Burden
Camera Storage
(Expensive)

Raw-sequence

(a) RAW video capturing procedure
1 GB

1 GB

ISP

sRGB

ISP

sRGB

sRGB-sequence

sRGB-sequence
High Computation Burden
10 GB

RAW

Raw-sequence

O(WHL)

Samping Model
on Camera

O(1)

10 GB

Select & Save

RAW

Meta-data

(b) Meta-data based method

Raw-sequence

One Raw Frame

(c) Our method

Figure 1. Comparison of Different RAW Video Capture Methods. (a) Saving the entire RAW video would cause significant
strain on bandwidth and storage resources. (b) Sampling metadata
for every frame in the video would burden the camera’s computation. (c) Our method only requires saving a single extra RAW
frame, which does not significantly burden the camera.

bit depth. This enables the production of video sequences
with superior visual effects compared to sRGB videos. In
addition, recent research has explored the benefits of using RAW data in computer vision tasks. Some studies have
discovered that the linear relationship between scene irradiance and RAW data is better suited for tasks such as image
denoising [2, 9, 12, 39], image super-resolution [7, 13, 34,
40], and low-light enhancement [5, 8, 11]. Additionally, the
wide tolerance of RAW data makes perception tasks more
robust in high-dynamic scenes [6, 22, 33, 36]. However, the
high cost of RAW video capturing limits the widespread
use of this technology. On one hand, the abundant and detailed information encoded in the RAW data takes up a huge
amount of storage, increasing storage costs for users. On
the other hand, real-time capturing of RAW video data puts
a significant strain on the camera’s bandwidth, as shown in
Figure 1 (a).
To address similar issues, many techniques have been

25659

