This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SCEdit: Efficient and Controllable Image Diffusion
Generation via Skip Connection Editing
Zeyinzi Jiang

Chaojie Mao

Yulin Pan Zhen Han
Alibaba Group

Jingfeng Zhang

(c) Controllable Generation

(b) Few-shot

(a) Text-to-Image

{zeyinzi.jzyz, chaojie.mcj, yanwen.pyl, hanzhen.hz, zhangjingfeng.zjf}@alibaba-inc.com

SD v1.5

A grey and
white cat…

COCO Eﬃcient Tuning

Anime

Flat illustration

3D

Oil painting

Sketch

Watercolor

Canny

Depth

Segmentation

Pose

Color

Inpainting

Outpainting

HED

Figure 1. Images generated by SCEdit. With a small number of trainable parameters and low memory usage, SCEdit enables efficient
fine-tuning on specific datasets (left top) and supports transfer learning with a few samples (right top). Additionally, it adopts various
conditions as inputs for efficient controllable generation (middle), while individually learned conditional models combine effortlessly,
providing endless compositional possibilities (bottom).

Abstract
Image diffusion models have been utilized in various
tasks, such as text-to-image generation and controllable image synthesis. Recent research has introduced tuning methods that make subtle adjustments to the original models,
yielding promising results in specific adaptations of foundational generative diffusion models. Rather than modifying the main backbone of the diffusion model, we delve
into the role of skip connection in U-Net and reveal that hierarchical features aggregating long-distance information
across encoder and decoder make a significant impact on
the content and quality of image generation. Based on
the observation, we propose an efficient generative tuning
framework, dubbed SCEdit, which integrates and edits

Skip Connection using a lightweight tuning module named
SC-Tuner. Furthermore, the proposed framework allows
for straightforward extension to controllable image synthesis by injecting different conditions with Controllable
SC-Tuner, simplifying and unifying the network design for
multi-condition inputs. Our SCEdit substantially reduces
training parameters, memory usage, and computational expense due to its lightweight tuners, with backward propagation only passing to the decoder blocks. Extensive experiments conducted on text-to-image generation and controllable image synthesis tasks demonstrate the superiority of
our method in terms of efficiency and performance. Project
page: https://scedit.github.io/.

8995

