This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

4D-fy: Text-to-4D Generation Using Hybrid Score Distillation Sampling
Sherwin Bahmani1,2 Ivan Skorokhodov3,4 Victor Rong1,2 Gordon Wetzstein5 Leonidas Guibas5
Peter Wonka3 Sergey Tulyakov4 Jeong Joon Park6 Andrea Tagliasacchi1,7,8 David B. Lindell1,2
1

University of Toronto 2 Vector Institute 3 KAUST 4 Snap Inc. 5 Stanford University 6 University of Michigan 7 SFU 8 Google

"a crocodile playing a drum set"

viewpoint

"a space shuttle launching"

time
Figure 1. Text-to-4D Synthesis. We present 4D-fy, a technique that synthesizes 4D (i.e., dynamic 3D) scenes from a text prompt. We show
scenes generated from two text prompts for different viewpoints (vertical dimension) at different time steps (horizontal dimension). Video
results can be viewed on our website: https://sherwinbahmani.github.io/4dfy.

Abstract
Recent breakthroughs in text-to-4D generation rely on
pre-trained text-to-image and text-to-video models to generate dynamic 3D scenes. However, current text-to-4D methods face a three-way tradeoff between the quality of scene
appearance, 3D structure, and motion. For example, textto-image models and their 3D-aware variants are trained
on internet-scale image datasets and can be used to produce scenes with realistic appearance and 3D structure—but
no motion. Text-to-video models are trained on relatively
smaller video datasets and can produce scenes with motion,
but poorer appearance and 3D structure. While these models have complementary strengths, they also have opposing
weaknesses, making it difficult to combine them in a way
that alleviates this three-way tradeoff. Here, we introduce
hybrid score distillation sampling, an alternating optimization procedure that blends supervision signals from multiple
pre-trained diffusion models and incorporates benefits of
each for high-fidelity text-to-4D generation. Using hybrid
SDS, we demonstrate synthesis of 4D scenes with compelling
appearance, 3D structure, and motion.

1. Introduction
The advent of internet-scale image–text datasets [54] and
advances in diffusion models [20, 58, 60] have led to new
capabilities in stable, high-fidelity image generation from
text prompts [6, 51, 52]. Recent methods have also shown
that large-scale text-to-image or text-to-video [56] diffusion
models learn useful priors for 3D [25, 44] and 4D scene
generation [57]. Our work focuses on text-to-4D scene generation (Fig. 1), which promises exciting new capabilities
for applications in augmented and virtual reality, computer
animation, and industrial design.
Current techniques for generating 3D or 4D scenes from
text prompts typically iteratively optimize a representation
of the scene using supervisory signals from a diffusion
model [44, 67, 71]. Specifically, these methods render an
image of a 3D scene, add noise to the rendered image, use a
pre-trained diffusion model to denoise the rendered image,
and estimate gradients used to update the 3D representation [44, 67]. This procedure, known as score distillation
sampling (SDS) [44], underpins most recent methods for
text-conditioned scene generation.
Using SDS for text-to-4D generation requires navigating

7996

