This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Visual Prompting for Generalized Few-shot Segmentation:
A Multi-scale Approach
Mir Rayat Imtiaz Hossain1,2
Mennatullah Siam3,1
Leonid Sigal1,2,4
James J. Little1
1
2
3
University of British Columbia
Vector Institute for AI
Ontario Tech University
4
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
Novel
Prompts

Abstract

Bicycle

1. Introduction
The emergence of foundational models, trained on broad
datasets, in natural language processing (e.g., GPT-3 [5])
and in vision-language (e.g., CLIP [31]), exhibits powerful
generalization and strong performance on multiple downstream tasks. These models have been adapted through different prompting techniques [6, 43] for them to be used in
the few-shot scenario.
However, despite successes, including in localization
[6, 43, 50], prompting, which allows for few-shot demon-

Dog

Target Image

Visual Prompts

The emergence of attention-based transformer models
has led to their extensive use in various tasks, due to their
superior generalization and transfer properties. Recent research has demonstrated that such models, when prompted
appropriately, are excellent for few-shot inference. However, such techniques are under-explored for dense prediction tasks like semantic segmentation. In this work,
we examine the effectiveness of prompting a transformerdecoder with learned visual prompts for the generalized
few-shot segmentation (GFSS) task. Our goal is to achieve
strong performance not only on novel categories with limited examples, but also to retain performance on base categories. We propose an approach to learn visual prompts
with limited examples. These learned visual prompts are
used to prompt a multiscale transformer decoder to facilitate accurate dense predictions. Additionally, we introduce a unidirectional causal attention mechanism between
the novel prompts, learned with limited examples, and the
base prompts, learned with abundant data. This mechanism enriches the novel prompts without deteriorating the
base class performance. Overall, this form of prompting
helps us achieve state-of-the-art performance for GFSS on
two different benchmark datasets: COCO-20i and Pascal5i , without the need for test-time optimization (or transduction). Furthermore, test-time optimization leveraging unlabelled test data can be used to improve the prompts, which
we refer to as transductive prompt tuning.

Pre-trained
Base Prompts

Transductive
Prompt-tuning
Novel-to-Base
Causal Attention

Prompting Multi-scale Transformer Decoder
Horse
Prompt-toTarget CrossAttention

Person

Segmentation
Head

Car

...
Novel-to-Base
Causal Attention

Bird
Bicycle

Predicted
Segmentation

Dog
Final Prompts

Figure 1. Overview of the Proposed Approach. Prompting
multi-scale transformer decoders for generalized few-shot segmentation. Our approach is a simple approach that allows testtime transductive prompt tuning (see red arrows).

strations in dense prediction, and specifically in semantic
segmentation tasks, is relatively under-explored.
Few-shot semantic segmentation [24, 40, 45, 46, 48, 49]
aims to segment novel (unseen) classes with few labelled
training examples. Most state-of-the-art methods rely on
meta-learning, to leverage abundant training data as a form
of “data augmentation” to construct many tasks that resemble test-time few-shot inference [26, 45]. In general, fewshot learning approaches can be classified as either inductive or transductive. Inductive approaches mainly rely on
the training data, while transductive ones [4], in addition,
exploit unlabelled test data in an unsupervised manner to
improve the performance e.g., by leveraging entropy priors over predictive class distributions. However, both cases
largely focus on the performance of the novel categories;
which isn’t particularly realistic. A recently proposed gen-

23470

