This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Building Vision-Language Models on Solid Foundations with Masked Distillation
Sepehr Sameni1*
1

Kushal Kafle2

University of Bern

sepehr.sameni@unibe.ch

Hao Tan2
2

Simon Jenni2

Adobe Research

{kkafle,hatan,jenni}@adobe.com

Abstract
Recent advancements in Vision-Language Models (VLMs)
have marked a significant leap in bridging the gap between
computer vision and natural language processing. However,
traditional VLMs, trained through contrastive learning on
limited and noisy image-text pairs, often lack the spatial and
linguistic understanding to generalize well to dense vision
tasks or less common languages. Our approach, Solid Foundation CLIP (SF-CLIP), circumvents this issue by implicitly
building on the solid visual and language understanding of
foundational models trained on vast amounts of unimodal
data. SF-CLIP integrates contrastive image-text pretraining
with a masked knowledge distillation from large foundational text and vision models. This methodology guides our
VLM in developing robust text and image representations.
As a result, SF-CLIP shows exceptional zero-shot classification accuracy and enhanced image and text retrieval capabilities, setting a new state of the art for ViT-B/16 trained
on YFCC15M and CC12M. Moreover, the dense per-patch
supervision enhances our zero-shot and linear probe performance in semantic segmentation tasks. A remarkable aspect
of our model is its multilingual proficiency, evidenced by
strong retrieval results in multiple languages despite being
trained predominantly on English data. We achieve all of
these improvements without sacrificing the training efficiency
through our selective application of masked distillation and
the inheritance of teacher word embeddings.

1. Introduction
The emergence of Vision-Language Models (VLMs), exemplified by pioneering models like CLIP [44] and ALIGN [24],
was pivotal in the integration of computer vision and natural
language processing. These models foster a unique symbiosis between visual and textual data, opening the door to
various applications. For instance, VLMs have been instrumental in enhancing text-guided image retrieval systems [3]
∗ Work in part performed during an internship at Adobe Research.

Figure 1. SF-CLIP’s Performance on Vision-Language Tasks.
Our model, SF-CLIP, builds on the knowledge of foundational
vision and language models to learn a joint embedding space. As a
result, it not only shows improved zero-shot performance but also
inherits strong multi-lingual and image segmentation capabilities
from its teachers. The plot shows the performance of SF-CLIP
compared to SLIP and vanilla CLIP across ten established benchmarks. (all models are pretrained on YFCC-15M)

and enabling breakthroughs in automated image captioning [29]. Furthermore, they have even extended their impact
to creative domains such as the generation of images from
text [25, 42, 43, 45]. This diverse range of applications underscores the versatile and transformative nature of VLMs
in bridging visual and linguistic domains.
However, despite their success and widespread adoption,
VLMs are not without limitations. A fundamental issue is
their heavy reliance on alt-text data, which is often readily
available but marred by noise and lacks the necessary depth
for a nuanced understanding of the visual-textual interplay.
This reliance typically leads to models developing representations akin to a “bag of words” approach, where the focus
lies predominantly on identifying objects without adequately
capturing their compositional context or the intricacies of

14216

