This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HIR-Diff: Unsupervised Hyperspectral Image Restoration Via Improved
Diffusion Models
Li Pang1,3, *, Xiangyu Rui2,3, *, Long Cui1 ,Hongzhong Wang1 , Deyu Meng2,3,4 , Xiangyong Cao1,3,†
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
3
MOEKLINNS Laboratory, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
4
Macao Institute of Systems Engineering, Macau University of Science and Technology, Taipa, Macao

Abstract
Hyperspectral image (HSI) restoration aims at recovering clean images from degraded observations and plays
a vital role in downstream tasks. Existing model-based
methods have limitations in accurately modeling the complex image characteristics with handcraft priors, and deep
learning-based methods suffer from poor generalization
ability. To alleviate these issues, this paper proposes an
unsupervised HSI restoration framework with pre-trained
diffusion model (HIR-Diff), which restores the clean HSIs
from the product of two low-rank components, i.e., the reduced image and the coefficient matrix. Specifically, the reduced image, which has a low spectral dimension, lies in
the image field and can be inferred from our improved diffusion model where a new guidance function with total variation (TV) prior is designed to ensure that the reduced image
can be well sampled. The coefficient matrix can be effectively pre-estimated based on singular value decomposition
(SVD) and rank-revealing QR (RRQR) factorization. Furthermore, a novel exponential noise schedule is proposed
to accelerate the restoration process (about 5× acceleration for denoising) with little performance decrease. Extensive experimental results validate the superiority of our
method in both performance and speed on a variety of HSI
restoration tasks, including HSI denoising, noisy HSI superresolution, and noisy HSI inpainting. The code is available
at https://github.com/LiPang/HIRDiff.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging is an advanced imaging technique
that captures and processes a large number of narrow, contiguous spectral bands across the electromagnetic spectrum.
Thus Hyperspectral images (HSIs) can provide more abun* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author (caoxiangyong@xjtu.edu.cn)

dant spatial and spectral information than natural images
and have extensive applications in various fields, e.g., agriculture [7, 19], mineral exploration [26, 41] and environmental monitoring [22]. However, due to sensor limitations
and atmospheric interference, HSIs suffer various degeneration during the acquisition process, significantly impairing the performance of downstream tasks. Therefore, HSI
restoration is very important for HSI applications and numerous methods have emerged in the past decades.
Existing HSI restoration methods can be mainly categorized into two classes, i.e. model-based approaches [50, 52,
53] and deep learning (DL)-based approaches [2, 11, 34,
37]. Model-based methods reformulate the image inverse
problem as an optimization problem which contains data fidelity term and regularization term. The data fidelity term
ensures that the restored image is close to the observed image and the regularization term constrains the solving space
by exploiting the prior knowledge of the clean images, e.g.
low-rank and total variation property. This type of method
obtains good generalization ability but the handcraft priors
are always subjective and thus cannot fully reveal image
characteristics, leaving a large room for improvement. Additionally, the optimization problem could be very complex,
resulting in high time costs and suboptimal solutions.
In the past decade, extensive DL-based approaches have
been proposed for HSI restoration and these methods can
learn the image structure and details from a substantial
amount of clean and degraded image pairs. Despite the
promising performance, the DL-based methods suffer from
a poor generalization problem. Besides, training deep neural networks (DNNs) requires a lot of image pairs, but
HSIs are very precious and only limited data are available
in most cases. Recently, extensive diffusion-based models have emerged for image restoration tasks such as denoising [18], super-resolution [5, 18, 40, 49] and inpainting [18, 28, 39, 45, 49]. Among these methods, DDRM [18]
solves linear inverse problems by performing singular value

3005

