This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Active Open-Vocabulary Recognition: Let Intelligent Moving
Mitigate CLIP Limitations
Lei Fan, Jianxiong Zhou, Xiaoying Xing and Ying Wu
Northwestern University
{leifan,jianxiongzhou2026,xiaoyingxing2026}@u.northwestern.edu,yingwu@northwestern.edu

CLIP prediction
Chair (wrong)

(a) An illustrative episode of active recognition: An agent begins from a
random viewpoint and has the freedom to execute movements to gather and
aggregate information, thereby enhancing recognition performance. In this
example, the integrated CLIP model fails to deliver an accurate prediction
from the starting position, necessitating a change in viewpoint.
Azimuth

Azimuth

Elevation

Active recognition, which allows intelligent agents to
explore observations for better recognition performance,
serves as a prerequisite for various embodied AI tasks, such
as grasping, navigation and room arrangements. Given the
evolving environment and the multitude of object classes, it
is impractical to include all possible classes during the training stage. In this paper, we aim at advancing active openvocabulary recognition, empowering embodied agents to
actively perceive and classify arbitrary objects. However, directly adopting recent open-vocabulary classification models,
like Contrastive Language Image Pretraining (CLIP), poses
its unique challenges. Specifically, we observe that CLIP’s
performance is heavily affected by the viewpoint and occlusions, compromising its reliability in unconstrained embodied perception scenarios. Further, the sequential nature of
observations in agent-environment interactions necessitates
an effective method for integrating features that maintains
discriminative strength for open-vocabulary classification.
To address these issues, we introduce a novel agent for active
open-vocabulary recognition. The proposed method leverages inter-frame and inter-concept similarities to navigate
agent movements and to fuse features, without relying on
class-specific knowledge. Compared to baseline CLIP model
with 29.6% accuracy on ShapeNet dataset, the proposed
agent could achieve 53.3% accuracy for open-vocabulary
recognition, without any fine-tuning to the equipped CLIP
model. Additional experiments conducted with the Habitat
simulator further affirm the efficacy of our method.

Table

CLIP prediction
Table (correct)

Elevation

Abstract

A sample from “table” class.
Grid color for correct or wrong prediction.

Average accuracy across all samples within
the “table” class for each view.

(b) The performance of CLIP on the ”table” class, collected from the
ShapeNet dataset. We discretize the viewing sphere surrounding each object
to a 12 × 12 viewing grid. The heatmap reveals a significant imbalance in
accuracy across various viewpoints, underscoring the importance of active
observation selection in embodied agents equipped with CLIP.
Agent

Base
classes

Training stage

Agent

Base
classes

Novel
classes

Testing stage

(c) The task setting of active open-vocabulary recognition.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Illustrations of active open-vocabulary recognition task
and the constraints of CLIP in embodied perception contexts.

In contrast to passive visual recognition [10, 11, 20, 27,
45], where the input is obtained through human-operated or
stationary devices, an active recognition agent is endowed
with the ability to actively seek different observations, as
illustrated in Figure 1a. This dynamic approach effectively
mitigates challenges associated with undesirable viewing
conditions, including ambiguous viewpoints and occlusions,

by employing a sequence of intelligent movements.
Recent advancements have spotlighted active recognition [8, 15, 21, 44] as a critical component in a range of
embodied AI tasks [24, 25, 28, 40], extending from fundamental object grasping [7] to the more intricate task of
semantic goal navigation [6, 28, 31, 41, 49]. Consider the

16394

