This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking Diffusion Model for Multi-Contrast MRI Super-Resolution
Guangyuan Li, Chen Rao, Juncheng Mo, Zhanjie Zhang, Wei Xing∗ , Lei Zhao∗
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, China
{cslgy, raochen, csmjc, cszzj, wxing, cszhl}@zju.edu.cn

Recently, diffusion models (DM) have been applied in
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) super-resolution (SR)
reconstruction, exhibiting impressive performance, especially with regard to detailed reconstruction. However, the
current DM-based SR reconstruction methods still face the
following issues: (1) They require a large number of iterations to reconstruct the final image, which is inefficient
and consumes a significant amount of computational resources. (2) The results reconstructed by these methods are
often misaligned with the real high-resolution images, leading to remarkable distortion in the reconstructed MR images. To address the aforementioned issues, we propose an
efficient diffusion model for multi-contrast MRI SR, named
as DiffMSR. Specifically, we apply DM in a highly compact low-dimensional latent space to generate prior knowledge with high-frequency detail information. The highly
compact latent space ensures that DM requires only a few
simple iterations to produce accurate prior knowledge. In
addition, we design the Prior-Guide Large Window Transformer (PLWformer) as the decoder for DM, which can extend the receptive field while fully utilizing the prior knowledge generated by DM to ensure that the reconstructed MR
image remains undistorted. Extensive experiments on public and clinical datasets demonstrate that our DiffMSR1 outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a widely utilized
in clinical imaging technology as it can provide clear information on tissue structure and function while being
non-invasive and radiation-free. However, obtaining highresolution (HR) magnetic resonance (MR) images is challenging due to acquisition limitations [5, 16]. Superresolution (SR) technology can handle this challenge by
reconstructing low-resolution (LR) images into their corresponding high-resolution (HR) version. Traditional meth* Corresponding author
1 Code: https://github.com/GuangYuanKK/DiffMSR

PSNR (dB)

Abstract

Iteration Steps T

Figure 1. Comparison with DM-based MRI reconstruction methods on FastMRI dataset. Note that the experimental settings used
by these methods are the same as those in Sec. 4. As can be seen,
our method has the best reconstruction metric and it only requires
4 iteration steps. Note that DiffuseRecon [32], MC-DDPM [39],
Score-MRI [2], and AdaDiff [9] are employed for single-contrast
SR (SCSR) reconstruction. DisC-Diff [27] is specifically designed
for multi-contrast SR (MCSR) reconstruction.

ods typically utilized model-based [26, 30] and learningbased [40, 43] SR reconstruction approaches. Nonetheless, these methods have insufficient reconstruction capabilities under high upsampling factors due to the complicated
anatomical structures in MR images[20].
Following the advent of deep learning, convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have found extensive application
in MRI SR reconstruction tasks [4, 13, 25, 35, 44]. Besides,
Transformer-based approaches [6, 11, 17, 18, 20, 23, 24]
are introduced as an alternative to CNNs for modeling
long-range dependencies in MR images. While these approaches enhance the performance of SR reconstruction,
they tend to yield images that lack detail [34], and for
MR images with complicated anatomical structures, they
fail to reconstruct some high-frequency details satisfactorily. Apart from CNN- and Transformer-based methods,
deep generative models like generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [8] provide different strategies for creating intri-

11365

