This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Implicit Discriminative Knowledge Learning for Visible-Infrared Person
Re-Identification
Kaijie Ren, Lei Zhang*
School of Microelectronics and Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, China
kaijieren@cqu.edu.cn, leizhang@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification (VI-ReID)
aims to match pedestrian images across multiple nonoverlapping camera views and different modalities. Advanced surveillance systems today are capable of automatically switching from visible to infrared mode at nightfall,
ensuring an ample supply of trainable data. However, the
unique modality of infrared images create significant domain discrepancies and a more complex environment. This
makes previous single-modality methods, which are based

color
spectrum
saturation
contrast
...

I(infrared)

discriminator

modalityspecific
branch

implicit discriminative
knowledge
confuser

purify
V+I

Visible-Infrared Person Re-identification (VI-ReID) is a
challenging cross-modal pedestrian retrieval task, due to
significant intra-class variations and cross-modal discrepancies among different cameras. Existing works mainly
focus on embedding images of different modalities into a
unified space to mine modality-shared features. They only
seek distinctive information within these shared features,
while ignoring the identity-aware useful information that is
implicit in the modality-specific features. To address this
issue, we propose a novel Implicit Discriminative Knowledge Learning (IDKL) network to uncover and leverage
the implicit discriminative information contained within the
modality-specific. First, we extract modality-specific and
modality-shared features using a novel dual-stream network. Then, the modality-specific features undergo purification to reduce their modality style discrepancies while
preserving identity-aware discriminative knowledge. Subsequently, this kind of implicit knowledge is distilled into
the modality-shared feature to enhance its distinctiveness.
Finally, an alignment loss is proposed to minimize modality
discrepancy on enhanced modality-shared features. Extensive experiments on multiple public datasets demonstrate
the superiority of IDKL network over the state-of-the-art
methods. Code is available at https://github.com/
1KK077/IDKL.

V(visible)

modality-shared
feature

Figure 1. Previous methods focused on seeking discriminative information within modality-shared features, overlooking the fact
that there are discriminative clues implicit in modality-specific
features. It is worth considering utilization of the implicit discriminative information to enhance shared invariant feature.

solely on visible images, less efficient for VI-ReID tasks.
Recently, numerous advanced methods have emerged
in the field of VI-ReID. In conclusion, these approaches
can generally be categorized into two types: the first aims
to learn modality-shared features directly from raw modal
data, and the second seeks to incorporate additional modal
information to refine the feature space or bridge the modal
gap, thereby facilitating the search for modality-shared features. Raw modal data based method [2, 4, 7, 8, 17, 19,
33, 49] is to embed different modality images into the same
space and align them on feature-level so that model learn
modality invariant feature directly. Despite original images
based methods has achieved desirable results, they still remain a huge gap between different modalities in feature
space. In order to bridge the gap between visible and infrared modalities and construct a continuous space for better
learning modality-shared features, various methods based
on introducing extra information [14, 29, 30, 34, 38, 42, 45]
have emerged constantly.
Although significant improvements have been made in

393

