This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Cross-spectral Gated-RGB Stereo Depth Estimation
Samuel Brucker1
1

Stefanie Walz2

Torc Robotics

2

Mercedes-Benz

Abstract
Gated cameras flood-illuminate a scene and capture the
time-gated impulse response of a scene. By employing
nanosecond-scale gates, existing sensors are capable of
capturing mega-pixel gated images, delivering dense depth
improving on today’s LiDAR sensors in spatial resolution
and depth precision. Although gated depth estimation methods deliver a million of depth estimates per frame, their resolution is still an order below existing RGB imaging methods. In this work, we combine high-resolution stereo HDR
RCCB cameras with gated imaging, allowing us to exploit
depth cues from active gating, multi-view RGB and multiview NIR sensing – multi-view and gated cues across the
entire spectrum. The resulting capture system consists only
of low-cost CMOS sensors and flood-illumination. We propose a novel stereo-depth estimation method that is capable of exploiting these multi-modal multi-view depth cues,
including the active illumination that is measured by the
RCCB camera when removing the IR-cut filter. The proposed method achieves accurate depth at long ranges, outperforming the next best existing method by 39% for ranges
of 100 to 220 m in MAE on accumulated LiDAR groundtruth. Our code, models and datasets are available here1 .

1. Introduction
Depth estimation has become a cornerstone sensing
modality for 3D scene understanding in a wide range of applications such as perception and planning in autonomous
driving and robotics [32, 47, 82]. Today’s fully-autonomous
robots mainly rely on scanning LiDAR for depth estimation [68, 71]. However, at ranges greater than 100 m, the
spatial resolution of existing sensors, with a few points
per pedestrian, is not sufficient for semantic understanding.
Furthermore, both frequency-modulated as well as time-offlight LiDAR systems have proven to be unreliable in the
presence of backscatter [6]. While innovations in LiDAR
technology such as MEMS scanning mechanisms [81] and
advanced photodiode systems [77] have substantially lowered costs and enabled the development of sensors with
approximately 100 to 200 scanlines, they still fall short
in comparison to the vertical resolution offered by mod1 https://light.princeton.edu/gatedrccbstereo/

Mario Bijelic1,3
3

Felix Heide1,3

Princeton University

ern HDR megapixel cameras, which can exceed 10k pixels. Wide-baseline RGB stereo depth estimation methods
overcome this issue by providing depth maps at image resolution, but struggle in low-light scenes and texture-less
regions. Recently, gated imaging [3, 7, 10, 11, 23, 29] has
emerged as a potential alternative sensor modality for 3D
detection and depth estimation, offering the capability to
overcome low LiDAR-resolution, while providing comparable accuracy [24, 78, 80]. Operating in the near-infrared
spectrum, gated imaging systems combine CMOS sensors
with active flash illumination and analogue gated readout.
This approach is robust to low-light and adverse weather
conditions [7]. For depth prediction, Gated2Depth [24] employs three gated slices in a neural network which is trained
via a combination of simulation and LiDAR supervision.
Following this, Walia et al. [78] proposed a self-supervised
training approach resulting in higher-quality depth maps.
Walz et al. [80] recently introduced Gated Stereo, employing a wide-baseline stereo-gated configuration for depth
estimation. These methods outperform scanning LiDAR
systems in depth resolution, precision, and robustness to
backscatter in fog, rain and snow. While these methods
successfully outperform LiDAR in depth sensing, they are
constrained by the gated imager’s megapixel resolution and
lack of color information. This results in diminished details, particularly noticeable at long distances. RGB-only
depth methods yield high-resolution depth maps, but these
are not metric and lack the precision of LiDAR-based depth
measurements.
In this work, we close this gap by proposing a lowcost CMOS-only sensing method that combines multiview RGB sensing with gated cameras, exploiting active
and multi-view cues across the visible and NIR spectrum.
Specifically, we propose a NIR gated camera in conjunction
with a HDR RCCB camera without an IR-cut filter present.
RCCB cameras incorporate clear channel filters where conventional RGGB Bayer color filters feature the green channel, which enhances their sensitivity in low-light conditions.
This joint approach allows us to use the spectral overlap
for estimating high-resolution depth maps at RCCB-camera
resolution of 8 megapixels, an order of magnitude higher
than the gated imager resolution. Previous works have recognized the capabilities of cross-spectral imaging due to

21654

