This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion-EDFs: Bi-equivariant Denoising Generative
Modeling on SE(3) for Visual Robotic Manipulation
Hyunwoo Ryu1 , Jiwoo Kim1 , Hyunseok An1 , Junwoo Chang1 , Joohwan Seo2 ,
Taehan Kim3 , Yubin Kim4 , Chaewon Hwang5,6 , Jongeun Choi1,2 ,* Roberto Horowitz2
1

4

Yonsei University, 2 University of California, Berkeley, 3 Samsung Research,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 5 Ewha Womans University, 6 Work done at Yonsei University
{tomato1mule,nfsshift9801,junwoochang,hs991210,jongeunchoi}@yonsei.ac.kr
{joohwan seo, horowitz}@berkeley.edu
taehan11.kim@samsung.com,

ybkim95@media.mit.edu,

Abstract
Diffusion generative modeling has become a promising approach for learning robotic manipulation tasks
from stochastic human demonstrations. In this paper,
we present Diffusion-EDFs, a novel SE(3)-equivariant
diffusion-based approach for visual robotic manipulation
tasks. We show that our proposed method achieves remarkable data efficiency, requiring only 5 to 10 human demonstrations for effective end-to-end training in less than an
hour. Furthermore, our benchmark experiments demonstrate that our approach has superior generalizability and
robustness compared to state-of-the-art methods. Lastly,
we validate our methods with real hardware experiments.
Project Website: https : / / sites . google . com /
view/diffusion-edfs

hcw0221@ewhain.net

Equivariant Descriptor Fields (EDFs) [61] achieve dataefficient end-to-end learning on 6-DoF visual robotic manipulation tasks by employing SE(3) bi-equivariant [37,
61] energy-based models. However, EDFs require more
than 10 hours to learn from only a few demonstrations due
to the inefficient training of energy-based models.
In this paper, we present Diffuion-EDFs, a diffusionbased alternative to EDFs with a significantly reduced training time (×15 faster). Similarly to EDFs, we exploit the biequivariance (see Supp. A) and locality of robotic manipulation tasks in our method design. This enables our method
to be trained end-to-end from only 5∼10 human demonstrations without requiring any pre-training and object segmentation, yet are highly generalizable to out-of-distribution object configurations. We validate Diffusion-EDFs through
simulation and real-robot experiments.

2. Preliminaries
1. Introduction
Diffusion models are increasingly being recognized as superior methods for modeling stochastic and multimodal
policies [1, 4, 6, 7, 11, 35, 50, 52, 56, 69, 75]. In particular,
SE(3)-Diffusion Fields [75] apply diffusion-based learning
on the SE(3) manifold to generate grasp poses of the endeffector. However, these methods require numerous demonstrations and do not generalize well on novel task configurations that are not provided during training.
In contrast, equivariant methods are well known for their
data efficiency and generalizability in learning robotic manipulation tasks [6, 7, 15, 32, 33, 37, 49, 61, 67, 68, 78,
86]. In particular, several recent works explore the use of
SE(3)-equivariant models for learning 6-DoF manipulation
tasks with point cloud observations [15, 33, 61, 67, 68].
* Corresponding author: Jongeun Choi (jongeunchoi@yonsei.ac.kr)

2.1. SO(3) Group Representation Theory
A representation D(g) is a map from a group G to a linear
map on a vector space W that satisfies
D(g)D(h) = D(gh) ∀g, h ∈ G

(1)

The vector space W where D(g) acts on is called the representation space of D(g). It is known that any representation of the special orthogonal group SO(3) can be blockdiagonalized into smaller representations by a change of basis. Irreducible representations are representations that cannot be reduced anymore, and hence constitute the building
blocks of any larger representation.
According to the representation theory of SO(3), all irreducible representations are classified according to their
angular frequency l ∈ {0, 1, 2, . . .}, a non-negative integer number called type, or spin. Any type-l, or spin-l

18007

