This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ToNNO: Tomographic Reconstruction of a Neural Network’s Output
for Weakly Supervised Segmentation of 3D Medical Images
Marius Schmidt-Mengin1 Alexis Benichoux1 Shibeshih Belachew1
Nikos Komodakis1,3,4,5 Nikos Paragios1,2
TheraPanacea, France 2 CentraleSupélec, University of Paris-Saclay, France
University of Crete, Greece 4 IACM, FORTH, Greece 5 Archimedes, Athena RC, Greece
1

3

Abstract
Annotating lots of 3D medical images for training
segmentation models is time-consuming. The goal of weakly
supervised semantic segmentation is to train segmentation
models without using any ground truth segmentation masks.
Our work addresses the case where only image-level
categorical labels, indicating the presence or absence of
a particular region of interest (such as tumours or lesions),
are available. Most existing methods rely on class activation
mapping (CAM). We propose a novel approach, ToNNO,
which is based on the Tomographic reconstruction of a
Neural Network’s Output. Our technique extracts stacks
of slices with different angles from the input 3D volume,
feeds these slices to a 2D encoder, and applies the inverse
Radon transform in order to reconstruct a 3D heatmap of
the encoder’s predictions. This generic method allows to
perform dense prediction tasks on 3D volumes using any 2D
image encoder. We apply it to weakly supervised medical
image segmentation by training the 2D encoder to output
high values for slices containing the regions of interest.
We test it on four large scale medical image datasets and
outperform 2D CAM methods. We then extend ToNNO by
combining tomographic reconstruction with CAM methods,
proposing Averaged CAM and Tomographic CAM, which
obtain even better results.

1. Introduction
The advent of 3D medical imaging, such as computed
tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) or
positron emission tomography (PET) has revolutionized
clinical practice by enabling precise visualization and
quantitative analysis of the internal structures of the body.
Many scenarios involve segmenting particular regions of
interest. For example, in radiotherapy workflows, it is
necessary to segment organs and tumours in order to
compute a treatment plan that maximizes the radiation dose

(a) Input

(b) LayerCAM [23]

(c) ToNNO

Figure 1. Our method, which allows to obtain high resolution
segmentations without using any ground truth segmentation masks,
is completely orthogonal to class activation mapping methods such
as GradCAM [45] or LayerCAM [23].

received by the tumours while sparing the surrounding
healthy tissues. In multiple sclerosis, segmentation of brain
lesions allows to estimate lesion load for monitoring patients
[40]. Furthermore, automatic segmentation methods may be
useful as a verification step in order to detect tumours or
lesions that were missed by human experts.
However, the volumetric nature of 3D medical images
(also referred to as volumes) makes their manual
segmentation slow and painstaking. Deep learning has
become an important tool to automate this task. Deep
learning techniques, though, typically still require large
amounts of manually segmented training data, which can
be prohibitive. Furthermore, manual segmentation can
be subjective and vary a lot between different experts.
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation methods aim to
circumvent this issue by training semantic segmentation
models without using any ground truth segmentation masks,
relying instead on bounding boxes, scribbles, point-wise
annotations, or image-level labels. Our work focuses on the
latter.
To this end, we propose ToNNO (Tomographic
reconstruction of a Neural Network’s Output), a generic
method that produces a 3D heatmap which represents the
predictions of a 2D encoder (such as a ResNet [16]) for

11428

