This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CAT-Seg: Cost Aggregation for Open-Vocabulary Semantic Segmentation
Seokju Cho1,∗
Anurag Arnab2
1

Heeseong Shin1,∗
Paul Hongsuck Seo1,\dagger 

Korea University

2

Sunghwan Hong1
Seungryong Kim1,\dagger 

Google Research

{seokju cho, hsshin98, sung hwan, phseo, seungryong kim}@korea.ac.kr
aarnab@google.com

❄ : Frozen CLIP 🔥: Fine-tuned CLIP

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation aims to assign
each pixel in an image to a class label from an unbounded
range, defined by text descriptions. To handle the challenge of associating an image with a wide variety of text
descriptions, pre-trained vision-language foundation models, e.g., CLIP [43] and ALIGN [22], have drawn attention
as they exerted strong open-vocabulary recognition capabilities achieved through training on extensive image-text
datasets. Nonetheless, these foundation models primarily receive image-level supervision during training, which
introduces a notable disparity when applying them to the
pixel-level segmentation tasks [66].
To address this gap, recent works [9, 14, 30, 55–57, 60]
have reformulated the task into a region-level problem by
utilizing mask proposal generators. While this partially
bridges the discrepancy between the pre-training and the
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding authors.

40

40

30

30

mIoU on ADE20K

Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation presents the
challenge of labeling each pixel within an image based on a
wide range of text descriptions. In this work, we introduce a
novel cost-based approach to adapt vision-language foundation models, notably CLIP, for the intricate task of semantic segmentation. Through aggregating the cosine similarity score, i.e., the cost volume between image and text
embeddings, our method potently adapts CLIP for segmenting seen and unseen classes by fine-tuning its encoders, addressing the challenges faced by existing methods in handling unseen classes. Building upon this, we explore methods to effectively aggregate the cost volume considering its
multi-modal nature of being established between image and
text embeddings. Furthermore, we examine various methods for efficiently fine-tuning CLIP.

mIoU on ADE20K

Abstract

20

10

0

20

10

❄ 🔥

❄ 🔥

Feature Agg.

Cost Agg.

(a) mIoU of seen classes

0

❄ 🔥

Feature Agg.

❄ 🔥
Cost Agg.

(b) mIoU of unseen classes

Figure 1. Comparison between feature and cost aggregation
for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation task. In contrast
to feature aggregation suffering severe overfitting to seen classes,
cost aggregation can generalize to unseen classes and achieve significant performance improvements upon fine-tuning of CLIP.

downstream task, a discernible gap persists between the
conceptualization of regions and the entire image for CLIP.
In this work, we investigate methods to transfer the holistic understanding capability of images to the pixel-level
task of segmentation. While a straightforward approach
would be to fine-tune the encoders of CLIP, existing methods struggle in such attempt [57, 60, 66] as they encounter
significant overfitting problems to the seen classes. This
results in the misalignment of the joint embedding space
for unseen classes, as the CLIP features undergo decoder
modules for aggregating them into segmentation masks,
hence losing their alignment. Consequently, most methods [9, 14, 30, 55–57, 60] opt for freezing the encoders of
CLIP instead, remaining the challenge underexplored.
In this regard, we extend the exploration of adapting
CLIP for open-vocabulary semantic segmentation and introduce a novel cost-based framework. We propose to aggregate the cosine similarity between image and text embeddings of CLIP, i.e., the matching cost, drawing parallels
to the visual correspondence literature [26]. Surprisingly,
we find that fine-tuning CLIP upon this framework effec-

4113

