This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GeoAuxNet: Towards Universal 3D Representation Learning for Multi-sensor
Point Clouds

1

Shengjun Zhang1 , Xin Fei2 , Yueqi Duan1†
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University

{zhangsj23, feix21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, duanyueqi@tsinghua.edu.cn

https://github.com/zhangshengjun2019/GeoAuxNet

Figure 1. Semantic segmentation results on S3DIS [1] and ScanNet [9] from RGB-D cameras and SemanticKITTI [2] from LiDAR. For
all methods, we trained collectively on three datasets. Our method outperforms other methods with better detailed structures.

Abstract
Point clouds captured by different sensors such as RGBD cameras and LiDAR possess non-negligible domain gaps.
Most existing methods design different network architectures and train separately on point clouds from various
sensors. Typically, point-based methods achieve outstanding performances on even-distributed dense point clouds
from RGB-D cameras, while voxel-based methods are more
efficient for large-range sparse LiDAR point clouds. In
this paper, we propose geometry-to-voxel auxiliary learning to enable voxel representations to access point-level
geometric information, which supports better generalisation of the voxel-based backbone with additional interpretations of multi-sensor point clouds. Specifically, we construct hierarchical geometry pools generated by a voxelguided dynamic point network, which efficiently provide
† Corresponding author.

auxiliary fine-grained geometric information adapted to
different stages of voxel features. We conduct experiments
on joint multi-sensor datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness of GeoAuxNet. Enjoying elaborate geometric information, our method outperforms other models collectively
trained on multi-sensor datasets, and achieve competitive
results with the-state-of-art experts on each single dataset.

1. Introduction
Point cloud analysis has attracted widespread attention
due to its growing applications, such as autonomous driving [20, 45, 51] and robotics [4, 40]. Unlike images which
are represented by regular pixels, 3D point clouds are irregular and unordered. These characteristics aggravate the
inconsistency on density and sampling patterns of point
clouds captured by different sensors, such as RGB-D cameras [1, 9, 33] and LiDAR [2, 5, 34].

20019

