This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

KITRO: Refining Human Mesh by 2D Clues and Kinematic-tree Rotation
Fengyuan Yang
Kerui Gu
Angela Yao
National University of Singapore

Relative Depth Error (mm)

{fyang, keruigu, ayao}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

1. Introduction
3D human pose and shape estimation, also called Human
Mesh Recovery (HMR), is relevant for augmented and virtual reality applications. Statistical human shape models
like SMPL [21] have greatly simplified the HMR task.
However, state-of-the-art methods [9, 13, 18] still suffer
from the “misalignment problem” [15] where the predicted
3D mesh does not align well with the 2D image evidence.
The most advanced HMR model [18] still has a 24 pixels
reprojection error on the 3DPW dataset [32], as shown in
Fig. 1a. On the other hand, estimating 2D human pose is
more advanced [2, 33, 36] and yields robust 2D keypoints,
even under challenging scenarios such as occlusion, varying

SOTA HMR (CLIFFb)

45
40

HMR+CLIFFr

35 HMR+Ours
30

0

5

10

15

20

Reprojection 2D Error (pixels)

25

(a) Reprojection and depth error after 2D keypoint refinement 1 .

PA-MPJPE Improvement Percentage(%)

2D keypoints are commonly used as an additional cue to
refine estimated 3D human meshes. Current methods optimize the pose and shape parameters with a reprojection loss
on the provided 2D keypoints. Such an approach, while simple and intuitive, has limited effectiveness because the optimal solution is hard to find in ambiguous parameter space
and may sacrifice depth. Additionally, divergent gradients
from distal joints complicate and deviate the refinement of
proximal joints in the kinematic chain. To address these, we
introduce Kinematic-Tree Rotation (KITRO), a novel mesh
refinement strategy that explicitly models depth and human
kinematic-tree structure. KITRO treats refinement from a
bone-wise perspective. Unlike previous methods which perform gradient-based optimizations, our method calculates
bone directions in closed form. By accounting for the 2D
pose, bone length, and parent joint’s depth, the calculation results in two possible directions for each child joint.
We then use a decision tree to trace binary choices for all
bones along the human skeleton’s kinematic-tree to select
the most probable hypothesis. Our experiments across various datasets and baseline models demonstrate that KITRO
significantly improves 3D joint estimation accuracy and
achieves an ideal 2D fit simultaneously. Our code available
at: https://github.com/MartaYang/KITRO.

HMR+SMPLify

50

40
30
20
10
0
10

+SMPLify
+Cliffr
+Ours

spine collar shoulder elbow

wrist

hand

(b) Improvement of joints along the kinematic chain of the arm.

Figure 1. (a) Our method has the lowest reprojection and depth
errors. (b) Competing methods exhibit a decrease in improvement
and even deterioration progressing along the kinematic chain from
the hand to the spine; our approach exhibits the opposite but maintains a significant and competitive improvement for all joints.

lighting, and extreme poses. As such, a standard strategy
for improving HMR is to leverage 2D keypoints as a cue to
refine the estimated 3D meshes. Prior methods [1, 9, 18]
optimize the pose and shape parameters with a reprojection
loss on the 2D keypoints with a standard gradient descent.
Such an approach, while intuitive and straightforward, is
not always effective.
A primary reason is the inherent depth ambiguity in 2D
projection, as multiple poses and shapes can fit the same 2D
evidence. As such, optimizing solely on 2D reprojection
does not account for depth ambiguity so is unlikely to find
the optimal solution and may even increase the depth error (see HMR+SMPLify [1] in Fig. 1a). Secondly, existing
1 CLIFF [18] proposes both a base model and a 2D keypoint refinement;
we distinguish the two as ‘CLIFFb’ and ‘CLIFFr’.

1052

