This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MVBench: A Comprehensive Multi-modal Video Understanding Benchmark
Kunchang Li1,2,3 Yali Wang1,3~ Yinan He3 Yizhuo Li4,3 Yi Wang3 Yi Liu1,2,3
Zun Wang3 Jilan Xu5,3 Guo Chen6,3 Ping Luo4,3 Limin Wang6,3~ Yu Qiao3,1~
1 Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4 The University of Hong Kong

5 Fudan University

2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

3 Shanghai AI Laboratory

6 State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University

Abstract
With the rapid development of Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs), a number of diagnostic benchmarks have recently emerged to evaluate the comprehension capabilities of these models. However, most benchmarks predominantly assess spatial understanding in the
static image tasks, while overlooking temporal understanding in the dynamic video tasks. To alleviate this issue, we
introduce a comprehensive Multi-modal Video understanding Benchmark, namely MVBench, which covers 20 challenging video tasks that cannot be effectively solved with a
single frame. Specifically, we first introduce a novel staticto-dynamic method to define these temporal-related tasks.
By transforming various static tasks into dynamic ones, we
enable the systematic generation of video tasks that require
a broad spectrum of temporal skills, ranging from perception to cognition. Then, guided by the task definition, we automatically convert public video annotations into multiplechoice QA to evaluate each task. On one hand, such a
distinct paradigm allows us to build MVBench efficiently,
without much manual intervention. On the other hand, it
guarantees evaluation fairness with ground-truth video annotations, avoiding the biased scoring of LLMs. Moreover, we further develop a robust video MLLM baseline, i.e.,
VideoChat2, by progressive multi-modal training with diverse instruction-tuning data. The extensive results on our
MVBench reveal that, the existing MLLMs are far from satisfactory in temporal understanding, while our VideoChat2
largely surpasses these leading models by over 15% on
MVBench. All models and data are available at https:
//github.com/OpenGVLab/Ask-Anything.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) [1, 16, 25, 37, 39, 44, 54, 97] have gradually
driven the advance in vision-language learning, by plugging
visual encoders within various pretrained LLMs [10, 15, 53,
 Interns at Shanghai AI Laboratory. ~ Corresponding authors.

Spatial Understanding: RJSFPPKJL SPIT G HKJLUF SPGTF
① Action

⑤ Scene

What’s the man doing?

Where’s the man?

② Object

⑥ Pose

What’s on the table?

What’s the man’s pose?

③ Position

⑦ Attribute

Is the man on the stage?

What color is the desk?

④ Count
How many chairs?

[02:16] Never gonna give!

⑧ Character
What are the subtitles?

⑨ Cognition Why is the man singing in the canteen?

Temporal Understanding: EFGHIJKJL MGHFN IJ FJOKPF QKNFI
① Action

③ Position

⑦ Attribute

Action Sequence

Moving Direction

State Change

Action Antonym

Action Localization

Moving Attribute

Action Prediction

④ Count

Unexpected Action

Action Count

Fine-grained Action

Moving Count

② Object

⑤ Scene

⑨ Cognition

Object Shuffle

Scene Transition

Episodic Reasoning

Object Existence

⑥ Pose

Egocentric Navigation

Object Interaction

Fine-grained Pose

Counterfactual Inference

⑧ Character

Character Order

Figure 1. Tasks of MVBench. We define temporal tasks by adapting static image tasks with dynamic evolution. This leads to 20
challenging tasks of video understanding, which cannot be effectively solved within a single frame. For example, “position” in an
image can be converted into “moving direction” through a video.

66, 67]. With such a fast development, there is a natural
question: How can we evaluate the comprehension capabilities of these MLLMs? Such assessment is vital to confirm their design effectiveness and further improve them for
a broader understanding of open-world multi-modalities.
In response to this need, a number of benchmarks have
been launched [17, 42, 46, 83, 90], by evaluating MLLMs
with Question Answering (QA) formulation of various perception tasks. However, most of these benchmarks primarily concentrate on image-based understanding, where
all the questions are designed for spatial perception in the
static images, e.g., “Is the man on the stage?”, as shown

22195

