This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

FSRT: Facial Scene Representation Transformer for Face Reenactment
from Factorized Appearance, Head-pose, and Facial Expression Features
Andre Rochow
University of Bonn

Max Schwarz
University of Bonn

Sven Behnke
University of Bonn

rochow@ais.uni-bonn.de

schwarz@ais.uni-bonn.de

behnke@cs.uni-bonn.de

Abstract

1. Introduction
Face reenactment is a special case of the motion transfer
task [38, 39]. Its objective is to synthesize a realistic facial
animation combining the appearance given by one or more
images of a source person and the facial expression and
head motion of a driving video, which may be of a different
person. The driving frame is used to transform the source
image to the desired expression and head pose. When the
driving video is of the same person (self-reenactment), applications include, e.g., low-bandwidth video conferencing.
1 Code & Video: https://andrerochow.github.io/fsrt

Keypoint
Keypoint && Expr.
Expr.
Extraction
Extraction

kD , eD

⊕
Source image(s)

Decoder
Transformer

kSi , eSi

Encoder
Transformer

Query pixels

CNN

The task of face reenactment is to transfer the head motion and facial expressions from a driving video to the appearance of a source image, which may be of a different person (cross-reenactment). Most existing methods are CNNbased and estimate optical flow from the source image to the
current driving frame, which is then inpainted and refined to
produce the output animation. We propose a transformerbased encoder for computing a set-latent representation of
the source image(s). We then predict the output color of
a query pixel using a transformer-based decoder, which
is conditioned with keypoints and a facial expression vector extracted from the driving frame. Latent representations of the source person are learned in a self-supervised
manner that factorize their appearance, head pose, and facial expressions. Thus, they are perfectly suited for crossreenactment. In contrast to most related work, our method
naturally extends to multiple source images and can thus
adapt to person-specific facial dynamics. We also propose
data augmentation and regularization schemes that are necessary to prevent overfitting and support generalizability of
the learned representations. We evaluated our approach in
a randomized user study. The results indicate superior performance compared to the state-of-the-art in terms of motion transfer quality and temporal consistency.1

Driving frame

Set-latent
source face representation

Output

Figure 1. Overview of our method (relative motion transfer). The
source image(s) are encoded along with keypoints kS , capturing
head pose, and facial expression vectors eS to a set-latent representation of the source person. The decoder attends this representation for a query pixel, conditioned on keypoints kD and a facial
expression vector eD extracted from the driving frame. ⊕ denotes
pixel-wise concatenation. Images from the VoxCeleb test set [27].

The more interesting and challenging case is when the driving video is of a different person (cross-reenactment) since,
if successful, only one or few images of the source person
are required to create a realistic facial animation.
Most face reenactment methods are CNN-based [10, 11,
11, 13, 38, 39, 48, 49, 53, 56–58]; and many of these utilize optical flow between the source and driving frames
for morphing the source image, followed by a refinement
stage [11, 38, 39, 49, 57].
Inspired by recent successes in scene reconstruction [35,
36], we apply a transformer-based architecture to face reenactment that encodes the face of the source person as a set
of latent vectors (see Fig. 1). This representation is learned
in a self-supervised way. We then sample each target pixel
location with a transformer-based decoder conditioned on
keypoints and an expression vector that are extracted from
the driving frame. The learned set-latent representation of
the source person factorizes their head pose, appearance,
and facial expression, which enables accurate head motion

7716

