This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Mind Artist: Creating Artistic Snapshots with Human Thought
Jiaxuan Chen1, 3 Yu Qi2, 3, 1 † Yueming Wang4, 2 Gang Pan3, 1, 2
1
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
2
MOE Frontier Science Center for Brain Science and Brain-Machine Integration, Zhejiang University
3
The State Key Lab of Brain-Machine Intelligence, Zhejiang University
4
Qiushi Academy for Advanced Studies, Zhejiang University
{jiaxuan chen, qiyu, ymingwang, gpan}@zju.edu.cn

Figure 1. Appreciating snapshot views of our mind in the style of your liking. Left: The proposed neural decoder Mind Artist supports
not only the reconstruction of visual stimuli from fMRI signals but also acts as an “artistic mind camera” without extra optimizations and
image-to-image translation operations. Right: We show the decoding results of our MindArt in oil, cartoon, Picasso and ink wash styles.

Abstract
We introduce Mind Artist (MindArt), a novel and efficient
neural decoding architecture to snap artistic photographs
from our mind in a controllable manner. Recently, progress
has been made in image reconstruction with non-invasive
brain recordings, but it’s still difficult to generate realistic images with high semantic fidelity due to the scarcity of
data annotations. Unlike previous methods, this work casts
the neural decoding into optimal transport (OT) and representation decoupling problems. Specifically, under discrete OT theory, we design a graph matching-guided neural representation learning framework to seek the underlying correspondences between conceptual semantics and
neural signals, which yields a natural and meaningful selfsupervisory task. Moreover, the proposed MindArt, structured with multiple stand-alone modal branches, enables
the seamless incorporation of semantic representation into
any visual style information, thus leaving it to have multimodal reconstruction and training-free semantic editing ca† Corresponding author: Yu Qi.

pabilities. By doing so, the reconstructed images of MindArt have phenomenal realism both in terms of semantics
and appearance. We compare our MindArt with leading alternatives, and achieve SOTA performance in different decoding tasks. Importantly, our approach can directly generate a series of stylized “mind snapshots” w/o extra optimizations, which may open up more potential applications.
Code is available at https://github.com/JxuanC/
MindArt.

1. Introduction
As we venture into the frontiers of human creativity, one
captivating question has surfaced: Can our brains serve as
hidden “artistic cameras”? Let’s envision a world where
painting tools, and photographic skills are going out of fashion. All you need is to think or gaze upon a visual object
or immerse yourself in the wonders of nature. Then, your
brain will be turned into an artistic lens transforming your
perceptions into astonishing works of art, perhaps resembling a Van Gogh-style snapshot with vibrant yellow and
orange sunflowers. To actualize aforesaid goals, we present

27207

