This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

4D Gaussian Splatting for Real-Time Dynamic Scene Rendering
Guanjun Wu1 ,* Taoran Yi2 ,* Jiemin Fang3†, Lingxi Xie3 , Xiaopeng Zhang3 ,
Wei Wei1 , Wenyu Liu2 , Qi Tian3 , Xinggang Wang2†‡
1
School of CS, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology 3 Huawei Inc.
{guajuwu, taoranyi, weiw, liuwy, xgwang}@hust.edu.cn
{jaminfong, 198808xc, zxphistory}@gmail.com

tian.qi1@huawei.com

Figure 1. Our method achieves real-time rendering‡ for dynamic scenes at high image resolutions while maintaining high rendering quality.
The right figure is tested on synthetic datasets, where the radius of the dot corresponds to the training time. “Res”: resolution.
‡

The rendering speed not only depends on the image resolution but also the number of 3D Gaussians and the scale of deformation fields which are determined by the complexity
of the scene.

Abstract
Representing and rendering dynamic scenes has been an
important but challenging task. Especially, to accurately
model complex motions, high efficiency is usually hard to
guarantee. To achieve real-time dynamic scene rendering
while also enjoying high training and storage efficiency, we
propose 4D Gaussian Splatting (4D-GS) as a holistic representation for dynamic scenes rather than applying 3D-GS
for each individual frame. In 4D-GS, a novel explicit representation containing both 3D Gaussians and 4D neural
voxels is proposed. A decomposed neural voxel encoding
algorithm inspired by HexPlane is proposed to efficiently
build Gaussian features from 4D neural voxels and then a
lightweight MLP is applied to predict Gaussian deformations at novel timestamps. Our 4D-GS method achieves
real-time rendering under high resolutions, 82 FPS at an
800×800 resolution on an RTX 3090 GPU while maintaining comparable or better quality than previous stateof-the-art methods. More demos and code are available at
* Equal contributions.
† Project Lead.
‡ Corresponding author.

https://guanjunwu.github.io/4dgs/.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis (NVS) stands as a critical task in the
domain of 3D vision and plays a vital role in many applications, e.g. VR, AR, and movie production. NVS aims
at rendering images from any desired viewpoint or timestamp of a scene, usually requiring modeling the scene accurately from several 2D images. Dynamic scenes are quite
common in real scenarios, rendering which is important but
challenging as complex motions need to be modeled with
both spatially and temporally sparse input.
NeRF [32] has achieved great success in synthesizing
novel view images by representing scenes with implicit
functions. The volume rendering techniques [7] are introduced to connect 2D images and 3D scenes. However,
the original NeRF method bears big training and rendering
costs. Though some NeRF variants [5, 8, 10, 11, 33, 44, 47]
reduce the training time from days to minutes, the rendering
process still bears a non-negligible latency.
Recent 3D Gaussian Splatting (3D-GS) [19] signifi-

20310

