This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Do Vision and Language Encoders Represent the World Similarly?
Mayug Maniparambil* 1
Mohamed El Amine Seddik3

Raiymbek Akshulakov* 2
Sanath Narayan3

Yasser Abdelaziz Dahou Djilali3 1

Karttikeya Mangalam2

Noel E. O’Connor1

Abstract
Aligned text-image encoders such as CLIP have become
the de-facto model for vision-language tasks. Furthermore, modality-specific encoders achieve impressive performances in their respective domains. This raises a central question: does an alignment exist between uni-modal
vision and language encoders since they fundamentally represent the same physical world? Analyzing the latent spaces
structure of vision and language models on image-caption
benchmarks using the Centered Kernel Alignment (CKA),
we find that the representation spaces of unaligned and
aligned encoders are semantically similar. In the absence of
statistical similarity in aligned encoders like CLIP, we show
that a possible matching of unaligned encoders exists without any training. We frame this as a seeded graph-matching
problem exploiting the semantic similarity between graphs
and propose two methods - a Fast Quadratic Assignment
Problem optimization, and a novel localized CKA metricbased matching/retrieval. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of this on several downstream tasks including cross-lingual,
cross-domain caption matching and image classification.
Code available at github.com/mayug/0-shot-llm-vision.

1. Introduction
The recent success of deep learning on vision-language
tasks mainly relies on jointly trained language and image encoders following the success of CLIP and ALIGN
[20, 40]. The standard procedure for training these models
aims at aligning text and image representation using a contrastive loss that maximizes the similarity between imagetext pairs while pushing negative captions away [10, 19, 36].
This achieves a statistical similarity across the two latent
spaces, which is key to retrieving the closest cross-modal
representations using cosine similarity. This property is not
valid for unaligned encoders, hence, extra transformations
are needed to bridge the gap. These transformations can be
* joint first authors
1 ML Labs, Dublin City University
2 University of California Berkeley
3 Technological Innovation Institute

Figure 1. For matching, we calculate the kernels for image and
text embeddings and employ QAP-based seeded matching to maximize CKA for obtaining the optimal permutation P . For retrieval,
we append query embeddings to base embeddings and retrieve the
best caption that maximizes the local CKA for a query image.

training a mapping network that captures the prior distribution over the text and image representations [31, 34, 35].
The work of [31] has shown that it is possible to train a
linear mapping from the output embeddings of vision encoders to the input embeddings of language models and
exhibit impressive performance on image captioning and
VQA tasks. This indicates that the representations between
the unaligned uni-modal vision and language encoders are
sufficiently high level and differ only by a linear transformation. However, this linear layer is trained on CC-3M [9]
consisting of three million image-caption pairs.
Is this training step necessary? In an ideal scenario,
we anticipate an alignment between vision and language
encoders as they inherently capture representations of the
same physical world. To this end, we employ Centered
Kernel Alignment (CKA) [12, 22, 42], which is known
for measuring representation similarity both within and between networks. As shown in Figure 2, we measure the
CKA between a variety of unaligned vision and language
encoders [8, 16, 28, 37, 47], on the image-caption pairs of
the COCO [27] dataset and observe that some have comparable scores to that of aligned encoders like CLIP [40],
affirmative of semantic similarities.
We then ask the question: If the unaligned image and text
encoders are semantically similar, is there a way to connect
them in a zero-shot manner? Do they build a similar representation graph over the same information coming from

14334

