This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RegionPLC: Regional Point-Language Contrastive Learning for Open-World 3D
Scene Understanding
Jihan Yang1 * Runyu Ding1∗ Weipeng Deng1 Zhe Wang2 Xiaojuan Qi1
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 SenseTime Research
https://jihanyang.github.io/projects/RegionPLC

Abstract
We propose a lightweight and scalable Regional PointLanguage Contrastive learning framework, namely RegionPLC, for open-world 3D scene understanding, aiming
to identify and recognize open-set objects and categories.
Specifically, based on our empirical studies, we introduce a
3D-aware SFusion strategy that fuses 3D vision-language
pairs derived from multiple 2D foundation models, yielding high-quality, dense region-level language descriptions
without human 3D annotations. Subsequently, we devise a
region-aware point-discriminative contrastive learning objective to enable robust and effective 3D learning from
dense regional language supervision. We carry out extensive experiments on ScanNet, ScanNet200, and nuScenes
datasets, and our model outperforms prior 3D open-world
scene understanding approaches by an average of 17.2%
and 9.1% for semantic and instance segmentation, respectively, while maintaining greater scalability and lower resource demands. Furthermore, our method has the flexibility to be effortlessly integrated with language models to
enable open-ended grounded 3D reasoning without extra
task-specific training. Code will be released at github.

1. Introduction
Open-world 3D scene understanding aims to equip models
with the ability to accurately perceive and identify open-set
objects and categories from 3D data, such as point clouds.
This ability is crucial for real-world applications where
objects from open-set categories are prevalent [2, 39].
However, this task poses significant challenges due to the
scarcity of dense 3D semantic annotations, which are difficult to gather and scale to a large vocabulary space.
Fortunately, the abundance of paired image and text
data from the Internet, featuring a vast semantic vocabulary, has enabled 2D vision-language models to exhibit
exceptional open-world image comprehension capabilities.
These abilities span various tasks, such as image captioning
[1, 31], grounding [24, 32], and dense semantic prediction

[19, 20, 44]. Consequently, recent research has been inspired to leverage these models to generate pseudo supervision such as dense semantic features [23, 40] and language
descriptions [7, 8] for training 3D models, thereby enabling
open-world inference without relying on image modalities.
Despite advancements, existing solutions still exhibit
limitations. For instance, feature distillation-based methods [23, 40]– despite harvesting dense supervision– suffer from the constraints of 2D feature qualities and require
resource-intensive feature extraction, fusion, and storage
processes, preventing them from being scaled up with more
advanced 3D architectures and larger 3D datasets. Additionally, while [7] utilizes pseudo 3D-language pairs to enable direct learning from large-vocabulary language supervision, it suffers from sparse supervision provided by image captioning models. Considering the recent success of
2D foundation models in image- and region-level visionlanguage learning, we explore combining their strengths to
enrich vocabulary and construct high-quality region-level
3D-language associations. By doing so, our method can
yield denser 3D-language supervision and circumvent the
knowledge limitations of a single foundation model, facilitating resource-efficient and large-vocabulary 3D learning.
To this end, we propose a holistic Regional Point
Language Contrastive learning framework, named RegionPLC. This framework generates and fuses diverse regionlevel captions from powerful 2D vision-language models,
which are subsequently mapped to 3D for constructing
region-level 3D and language pairs. These paired data are
then incorporated into a region-aware point-discriminative
contrastive learning framework, enabling 3D open-world
learning from dense language supervision.
Specifically, we begin by conducting a comprehensive
examination of various 2D foundation models (e.g., image
captioning [31], dense captioning [24, 32], and detection
models [44]) along with visual prompting techniques for
their capability to generate region-level 3D-language pairs.
Based on our examination, we propose a supplementaryoriented fusion strategy that leverages the geometric relationship of regions in 3D space to alleviate ambiguities and

19823

