This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Accurate Training Data for Occupancy Map Prediction
in Automated Driving Using Evidence Theory
Jonas Kälble†
Sascha Wirges†
Maxim Tatarchenko†
†
Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence, Germany
‡
Saarland University, Germany

Eddy Ilg‡

{firstname.lastname}@de.bosch.com

1. Introduction
The safe operation of automated vehicles requires accurate environment models to reason about geometry and
semantics. The most popular geometry model today
is an occupancy grid map that tessellates the space
into a regular grid of volume elements called voxels [5].
Such occupancy grid maps allow for compute-efficient
free-space estimation (e.g., via ray casting) and data
storage via Octrees [21, 25].
For several years, automated driving has mainly relied on LiDAR due to its low and distance-independent
measurement error. However, recent approaches at-

Ours

Occ3D [22]

Ours

Model [7]

Automated driving fundamentally requires knowledge
about the surrounding geometry of the scene. Modern
approaches use only captured images to predict occupancy maps that represent the geometry. Training these
approaches requires accurate data that may be acquired
with the help of LiDAR scanners. We show that the
techniques used for current benchmarks and training
datasets to convert LiDAR scans into occupancy grid
maps yield very low quality, and subsequently present a
novel approach using evidence theory that yields more
accurate reconstructions. We demonstrate that these are
superior by a large margin, both qualitatively and quantitatively, and that we additionally obtain meaningful
uncertainty estimates. When converting the occupancy
maps back to depth estimates and comparing them with
the raw LiDAR measurements, our method yields a
MAE improvement of 30% to 52% on nuScenes and
53% on Waymo over other occupancy ground-truth data.
Finally, we use the improved occupancy maps to train a
state-of-the-art occupancy prediction method and demonstrate that it improves the MAE by 25% on nuScenes.

Occ3D [22]
GT

Abstract

−2

0

2

Distance error / m

−2

0

2

Distance error / m

Figure 1. Comparison of Depth Errors Between Occupancy Grid Maps and LiDAR Measurements. We
compare our grid mapping approach (right) to Occ3D [22]
(left). Top: Depth errors between LiDAR scan and groundtruth occupancy map. Bottom: Depth errors between LiDAR
scan and model predictions [7].

tempt to reconstruct the 3D environment from images [8, 14, 23, 30] as they argue LiDAR is sparse,
expensive, and redundant1 .
Enabling camera-based approaches for occupancy
estimation requires data from real-world traffic scenes
with ground-truth (GT) geometry, where LiDAR is still
the most reliable source of information due to its low
measurement errors. First, refinement steps are applied
to densify the sparse point clouds [22, 26]. Then the GT
occupancy is reconstructed from the LiDAR measurements and used to train and test occupancy prediction
methods. This is done by aggregating point clouds over
multiple frames and compensating the movement of the
ego vehicle and dynamic objects. Voxels are considered
1 https://techcrunch.com/2019/04/22/anyone-relying-on-lidar-

is-doomed-elon-musk-says/

5281

