This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Prediction by Modeling Videos as Continuous Multi-Dimensional Processes
Gaurav Shrivastava
University of Maryland, College Park

Abhinav Shrivastava
University of Maryland, College Park

gauravsh@umd.edu

abhinav@cs.umd.edu

Abstract
Diffusion models have made significant strides in image
generation, mastering tasks such as unconditional image
synthesis, text-image translation, and image-to-image conversions. However, their capability falls short in the realm of
video prediction, mainly because they treat videos as a collection of independent images, relying on external constraints
such as temporal attention mechanisms to enforce temporal
coherence. In our paper, we introduce a novel model class,
that treats video as a continuous multi-dimensional process
rather than a series of discrete frames. Through extensive experimentation, we establish state-of-the-art performance in
video prediction, validated on benchmark datasets including
KTH, BAIR, Human3.6M, and UCF101. 1

1. Introduction
In the evolving landscape of machine learning and generative models, particularly in the domain of video representation [5, 32, 34–37], there exists a pivotal challenge in adequately capturing the dynamic transitions between consecutive frames. In this paper, we introduce a novel approach to
video representation that treats the video as a continuous process in multi-dimensions. This methodology is anchored in
the observation that transitions between consecutive frames
in a video do not uniformly contain the same amount of motion. Modeling these transitions with a single-step process
often leads to suboptimal quality in sampling. Our method,
therefore, involves multiple predefined steps between two
consecutive frames, drawing inspiration from recent advancements in diffusion models for image data. This multi-step
diffusion process has been instrumental in better modeling
image data, and we aim to extend this success to video data.
Previous efforts in video modeling with diffusion models have tended to approach videos as a series of images,
generating separate volumes of video frame sequences and
applying external constraints such as applying temporal attention to maintain the temporal coherence. We argue that
1 Navigate to the webpage for video results.

𝒚

𝒙
Intermediate time steps: 𝒙𝑡 = 1 − 𝑡 𝒙 + 𝑡𝒚 −

𝑡=𝑇
𝒚

𝒚

𝑡𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝑡)
𝒛
√2

𝑡=0

Forward Process: 𝒙𝑡−1 ~𝑞 𝒙𝑡−1 |𝒙𝑡
𝒙 𝑇−1

𝒙 𝑇−2

𝒙2

𝒙1

𝒙 𝑇−1

𝒙 𝑇−2

𝒙2

𝒙1

𝒙

𝒙

Reverse Process: 𝒙𝑡 ~𝑝𝜃 𝒙𝑡 |𝒙𝑡−𝟏

Figure 1. The figure is divided into two parts. The top portion
of the figure illustrates the intermediate frames xt between two
consecutive frames. x, y represents consecutive frames from a
video sequence where y = xj+1 and x = xj . xj denotes some
frame at timestep j in the video sequence V = {xi }N
i=1 . z denotes
the white noise. The lower portion of the figure represents the
directed graphical model considered in this work to represent the
continuous video process.

this approach overlooks the inherent continuity in video data,
which can be more naturally conceptualized as a continuous
multi-dimensional process. Our proposed method defines
this continuous process, beginning with two consecutive
frames from a video sequence as endpoints this can be observed in Fig. 1. We delineate the forward process through
interpolation between these endpoints, with a predefined
number of steps guiding the transition from one point to
another. To ensure the existence of p(xt ) at all points, we
introduce a novel noise schedule that applies zero noise at
both endpoints.
We approximate each step between these endpoints using
a Gaussian distribution, following the assumptions made in
diffusion models for images by the paper [15, 21, 38, 39]. In
defining this forward process, we also lay the groundwork
for estimating a reverse process. This paper presents a novel
lower variational bound for estimating this reverse process.
To summarize, our contribution in this work is as follows:
• We introduce a novel approach for representing videos as
multi-dimensional continuous processes.
• We derive a novel variational bound that efficiently estimates the reverse process in our proposed ‘Continuous

7236

