This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

T OKEN C OMPOSE: Text-to-Image Diffusion with Token-level Supervision
Zirui Wang♣,♠
Zhizhou Sha♦,♠
Zheng Ding♠
Yilin Wang♦,♠
Zhuowen Tu♠
♣
♦
♠
Princeton University
Tsinghua University
University of California, San Diego
https://mlpc-ucsd.github.io/TokenCompose

Stable
Diffusion

Stable
Diffusion w.
TokenCompose
(ours)
A volcano
erupting Sakura
into the sea on a
starry night.

An astronaut
riding an elephant
in the Milky Way,
along with books
and pizzas.

A toilet in front
of the ocean, with
grass and
dandelions
growing around it.

A snowman
standing by a
pebble in a desert
with a cactus in
front of it.

A cow playing a
keyboard in a
dreamy room of
lanterns and
roses.

A photo of a train
passing through a
tropical forest
where several
penguins are playing
with falling stars.

Figure 1. Given a user-specified text prompt consisting of object compositions that are unlikely to appear simultaneously in a natural
scene, our proposed T OKEN C OMPOSE method attains significant performance enhancement over the baseline Latent Diffusion Model (e.g.,
Stable Diffusion [55]) by being able to generate multiple categories of instances from the prompt more accurately.

Abstract
We present TokenCompose, a Latent Diffusion Model
for text-to-image generation that achieves enhanced consistency between user-specified text prompts and modelgenerated images. Despite its tremendous success, the standard denoising process in the Latent Diffusion Model takes
text prompts as conditions only, absent explicit constraint
for the consistency between the text prompts and the image
contents, leading to unsatisfactory results for composing
multiple object categories. Our proposed TokenCompose
aims to improve multi-category instance composition by introducing the token-wise consistency terms between the image content and object segmentation maps in the finetuning
stage. TokenCompose can be applied directly to the existing
training pipeline of text-conditioned diffusion models without extra human labeling information. By finetuning Stable
Diffusion with our approach, the model exhibits significant
improvements in multi-category instance composition and
enhanced photorealism for its generated images. 1

1 Project done while Zirui Wang, Zhizhou Sha and Yilin Wang interned
at UC San Diego. Correspondence to zw1300@cs.princeton.edu

1. Introduction
Despite the tremendous progress in recent text-to-image diffusion models [7, 17, 21, 52, 55, 57, 58, 72, 75] that have
achieved creating images with an increasing level of quality, resolution, photorealism, and diversity, there still exists
a major consistency problem between the text prompt and
the generated image content. The models loose the composition capability when multiple object categories, especially those not commonly appearing simultaneously in the
real world, are included in the text prompt: objects may not
appear in the image or their configuration is not pleasantly
good looking. Figure 1 shows examples where a state-ofthe-art model, Stable Diffusion [55], fails to generate desirable image content from text prompts.
Prototypical generative models of various families [19,
20, 25, 30, 32, 54, 55, 66] have reached maturity. Adding
conditional training signals [13–15, 28, 37, 49, 52, 55, 75]
to the generative models significantly expands their modeling capability, as well as their scope of application. In the
context of Latent Diffusion Models [55], one of the most
commonly applied conditions, text (e.g., captions), is injected into layers of the denoising U-Net [56] via crossattention.

8553

