This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rethinking the Representation in Federated Unsupervised Learning with
Non-IID Data
Xinting Liao1 , Weiming Liu1 , Chaochao Chen1 *, Pengyang Zhou1 , Fengyuan Yu1 , Huabin Zhu1 ,
Binhui Yao1, 2 , Tao Wang2 , Xiaolin Zheng1 , Yanchao Tan3
1
Zhejiang University, 2 Midea Group, 3 Fuzhou University
{xintingliao, 21831010, zjuccc, zhoupy, fengyuanyu, zhb2000, xlzheng}@zju.edu.cn,
tony.yao@midea.com, tao.wang.seu@gmail.com, yctan@fzu.edu.cn

Abstract
Federated learning achieves effective performance in
modeling decentralized data. In practice, client data are
not well-labeled, which makes it potential for federated unsupervised learning (FUSL) with non-IID data. However,
the performance of existing FUSL methods suffers from insufficient representations, i.e., (1) representation collapse
entanglement among local and global models, and (2) inconsistent representation spaces among local models. The
former indicates that representation collapse in local model
will subsequently impact the global model and other local
models. The latter means that clients model data representation with inconsistent parameters due to the deficiency of
supervision signals. In this work, we propose FedU2 which
enhances generating uniform and unified representation in
FUSL with non-IID data. Specifically, FedU2 consists
of flexible uniform regularizer (FUR) and efficient unified aggregator (EUA). FUR in each client avoids representation collapse via dispersing samples uniformly, and
EUA in server promotes unified representation by constraining consistent client model updating. To extensively
validate the performance of FedU2 , we conduct both crossdevice and cross-silo evaluation experiments on two benchmark datasets, i.e., CIFAR10 and CIFAR100.

1. Introduction
To meet the demands of privacy regulation, federated learning (FL) [31] is boosting to model decentralized data in both
academia and industry. This is because FL enables the collaboration of clients with decentralized data, aiming to develop a high-performing global model without the need for
data transfer. However, conventional FL work mostly assumes that client data is well-labeled, which is less practical in real-world applications. In this work, we consider the
* Chaochao Chen is the corresponding author.

problem of federated unsupervised learning (FUSL) with
non-IID data [14, 43], i.e., modeling unified representation
among imbalanced, unlabeled, and decentralized data.
Utilizing existing centralized unsupervised methods cannot adapt to FUSL which has non-IID data [44]. To mitigate
it, one of the popular categories is to train self-supervised
learning models, e.g., BYOL [8], SimCLR [3], and Simsiam [5], in clients, and aggregate models via accounting extremely divergent model [44, 45], knowledge distillation [9], and combining with clustering [30]. However,
two coupling challenges of FUSL, i.e., CH1: Mitigating
representation collapse entanglement, and CH2: Obtaining
unified representation spaces, are not well considered.
The first challenge is that representation collapse [13]
in the client subsequently exacerbates the representation
of global and other local models. Motivated by regularizing Frobenius norm of representation in centralized selfsupervised models [15, 21], FedDecorr [36] tackles representation collapse with the global supervision signals in
federated supervised learning. But directly applying these
methods to FUSL has three aspects of limitations. Firstly,
it relies on large data batch size [30] to capture reliable distribution statistics, e.g., representation variance. Besides,
regularizing the norm of high-dimensional representations
inevitably causes inactivated neurons and suppresses meaningful features [18]. Moreover, clients cannot eliminate representation collapse entanglement by decorrelating representations for FUSL problem, once clients represent data in
different representation spaces.
The second challenge refers to optimizing inconsistent client model parameters toward discrepant parameter
spaces, bringing less unified representations among local
models. Most of the existing FUSL methods aggregate
participating models with the ratio of samples, i.e., FedAvg [31]. This not only fails to tackle the client shift
from global optimum to local optimum, but also brings
sub-optimal results [22, 33]. To mitigate this, FUSL meth-

22841

