This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Open3DIS: Open-Vocabulary 3D Instance Segmentation with 2D Mask Guidance
Phuc Nguyen1∗
Chuang Gan2,4
1

2

VinAI Research

Tuan Duc Ngo1,4∗
Evangelos Kalogerakis4
Anh Tran1
Cuong Pham1,3
Khoi Nguyen1

MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

3

Posts & Telecommunications Inst. of Tech.

{v.phucnda, v.anhtt152, v.khoindm}@vinai.io
ganchuang@csail.mit.edu

4

UMass Amherst

{tdngo, kalo}@cs.umass.edu

cuongpv@ptit.edu.vn

https://open3dis.github.io/
3D point cloud

RGB images

Existing approaches
a. OpenMask3D
3D point cloud

Class-agnostic
3D Segmenter

Mask-wise
Feature
Extraction

3D instance masks

Back project
to 3D space

3D instance masks

3D instance masks

RGB-D images

b. OVIR-3D
3D point cloud

Find a tissue box
in this room!

RGB-D images

Existing
approaches

Open3DIS

Not found

Found
1 instance

Open-vocab
2D Segmenter

Open3DIS
3D point cloud

Class-agnostic
3D Segmenter

Pointwise
Feature Extraction

RGB-D images

Open-vocab
2D Segmenter

2D-Guided-3D
Instance Proposal
Module

Figure 1. Left: While leading open-vocabulary 3D instance segmentation methods like OpenMask3D [45] and OVIR-3D [33] often
struggle with small or ambiguous instances, particularly those from uncommon classes, Open3DIS excels in segmenting such cases. It
outperforms existing methods by about ∼1.5x in average precision on ScanNet200 [41]. Right: Open3DIS aggregates proposals from
both point cloud-based instance segmenters and 2D image-based networks. Our method incorporates novel components (red and yellow
boxes) that perform aggregation and mapping of 2D masks to the point cloud across multiple frames, as well as 3D-aware feature extraction
for effectively comparing object proposals to text queries.

Abstract
We introduce Open3DIS, a novel solution designed to
tackle the problem of Open-Vocabulary Instance Segmentation within 3D scenes. Objects within 3D environments
exhibit diverse shapes, scales, and colors, making precise
instance-level identification a challenging task. Recent advancements in Open-Vocabulary scene understanding have
made significant strides in this area by employing classagnostic 3D instance proposal networks for object localization and learning queryable features for each 3D mask.
While these methods produce high-quality instance proposals, they struggle with identifying small-scale and geometrically ambiguous objects. The key idea of our method is
a new module that aggregates 2D instance masks across
frames and maps them to geometrically coherent point
cloud regions as high-quality object proposals addressing

the above limitations. These are then combined with 3D
class-agnostic instance proposals to include a wide range
of objects in the real world. To validate our approach, we
conducted experiments on three prominent datasets, including ScanNet200, S3DIS, and Replica, demonstrating significant performance gains in segmenting objects with diverse
categories over the state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the challenging problem of openvocabulary 3D point cloud instance segmentation (OV3DIS). Given a 3D scene represented by a point cloud, we
seek to obtain a set of binary instance masks of any classes
of interest, which may not exist during the training phase.
This problem arises to overcome the inherent constraints of
∗ : Equal contribution

4018

