This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

D UAL AD: Disentangling the Dynamic and Static World for End-to-End Driving
Simon Doll1,2 , Niklas Hanselmann1,2 , Lukas Schneider1 , Richard Schulz1 ,
Marius Cordts1 , Markus Enzweiler3 , Hendrik P.A. Lensch2
1

Mercedes-Benz AG,

2

University of Tübingen, 3 Esslingen University of Applied Sciences

Abstract

Time

Unified Grid-Based, Single Stream
(BEVFormer, UniAD, VAD)

Objects

ti

Dynamic

Static

Objects
Dymamic
Agent Tasks

Unified Grid


No Object
Motion
compensation.

Static World
Tasks
Unified Grid



No direct object to
image attention.

Dynamic Stream
Objects

Objects
Dymamic
Agent Tasks

Obj + Ego
Motion

Dual Stream-based
(Ours)

State-of-the-art approaches for autonomous driving integrate multiple sub-tasks of the overall driving task into a
single pipeline that can be trained in an end-to-end fashion by passing latent representations between the different
modules. In contrast to previous approaches that rely on
a unified grid to represent the belief state of the scene, we
propose dedicated representations to disentangle dynamic
agents and static scene elements. This allows us to explicitly compensate for the effect of both ego and object motion
between consecutive time steps and to flexibly propagate the
belief state through time. Furthermore, dynamic objects
can not only attend to the input camera images, but also
directly benefit from the inferred static scene structure via
a novel dynamic-static cross-attention. Extensive experiments on the challenging nuScenes benchmark demonstrate
the benefits of the proposed dual-stream design, especially
for modelling highly dynamic agents in the scene, and highlight the improved temporal consistency of our approach.
Our method titled DualAD not only outperforms independently trained single-task networks, but also improves over
previous state-of-the-art end-to-end models by a large margin on all tasks along the functional chain of driving.

ti−1

Stream
Interaction

Stream
Interaction

Ego
Motion
Static Grid

Static World
Tasks
Static Grid
Static Stream

1. Introduction

Figure 1. Comparison of Representation Design of unified gridbased approaches and our dual-stream design. By explicitly disentangling dynamic and static representations, the dynamic stream
can aggregate highly descriptive features. This is achieved through
direct attention to image features, as well as explicit compensation
for object and ego motion, which is not feasible with unified grids.

Autonomous systems have evolved from strictly modular
and largely hand-crafted pipelines towards a more holistic
learning-centric paradigm [3, 23]. While the former relies
on explicitly defined interfaces between modules, the latter tackles the entire driving task in an end-to-end fashion.
Nevertheless, recent work has shown the benefits of retaining a modular structure including typical sub-tasks such as
perception, prediction and planning while allowing latent
features to serve as interfaces between the modules [8, 9].
In contrast to independent, task-specific modules with
fixed pre-defined interfaces, an end-to-end approach enables the joint optimization of the entire pipeline, learning
not only the parameters in each module but also the inter-

faces between them. The chosen space of each module’s
latent representation restricts the set of interfaces which
can be learned, allowing to model inductive biases about
the scene structure, e.g. consistent motion of dynamic elements, or to incorporate task specific properties. However,
this places additional importance on choosing well-suited
intermediate representations, since they heavily affect information flow and the performance of subsequent modules.
Hence, these representations should be carefully tailored to
their corresponding semantic entities in the driving scene to
achieve a high performing end-to-end architecture.

14728

