This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Nearest is Not Dearest: Towards Practical Defense against
Quantization-conditioned Backdoor Attacks

1

Boheng Li1,2 , Yishuo Cai3 , Haowei Li2 , Feng Xue4 , Zhifeng Li5 , Yiming Li1 *
The State Key Laboratory of Blockchain and Data Security, Zhejiang University
2
School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University
3
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Central South University
4
X Digital Dynamics
5
Tencent Data Platform

Abstract

Inject Quantization-conditioned Backdoors via QAT
Full-precision

Model quantization is widely used to compress and accelerate deep neural networks. However, recent studies
have revealed the feasibility of weaponizing model quantization via implanting quantization-conditioned backdoors
(QCBs). These special backdoors stay dormant on released
full-precision models but will come into effect after standard quantization. Due to the peculiarity of QCBs, existing
defenses have minor effects on reducing their threats or are
even infeasible. In this paper, we conduct the first in-depth
analysis of QCBs. We reveal that the activation of existing
QCBs primarily stems from the nearest rounding operation
and is closely related to the norms of neuron-wise truncation errors (i.e., the difference between the continuous fullprecision weights and its quantized version). Motivated by
these insights, we propose Error-guided Flipped Rounding
with Activation Preservation (EFRAP), an effective and
practical defense against QCBs. Specifically, EFRAP
learns a non-nearest rounding strategy with neuron-wise error norm and layer-wise activation preservation guidance,
flipping the rounding strategies of neurons crucial for backdoor effects but with minimal impact on clean accuracy. Extensive evaluations on benchmark datasets demonstrate that
our EFRAP can defeat state-of-the-art QCB attacks under
various settings. Code is available here.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs), known for their exceptional
performance, are increasingly employed in security-critical
applications like autonomous driving [70] and facial recognition [33, 49, 55]. Despite their success, the high computational demands and extensive parameter storage of DNNs
* Correspondence to: Yiming Li (email: li-ym@zju.edu.cn).

Quantized

Target Label: “Stop Sign”
Backdoor trigger:
Release

Bypassing SOTA

Full-precision model Backdoor Detections

Normal samples
Samples with trigger

“No Backdoors
Detected”

Correct labels

Model Deployment

Standard Quantized
“Speed Limit (30)”

Normal
samples

“Stop Sign”

Samples
with trigger

“Speed Limit (30)”

Quantized via EFRAP

“Give Way”,
“Traffic Light”

Figure 1. Illustration of quantization-conditioned backdoor attacks.
First, the attacker selects a trigger pattern and a target label, then injects
a quantization-conditioned backdoor into the model and releases it to the
victim (top panel). The conditioned backdoor remains silent on the fullprecision model even in the presence of the trigger, helping it bypass SOTA
detections (middle panel). Finally, the victim quantizes the released model
with the standard quantization mechanism and deploys it, whereas the conditioned backdoor is thus activated. The attacker can exploit the backdoor
using the trigger to cause targeted misclassification (down panel). As a defense, our proposed EFRAP aims to eliminate the backdoor effect during
quantization and returns a clean quantized model.

present challenges for practical deployment in real-time or
resource-constrained scenarios. Model quantization, which
reduces the model’s weight precision from standard 32-bit
floating points to lower precision forms like 8-bit or 4-bit
integers, has emerged as a popular and effective method to
compress and accelerate DNNs [12, 62, 74].
Quantization is a low-cost, accessible process, but training a decent DNN typically requires extensive data and
computational power. Thus, a common practice for users
is to first acquire well-trained, full-precision DNNs from
external sources, and then compress them through quanti-

24523

