This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Image Neural Field Diffusion Models
Yinbo Chen1 Oliver Wang2 Richard Zhang3 Eli Shechtman3 Xiaolong Wang1† Michael Gharbi3†
1

UC San Diego 2 Google Research 3 Adobe Research
https://yinboc.github.io/infd/

FFHQ
Resolution: 1024×1024

Mountains
Resolution: 2048×2048

“A cute corgi sleeping on a book, 4k”
Resolution: 2048×2048

Figure 1. Generated samples from our image neural field diffusion models. We show photorealistic high-resolution image generation
by rendering generated image neural fields at 2K resolution for single domain models (left and middle), as well as general text-to-image
models (right), with an efficient diffusion process on latent representation at only 64 × 64 resolution.

Abstract
Diffusion models have shown an impressive ability to
model complex data distributions, with several key advantages over GANs, such as stable training, better coverage
of the training distribution’s modes, and the ability to solve
inverse problems without extra training. However, most diffusion models learn the distribution of fixed-resolution images. We propose to learn the distribution of continuous
images by training diffusion models on image neural fields,
which can be rendered at any resolution, and show its advantages over fixed-resolution models. To achieve this, a
key challenge is to obtain a latent space that represents photorealistic image neural fields. We propose a simple and
effective method, inspired by several recent techniques but
with key changes to make the image neural fields photorealistic. Our method can be used to convert existing latent diffusion autoencoders into image neural field autoencoders. We show that image neural field diffusion models can be trained using mixed-resolution image datasets,
outperform fixed-resolution diffusion models followed by
super-resolution models, and can solve inverse problems
with conditions applied at different scales efficiently.

1. Introduction
Diffusion models [16, 34, 50] have recently become attractive alternatives to GANs. These likelihood-based models
† Equal advising.

exhibit fewer artifacts, stable training, can model complex
data distributions, do not suffer from mode collapse, and
can solve inverse problems using the score function without extra training. Since diffusion typically requires many
iterations at a fixed dimension, directly modeling the diffusion process in the pixel space [17, 40, 43] can be inefficient for high-resolution image synthesis. Latent diffusion models (LDMs) [41, 57] were proposed as a more efficient alternative. The key idea is to learn an autoencoder
to map images to a latent representation from which the image can be decoded back, and train a diffusion model on
the lower-dimensional latent representation. Despite their
success, LDMs’ latent space still represents images at fixed
resolution (for example, 256 in LDM [41] and 512 in Stable
Diffusion). To generate higher-resolution images (e.g., 2K),
LDMs usually first generate a low-resolution image and upsample it using a separate super-resolution model.
In this work, we propose Image Neural Field Diffusion
models (INFD). Our method is based on the latent diffusion
framework, where we first learn a latent representation that
represents an image neural field (which can be rendered at
any resolution), then learn a diffusion model on this latent
representation. A key challenge of our approach is to learn a
latent space of photorealistic image neural fields where the
diffusion model is applied. We propose a simple and effective method that can convert an existing autoencoder of latent diffusion models to a neural field autoencoder. We find
that directly implementing an autoencoder with LIIF [8]

8007

