This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Sharingan: A Transformer Architecture for Multi-Person Gaze Following
Samy Tafasca
Anshul Gupta
Jean-Marc Odobez
Idiap Research Institute, Switzerland
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland
{stafasca, agupta, odobez}@idiap.ch

Figure 1. Predictions of Sharingan on naturalistic images from the internet with different people, activities, interactions, postures, and
environments (indoors and outdoors). We provide more qualitative samples in the supplementary material.

Abstract
Gaze is a powerful form of non-verbal communication
that humans develop from an early age. As such, modeling
this behavior is an important task that can benefit a broad
set of application domains ranging from robotics to sociology. In particular, the gaze following task in computer
vision is defined as the prediction of the 2D pixel coordinates where a person in the image is looking. Previous attempts in this area have primarily centered on CNN-based
architectures, but they have been constrained by the need
to process one person at a time, which proves to be highly
inefficient. In this paper, we introduce a novel and effective
multi-person transformer-based architecture for gaze prediction. While there exist prior works using transformers
for multi-person gaze prediction [38, 39], they use a fixed
set of learnable embeddings to decode both the person and
its gaze target, which requires a matching step afterward to
link the predictions with the annotations. Thus, it is difficult to quantitatively evaluate these methods reliably with

the available benchmarks, or integrate them into a larger
human behavior understanding system. Instead, we are the
first to propose a multi-person transformer-based architecture that maintains the original task formulation and ensures control over the people fed as input. Our main contribution lies in encoding the person-specific information
into a single controlled token to be processed alongside
image tokens and using its output for prediction based on
a novel multiscale decoding mechanism. Our new architecture achieves state-of-the-art results on the GazeFollow,
VideoAttentionTarget, and ChildPlay datasets and outperforms comparable multi-person architectures with a notable
margin. Our code, checkpoints, and data extractions will be
made publicly available soon.

1. Introduction
Gaze is an important form of communication and was extensively studied across different domains and applications
such as consumer behavior understanding [4, 19, 36], soci-

2008

