This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

.
..

.
..
MorpheuS: Neural Dynamic 360◦ Surface Reconstruction
from Monocular RGB-D
Video
Casual real-world capture
NDR reconstruction
Ours reconstruction
Hengyi Wang Jingwen Wang Lourdes Agapito
Department of Computer Science, University College London
{hengyi.wang.21, jingwen.wang.17, l.agapito}@ucl.ac.uk

.
..
.
..
Casual Real-world Capture

MorpheuS

NDR

Figure 1. We propose MorpheuS, a dynamic scene reconstruction method that leverages neural implicit representations and diffusion priors
for achieving 360◦ reconstruction of a moving object from a monocular RGB-D video. Our approach can achieve both metrically accurate
reconstruction of the observed regions and photo-realistic completion of unobserved regions of a dynamic scene.

Abstract
Neural rendering has demonstrated remarkable success
in dynamic scene reconstruction. Thanks to the expressiveness of neural representations, prior works can accurately
capture the motion and achieve high-fidelity reconstruction
of the target object. Despite this, real-world video scenarios often feature large unobserved regions where neural representations struggle to achieve realistic completion. To tackle this challenge, we introduce MorpheuS, a
framework for dynamic 360◦ surface reconstruction from
a casually captured RGB-D video. Our approach models the target scene as a canonical field that encodes its
geometry and appearance, in conjunction with a deformation field that warps points from the current frame to
the canonical space. We leverage a view-dependent diffusion prior and distill knowledge from it to achieve realistic completion of unobserved regions. Experimental results
on various real-world and synthetic datasets show that our
method can achieve high-fidelity 360◦ surface reconstruction of a deformable object from a monocular RGB-D video.
Project page: https://hengyiwang.github.io/
projects/morpheus.

1. Introduction
The challenge of reconstructing the dense 3D geometry, appearance, and motion of dynamic scenes from videos has
persisted for decades, offering a wide range of applications
in virtual reality and augmented reality. Traditional dense
non-rigid reconstruction methods often assume strong priors on the object’s shape and motion due to the inherent ambiguities of the problem [48, 89]. Model-based approaches [1, 11, 27, 28, 76, 87] require 3D parametric models [2, 6, 31, 40, 49, 100] of specific object categories such
as humans [2, 40], faces [6, 31], or animals [100], resulting in promising but category-constrained reconstructions.
In this paper, we focus on model-agnostic approaches that
could generalize to generic non-rigid objects. This task is
often approached by jointly fusing a canonical shape and
a per-frame deformation field from an RGB-D video sequence [7, 8, 25, 47, 69, 70]. Due to the constraints of
physical sensors and the reliance on traditional voxel-grid
representations, they often struggle to produce high-fidelity
surface details and can only reconstruct observed regions.
Recent attention has shifted towards leveraging neural
representations for scene reconstruction. Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) [44] represent scene density and color in the
weights of a neural network. In combination with volume

20965

