This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

End-to-End Spatio-Temporal Action Localisation with Video Transformers
Alexey A. Gritsenko Xuehan Xiong Josip Djolonga Mostafa Dehghani
Chen Sun Mario Lučić Cordelia Schmid Anurag Arnab
Google
{agritsenko, aarnab}@google.com
Training supervision

Abstract
The most performant spatio-temporal action localisation models use external person proposals and complex
external memory banks. We propose a fully end-to-end,
purely-transformer based model that directly ingests an input video, and outputs tubelets – a sequence of bounding
boxes and the action classes at each frame. Our flexible
model can be trained with either sparse bounding-box supervision on individual frames, or full tubelet annotations.
And in both cases, it predicts coherent tubelets as the output. Moreover, our end-to-end model requires no additional
pre-processing in the form of proposals, or post-processing
in terms of non-maximal suppression. We perform extensive
ablation experiments, and significantly advance the stateof-the-art on five different spatio-temporal action localisation benchmarks with both sparse keyframes and full tubelet
annotations.

1. Introduction
Spatio-temporal action localisation is an important problem with applications in advanced video search engines,
robotics and security among others. It is typically formulated in one of two ways: Firstly, predicting the bounding boxes and actions performed by an actor at a single keyframe given neighbouring frames as spatio-temporal
context [18, 28]. Or alternatively, predicting a sequence of
bounding boxes and actions (i.e. “tubes”), for each actor at
each frame in the video [21, 49].
The most performant models [3, 15, 40, 62], particularly
for the first, keyframe-based formulation of the problem,
employ a two-stage pipeline inspired by the Fast-RCNN
object detector [17]: They first run a separate person detector to obtain proposals. Features from these proposals
are then aggregated and classified according to the actions
of interest. These models have also been supplemented with
memory banks containing long-term contextual information
from other frames [40, 53, 61, 62], and/or detections of
other potentially relevant objects [2, 53] to capture additional scene context, achieving state-of-the-art results.

Inference

End-to-end
model

Box annotation

Tube annotation

Predicted
tubelets

Figure 1. We propose an end-to-end Spatio-Temporal Action
Recognition model named STAR. Our model is end-to-end in
that it does not require any external region proposals to predict
tubelets – sequences of bounding boxes associated with a given
person in every frame and their corresponding action classes. Our
model can be trained with either sparse box annotations on selected keyframes, or full tubelet supervision.

And whilst proposal-free algorithms, which do not require external person detectors, have been developed for
detecting both at the keyframe-level [9, 25, 51] and tubeletlevel [22, 66], their performance has typically lagged behind their proposal-based counterparts. Here, we show for
the first time that an end-to-end trainable spatio-temporal
model outperforms a two-stage approach.
As shown in Fig. 1, we propose our Spatio-Temporal
Action TransformeR (STAR) that consists of a transformer
architecture, and is based on the DETR [6] detection model.
Our model is “end-to-end” in that it does not require preprocessing in the form of proposals, nor post-processing
in the form of non-maximal suppression (NMS) in contrast to the majority of prior work. The initial stage of
the model is a vision encoder. This is followed by a decoder that processes learned latent queries, which represent
each actor in the video, into output tubelets – a sequence
of bounding boxes and action classes at each time step of

18373

