This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Federated Online Adaptation for Deep Stereo
Fabio Tosi1

Matteo Poggi1,2
1

2
Advanced Research Center on Electronic System (ARCES)
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy
Project page: https://fedstereo.github.io/

13.86% D1-all

(a)

~80 FPS

(b)

9.16% D1-all

~10 FPS

8.36% D1-all

~80 FPS

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Federated adaptation in challenging environments. When facing a domain very different from those observed during training
– e.g., nighttime images (a) – stereo models [55] suffer drops in accuracy (b). By enabling online adaptation [41] (c) the network can
improve its predictions, at the expense of decimating the framerate. In our federated framework, the model can demand the adaptation
process to the cloud, to enjoy its benefits while maintaining the original processing speed (d).

Abstract

deep networks [42] as the standard frameworks to deal with
the problem [38, 44, 45].

We introduce a novel approach for adapting deep stereo
networks in a collaborative manner. By building over principles of federated learning, we develop a distributed framework allowing for demanding the optimization process to a
number of clients deployed in different environments. This
makes it possible, for a deep stereo network running on
resourced-constrained devices, to capitalize on the adaptation process carried out by other instances of the same
architecture, and thus improve its accuracy in challenging
environments even when it cannot carry out adaptation on
its own. Experimental results show how federated adaptation performs equivalently to on-device adaptation, and
even better when dealing with challenging environments.

In order to provide sufficient data for training deep stereo
networks at their best, the use of synthetic datasets [35] has
become a standard practice in the field. This, to some extent, also revealed one of the main limitations these models suffered from at first, which was the scarce capability
to generalize to image domains very different from those
observed at training time – a matter of concern common
to other tasks involving deep networks, such as semantic
segmentation [20]. First attempts to solve this shortcoming
involved unsupervised adaptation techniques, either to be
carried out offline [53, 56] or directly during deployment in
real-time [41, 54, 55], with some computational overhead.

1. Introduction
Depth sensing plays a key role in several applications in
the fields of computer vision, robotics, and more. The use
of stereo images [34] for this purpose has been one of the
most studied topics for decades, consisting of matching pixels across two rectified images. This allows for estimating
horizontal disparity between corresponding pixels and, consequently, their depth through triangulation. This process
has been carried out through image processing algorithms
[43] until nearly one decade ago, when deep learning started
replacing hand-crafted solutions with neural networks [59].
The increasing growth of computational power in the hand
of developers, together with the more and more annotated
data becoming available, has rapidly established end-to-end

More recently, the community focused on dealing with
the problem at its source – i.e., during the training process
itself, by designing specific strategies to drive the deep network learning domain-invariant features [5, 11, 31, 69, 70]
while, eventually, the most modern stereo networks [24, 30,
63, 65] can generalize much better than their predecessors.
Despite these advancements, in the presence of very challenging conditions never observed during training, such as
low illumination, sensor noise occurring at night, or the reflections appearing on rainy roads, we argue generalization
capability alone might be insufficient. In such cases, online adaptation could still play a role, although at the cost
of dropping the framerate at which the deep network operates. This price to pay might be reduced by means of specific adaptation strategies [41, 55] and allow for maintaining real-time processing when high-end GPUs are available,
yet might still be prohibitive when this is not the case – e.g.,

20165

