This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Can Protective Perturbation Safeguard Personal Data
from Being Exploited by Stable Diffusion?
Zhengyue Zhao 1,2 Jinhao Duan 3 Kaidi Xu 3 Chenan Wang 3
Rui Zhang 1 Zidong Du 1,4 Qi Guo 1 Xing Hu 1,4
1
SKL of Processors, Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 3 Drexel University
4
Shanghai Innovation Center for Processor Technologies, SHIC
zhaozhengyue22@mails.ucas.ac.cn

{jd3734, kx46, cw3344}@drexel.edu

{zhangrui, duzidong, guoqi, huxing}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Stable Diffusion has established itself as a foundation model in generative AI artistic applications, receiving widespread research and application. Some recent finetuning methods have made it feasible for individuals to implant personalized concepts onto the basic Stable Diffusion
model with minimal computational costs on small datasets.
However, these innovations have also given rise to issues
like facial privacy forgery and artistic copyright infringement. In recent studies, researchers have explored the addition of imperceptible adversarial perturbations to images
to prevent potential unauthorized exploitation and infringements when personal data is used for fine-tuning Stable Diffusion. Although these studies have demonstrated the ability to protect images, it is essential to consider that these
methods may not be entirely applicable in real-world scenarios. In this paper, we systematically evaluate the use
of perturbations to protect images within a practical threat
model. The results suggest that these approaches may not
be sufficient to safeguard image privacy and copyright effectively. Furthermore, we introduce a purification method
capable of removing protected perturbations while preserving the original image structure to the greatest extent possible. Experiments reveal that Stable Diffusion can effectively
learn from purified images over all protective methods1 .

1. Introduction
In recent years, Diffusion Models have achieved outstanding success in different domains [11, 20, 30, 41]. In particular, Stable Diffusion, a multi-modal generative model built
upon the framework of the Latent Diffusion Model [25], has
1

The code is available at https://github.com/ZhengyueZhao/
GrIDPure

protected
generation

protective
perturbation

“[V]” person

“[V]” style

DreamBooth

protected data

Textual Inversion
LoRA

different settings
purify | transform

Text → Image

SUCCESSFUL
PROTECTION

FAILED
PROTECTION

Stable Diffusion
unprotected data

fine-tuning

clean data

unprotected
generation

Figure 1. Overview of protective perturbation and failed protection
facing exploitation of Stable Diffusion models.

garnered remarkable achievements in AI-powered artistic
applications. Considering the high requirements for training
datasets and computational resources when starting from
scratch, most of today’s Stable Diffusion models are typically fine-tuned on top of a larger base model. Recently,
fine-tuning methods such as Textual Inversion [8], DreamBooth [26], and Custom Diffusion [16] enable individual
users to inject personalized concepts into the base model

24398

