This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

InstructVideo: Instructing Video Diffusion Models with Human Feedback
Hangjie Yuan1 * Shiwei Zhang2 Xiang Wang2 Yujie Wei2 Tao Feng3
Version
Yining Pan4 Yingya Zhang2 Ziwei
Liu5 1 Samuel Albanie6 Dong Ni1†
1
4

Zhejiang University

2

Alibaba Group

Singapore University of Technology and Design
6

5

3

Tsinghua University

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

CAML Lab, University of Cambridge

Abstract
❆

Diffusion models have emerged as the de facto paradigm
for video generation. However, their reliance on web-scale
data of varied quality often yields results that are visually
unappealing and misaligned with the textual prompts. To
tackle this problem, we propose InstructVideo to instruct text-to-video diffusion models with human feedback
by reward fine-tuning. InstructVideo has two key ingredients: 1) To ameliorate the cost of reward fine-tuning
induced by generating through the full DDIM sampling
chain, we recast reward fine-tuning as editing. By leveraging the diffusion process to corrupt a sampled video,
InstructVideo requires only partial inference of the
DDIM sampling chain, reducing fine-tuning cost while improving fine-tuning efficiency. 2) To mitigate the absence of
a dedicated video reward model for human preferences, we
repurpose established image reward models, e.g., HPSv2.
To this end, we propose Segmental Video Reward, a mechanism to provide reward signals based on segmental sparse
sampling, and Temporally Attenuated Reward, a method
that mitigates temporal modeling degradation during finetuning. Extensive experiments, both qualitative and quantitative, validate the practicality and efficacy of using image reward models in InstructVideo, significantly enhancing the visual quality of generated videos without compromising generalization capabilities. Code and models
can be accessed through our project page https://
instructvideo.github.io/.

1. Introduction
The emergence of diffusion models [32, 68, 70, 98] has significantly boosted generation quality across a wide range of
media content [34, 40, 62, 76]. This generation paradigm
has shown promise for video generation [5, 33, 34, 76, 79],
despite the challenges of working with high-dimensional
* Work conducted during his research internships at DAMO Academy.
† Corresponding author.

Frozen

Original
Generation
Caption

InstructVideo
Generation
Fine-tuning
Caption

Noised
Video

❆

Froz

Caption

Trainable

Pre-trained
UNet
LoRA
Gradient

❆

❆

❆

❆

❆
❆

Pre-tr
UNe

❆
❆

LoR

Image
Reward
Model

Gradi

Figure 1. Overview of the InstructVideo framework. Our
method performs efficient fine-tuning on sampled video-text pairs,
instructed by human preferences in image reward models.
Reward

Model
data. While diffusion models are one factor driving
progress, the scaling of training datasets has also played
a key role [66, 81]. However, despite recent progress, the
visual quality of generated videos still leaves room for improvement [76, 85]. A significant contributing factor to this
issue is the varying quality of web-scale data employed during pre-training [3, 65], which can yield models capable of
generating content that is visually unappealing, toxic and
misaligned with the prompt.
While aligning model outputs with human preferences
has proven highly effective for control [13], text generation [2, 43, 55, 56, 73] and image generation [42, 87, 92],
it remains a notion unexplored in video diffusion models.
The most widely-adopted methods for aligning models with
human preferences include off-line reinforcement learning
(RL) [4, 44, 56] and direct reward back-propagation [16,
58]. Typically, this entails training a reward model on manually annotated datasets that is then subsequently used to
fine-tune the pre-trained generative model.
Two major challenges arise when seeking to align video
generation models with human preferences: 1) The optimization process for optimizing human preferences is computationally demanding, often requiring video generation
from textual inputs. While video generation pre-training us-

6463

