This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ICON: Incremental CONfidence for Joint Pose and Radiance Field Optimization
Weiyao Wang, Pierre Gleize,* Hao Tang,* Xingyu Chen, Kevin J Liang, Matt Feiszli
FAIR, Meta
{weiyaowang,gleize,haotang,xingyuchen,kevinjliang,mdf}@meta.com

weiyaowang.github.io/icon/

Abstract
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) exhibit remarkable performance for Novel View Synthesis (NVS) given a set of 2D
images. However, NeRF training requires accurate camera
pose for each input view, typically obtained by Structurefrom-Motion (SfM) pipelines. Recent works have attempted
to relax this constraint, but they still often rely on decent initial poses which they can refine. Here we aim at removing
the requirement for pose initialization. We present Incremental CONfidence (ICON), an optimization procedure for
training NeRFs from 2D video frames. ICON only assumes
smooth camera motion to estimate initial guess for poses.
Further, ICON introduces “confidence”: an adaptive measure of model quality used to dynamically reweight gradients. ICON relies on high-confidence poses to learn NeRF,
and high-confidence 3D structure (as encoded by NeRF) to
learn poses. We show that ICON, without prior pose initialization, achieves superior performance in both CO3D and
HO3D versus methods which use SfM pose.

1. Introduction
Robustly lifting objects into 3D from 2D videos is a challenging problem with wide-ranging applications. For example, advances in virtual, mixed, and augmented reality [28]
are unlocking new interactions with virtual 3D objects; 3D
object understanding is important for robotics as well (e.g.
manipulation [18, 42, 64] and learning-by-doing [7, 65]).
Bringing objects to 3D requires both extracting 3D structure and tracking 6DoF pose, but existing approaches have
limitations. Many [1, 63, 66] rely on depth, which is a
powerful signal for 3D reasoning. However, accurate depth
typically requires additional sensors (e.g. stereo, LiDAR),
which add cost, weight, and power consumption to a device, and is thus often not widely available. Without this
depth signal, these methods often fail. Solving only half the
problem is also common: 3D object reconstruction methods often assume pose [34, 36, 39, 43, 53, 61, 71], and
* Equal contribution.

(a) BARF pose predictions

(b) ICON pose predictions

(c) BARF novel-view synthesis

(d) ICON novel-view synthesis

Figure 1. Novel view and pose visualizations of ICON and
BARF when no initial pose is available. We train on a flyaround
video of a book from CO3D [43]. BARF [23] trajectories exhibit
fragmentation: camera poses split into two forward-facing clusters
and create two books. ICON provides high-quality view synthesis
and precisely recovers poses. The colored triangle meshes represent ICON predicted poses, and grey ones represent groundtruth.

object pose estimation methods often assume a 3D model
(e.g. CAD) [21, 41, 68]. This chicken-and-egg problem often limits the applicability of these approaches.
Here we aim to tackle both problems jointly, learning
both an implicit 3D representation and per-frame camera
poses from a single monocular RGB video. We supervise
both 6DoF poses and reconstruction with a dense photometric loss, projecting the 3D representation onto the 2D
input frames. Specifically, we represent objects/scenes as a
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) [34] to obtain 2D rendering.
While recent works [17, 23, 24, 57, 62, 72] have shown
that poses can to some extent be (jointly) learned in this setting, they are most effective when used to refine initial poses
with moderate noise. For example, [62] shows they begin
to fail when pose noise exceeds approximately 20 degrees
of rotation error; more complex trajectories are unrecoverable. Indeed, these methods also fail on even moderately-

5406

