This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Decentralized Directed Collaboration for Personalized Federated Learning
Yingqi Liu1 Yifan Shi2 Qinglun Li 3 Baoyuan Wu4 Xueqian Wang2 Li Shen5 *
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China; 2 Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China;
3
National University of Defense Technology, Changsha, China;
4
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, China; 5 JD Explore Academy; Beijing, China.
lyq@njust.edu.cn; shiyf21@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; liqinglun@nudt.edu.cn;
wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn; wang.xq@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn; mathshenli@gmail.com.

Recently, Personalized Federated Learning (PFL) has
emerged to find the best model for each client since one
consensus model can not satisfy all clients’ needs in classi* Corresponding Author.

)
(

)

1. Introduction

(

(

Personalized Federated Learning (PFL) is proposed to
find the greatest personalized models for each client. To
avoid the central failure and communication bottleneck in
the server-based FL, we concentrate on the Decentralized
Personalized Federated Learning (DPFL) that performs
distributed model training in a Peer-to-Peer (P2P) manner. Most personalized works in DPFL are based on undirected and symmetric topologies, however, the data, computation and communication resources heterogeneity result
in large variances in the personalized models, which lead
the undirected aggregation to suboptimal personalized performance and unguaranteed convergence. To address these
issues, we propose a directed collaboration DPFL framework by incorporating stochastic gradient push and partial
model personalized, called Decentralized Federated Partial
Gradient Push (DFedPGP). It personalizes the linear classifier in the modern deep model to customize the local solution and learns a consensus representation in a fully decentralized manner. Clients only share gradients with a
subset of neighbors based on the directed and asymmetric
topologies, which guarantees flexible choices for resource
efficiency and better convergence. Theoretically, we show
that the proposed DFedPGP achieves a superior convergence rate of O( √1T ) in the general non-convex setting,
and prove the tighter connectivity among clients will speed
up the convergence. The proposed method achieves stateof-the-art (SOTA) accuracy in both data and computation
heterogeneity scenarios, demonstrating the efficiency of the
directed collaboration and partial gradient push.

Client 2

Client 1

Abstract

)

Client 3
Shared
Parameters

Client 4
Private
Parameters

Directed
Transmission

Figure 1. An overview of the DFedPGP with a directed graph.
We take Client 1 as an example. It pushes the shared paramet+1/2
and bias information ptj,1 , µt1 to its out-neighbors
ters ptj,1 , u1
t+1/2
and bias in(Client 2, 3); pulls the shared parameters pt1,j , uj
t
t
formation p1,j , µj from its in-neighbors (Client 3, 4).

cal Federated Learning (FL) [69]. The existing PFL algorithm can be categorized into two branches in terms of the
existence of the centralized server (i.e., Centralized Personalized Federated Learning (CPFL) [1, 22, 39, 46] and Decentralized Personalized Federated Learning (DPFL) [14,
31, 55]). The challenges of centralized communication bottleneck or central failure may incur low communication efficiency or system crash in the federated processing. Thus,
we focus on the DPFL, which allows edge clients to communicate with each other in a peer-to-peer manner, aiming
to reduce the communication column of the busiest server
node and embrace peer-to-peer communication for faster
convergence. In decentralized FL, clients usually follow
an undirected and symmetric communication topology to
reach a consensus model [14, 53, 56], which means if one
client receives neighbors’ models, it sends its model back.

23168

