This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

It’s All About Your Sketch: Democratising Sketch Control in Diffusion Models
Subhadeep Koley1,2 Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Deeptanshu Sekhri1 Aneeshan Sain1
Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1 Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.
{s.koley, a.bhunia, d.sekhri, a.sain, p.chowdhury, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk
https://subhadeepkoley.github.io/StableSketching

Sketch

Edgemap

SGDM

ControlNet T2I-Adapter

ControlNet

Ours

T2I-Adapter

Sketch

Ours

ControlNet T2I-Adapter

Our Results

Ours

Sketch

ControlNet T2I-Adapter

Ours

Figure 1. Top-left: Comparison of images generated by our method with SGDM [81], ControlNet [90], and T2I-Adapter [55]. Top-right:
A set of photos generated by our method. Bottom: While existing methods [55, 90] generate realistic images from pixel-perfect edgemaps,
they perform sub-optimally for freehand abstract sketches. (Best view when zoomed in.)

Abstract
This paper unravels the potential of sketches for diffusion models, addressing the deceptive promise of direct
sketch control in generative AI. We importantly democratise the process, enabling amateur sketches to generate
precise images, living up to the commitment of “what
you sketch is what you get”. A pilot study underscores
the necessity, revealing that deformities in existing models stem from spatial-conditioning. To rectify this, we propose an abstraction-aware framework, utilising a sketch
adapter, adaptive time-step sampling, and discriminative
guidance from a pre-trained fine-grained sketch-based image retrieval model, working synergistically to reinforce
fine-grained sketch-photo association. Our approach operates seamlessly during inference without the need for textual prompts; a simple, rough sketch akin to what you and
I can create suffices! We welcome everyone to examine results presented in the paper and its supplementary. Contributions include democratising sketch control, introducing
an abstraction-aware framework, and leveraging discriminative guidance, validated through extensive experiments.

1. Introduction
This paper is dedicated to unlocking the full potential of
your sketches to control diffusion models [24, 25, 61]. Diffusion models [16, 24, 25, 61] have made a significant impact, empowering individuals to unleash their visual creativity – consider prompts like “astronauts riding a horse
on Mars” and other “creative” ones of your own! While
prevailing in text-to-image generation [16, 61, 64], recent
works [55, 81, 90] have started to question the expressive power of text as a conditioning modality. This shift
has led to an exploration of sketches – a modality that offers a degree of fine-grained control that is unparalleled by
text [13, 70], resulting in generated content of closer resemblance. The promise is “what you sketch is what you get”.
This promise is, however, deceptive. Current works (e.g.,
ControlNet [90], T2I-Adapter [55]) predominantly focus on
curated edgemap-like sketches – you better sketch like a
trained artist, otherwise “what you get” will literally be reflecting deformities captured in your (“half-decent”) sketch
(Fig. 1). The primary goal of this paper is to democratise
sketch control in diffusion models, empowering real am-

7204

