This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GraphDreamer: Compositional 3D Scene Synthesis from Scene Graphs
Gege Gao1,2,3,4 Weiyang Liu1,5,* Anpei Chen2,3,4 Andreas Geiger3,4,† Bernhard Schölkopf1,2,4,†
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems – Tübingen 2 ETH Zürich 3 University of Tübingen
4
Tübingen AI Center 5 University of Cambridge * Directional lead † Shared last author
graphdreamer.github.io

User Text Input

Weathered

Standing in front of
Wise-looking

Stack of Spell Books

Wizard

Next to

Robed
Gazing into

Bearded

Ball

Mystical

User can also directly input / edit the scene graph

Glowing

Wizard

Sitting on

Placed on
Rune-etched

Scene

Object

Desk

Leather-bound
Ancient

Attributes:
- Wizard: bearded, robed, wise-looking
- Crystal Ball: small, glowing, transparent, mystical
- Stack of Ancient Spell Books: leather-bound, weathered, rune-etched
- Wooden Desk: sturdy, carved, aged

Attribute

Carved

Sturdy

Relationship

ChatGPT

Edges (Relationships):
- Wizard -> standing in front of -> Wooden Desk
- Crystal Ball -> placed on -> Wooden Desk
- Wizard -> gazing into -> Crystal Ball
- Stack of Ancient Spell Books -> sitting on -> Wooden Desk
- Stack of Ancient Spell Books -> next to -> Crystal Ball

Aged

Desk

Nodes (Objects):
- Wizard
- Wooden Desk
- Crystal Ball
- Stack of Ancient Spell Books

Wooden

Ball

User

“A Wizard standing in front of a Wooden Desk, gazing into a Crystal
Ball placed on the Wooden Desk, with a Stack of Ancient Spell Books
sitting on the Wooden Desk and next to the crystal ball.”

Small

Crystal

Scene Graph

Transparent

Books

Please follow the examples in the Visual Genome dataset and generate a
scene graph that best describes the following text:

Optimization via score distillation sampling

Compositional 3D Scene

Figure 1. GraphDreamer takes a scene graph as input and generates a compositional 3D scene where each object is fully disentangled. To save the effort of
building a scene graph from scratch, the scene graph can be generated by a language model (e.g., ChatGPT) from a user text input (left box).

Abstract
As pretrained text-to-image diffusion models become increasingly powerful, recent efforts have been made to distill
knowledge from these text-to-image pretrained models for
optimizing a text-guided 3D model. Most of the existing
methods generate a holistic 3D model from a plain text
input. This can be problematic when the text describes a
complex scene with multiple objects, because the vectorized
text embeddings are inherently unable to capture a complex
description with multiple entities and relationships. Holistic
3D modeling of the entire scene further prevents accurate
grounding of text entities and concepts. To address this limitation, we propose GraphDreamer, a novel framework to
generate compositional 3D scenes from scene graphs, where
objects are represented as nodes and their interactions as
edges. By exploiting node and edge information in scene
graphs, our method makes better use of the pretrained textto-image diffusion model and is able to fully disentangle
different objects without image-level supervision. To facilitate modeling of object-wise relationships, we use signed
distance fields as representation and impose a constraint to
avoid inter-penetration of objects. To avoid manual scene
graph creation, we design a text prompt for ChatGPT to
generate scene graphs based on text inputs. We conduct

both qualitative and quantitative experiments to validate the
effectiveness of GraphDreamer in generating high-fidelity
compositional 3D scenes with disentangled object entities.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed substantial progresses in text-to3D generation [20, 28, 38], largely due to the rapid development made in text-to-image models [31, 32] and text-image
embeddings [30]. This emerging field has attracted considerable attention due to its significant potential to revolutionize
the way artists and designers work.
The central idea of current text-to-3D pipelines is to leverage knowledge of a large pretrained text-to-image generative
model to optimize each randomly sampled 2D view of a
3D object such that these views resemble what the input
text describes. The 3D consistency of these 2D views is
typically guaranteed by a proper 3D representation (e.g.,
neural radiance fields (NeRF) [22] in DreamFusion [28]).
Despite being popular, current text-to-3D pipelines still suffer from attribute confusion and guidance collapse. Attribute
confusion is a fundamental problem caused by text-image
embeddings (e.g., CLIP [30]). For example, models often
fail at distinguishing the difference between “a black cat
on a pink carpet” and “a pink cat on a black carpet”. This

21295

