This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G ROUNDHOG

: Grounding Large Language Models to Holistic Segmentation

Yichi Zhang1†, Ziqiao Ma1†, Xiaofeng Gao2 , Suhaila Shakiah2 , Qiaozi Gao2 , Joyce Chai1
1
University of Michigan, 2 Amazon AGI
zhangyic@umich.edu
https://groundhog-mllm.github.io/

👤

👤

Describe the image briefly.

A man and a little girl are
sitting in a shopping cart.

👤

Describe the given
picture in very detail.

In this image, we can see a
boat on the water. There
are few people inside the
boat. There are also few
people on the rocks. In the
background, there are
trees, hills, and sky.

Generate a short caption.

Two dogs are playing with
a stick in a field.
(a) Grounded Image Captioning (GIC).

<PTR>

👤

Could you please segment out "laptop
barely onscreen not apple" in the image?

Laptop barely onscreen not apple.
(b) Referential Expression Segmentation (RES).

What date is shown on the

Provide a distinct description for

👤 calendar?

👤 that <PTR>.

Feb 2.

Blue container with apples.

(c) Grounded Visual Question Answering (GVQA).

(d) Referential Dialogue (RD).

Figure 1. We propose G ROUNDHOG, a multimodal large language model that enhances its text output with pixel-level phrase grounding
across diverse semantic granularities. The figure demonstrates outputs from our model on the four task types we considered in this work.

Abstract
Most multimodal large language models (MLLMs)
learn language-to-object grounding through causal language modeling where grounded objects are captured by
bounding boxes as sequences of location tokens. This
paradigm lacks pixel-level representations that are important for fine-grained visual understanding and diagnosis.
In this work, we introduce G ROUNDHOG, an MLLM developed by grounding Large Language Models to holistic
segmentation. G ROUNDHOG incorporates a masked feature extractor and converts extracted features into visual
entity tokens for the MLLM backbone, which then con-

nects groundable phrases to unified grounding masks by retrieving and merging the entity masks. To train G ROUND HOG , we carefully curated M3G2, a grounded visual instruction tuning dataset with Multi-Modal Multi-Grained
Grounding, by harvesting a collection of segmentationgrounded datasets with rich annotations. Our experimental
results show that G ROUNDHOG achieves superior performance on various language grounding tasks without taskspecific fine-tuning, and significantly reduces object hallucination. G ROUNDHOG also demonstrates better grounding towards complex forms of visual input and provides
easy-to-understand diagnosis in failure cases.

† Work done during internship at Amazon AGI.

14227

