This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Edge-Aware 3D Instance Segmentation Network with Intelligent Semantic Prior
Wonseok Roh1 Hwanhee Jung1 Giljoo Nam2 Jinseop Yeom1
Hyunje Park1 Sang Ho Yoon3 Sangpil Kim1 *
1

Korea University

2

3

Meta Reality Labs

Abstract

1. Introduction
Understanding 3D scenes is a fundamental task within 3D
computer vision. Given 3D point cloud scenes, identifying
and perceiving instances on sparse points, along with assigning semantic class labels, play a crucial role in a comprehensive understanding of the entire spatial environment.
In real-world 3D scenarios, significant occlusion and
truncation often occur, especially when objects are overlapped or hidden by others. To address these issues, conventional works [3, 7, 8, 16, 18, 40, 43, 44] in 3D instance
segmentation (3DIS) primarily focus on accurately generating region proposals (top-down) [16, 43, 44] or effectively grouping points with clustering algorithms (bottomup) [3, 7, 8, 18, 40]. Inspired by the remarkable sensation
of Mask-RCNN [14], the former (proposal-based) meth* Corresponding author.

Project Page: https://kuai-lab.github.io/ease2024.

Toilet

Desk

Cabinet

Baseline

Refrigerator

Ours

Scene2

Scene1

Ground truth

Sofa

Scene3

(a) Semantic failure cases

Scene4

While recent 3D instance segmentation approaches show
promising results based on transformer architectures, they
often fail to correctly identify instances with similar appearances. They also ambiguously determine edges, leading to
multiple misclassifications of adjacent edge points. In this
work, we introduce a novel framework, called EASE, to
overcome these challenges and improve the perception of
complex 3D instances. We first propose a semantic guidance network to leverage rich semantic knowledge from a
language model as intelligent priors, enhancing the functional understanding of real-world instances beyond relying solely on geometrical information. We explicitly instruct
the basic instance queries using text embeddings of each instance to learn deep semantic details. Further, we utilize the
edge prediction module, encouraging the segmentation network to be edge-aware. We extract voxel-wise edge maps
from point features and use them as auxiliary information
for learning edge cues. In our extensive experiments on
large-scale benchmarks, ScanNetV2, ScanNet200, S3DIS,
and STPLS3D, our EASE outperforms existing state-of-theart models, demonstrating its superior performance.

Chair

KAIST

(b) Instance misinterpretation cases

Figure 1. Examples of 3DIS for two challenging cases. (a) Semantic failure cases: the baseline [35] confuses seat-shaped objects as chair or toilet (Scene1) and also misclassifies large cuboid
blocks as desk (Scene2). And (b) Instance misinterpretation cases:
baseline erroneously segments a single object into multiple parts
(Scene3) or merges multiple objects into one instance (Scene4).

ods initially detect instances as bounding boxes and predict
masks within each proposed region. However, these strategies are susceptible to the quality of the detection results.
On the other hand, the latter (grouping-based) methods use
clustering algorithms to group closely related points and aggregate point-wise class labels and instance features. While
they show great advancements in 3DIS, these methods require additional manually tuned processing, such as point
grouping [18] or voting mechanisms [31], to determine specific geometric properties (e.g., centers, occupancy).
Recently, transformer-based 3DIS frameworks [22, 26,
35, 36] have tackled several limitations of traditional approaches by introducing a fully end-to-end pipeline. They
directly predict masks from 3D points without resource-

20644

