This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Effective Video Mirror Detection with Inconsistent Motion Cues
Alex Warren1 , Ke Xu2 , Jiaying Lin2 , Gary K.L. Tam1 , Rynson W.H. Lau1,2
Department of Computer Science, Swansea University1 and City University of Hong Kong2
alex.warren@swansea.ac.uk, kkangwing@gmail.com, jiayinlin5-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
k.l.tam@swansea.ac.uk, Rynson.Lau@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Image-based mirror detection has recently undergone
rapid research due to its significance in applications such
as robotic navigation, semantic segmentation and scene reconstruction. Recently, VMD-Net was proposed as the first
video mirror detection technique, by modeling dual correspondences between the inside and outside of the mirror both spatially and temporally. However, this approach
is not reliable, as correspondences can occur completely
inside or outside of the mirrors. In addition, the proposed dataset VMD-D contains many small mirrors, limiting its applicability to real-world scenarios. To address
these problems, we developed a more challenging dataset
that includes mirrors of various shapes and sizes at different locations of the frames, providing a better reflection of
real-world scenarios. Next, we observed that the motions
between the inside and outside of the mirror are often inconsistent. For instance, when moving in front of a mirror, the motion inside the mirror is often much smaller than
the motion outside due to increased depth perception. With
these observations, we propose modeling inconsistent motion cues to detect mirrors, and a new network with two
novel modules. The Motion Attention Module (MAM) explicitly models inconsistent motions around mirrors via optical flow, and the Motion-Guided Edge Detection Module
(MEDM) uses motions to guide mirror edge feature learning. Experimental results on our proposed dataset show
that our method outperforms state-of-the-arts. The code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
AlexAnthonyWarren/MG-VMD.

1. Introduction
Mirrors and reflective surfaces are abundant in our surroundings. Successful detection of mirrors underpins many
vision applications such as autonomous drone navigation
and vehicle vision systems [16]. When a scene contains mirrored regions, mirror identification is critical to
reducing errors in applications such as salient object de-

Figure 1. We propose to model motion inconsistency as a cue for
mirror detection. The 1st column shows the inconsistent motions
(depicted with arrows). The locations of these cues align well with
the mirror regions. The 2nd column shows the optical flow computed between frame N (3rd column), and frame N-1 from respective videos in our new dataset. Our method (5th column) predicts
more reliable and consistent mirror regions, outperforming VMDNet [12] (4th column). The 6th column is the ground truth.

tection [25, 26], semantic segmentation [16, 21], scene
reconstruction[3, 4] and NeRF modeling [6, 31].
Mirror detection involves binary classification of individual pixels in RGB images to determine if they are inside
or outside of the mirror. It is a challenging research as mirrors typically do not have their own visual appearance. They
instead reflect objects within their surroundings. This visual
attribute makes mirrors difficult to detect.
There are a few image-based and one video-based mirror detection methods in the literature. Yang et al. [30] first
introduced a mirror detection method using contrast and semantics. Lin et al. [11] introduced a PMD-Net that utilizes
edge detection and leverages contextual contrasting objects
inside and outside of mirrored regions to detect mirrored regions. Tan et al. [22] detect mirrors using Visual Chirality
Cue [13] that encodes mirror-like symmetrical properties
at the pixel level. Mei et al. [15] factor depth estimation
into their mirror detection process and show good results

17244

