This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Explaining CLIP’s performance disparities on data from blind/low vision users
Daniela Massiceti†

Camilla Longden†
Martin Grayson†
†

Agnieszka Słowik†
Cecily Morrison†
⋄

Microsoft Research

The World Bank

Abstract

1. Introduction
AI-based applications hold the potential to help people
who are blind and low vision (BLV) with everyday visual
tasks [3, 5]. However, the popularity of video-calling services like Be My Eyes [1] suggest that human assistance
is still often required due to the wide set of assistance
tasks [44] and varying quality of BLV images [8, 17]. Recent advances in large multi-modal models (LMMs) [19,
49, 52] could potentially address these challenges, enabling
a new era of automated visual assistance as highlighted by
the early partnership between Open AI and Be My Eyes [2].
Despite the opportunity, little work has evaluated how
well LMMs perform on data from BLV users. Performance
disparities have been identified for other user groups [6, 36,

70

Web-crawled Avg: 66.5%

60

Accuracy (%)

Large multi-modal models (LMMs) hold the potential to
usher in a new era of automated visual assistance for people who are blind or low vision (BLV). Yet, these models
have not been systematically evaluated on data captured by
BLV users. We address this by empirically assessing CLIP,
a widely-used LMM likely to underpin many assistive technologies. Testing 25 CLIP variants in a zero-shot classification task, we find that their accuracy is 15 percentage points
lower on average for images captured by BLV users than
web-crawled images. This disparity stems from CLIP’s sensitivities to 1) image content (e.g. not recognizing disability
objects as well as other objects); 2) image quality (e.g. not
being robust to lighting variation); and 3) text content (e.g.
not recognizing objects described by tactile adjectives as
well as visual ones). We delve deeper with a textual analysis of three common pre-training datasets: LAION-400M,
LAION-2B and DataComp-1B, showing that disability content is rarely mentioned. We then provide three examples
that illustrate how the performance disparities extend to
three downstream models underpinned by CLIP: OWL-ViT,
CLIPSeg and DALL-E2. We find that few-shot learning with
as few as 5 images can mitigate CLIP’s quality-of-service
disparities for BLV users in some scenarios, which we discuss alongside a set of other possible mitigations.

Samuel Wills⋄

BLV Avg: 51.5%

50
40
30
20
10
0

MSCOCO

Open Images

ORBIT

VizWiz-Cls

Figure 1. CLIP’s zero-shot object recognition accuracy
is 15 percentage points lower in images from BLV users
(ORBIT, VizWiz-Classification) versus web-crawled images
(MSCOCO, Open Images). Average accuracy (with 95% c.i.) in
a standardized zero-shot image classification task is reported over
80-100K images per dataset for 25 CLIP variants.

45, 52, 55, 66] but the evidence for BLV users is either anecdotal [49] or not specific to large multi-modal models [8].
Since BLV users are likely to be one of the biggest beneficiaries of LMMs, often in productivity- and safety-critical
situations, it is important to extend studies to this group.
To address this, we systematically evaluate CLIP, a
widely used LMM with 8700+ citations and 24M+ downloads1 , on data from BLV users. CLIP’s rich embeddings
and strong zero-shot capabilities have led to it underpinning a wide range of downstream tasks including image
classification [52], object detection [41, 42], semantic segmentation [37], image captioning [61, 63] and video recognition [35]. It has also been used to create large-scale
datasets [23, 34, 57, 58] and evaluation metrics [26, 50].
As CLIP’s pre-trained parameters are often used directly,
poor performance can have wide-ranging implications for
downstream assistive applications that use them.
We investigate CLIP’s performance on BLV data along
three dimensions: image content, image quality, and textual
1 Statistics taken from Google Scholar and OpenAI’s Hugging Face
Hub (for CLIP ViT-L/14, ViT-B/32 and ViT-B/16) on 23 October 2023.

12172

