This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MTMMC: A Large-Scale Real-World Multi-Modal Camera Tracking Benchmark
Sanghyun Woo1∗

Kwanyong Park2∗
1

Inkyu Shin3∗

New York University

2

ETRI

Myungchul Kim3∗
3

In So Kweon3

KAIST

https://sites.google.com/view/mtmmc

Figure 1. The 3D layout overview. (a) campus and (b) factory. We installed 16 multi-modal cameras in both indoor and outdoor settings, across multiple
floors, with overlapping coverage. The cameras were fixed in position and angle to densely cover the building, creating a realistic surveillance camera system.

Abstract
Multi-target multi-camera tracking is a crucial task that
involves identifying and tracking individuals over time using
video streams from multiple cameras. This task has practical
applications in various fields, such as visual surveillance,
crowd behavior analysis, and anomaly detection. However,
due to the difficulty and cost of collecting and labeling data,
existing datasets for this task are either synthetically generated or artificially constructed within a controlled camera
network setting, which limits their ability to model real-world
dynamics and generalize to diverse camera configurations.
To address this issue, we present MTMMC, a real-world,
* Equal contribution

large-scale dataset that includes long video sequences captured by 16 multi-modal cameras in two different environments - campus and factory - across various time, weather,
and season conditions. This dataset provides a challenging
test-bed for studying multi-camera tracking under diverse
real-world complexities and includes an additional input
modality of spatially aligned and temporally synchronized
RGB and thermal cameras, which enhances the accuracy
of multi-camera tracking. MTMMC is a super-set of existing datasets, benefiting independent fields such as person
detection, re-identification, and multiple object tracking. We
provide baselines and new learning setups on this dataset
and set the reference scores for future studies. The datasets,
models, and test server will be made publicly available.

22335

