This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Synergistic Global-space Camera and Human Reconstruction from Videos
Yizhou Zhao1 ,* Tuanfeng Yang Wang2 , Bhiksha Raj1 , Min Xu1 , Jimei Yang2 , Chun-Hao Paul Huang2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Adobe Research
{yizhouz,bhiksha,mxu1}@cs.cmu.edu, {yangtwan,jimyang,chunhaoh}@adobe.com

Input Video

Camera Trajectory & Human Meshes & Scene Point Cloud in One Global Coordinate
Figure 1. Our SynCHMR recovers metric-scale camera trajectories (color pyramids), human meshes, and scene point clouds in a global
coordinate from casual videos by joining forces of Human Mesh Recovery (HMR) and Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM).

Abstract
Remarkable strides have been made in reconstructing
static scenes or human bodies from monocular videos. Yet,
the two problems have largely been approached independently, without much synergy. Most visual SLAM methods
can only reconstruct camera trajectories and scene structures up to scale, while most HMR methods reconstruct human meshes in metric scale but fall short in reasoning with
cameras and scenes. This work introduces Synergistic Camera and Human Reconstruction (SynCHMR) to marry the
best of both worlds. Specifically, we design Human-aware
Metric SLAM to reconstruct metric-scale camera poses and
scene point clouds using camera-frame HMR as a strong
prior, addressing depth, scale, and dynamic ambiguities.
Conditioning on the dense scene recovered, we further learn
a Scene-aware SMPL Denoiser to enhance world-frame
HMR by incorporating spatio-temporal coherency and dynamic scene constraints. Together, they lead to consistent
reconstructions of camera trajectories, human meshes, and
dense scene point clouds in a common world frame.
* Part of this work was done when interned at Adobe Research.

1. Introduction
Physically plausible 3D human motion reconstruction from
monocular videos is a long-standing problem in computer
vision and graphics and has many applications in character animation, VFX, video games, sports, and healthcare.
It requires estimating 3D humans across video frames in a
common coordinate even with a moving camera. While human mesh recovery (HMR) has made significant progress
recently [55], most existing methods typically estimate 3D
humans in the camera coordinate by one frame at a time and
fail to disambiguate camera motion. It calls for methods to
jointly reconstruct 3D human and camera motion in a consistent global coordinate system from monocular videos. In
other words, taking a video captured by a moving camera as
input, the method should recover both temporally and spatially coherent movements of human bodies and cameras.
Intuitively, if the accurate camera motion is given, one
can transform the bodies from individual camera frames to
a common world frame by multiplying the inverse of camera extrinsic matrices. In practice, with humans moving
in the scene, estimating the camera motion of a video is
still an open challenge in monocular SLAM [1]. It not only

1216

