This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Binding Touch to Everything:
Learning Unified Multimodal Tactile Representations
Fengyu Yang1* Chao Feng2* Ziyang Chen2* Hyoungseob Park1 Daniel Wang1 Yiming Dou2
Ziyao Zeng1 Xien Chen1 Rit Gangopadhyay1 Andrew Owens2 Alex Wong1
1

Touch

Text prompts:

[ CLASS ]
denim

···

This
feels
like

cotton

···
nylon

Reference

cosine

similarity

University of Michigan
Zero-shot Image Synthesis with Touch

Cross-modal Retrieval

Zero-shot Touch Understanding
Input touch

2

Yale University

Image

Audio

Touching
guitar string

Text

Guitar

Touching
rock

Touch-LLM
Can you tell me materials and hardness
of objects in the touch image?
Reference

Classes

Restyled Image

Generated Image
Reference

Input touch

Original Image

X-to-Touch Generation
Input
image

The materials of the objects in the
touch image are likely to be rocks, or
stones, which is a hard and durable.

Score

Input touch

Input touch

”It is
touching
the string
of a guitar.”

Generated
touch

Input
text

Generated
touch

”The surface
of densely
woven or
looped
carpet.”

Figure 1. Putting touch “in touch” with other modalities. We show that a variety of tactile sensing tasks, ranging from tactile image
understanding to image synthesis with touch, can be solved zero-shot by aligning touch to pretrained multimodal models, extending previous
approaches on work on other modalities [41]. Our learned model can be applied to various vision-based tactile sensors and simulators (e.g.,
GelSight, DIGIT, Taxim, and Tacto). For visualization purposes, we show the corresponding visual signal (labeled “reference”) for each
touch signal, even though it is not used by the model.

Abstract
Touch provides crucial information about the physical
properties of the objects around us. Creating models that
capture cross-modal associations between touch and other
modalities, however, remains a challenging problem, due to
wide variety of touch sensors and the intensive effort required
to collect tactile data. We propose UniTouch, a unified model
for vision-based touch sensors that connects their tactile signals to other modalities, including vision, language, and
sound. We achieve this by aligning our tactile embeddings to
pretrained image embeddings already associated with a variety of other modalities. We further propose learnable sensorspecific tokens, allowing the model to learn from a set of heterogeneous tactile sensors, all at the same time. UniTouch is
capable of conducting various touch sensing tasks in a zeroshot setting, from robot grasping prediction to touch-based
question answering. To the best of our knowledge, UniTouch
is the first model to demonstrate these capabilities. Project
* Indicates equal contribution.

Page: https://cfeng16.github.io/UniTouch/.

1. Introduction
Amongst our five main senses, touch sensing is perhaps the
most crucial to human survival, due to its role in perceiving
physical contact — rivaling even vision in its overall importance [53, 83, 91]. Our ability to form cross-modal associations between touch and our other senses [106] thus underlies
a great deal of our physical capabilities. For example, we
predict from vision how a surface will feel before we touch it,
and we predict from touch how an object will sound before
we strike it. These cross-modal associations are also a key
component of computational systems, such as for robotic manipulation [8, 73, 85, 89, 90, 95, 99, 103, 123, 131, 133], material and geometry estimation [10, 44, 110, 128, 136], assistive technology [49], and texture recognition [57, 88, 135].
Despite their importance, cross-modal associations be-

26340

