This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TextCraftor: Your Text Encoder Can be Image Quality Controller
Yanyu Li1,2 Xian Liu1 Anil Kag1 Ju Hu1 Yerlan Idelbayev1
Dhritiman Sagar1 Yanzhi Wang2 Sergey Tulyakov1 Jian Ren1
1
Snap Inc. 2 Northeastern University

a plate with white rice topped by cooked vegetables

a thumbnail image of a gingerbread man

a bowl with a cartoon dinosaur on it

a girl with long curly blonde hair and sunglasses world's best brother t-shirt

a frustrated child

a cartoon of a house on a mountain

an owl standing on a telephone wire

a cartoon of a boy playing with a tiger

Figure 1. Example generated images. For each prompt, we show images generated from three different models, which are SDv1.5,
TextCraftor, TextCraftor + UNet, listed from left to right. The random seed is fixed for all generation results.

Abstract
Diffusion-based text-to-image generative models, e.g.,
Stable Diffusion, have revolutionized the field of content
generation, enabling significant advancements in areas like
image editing and video synthesis. Despite their formidable
capabilities, these models are not without their limitations.
It is still challenging to synthesize an image that aligns well
with the input text, and multiple runs with carefully crafted
prompts are required to achieve satisfactory results. To mitigate these limitations, numerous studies have endeavored
to fine-tune the pre-trained diffusion models, i.e., UNet, utilizing various technologies. Yet, amidst these efforts, a pivotal question of text-to-image diffusion model training has
remained largely unexplored: Is it possible and feasible to fine-tune the text encoder to improve the performance of text-to-image diffusion models?
Our findings reveal that, instead of replacing the CLIP text encoder
used in Stable Diffusion with other large language models, we can enhance it through our proposed fine-tuning approach, TextCraftor, leading to substantial improvements in
quantitative benchmarks and human assessments. Interestingly, our technique also empowers controllable image generation through the interpolation of different text encoders

fine-tuned with various rewards. We also demonstrate that
TextCraftor is orthogonal to UNet finetuning, and can be
combined to further improve generative quality.

1. Introduction
Recent breakthroughs in text-to-image diffusion models
have brought about a revolution in content generation [10,
17, 27, 40, 51]. Among these models, the open-sourced
Stable Diffusion (SD) has emerged as the de facto choice
for a wide range of applications, including image editing,
super-resolution, and video synthesis [4, 18, 25, 29, 31, 42,
44, 47, 59]. Though trained on large-scale datasets, SD still
holds two major challenges. First, it often produces images
that do not align well with the provided prompts [5, 57].
Second, generating visually pleasing images frequently requires multiple runs with different random seeds and manual prompt engineering [13, 53]. To address the first challenge, prior studies explore the substitution of the CLIP text
encoder [36] used in SD with other large language models
like T5 [7, 43]. Nevertheless, the large T5 model has an
order of magnitude more parameters than CLIP, resulting
in additional storage and computation overhead. In tack-

7985

