This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Scaling Diffusion Models to Real-World 3D LiDAR Scene Completion
Lucas Nunes1
Rodrigo Marcuzzi1
Benedikt Mersch1
1
Jens Behley
Cyrill Stachniss1,2
1

Center for Robotics, University of Bonn

2

Lamarr Institute for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence

{firstname.lastname}@igg.uni-bonn.de

...

...

Figure 1. Starting from a single input scan P, we add Gaussian noise to each point, defining the noisy input P T . Then, we use our trained
noise predictor ϵθ to denoise P T iteratively until arriving at P 0 , yielding a completed representation of the 3D scene.

Abstract
Computer vision techniques play a central role in the
perception stack of autonomous vehicles. Such methods are
employed to perceive the vehicle surroundings given sensor data. 3D LiDAR sensors are commonly used to collect sparse 3D point clouds from the scene. However, compared to human perception, such systems struggle to deduce the unseen parts of the scene given those sparse point
clouds. In this matter, the scene completion task aims at
predicting the gaps in the LiDAR measurements to achieve
a more complete scene representation. Given the promising
results of recent diffusion models as generative models for
images, we propose extending them to achieve scene completion from a single 3D LiDAR scan. Previous works used
diffusion models over range images extracted from LiDAR
data, directly applying image-based diffusion methods. Distinctly, we propose to directly operate on the points, reformulating the noising and denoising diffusion process such
that it can efficiently work at scene scale. Together with
our approach, we propose a regularization loss to stabilize
the noise predicted during the denoising process. Our experimental evaluation shows that our method can complete
the scene given a single LiDAR scan as input, producing a
scene with more details compared to state-of-the-art scene
completion methods. We believe that our proposed diffusion
process formulation can support further research in diffusion models applied to scene-scale point cloud data. 1
1 Code: https://github.com/PRBonn/LiDiff

1. Introduction
Perception systems are a crucial component of self-driving
cars, enabling them to understand their surroundings and
safely navigate through it. Such systems rely on the data
collected by the sensors installed on the vehicle to perceive
the environment but fail to deduce areas only partially observable by the sensor. For a human it is comparably rather
simple to infer the complete scene from the scene context.
Especially in autonomous driving, LiDAR sensors are employed to collect 3D information of the vehicle surroundings to enable safe navigation. Despite the accuracy of those
sensors, collected point clouds are sparse, with large gaps
between the data points measured by the sensor beams. Being able to complete the measured scene can add valuable
information to perception systems, helping to improve different tasks such as object detection [42], localization [40]
or navigation [29].
Scene completion tries to infer the missing parts of a
scene, providing a dense and more complete scene representation. Given the LiDAR data sparsity, having a way
to fill the gaps of non-observed regions is helpful to enlarge the incomplete data measured by the sensor. Previously, this task was tackled using paired RGB images
and LiDAR point clouds by inferring depth maps from
an RGB image supervised by the LiDAR depth measurements [8, 21, 22, 44]. Other approaches [15, 25, 40] employ
signed distance fields (SDF) where the scene is represented
as a voxel grid where each voxel stores its distance to the
closest surface in the point cloud. Such methods approx-

14770

