This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Taming the Tail in Class-Conditional GANs: Knowledge Sharing via
Unconditional Training at Lower Resolutions
Saeed Khorram1 , Mingqi Jiang1 , Mohamad Shahbazi 2 , Mohamad H. Danesh3 , Li Fuxin 1
1
Oregon State University 2 ETH Zürich 3 McGill University
{khorrams, jiangmi, lif}@oregonstate.edu
mshahbazi@vision.ee.ethz.ch, mohamad.danesh@mail.mcgill.ca
Abstract

All (2) Training Images in Tail Classes

Despite extensive research on training generative adversarial networks (GANs) with limited training data, learning to generate images from long-tailed training distributions remains fairly unexplored. In the presence of imbalanced multi-class training data, GANs tend to favor
classes with more samples, leading to the generation of
low quality and less diverse samples in tail classes. In this
study, we aim to improve the training of class-conditional
GANs with long-tailed data. We propose a straightforward
yet effective method for knowledge sharing, allowing tail
classes to borrow from the rich information from classes
with more abundant training data. More concretely, we
propose modifications to existing class-conditional GAN architectures to ensure that the lower-resolution layers of the
generator are trained entirely unconditionally while reserving class-conditional generation for the higher-resolution
layers. Experiments on several long-tail benchmarks and
GAN architectures demonstrate a significant improvement
over existing methods in both the diversity and fidelity of
the generated images. The code is available at https:
//github.com/khorrams/utlo.

Baseline (FID: 9.8)

Baseline + Ours (FID: 6.6)

1. Introduction
In the past few years, research on Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [7] has led to remarkable advances in
generating realistic images [2, 17, 41]. Conditional GANs
[29] (cGANs) have garnered particular attention due to their
ability to accept user inputs which can additionally guide
the generation process. They enable a wide range of applications such as class-conditional image generation [42],
image manipulation [43], image-to-image translation [12],
super-resolution [22] and text-to-image synthesis [52].
Despite the advances, past research on cGANs has focused primarily on learning from balanced data. In realworld scenarios, however, data often follows a power-law
distribution, with a few classes dominating most of the

Figure 1. Generating images from rare tail classes in the FlowersLT with only two training images. Our proposed approach allows
for a more diverse set of features such as backgrounds, colors,
poses, and object layouts to be infused into the tail classes.

training data. This is referred to as the “long-tail (LT) problem” [55], where most of the training data come from a few
classes (referred to as the “head” of the distribution). In
contrast, data from a large number of classes rarely occur
(referred to as the “tail” of the distribution). This imbalance in data poses a challenge to the effective learning of
tail classes, as standard machine learning algorithms tend

7580

