This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SIGNeRF: Scene Integrated Generation for Neural Radiance Fields
Jan-Niklas Dihlmann

Andreas Engelhardt
University of Tübingen

Hendrik Lensch

{jan-niklas.dihlmann, andreas.engelhardt, hendrik.lensch}@uni-tuebingen.de

+
Reference Sheet

“A grizzly bear”
Object Editing

Shape Selection

+
Reference Sheet “A brown bunny”
Original NeRF

Proxy Selection

Object Generation

Figure 1. SIGNeRF – A method that enables NeRF scene editing by either shape selection for object modification or by proxy object
placement to insert a synthesized object. The transformed scene is represented by a NeRF trained on a set of edited input images, which are efficiently generated by a diffusion process using a multiview consistent reference sheet. Project page available at https://signerf.jdihlmann.com/

Abstract
Advances in image diffusion models have recently led to
notable improvements in the generation of high-quality images. In combination with Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs),
they enabled new opportunities in 3D generation. However,
most generative 3D approaches are object-centric and applying them to editing existing photorealistic scenes is not
trivial. We propose SIGNeRF, a novel approach for fast and
controllable NeRF scene editing and scene-integrated object generation. A new generative update strategy ensures
3D consistency across the edited images, without requiring
iterative optimization. We find that depth-conditioned diffusion models inherently possess the capability to generate
3D consistent views by requesting a grid of images instead
of single views. Based on these insights, we introduce a
multi-view reference sheet of modified images. Our method
updates an image collection consistently based on the reference sheet and refines the original NeRF with the newly
generated image set in one go. By exploiting the depth conditioning mechanism of the image diffusion model, we gain
fine control over the spatial location of the edit and enforce
shape guidance by a selected region or an external mesh.

1. Introduction
In this work, we focus on scene-integrated generation for
editing existing 3D scenes using generative 2D diffusion
models (Fig. 1). We propose an approach to create or modify
objects within existing NeRF [27] scenes while preserving the original scenes’ structure and appearance. Previous
methods such as Instruct-NeRF2NeRF [11] and DreamEditor [57] already demonstrated scene modification with text
instructions. However, their pipelines are complex, involve
additional training and lack fine-grained control.
We observe that ControlNet [55], an image diffusion
model with additional depth guidance is inherently capable of generating coherent and consistent views of an object
when applied to image tiles in a grid layout. Using this combined image generation, we construct a reference sheet of
edits that can subsequently be applied to the original NeRF
scene by updating the underlying image dataset. The generation process of the reference sheet is conditioned on the
existing NeRF scene and a text prompt that can be tuned

6679

