This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Addressing Background Context Bias in Few-Shot Segmentation through
Iterative Modulation
Lanyun Zhu1 * Tianrun Chen2 Jianxiong Yin3 Simon See3 Jun Liu1†
Singapore University of Technology and Design 1 Zhejiang University 2 NVIDIA AI Tech Centre 3

Abstract
Existing few-shot segmentation methods usually extract
foreground prototypes from support images to guide query
image segmentation. However, different background contexts of support and query images can cause their foreground features to be misaligned. This phenomenon, known
as background context bias, can hinder the effectiveness of
support prototypes in guiding query image segmentation.
In this work, we propose a novel framework with an iterative structure to address this problem. In each iteration of the framework, we first generate a query prediction
based on a support foreground feature. Next, we extract
background context from the query image to modulate the
support foreground feature, thus eliminating the foreground
feature misalignment caused by the different backgrounds.
After that, we design a confidence-biased attention to eliminate noise and cleanse information. By integrating these
components through an iterative structure, we create a
novel network that can leverage the synergies between different modules to improve their performance in a mutually
reinforcing manner. Through these carefully designed components and structures, our network can effectively eliminate background context bias in few-shot segmentation, thus
achieving outstanding performance. We conduct extensive
experiments on the PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i datasets
and achieve state-of-the-art (SOTA) results, which demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation [2–6, 10, 11, 24, 35, 39, 46, 49–51] is a
crucial task in computer vision. In recent years, significant
progresses have been made in this field, which are primarily attributed to the development of deep learning models
[4, 25, 46, 50] trained on large-scale datasets [7, 47]. However, obtaining sufficient labeled data to train a segmentation model is time-consuming and labor-intensive, since it
usually takes more than 10 minutes to annotate only one
* Email: lanyun zhu@mymail.sutd.edu.sg
† Corresponding Author

Support Image

Query Image Ⅰ

Query Image Ⅱ

Support GT

Query Prediction Ⅰ

Query Prediction Ⅱ

Figure 1. An example of background context bias in few-shot
segmentation. When the query image shares the same background as the support image (Query Image I), the segmentation
is high-quality; but when the query image has a different background (Query Image II), the segmentation is undesirable.

image for getting its ground truth label. To address this issue, Few-Shot Segmentation (FSS) has been proposed as an
alternative solution, which aims to segment a class using a
very small number of annotated images, thus reducing the
need for costly data labeling.
Currently, the prevailing methods for few-shot segmentation [1, 19, 23, 32, 34, 41, 48] typically use the metalearning and episodic training strategies, in which the model
is trained to segment a query image based on a few support images and their ground truth maps in the target class.
To extract useful information that can represent the general properties of a class, these methods usually extract one
[8, 16, 28] or a few [17, 41] prototypes from the foreground
region of the support images. These prototypes are then
used to segment query images based on feature concatenation [16, 17] or distance calculation [13, 26]. For this
paradigm to be successful, it is necessary to assume that
support and query images posses the similar or aligned foreground features. Only when this assumption holds true, the
support prototypes can capture the query foreground properties accurately, thus enabling them to guide the segmentation process effectively.
However, we contend that this assumption may not always be true, since different backgrounds between support and query images may cause misalignment of their
foreground features. Specifically, the prototypes for fewshot segmentation are typically derived from CNN or trans-

3370

