This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

EventPS: Real-Time Photometric Stereo Using an Event Camera
Bohan Yu1,2
1

Jieji Ren3

Feishi Wang1,2

Jinxiu Liang1,2

Boxin Shi1,2 *

National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing, School of Computer Science, Peking University
2

National Engineering Research Center of Visual Technology, School of Computer Science, Peking University
3

4

Jin Han4,5

School of Mechanical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Graduate School of Information Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo

5

National Institute of Informatics

{ybh1998, wangfeishi, cssherryliang, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn
jiejiren@sjtu.edu.cn, jinhan@nii.ac.jp

(a)

(b)

I
Small
Data Stream

EventPS

Fast Capture

EventPS
Algorithm
t

Input:
Null Space Vectors

Sparse
Event Stream
...

(f)

...

Slow Capture

...

Exposure

FramePS

(d)

Reduce to 31%

~0.33s

Event Camera
& Continuous Light

(e)

(c)

Large
Data Stream

Output:
Estimated Surface Normal

(g)

(h)
...

FramePS
Algorithm

Light

Frame Camera
& Discrete Lights

~2.5 s

Dense
Image Observations

100%

Input:
HDR Image Sequence

Output:
Estimated Surface Normal

Figure 1. Comparison between the proposed EventPS and its frame-based counterpart, i.e., FramePS. Bottom: FramePS estimates the
surface normal (h) by analyzing images of an object illuminated from multiple directions (e). It involves capturing a series of exposurebracketing images2 (f, g), a process that is not only time-consuming but also demands substantial bandwidth for processing. Top: In
contrast, EventPS estimates the surface normal by analyzing the events triggered by a continuously rotating light source (a). The unique
attributes of event cameras, e.g., low latency, high dynamic range, and low redundancy in data representation (b), enable EventPS, a rapid
and highly efficient real-time solution (c, d), which significantly reduces the bandwidth usage while maintaining comparable performance
to FramePS.

Abstract
Photometric stereo is a well-established technique to estimate the surface normal of an object. However, the requirement of capturing multiple high dynamic range images
under different illumination conditions limits the speed and
real-time applications. This paper introduces EventPS, a
novel approach to real-time photometric stereo using an
event camera. Capitalizing on the exceptional temporal
resolution, dynamic range, and low bandwidth characteristics of event cameras, EventPS estimates surface normal only from the radiance changes, significantly enhancing data efficiency. EventPS seamlessly integrates with
∗ Corresponding author: Boxin Shi
1 Code available: https://codeberg.org/ybh1998/EventPS

both optimization-based and deep-learning-based photometric stereo techniques to offer a robust solution for nonLambertian surfaces. Extensive experiments validate the
effectiveness and efficiency of EventPS compared to framebased counterparts. Our algorithm runs at over 30 fps in
real-world scenarios, unleashing the potential of EventPS
in time-sensitive and high-speed downstream applications.

1. Introduction
Photometric Stereo (PS) [53], a technique that estimates the
orientation of surface normals by analyzing images of an
object illuminated from various directions, is distinctive by
its ability to reconstruct high-resolution and precise surface
details, especially under controlled lighting conditions.

9602

