This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HOIDiffusion: Generating Realistic 3D Hand-Object Interaction Data
Mengqi Zhang1∗ Yang Fu1∗ Zheng Ding1 Sifei Liu2
Zhuowen Tu1 Xiaolong Wang1
1
UC San Diego 2 NVIDIA
on the table

Stable Diffusion

on the table

on the beach

Input

in the snow

on the grass

Ours

Figure 1. (i) Left: Hand-object synthesis with Stable Diffusion model; (ii) Right: HOIDiffusion generates high-quality hand-object
interaction images conditioned on physical structures and detailed text description. The model disentangles the geometry from appearance,
exhibiting high generation diversity. Each row: We can fix the structure and control the style based on text inputs; Each column: We can
fix the style and control the structure based on 3D structural inputs.

Abstract
3D hand-object interaction data is scarce due to the
hardware constraints in scaling up the data collection process. In this paper, we propose HOIDiffusion for generating realistic and diverse 3D hand-object interaction data.
Our model is a conditional diffusion model that takes both
the 3D hand-object geometric structure and text description
as inputs for image synthesis. This offers a more controllable and realistic synthesis as we can specify the structure
and style inputs in a disentangled manner. HOIDiffusion
is trained by leveraging a diffusion model pre-trained on
large-scale natural images and a few 3D human demonstrations. Beyond controllable image synthesis, we adopt the
generated 3D data for learning 6D object pose estimation
and show its effectiveness in improving perception systems.
Project page: https://mq-zhang1.github.io/HOIDiffusion.
* Equal Contribution.

1. Introduction
Understanding how human hands interact with objects has
been a long-standing problem in computer vision. Recently,
researchers have tried to scale up such understandings
by collecting videos on hand-object interactions [10, 17].
Models trained with these datasets focus on performing
hand-object relational reasoning in 2D space. To enable
broader applications in robotics and VR/AR, more efforts
have been spent on collecting hand-object interaction data
with 3D annotations via multiple cameras [6] and new labeling approaches with prepared object CAD models [19].
However, such a data collection process is not scalable and
most datasets only contain dozens of objects.
Given the recent advancement of generative modeling
with diffusion process [25, 53], can we leverage them to
generate realistic 3D hand-object interaction data? While

8521

