This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Morphological Prototyping for Unsupervised Slide Representation Learning
in Computational Pathology
Andrew H. Song1,2,∗, Richard J. Chen1,2,∗ , Tong Ding1,2 , Drew F.K. Williamson1,2,†,
Guillaume Jaume1,2 , Faisal Mahmood1,2
1
Mass General Brigham and 2 Harvard University
asong@bwh.harvard.edu, richardchen@g.harvard.edu, faisalmahmood@bwh.harvard.edu

Abstract
Representation learning of pathology whole-slide images (WSIs) has been has primarily relied on weak supervision with Multiple Instance Learning (MIL). However,
the slide representations resulting from this approach are
highly tailored to specific clinical tasks, which limits their
expressivity and generalization, particularly in scenarios
with limited data. Instead, we hypothesize that morphological redundancy in tissue can be leveraged to build a
task-agnostic slide representation in an unsupervised fashion. To this end, we introduce PANTHER, a prototypebased approach rooted in the Gaussian mixture model that
summarizes the set of WSI patches into a much smaller
set of morphological prototypes. Specifically, each patch
is assumed to have been generated from a mixture distribution, where each mixture component represents a morphological exemplar. Utilizing the estimated mixture parameters, we then construct a compact slide representation
that can be readily used for a wide range of downstream
tasks. By performing an extensive evaluation of PANTHER
on subtyping and survival tasks using 13 datasets, we show
that 1) PANTHER outperforms or is on par with supervised MIL baselines and 2) the analysis of morphological prototypes brings new qualitative and quantitative insights into model interpretability. The code is available at
https://github.com/mahmoodlab/Panther.

1. Introduction
Representation learning of whole-slide images (WSIs) is a
fundamental task in Computational Pathology (CPath) [77].
Given a WSI, the goal is to learn a slide-level representation that can be used for various downstream tasks, such as
diagnosis, prognostication, and therapeutic response prediction. The standard approach is weakly supervised learning
∗ Equal contribution
† Presently at Emory University School of Medicine

Figure 1. Slide decomposition into morphological prototypes
Due to morphological redundancy across and within the tissue, a
slide can be decomposed into prototypes. We introduce PANTHER,
a method that can identify and extract morphological prototypes to
form a compact and unsupervised slide representation.

based on Multiple Instance Learning (MIL) [13, 29, 40],
in which the gigapixel WSI is tokenized into a large set of
patch embeddings (N > 10, 000) with a pretrained vision
encoder, followed by aggregation of the embeddings [40].
Current advances in CPath have examined: (1) learning better patch embeddings with domain-specific vision encoders
based on self-supervised learning (SSL) [1, 18, 21, 31, 39,
44, 46, 58, 83] and (2) developing new aggregation strategies for pooling patch embeddings into a slide representation [55, 56, 60, 73]. As many histology datasets have limited samples for supervised MIL, an emerging goal in CPath
is to (3) shift slide representation learning from weaklysupervised to unsupervised [17, 41, 52, 69, 81], which may
help mitigating data and label scarcity and improving generalization.

11566

