This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

JoAPR: Cleaning the Lens of Prompt Learning for Vision-Language Models
Yuncheng Guo1 , Xiaodong Gu2 *
Department of Electronic Engineering, Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China
1

23210720033@m.fudan.edu.cn, 2 xdgu@fudan.edu.cn

65.0

Abstract

90.0
55.0

80.0
70.0

1. Introduction
Vision-Language Pre-Trained Models(VL-PTMs) [18, 33,
48] have garnered significant attention in the field of computer vision due to their image understanding and processing capabilities. CLIP [33], as a representative model in
VL-PTMs, excels at comprehending the intricate relationship between images and text, going beyond traditional
classification tasks. It leverages a vast dataset of over 400
million image-text pairs for pre-training. The pre-trained
text encoder and image encoder are instrumental in obtaining embeddings for text and images, enabling the fusion of
textual and visual information in downstream tasks. The
abundance of data equips CLIP with remarkable transfer
learning capability.
Specifically, CLIP formulates a description text for
each class, referred to as a prompt (e.g. “A photo of a
[CLASS]”), which is then fed into the pre-trained text encoder to generate corresponding embeddings. Simultane* corresponding author

Accuracy()%

Accuracy()%

45.0

Leveraging few-shot datasets in prompt learning for
Vision-Language Models eliminates the need for manual
prompt engineering while highlighting the necessity of accurate annotations for the labels. However, high-level or
complex label noise challenges prompt learning for VisionLanguage Models. Aiming at this issue, we propose a
new framework for improving its robustness. Specifically,
we introduce the Joint Adaptive Partitioning for Label
Refurbishment (JoAPR), a structured framework encompassing two key steps. 1) Data Partitioning, where we differentiate between clean and noisy data using joint adaptive thresholds. 2) Label Refurbishment, where we correct
the labels based on the partition outcomes before retraining the network. Our comprehensive experiments confirm
that JoAPR substantially enhances the robustness of prompt
learning for Vision-Language Models against label noise,
offering a promising direction for future research.

60.0
50.0
40.0

35.0

25.0

CoOp (Symflip)

CoOp (Symflip)

30.0
15.0
20.0

CoOp (Pairflip)

CoOp (Pairflip)

10.0

5.0
12.5

25.0

37.5

50.0

62.5

75.0

12.5

25.0

37.5

Noise Ratio(%)
Caltech101

(a) Caltech101

50.0

62.5

75.0

Noise Ratio(%)

(b) DTD

DTD

Figure 1. Accuracy vs. Noise Ratio on two datasets. The graph
depicts the impact of synthetic label noise (Symflip and Pairflip)
on the CoOp’s accuracy. CoOp maintains a certain degree of performance at lower noise ratios, indicating some resilience to mild
noise conditions. However, with an increase in the noise ratio,
there is a clear downward trend in model accuracy for both types
of noise, with Pairflip leading to a more pronounced degradation
in performance. This finding highlights the limited robustness of
prompt learning for VL-PTMs.

ously, the image to be recognized is processed by the pretrained image encoder to extract image features. The similarity between these text and image embeddings is calculated to achieve the task of image recognition. Recently,
Zhou et al. [55] shed light on one of the primary challenges
in developing large visual models: the design of appropriate prompts. They discover that even minor changes to the
prompt significantly impact the model’s performance. Manual prompt design, however, is time-consuming and finding the best prompt is impractical. To address this, they
introduce prompt learning into VL-PTMs, known as CoOp.
This model requires only a few-shot dataset to learn suitable
prompts and has substantially improved the transferability
of large vision-language models to downstream tasks.
Despite the enhanced transfer learning capability of
prompt learning for VL-PTMs, a critical issue in its development has been overlooked by many researchers: how
to handle label noise in the few-shot dataset. Despite easier acquisition of massive datasets today, accurate annotation remains costly, often leading to label noise that impairs model performance. Prompt learning for VL-PTMs
is no exception, motivating us to explore ways to make it
more robust. Recently, Wu et al. [41] observe the presence

28695

