This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Specularity Factorization for Low-Light Enhancement
Saurabh Saini
CVIT, KCIS
IIIT-Hyderabad, India

P J Narayanan
CVIT, KCIS
IIIT-Hyderabad, India

saurabh.saini@research.iiit.ac.in

pjn@iiit.ac.in

Figure 1. Sepcularity Factorization: We factorize a single input image (blue box, top row) into multiple soft specular factors (rescaled for
visualization) based on their similar illumination characteristics (note table shadow and lamp reflection). Our factors directly enable zeroreference low-light enhancement and user controlled image relighting (bottom left). Additionally, they can also be used as a plug-and-play
prior for various supervised image enhancement tasks like dehazing, deraining and deblurring. On right, our conceptual block diagram.

1. Introduction

Abstract

A low-light image has most regions too dark for comprehension due to low exposure setting or insufficient scene
lighting which makes images highly challenging for computer processing and aesthetically unpleasant. Low-Light
Enhancement (LLE) aims to recovers a well-exposed image from a low-light input [46]. LLE can be a critical pre-processing step before the downstream applications
[55, 57]. Core LLE challenge lies in modeling the degradation function which is spatially varying and has complex
dependence on multiple variables like color, camera sensitivity, illuminant spectra, scene geometry, etc.

We present a new additive image factorization technique that treats images to be composed of multiple latent specular components which can be simply estimated recursively by modulating the sparsity during decomposition.
Our model-driven RSFNet estimates these factors by unrolling the optimization into network layers requiring only
a few scalars to be learned. The resultant factors are interpretable by design and can be fused for different image
enhancement tasks via a network or combined directly by
the user in a controllable fashion. Based on RSFNet, we
detail a zero-reference Low Light Enhancement (LLE) application trained without paired or unpaired supervision.
Our system improves the state-of-the-art performance on
standard benchmarks and achieves better generalization on
multiple other datasets. We also integrate our factors with
other task specific fusion networks for applications like deraining, deblurring and dehazing with negligible overhead
thereby highlighting the multi-domain and multi-task generalizability of our proposed RSFNet. The code and data is
released for reproducibility on the project homepage 1 .

Most LLE solutions decompose the image into meaningful latent factors based on a relevant optical property
(Tab. 1). This allows individual manipulation of each
factor which simplifies the enhancement operation. A
common factorization is based on the Retinex approximation [39, 58], which assumes a multiplicative disentanglement of image I into two intrinsic factors: illuminationinvariant, piecewise constant reflectance R and colorinvariant, smooth shading S as I = R · S. Other factorization criteria include frequency [35, 89], spatial scale
[3, 50], spatio-frequency representation [18, 67], intensity

1 https://sophont01.github.io/data/projects/RSFNet/

1

