This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CFPL-FAS: Class Free Prompt Learning for Generalizable Face Anti-spoofing
Ajian Liu1 , Shuai Xue2 , Jianwen Gan3 , Jun Wan1,4,5 ,* Yanyan Liang4 *
Jiankang Deng6 , Sergio Escalera7 , Zhen Lei1,5,8
1
MAIS, CASIA, China; 2 BIT, Zhuhai; 3 GC&UKLIS, Wuzhou University; 4 M.U.S.T, Macau
5
SAI, UCAS, China; 6 ICL, UK; 7 CVC, Spain; 8 CAIR, HKISI, CAS
1 {ajian.liu,jun.wan}@ia.ac.cn, 4 yyliang@must.edu.mo 1 zlei@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Domain generalization (DG) based Face Anti-Spoofing
(FAS) aims to improve the model’s performance on unseen
domains. Existing methods either rely on domain labels
to align domain-invariant feature spaces, or disentangle
generalizable features from the whole sample, which inevitably lead to the distortion of semantic feature structures
and achieve limited generalization. In this work, we make
use of large-scale VLMs like CLIP and leverage the textual feature to dynamically adjust the classifier’s weights
for exploring generalizable visual features. Specifically,
we propose a novel Class Free Prompt Learning (CFPL)
paradigm for DG FAS, which utilizes two lightweight transformers, namely Content Q-Former (CQF) and Style QFormer (SQF), to learn the different semantic prompts conditioned on content and style features by using a set of
learnable query vectors, respectively. Thus, the generalizable prompt can be learned by two improvements: (1)
A Prompt-Text Matched (PTM) supervision is introduced
to ensure CQF learns visual representation that is most
informative of the content description. (2) A Diversified
Style Prompt (DSP) technology is proposed to diversify the
learning of style prompts by mixing feature statistics between instance-specific styles. Finally, the learned text features modulate visual features to generalization through the
designed Prompt Modulation (PM). Extensive experiments
show that the CFPL is effective and outperforms the stateof-the-art methods on several cross-domain datasets.

1. Introduction
Face Anti-Spoofing (FAS) is an important step in protecting the security of face recognition systems from printattack [58], replay-attack [4] and mask-attack [6, 20]. Despite the existing presentation attack detection (PAD) methods [7, 19, 21, 30, 32, 52, 55] obtain remarkable per* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison with existing DG FAS methods. (a) the previous methods either rely on a projector to align domain-invariant
feature spaces with adversarial training, or disentangle generalizable features from the whole sample with a decoupler, which inevitably leads to the distortion of semantic structures and achieves
limited generalization. (b) Our CFPL framework is built on CLIP
to learn generalized visual features by using the text features as
weights of the classifier.

formance in intra-dataset experiments where training and
testing data are from the same domain, their performance
severely degraded in cross-dataset experiments due to large
distribution discrepancies among different domains. Domain Generalization (DG) based FAS aims to mitigate the
impact of distribution discrepancy by accessing multiple
domains. As shown in Fig. 1 (a) (left), a typical strategy [12, 40, 41, 50] is rely on domain labels to learn
a domain-invariant feature space by adversarial training,
which is also generalized to unseen domains. While it is
difficult to seek a compact and generalized feature space for
all domains. Even, there is no guarantee that such a feature

222

