This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

3D Building Reconstruction from Monocular Remote Sensing Images
with Multi-level Supervisions

1

Weijia Li1 *, Haote Yang2 *, Zhenghao Hu1 , Juepeng Zheng1 , Gui-Song Xia3 , Conghui He2,4†
Sun Yat-Sen University, 2 Shanghai AI Laboratory, 3 Wuhan University, 4 SenseTime Research
{liweij29, zhengjp8}@mail.sysu.edu.cn, {yanghaote, heconghui}@pjlab.org.cn,
huzhh9@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, guisong.xia@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
3D building reconstruction from monocular remote sensing images is an important and challenging research problem that has received increasing attention in recent years,
owing to its low cost of data acquisition and availability for
large-scale applications. However, existing methods rely on
expensive 3D-annotated samples for fully-supervised training, restricting their application to large-scale cross-city
scenarios. In this work, we propose MLS-BRN, a multi-level
supervised building reconstruction network that can flexibly utilize training samples with different annotation levels to achieve better reconstruction results in an end-to-end
manner. To alleviate the demand on full 3D supervision,
we design two new modules, Pseudo Building Bbox Calculator and Roof-Offset guided Footprint Extractor, as well
as new tasks and training strategies for different types of
samples. Experimental results on several public and new
datasets demonstrate that our proposed MLS-BRN achieves
competitive performance using much fewer 3D-annotated
samples, and significantly improves the footprint extraction
and 3D reconstruction performance compared with current
state-of-the-art. The code and datasets of this work will be
released at https://github.com/opendatalab/MLS-BRN.git.

1. Introduction
3D building reconstruction is a fundamental task for largescale city modeling and has received increasing attention in
recent studies. Among these studies, monocular 3D building reconstruction has become a promising and economic
solution for large-scale real-world applications, owing to its
lower data acquisition cost and larger data coverage compared to multi-view stereo imagery and LiDAR data [6, 31].
Meanwhile, the limited information of monocular images
as well as the diversity of building structures also result in
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Our proposed method achieves 3D building reconstruction by training samples of different annotation levels. Large
quantity of samples only include building footprint annotations,
whereas a small quantity of samples contain extra roof-to-footprint
offset and building height annotations.

great challenges for large-scale 3D building reconstruction.
Inspired by the progress of supervised monocular depth
estimation methods, deep neural networks have been
broadly applied to monocular 3D building reconstruction
studies. Most studies utilize building footprints or other
types of semantic labels as prior information to facilitate
building height estimation from near-nadir images [15, 24,
25, 29, 37]. Off-nadir images, by contrast, constitute a
larger proportion of the remote sensing images and provide additional useful information for building height estimation, which have demonstrated significant potential in
several recent studies [4, 5, 19, 32, 33]. Some studies designed geocentric pose estimation task considering the parallax effect of building roof and footprint [4, 5], aiming
at estimating the height values instead of reconstruct a 3D
model. Other studies leveraged the relation between different components of a building instance (e.g. roof, footprint,

27728

