This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Grounding and Enhancing Grid-based Models for Neural Fields
Zelin Zhao1 , Fenglei Fan* 2 , Wenlong Liao1,3 , and Junchi Yan1
1

Department of CSE & MoE Key Lab of AI, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Department of Mathematics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Cowa Tech. Ltd.

Abstract
Many contemporary studies utilize grid-based models
for neural field representation, but a systematic analysis of
grid-based models is still missing, hindering the improvement of those models. Therefore, this paper introduces a
theoretical framework for grid-based models. This framework points out that these models’ approximation and generalization behaviors are determined by grid tangent kernels (GTK), which are intrinsic properties of grid-based
models. The proposed framework facilitates a consistent
and systematic analysis of diverse grid-based models. Furthermore, the introduced framework motivates the development of a novel grid-based model named the Multiplicative Fourier Adaptive Grid (MulFAGrid). The numerical
analysis demonstrates that MulFAGrid exhibits a lower generalization bound than its predecessors, indicating its robust generalization performance. Empirical studies reveal
that MulFAGrid achieves state-of-the-art performance in
various tasks, including 2D image fitting, 3D signed distance field (SDF) reconstruction, and novel view synthesis,
demonstrating superior representation ability. The project
website is available at this link.

1. Introduction
Neural fields [29, 56] are coordinate-based networks representing a field, a continuous parameterization representing a
physical quantity of an object or a scene. These fields have
demonstrated significant success in image regression [46],
view synthesis [29], and 3D model reconstruction [51]. Recent studies find that neural field techniques can be applied
to visual computing problems and beyond [56]. Therefore,
this field is poised to have a topographic impact on computer vision and machine learning.
Recent empirical studies [9, 18, 43, 54, 58] have sub* Corresponding author.

stantiated that grid-based models, parameterized by grid
feature tensors and operating on grids, can achieve a
maximum two-orders-of-magnitude speed-up compared to
MLP-based neural fields [29, 31, 43], all while upholding
high-fidelity representation quality. Grid-based models can
be either regular (based on regular grids [43, 44, 58]) or irregular (based on point cloud [18] or mesh [33, 51]). However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no known theory
to analyze the learning behaviors of grid-based models systematically. Consequently, the empirical success of gridbased models not only lacks a theoretical foundation but
also reveals a deficiency in effective principles for designing enhanced grid-based models.
To ground and enhance grid-based models, we propose
a theory inspired by neural tangent kernels [6, 17, 53]. Our
theory aims to capture the optimization characteristics and
generalization performance of grid-based models. Different
from neural tangent kernels (NTKs) [17] that study behaviors of MLPs, we target grid-based models and propose tangent kernels for them named grid tangent kernels (GTKs).
GTKs are defined as the covariance between model gradients with respect to their parameters at two different input
data. They describe precisely how changes in grid-based
models’ parameters impact their predictions during training. We show that GTKs of grid-based models remain unchanged during training so that a grid-based model behavior can be understood as a linear kernelized model when the
kernel used in the GTK remains unchanged. Therefore, the
GTK is particularly useful for understanding the connection
between grid-based model architectures and their training
dynamics. Furthermore, we derive a generalization bound
based on Rademacher complexity [3], which measures how
well a trained grid-based model performs on unseen data.
This property helps researchers interested in neural fields
understand the factors influencing generalization in gridbased models. Our numerical studies reveal that the performance of previous grid-based models can be escalated
further by designing better structures toward a suitable GTK

19425

