This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Bilateral Propagation Network for Depth Completion
Jie Tang1 , Fei-Peng Tian2 , Boshi An3 , Jian Li1 ,* Ping Tan4,2
1
National University of Defense Technology,
2
LightIllusions, 3 Peking University,
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Depth completion aims to derive a dense depth map from
sparse depth measurements with a synchronized color image. Current state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods are predominantly propagation-based, which work as an iterative refinement on the initial estimated dense depth. However,
the initial depth estimations mostly result from direct applications of convolutional layers on the sparse depth map.
In this paper, we present a Bilateral Propagation Network
(BP-Net), that propagates depth at the earliest stage to
avoid directly convolving on sparse data. Specifically, our
approach propagates the target depth from nearby depth
measurements via a non-linear model, whose coefficients
are generated through a multi-layer perceptron conditioned
on both radiometric difference and spatial distance. By integrating bilateral propagation with multi-modal fusion and
depth refinement in a multi-scale framework, our BP-Net
demonstrates outstanding performance on both indoor and
outdoor scenes. It achieves SOTA on the NYUv2 dataset
and ranks 1st on the KITTI depth completion benchmark at
the time of submission. Experimental results not only show
the effectiveness of bilateral propagation but also emphasize the significance of early-stage propagation in contrast
to the refinement stage. Our code and trained models will
be available on the project page.

1. Introduction
Dense depth perception, i.e. estimating per-pixel distance to
the camera, is crucial for 3D tasks, with a rapid growth of
applications, such as augmented reality, autonomous driving and robotics. However, due to current hardware limitations, it is still difficult to directly measure dense depth
maps. Depth measured from LiDAR [9] or SfM [38] is typically sparse, which is insufficient for real applications like
scene reconstruction [47] and robot grasping [29]. Depth
completion1 , i.e. estimating dense depth map from sparse
* indicates the corresponding author.
1 The exact name should be image guided depth completion, if consid-

ering some early attempts don’t utilize color images.

Dense Depth

MF.

Abstract
Color Image

(a) 1-stage depth completion (e.g. [16, 27, 41]).
MF.

Post.

Dense Depth

Sparse Depth
(b) 2-stage Depth Completion (e.g. [6-9])

(b) 2-stage depth completion (e.g. [3, 22, 31]).
Pre.

MF.

Post.

Dense Depth

(c) 3-stage Depth Completion (our BP-Net)

(c) 3-stage depth completion (our BP-Net).

Figure 1. Depth completion is to produce a dense depth map from
sparse depth measurements with a synchronized color image. (a)
Earlier methods take a 1-stage approach to solve this problem by
multi-model fusion network (MF.). (b) Some recent works include
a post-processing stage (Post.) to refine the results. (c) Our BP-Net
further introduces a pre-processing stage (Pre.) to make the multimodal fusion (MF.) network more effective for better results.

depth measurements with a synchronized color image, is a
promising solution with the advantage of exploiting complementary information from data in different modalities.
A key challenge in this task is to effectively process irregularly sampled sparse depth points.
In the context of depth completion, deep learning-based
methods have achieved great success. As shown in Fig. 1a,
earlier methods [16, 27, 41] often take a 1-stage depth completion strategy by a multi-modal fusion (MF) network to
recover dense depth maps. These methods mostly suffer
from excessive smoothing at depth edges which leads to loss
of details in the results. More recent works [3, 22, 31] have
started to adopt a 2-stage approach as shown in Fig. 1b,
with an additional post-processing stage via propagationbased networks. By revisiting sparse depth measurements
to iteratively refine the regressed depth, such propagation-

9763

