This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Continual Learning for Motion Prediction Model via Meta-Representation
Learning and Optimal Memory Buffer Retention Strategy
DaeJun Kang1
Dongsuk Kum2
Sanmin Kim2
1
Korea Automotive Technology Institute
2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
djkang@katech.re.kr,
{dskum,sanmin.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Embodied AI, such as autonomous vehicles, suffers from
insufficient, long-tailed data because it must be obtained
from the physical world. In fact, data must be continuously obtained in a series of small batches, and the model
must also be continuously trained to achieve generalizability and scalability by improving the biased data distribution. This paper addresses the training cost and catastrophic forgetting problems when continuously updating
models to adapt to incoming small batches from various environments for real-world motion prediction in autonomous
driving. To this end, we propose a novel continual motion prediction (CMP) learning framework based on sparse
meta-representation learning and an optimal memory buffer
retention strategy. In meta-representation learning, a model
explicitly learns a sparse representation of each driving environment, from road geometry to vehicle states, by training to reduce catastrophic forgetting based on an augmented modulation network with sparsity regularization.
Also, in the adaptation phase, We develop an Optimal Memory Buffer Retention strategy that smartly preserves diverse
samples by focusing on representation similarity. This approach handles the nuanced task distribution shifts characteristic of motion prediction datasets, ensuring our model
stays responsive to evolving input variations without requiring extensive resources. The experiment results demonstrate
that the proposed method shows superior adaptation performance to the conventional continual learning approach,
which is developed using a synthetic dataset for the continual learning problem.

1. Introduction
For autonomous driving, reliable motion prediction in various driving environments is essential. However, while current motion prediction studies perform well on given benchmark datasets, their performance deteriorates significantly

Continual Model Update in Real World

Trained
model

Stage 1

Stage 2

Model

Model

update

...

Stage N
Model

deploy

data
...

Figure 1. Continual model update problem for scalability to
changing environments.

in changed environments, for example, new driving patterns
due to different road types never seen before [1]. Since
the driving environment is non-stationary and changes over
time and place, it is necessary to update the motion prediction model seamlessly under changing environments to
maintain reliable performance as shown in Fig. 1.
Joint training described in [25], as an example is a representative conventional method for such a model update.
This method re-trains the model with all existing datasets
and data from new environments upon each update. Therefore, it guarantees decent performance across all environments by embracing the entirety of the data distribution.
However, it demands substantial training resources, which
escalate as data volume increases due to the redundant training inherent in the constant update process. Moreover, performance degradation in data-scarce environments is a notable challenge stemming from the learning’s bias toward
more abundantly represented data. Conversely, transfer
learning [28] adopts a more streamlined approach by utilizing solely the data from new environments for learning,
significantly enhancing the efficiency of the model update
process. However, this method encounters a notable limitation: it struggles to retain previously acquired knowledge
while adjusting to a specific target environment, posing a
challenge to preserving learned experiences.
To tackle the above problem, continual learning, which

15438

