This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NIVeL: Neural Implicit Vector Layers for Text-to-Vector Generation
Vikas Thamizharasan1,2 Difan Liu2 Matthew Fisher2
Nanxuan Zhao2 Evangelos Kalogerakis1 Michal Lukáč2
University of Massachusetts Amherst1

Adobe Research2

Figure 1. We present NIVeL, a neural implicit vector layer representation for generative text-to-vector graphics. Given an input text prompt,
NIVeL outputs resolution-independent 2D shapes and colors in editable layers. Our neural representation can capture plausible shapes of
arbitrary topology and genus, which were challenges of previous text-to-vector works (VectorFusion[16]) that directly operated on classical
Bézier curves. Importantly, our results can easily be imported into traditional vector graphics software and make intuitive edits.

Abstract
The success of denoising diffusion models in representing rich data distributions over 2D raster images has
prompted research on extending them to other data representations, such as vector graphics. Unfortunately due to
their variable structure and scarcity of vector training data,
directly applying diffusion models on this domain remains
a challenging problem. Using workarounds like optimization via Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) is also fraught
with difficulty, as vector representations are non-trivial to
directly optimize and tend to result in implausible geometries such as redundant or self-intersecting shapes. NIVeL
addresses these challenges by reinterpreting the problem on
an alternative, intermediate domain which preserves the desirable properties of vector graphics – mainly sparsity of
representation and resolution-independence. This alternative domain is based on neural implicit fields expressed in
a set of decomposable, editable layers. Based on our experiments, NIVeL produces text-to-vector graphics results
of significantly better quality than the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Vector Graphics is a widely used representation to express visual concepts as a compact collection of primitives,
such as Bézier curves, polygons, circles, lines and colors
in a resolution-independent manner. Synthesizing vector
graphics through generative models and high-level guidance, such as text prompts, would be highly desirable for
automating modeling pipelines.
By leveraging massive scale, denoising diffusion has become the gold standard in generative raster imaging. In
vector graphics however, no equivalent exists. The variable
structure of the vector representation (e.g., varying number
and types of primitives) means that we could only apply
diffusion to a fixed subset of this domain at a time (i.e. the
subdomain of vector graphics with one particular structure);
and if we did so, we would not be able to find training data
at requisite scale.
As a result, to enable generative vector applications, such
as text-to-vector, one may turn to various workarounds,
Project website: https://vikastmz.github.io/NIVeL/

4589

