This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Enhancing 3D Object Detection with 2D Detection-Guided Query Anchors
Haoxuanye Ji2,∗,♯
Pengpeng Liang1,∗,†
Erkang Cheng2,‡
1
School of Computer and Artificial Intelligence, Zhengzhou University 2 Nullmax
jihaoxuanye@163.com, {liangpcs, twokang.cheng}@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-camera-based 3D object detection has made notable progress in the past several years. However, we observe that there are cases (e.g. faraway regions) in which
popular 2D object detectors are more reliable than stateof-the-art 3D detectors. In this paper, to improve the performance of query-based 3D object detectors, we present
a novel query generating approach termed QAF2D, which
infers 3D query anchors from 2D detection results. A 2D
bounding box of an object in an image is lifted to a set of
3D anchors by associating each sampled point within the
box with depth, yaw angle, and size candidates. Then, the
validity of each 3D anchor is verified by comparing its projection in the image with its corresponding 2D box, and only
valid anchors are kept and used to construct queries. The
class information of the 2D bounding box associated with
each query is also utilized to match the predicted boxes with
ground truth for the set-based loss. The image feature extraction backbone is shared between the 3D detector and
2D detector by adding a small number of prompt parameters. We integrate QAF2D into three popular query-based
3D object detectors and carry out comprehensive evaluations on the nuScenes dataset. The largest improvement
that QAF2D can bring about on the nuScenes validation
subset is 2.3% NDS and 2.7% mAP. Code is available at
https://github.com/nullmax-vision/QAF2D.

1. Introduction
3D object detection with multi-view images captured by surrounding cameras plays an important role in autonomous
driving systems, and camera-based approaches have the benefit of low deployment cost in comparison to LIDAR-based
approaches [4, 7, 32]. Though notable progress has been
made in the past several years [12, 18, 23, 29, 33, 40], multicamera-based 3D object detection is still a challenging task
due to the lack of depth information and the small object
size in faraway regions.
∗ Equal contribution. ♯ Work done during an internship at Nullmax.
† Project lead. ‡ Corresponding author.

Image

Ground truth 3D boxes

Randomly generated anchors

Baseline w/ random anchors

Anchors generated by QAF2D

Baseline w/ QAF2D

Truck

Pedestrian

Traffic cone

Class-agnostic

Figure 1. Comparison between randomly generated anchors and
anchors generated by our QAF2D and comparison between their
corresponding detection results. We use StreamPETR [33] as the
baseline. Note that for illustration purpose, we just draw part of the
anchors to alleviate clutter.

Inspired by the promising performance of query-based
2D object detectors [14, 21, 26, 27, 41], query-based strategy [27] has been explored by several recent works for multicamera-based 3D object detection [18, 19, 23, 24, 33, 35].
DETR3D [35] projects a set of sparse 3D object queries to
the 2D images for image feature aggregation. PETR [23, 24]
constructs queries based on 3D points to interact with 3D
position-aware image features. SparseBEV [19] initializes
a set of sparse queries based on pillars in bird’s-eye-view
(BEV) space which is used to sample multi-view image features of several frames. StreamPETR [33] is built upon [23]
with query propagation for temporal information modeling.
BEVFormer [18] adopts a 3D detection head based on Deformable DETR [41] after constructing the BEV feature

21178

