This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

An Aggregation-Free Federated Learning for Tackling Data Heterogeneity
Yuan Wang

Huazhu Fu

Renuga Kanagavelu Qingsong Wei Yong Liu Rick Siow Mong Goh
Institute of High Performance Computing (IHPC)
Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore

Abstract
The performance of Federated Learning (FL) hinges on
the effectiveness of utilizing knowledge from distributed
datasets. Traditional FL methods adopt an aggregate-thenadapt framework, where clients update local models based
on a global model aggregated by the server from the previous training round. This process can cause client drift, especially with significant cross-client data heterogeneity, impacting model performance and convergence of the FL algorithm. To address these challenges, we introduce FedAF,
a novel aggregation-free FL algorithm. In this framework,
clients collaboratively learn condensed data by leveraging
peer knowledge, the server subsequently trains the global
model using the condensed data and soft labels received
from the clients. FedAF inherently avoids the issue of
client drift, enhances the quality of condensed data amid
notable data heterogeneity, and improves the global model
performance. Extensive numerical studies on several popular benchmark datasets show FedAF surpasses various
state-of-the-art FL algorithms in handling label-skew and
feature-skew data heterogeneity, leading to superior global
model accuracy and faster convergence.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) algorithms typically follow an iterative aggregate-then-adapt paradigm in which clients use
their local private data to refine a global model provided by
a central server. These locally updated models are subsequently returned to and aggregated by the server, where the
global model is updated through averaging the local models
according to predetermined rules [26]. Given the decentralized nature of client data in FL, substantial variations
in the clients’ data distribution are common. This scenario
results in non-Independent and Identically Distributed (nonIID) data across clients, often referred to as data heterogeneity. Such heterogeneity presents considerable challenges to
the convergence of FL algorithms, primarily due to the significant drift in local learning paths among clients [15, 30].
This phenomenon, known as client drift, can significantly

(a) Aggregate-then-adapt FL approach

(b) Aggregation-free FL approach

Figure 1. The conventional aggregate-then-adapt approach (a) is
prone to client drift in data-heterogeneous scenarios, as clients update a downloaded global model and risk forgetting prior knowledge. In contrast, the aggregation-free paradigm (b) has the server
train the global model directly using condensed synthetic data
learned and shared by clients, which circumvents the client drift
issue.

decrease the accuracy of the global model. [20, 39, 40].
Most existing efforts to address the challenge of data
heterogeneity have focused either on modifying the local
model training with additional regularization terms [1, 10,
15, 19, 22] or on utilizing alternative server-side aggregation or model update schemes [5, 13, 24, 29, 35, 41]. Nevertheless, these methods remain constrained by the conventional aggregate-then-adapt framework, as depicted in Figure 1a. In scenarios with strong cross-client non-IID data
distribution, the fine-tuning of the global model over local
data becomes susceptible to catastrophic forgetting. This
means that clients tends to forget the knowledge learned in
the global model and diverge away from the stationary point
of global learning objective when they update the model in-

26233

