This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Behind the Veil: Enhanced Indoor 3D Scene Reconstruction with Occluded
Surfaces Completion
Su Sun* 1 , Cheng Zhao* 2 , Yuliang Guo2 , Ruoyu Wang2 , Xinyu Huang2 , Yingjie Victor Chen1 , Liu Ren2
1
Purdue University, 2 Bosch Research North America, Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
{sun931, victorchen}@purdue.edu
{cheng.zhao, yuliang.guo2, ruoyu.wang, xinyu.huang, liu.ren}@us.bosch.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel indoor 3D reconstruction method with occluded surface completion, given a sequence of depth readings. Prior state-of-the-art (SOTA)
methods only focus on the reconstruction of the visible areas
in a scene, neglecting the invisible areas due to the occlusions, e.g., the contact surface between furniture, occluded
wall and floor. Our method tackles the task of completing the occluded scene surfaces, resulting in a complete 3D
scene mesh. The core idea of our method is learning 3D geometry prior from various complete scenes to infer the occluded geometry of an unseen scene from solely depth measurements. We design a coarse-fine hierarchical octree representation coupled with a dual-decoder architecture, i.e.,
Geo-decoder and 3D Inpainter, which jointly reconstructs
the complete 3D scene geometry. The Geo-decoder with
detailed representation at fine levels is optimized online for
each scene to reconstruct visible surfaces. The 3D Inpainter
with abstract representation at coarse levels is trained offline using various scenes to complete occluded surfaces.
As a result, while the Geo-decoder is specialized for an individual scene, the 3D Inpainter can be generally applied
across different scenes. We evaluate the proposed method
on the 3D Completed Room Scene (3D-CRS) and iTHOR
datasets, significantly outperforming the SOTA methods by
a gain of 16.8% and 24.2% in terms of the completeness of
3D reconstruction. 3D-CRS dataset including a complete
3D mesh of each scene is provided on project webpage1 .

1. Introduction
Interactable 3D scene reconstruction at room scale is an
enabling technology for a large variety of AR/VR and
embodied AI applications, e.g., virtual touring, room rearrangement, teleoperation etc. Over recent decades, numerous methods [1, 3, 5, 11, 19, 24] have been developed to
reconstruct 3D surfaces. These methods have now become
* Equally contributed as co-first author. This work was done during Su’s
internship at Bosch.
1 https://github.com/BoschRHI3NA/3D-CRS-dataset

BNV-Fusion

Ours

Figure 1. Occluded Surface Completion: Our approach marks
a novel 3D surface reconstruction, uniquely completing occluded
surfaces in areas invisible to existing methods. It enables more
accurate 3D modelling of furniture and the reconstruction of
furniture-obscured room regions, significantly advancing indoor
scene reconstruction.

highly automated and capable of producing high-quality
outputs. However, a critical aspect in advancing scene representation—making it editable, re-configurable, and suitable for object manipulation in mixed reality and embodied AI applications—lies in completing occluded areas. In
mixed reality scenarios, for instance, it is crucial to avoid
the appearance of occluded parts like the backside of a sofa
or the holes on the floors during the repositioning of furniture in a living room. Ensuring a complete 3D shape of
the furniture and a seamless layout is essential for effective object manipulation and scene editing. However, most
existing methods [1, 5, 11, 24] fall short in addressing this
issue, as they predominantly focus on reconstructing visible regions where sensor measurements are available. This

12744

