This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dense Optical Tracking: Connecting the Dots
Guillaume Le Moing1, 2, *
1 Inria

Jean Ponce2, 3

Cordelia Schmid1, 2

2 Département d’informatique de

3 Courant Institute and Center for Data Science

l’ENS (CNRS, ENS-PSL, Inria)

New York University

Abstract
Recent approaches to point tracking are able to recover
the trajectory of any scene point through a large portion of
a video despite the presence of occlusions. They are, however, too slow in practice to track every point observed in
a single frame in a reasonable amount of time. This paper
introduces DOT, a novel, simple and efficient method for
solving this problem. It first extracts a small set of tracks
from key regions at motion boundaries using an off-the-shelf
point tracking algorithm. Given source and target frames,
DOT then computes rough initial estimates of a dense flow
field and visibility mask through nearest-neighbor interpolation, before refining them using a learnable optical
flow estimator that explicitly handles occlusions and can
be trained on synthetic data with ground-truth correspondences. We show that DOT is significantly more accurate
than current optical flow techniques, outperforms sophisticated “universal” trackers like OmniMotion, and is on
par with, or better than, the best point tracking algorithms
like CoTracker while being at least two orders of magnitude
faster. Quantitative and qualitative experiments with synthetic and real videos validate the promise of the proposed
approach. Code, data, and videos showcasing the capabilities of our approach are available in the project webpage.1

1. Introduction
A fine-grain analysis of motion is crucial in many applications involving video data, including frame interpolation [27, 40], inpainting [39, 74], motion segmentation [11,
69], compression [1, 44], future prediction [37, 65], or editing [34, 70]. Historically, most systems designed for these
tasks have heavily relied on optical flow algorithms [18, 59,
60] with an inherent lack of robustness to large motions or
occlusions [19], confining their use of context to a handful
of neighboring frames and limiting long-term reasoning.
* corresponding author: guillaume.le-moing@inria.fr
1 https://16lemoing.github.io/dot

Target

Source

Figure 1. DOT unifies point tracking and optical flow techniques.
From a few initial tracks, it predicts dense motions and occlusions
from source to target frames. We represent tracks in white, occlusions with stripes, and motion directions using distinctive colors.

Lately, point tracking methods [16, 17, 22, 33, 72] have
emerged as a promising alternative. They are, in most cases,
able to track any specific point through a large portion of a
video, even in the presence of occlusions, successfully retaining more than 50% of initial queries after thousands of
frames [72]. Yet, these methods remain too slow and memory intensive to track every individual point in a video, that
is, to obtain a set of tracks dense enough to cover every pixel
location at every time step. This computational hurdle has
thus far limited the widespread adoption of point tracking as
a viable replacement for optical flow in downstream tasks.
The inefficiency of point tracking methods [16, 17, 22,
72] arises from their independent processing of individual
tracks. In a recent study [33], Karaev et al. shed light on
a related issue: tracking individual queries independently
lacks spatial context. Their approach, CoTracker, tracks
multiple points together to exploit the correlations among
their trajectories. In some cases, performance drops when
the number of simultaneous tracks increases too much, thus
preventing solutions which are both fast and accurate.

19187

