This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ArGue: Attribute-Guided Prompt Tuning for Vision-Language Models
Xinyu Tian1
Shu Zou1
Zhaoyuan Yang2
Jing Zhang1
1
Australian National University 2 GE Research
1

firstname.lastname@anu.edu.au, 2 firstname.lastname@ge.com

CLIP

Abstract

Ours

a photo of a cat

Although soft prompt tuning is effective in efficiently
adapting Vision-Language (V&L) models for downstream
tasks, it shows limitations in dealing with distribution shifts.
We address this issue with Attribute-Guided Prompt Tuning (ArGue), making three key contributions. 1) In contrast to the conventional approach of directly appending
soft prompts preceding class names, we align the model
with primitive visual attributes generated by Large Language Models (LLMs). We posit that a model’s ability to
express high confidence in these attributes signifies its capacity to discern the correct class rationales. 2) We introduce attribute sampling to eliminate disadvantageous attributes, thus only semantically meaningful attributes are
preserved. 3) We propose negative prompting, explicitly
enumerating class-agnostic attributes to activate spurious
correlations and encourage the model to generate highly
orthogonal probability distributions in relation to these negative features. In experiments, our method significantly outperforms current state-of-the-art prompt tuning methods on
both novel class prediction and out-of-distribution generalization tasks. The code is available https://github.
com/Liam-Tian/ArGue.

1. Introduction
Soft prompt tuning is increasingly favored in enabling
Vision-Language (V&L) models [1, 16, 33] to be efficiently
adapted to downstream tasks [20, 22, 24]. Models with
a few soft tokens can achieve performance parity with,
or even outperform, fully fine-tuned ones. Additionally,
adapting to different downstream tasks typically necessitates prompt replacement rather than extensive model reconfiguration [21, 38], further explaining the superiority of
soft prompt tuning.
In typical classification tasks, prompt tuning often involves introducing a learnable context directly preceding
the class name [20]. However, recent research in zero-shot
recognition has emphasized the substantial benefits of incorporating visual attributes that describe the classes into

the background of a cat

Figure 1. The illustration of negative prompting. Given an image of a cat (Left), we visualize the model rationale with GradCAM [36], which highlights the image pixels significantly determining the results (Middle). The standard prompt could be
a photo of a cat, where vanilla models, e.g. CLIP [33], give high
confidence on the ground truth class (the “CLIP” column). However, a negative prompt, e.g., the background of a cat, yields
biased prediction since it activates the spurious correlation, i.e.,
background. In contrast, our attribute-guided model (the “Ours”
column) disregards incorrect rationales and bases its predictions
solely on class-specific semantics.

the input [28, 31, 35, 42, 44]. One observes that although
class names, e.g., cat or bird, capture high-level semantics, during inference, primitive attributes, e.g., long tail
or black paw, provide a more precise specification. This
augmentation significantly enhances zero-shot classification accuracy, offering insights into transfer learning, particularly in few-shot scenarios.
In this paper, we investigate visual attributes for transfer learning by identifying the shortcuts existing in V&L
models, which exhibit ease in adapting to new tasks but
often provide incorrect rationales for their decisions [27].
For instance, a V&L model may correctly classify an object in the sky as a bird, not due to a comprehension of
the semantic features, but because it detects spurious correlations between the bird and the sky. A model that
predominantly highlights spurious correlations, e.g., the
background, struggles to generalize effectively to out-ofdistribution data.
To mitigate this challenge, we introduce AttributeGuided Prompt Tuning (ArGue). In contrast to the vanilla

28578

