This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Domain-Rectifying Adapter for Cross-Domain Few-Shot Segmentation
Jiapeng Su1 ,* Qi Fan2 ,* Wenjie Pei1†, Guangming Lu1 , Fanglin Chen1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen 2 Nanjing University
MattSu@163.com, fanqics@gmail.com, wenjiecoder@outlook.com,
luguangm@hit.edu.cn, chenfanglin@hit.edu.cn

Abstract

DS

train

Few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) has achieved
great success on segmenting objects of novel classes, supported by only a few annotated samples. However, existing FSS methods often underperform in the presence of
domain shifts, especially when encountering new domain
styles that are unseen during training. It is suboptimal to
directly adapt or generalize the entire model to new domains in the few-shot scenario. Instead, our key idea is
to adapt a small adapter for rectifying diverse target domain styles to the source domain. Consequently, the rectified target domain features can fittingly benefit from the
well-optimized source domain segmentation model, which
is intently trained on sufficient source domain data. Training domain-rectifying adapter requires sufficiently diverse
target domains. We thus propose a novel local-global style
perturbation method to simulate diverse potential target
domains by perturbating the feature channel statistics of
the individual images and collective statistics of the entire
source domain, respectively. Additionally, we propose a
cyclic domain alignment module to facilitate the adapter
effectively rectifying domains using a reverse domain rectification supervision. The adapter is trained to rectify the
image features from diverse synthesized target domains to
align with the source domain. During testing on target domains, we start by rectifying the image features and then
conduct few-shot segmentation on the domain-rectified features. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method, achieving promising results on cross-domain
few-shot semantic segmentation tasks. Our code is available at https://github.com/Matt-Su/DR-Adapter.

DS

test

1. Introduction
Benefiting from well-established large-scale datasets [1,
24], numerous semantic segmentation methods [5, 30, 36]
* Both authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

train & adapt

Multiple DS
Model

test

DT

(a) Train and test the model

Model

(b) Adapt the entire model to

on the same domain

new domains

simulate
Diverse DSIM

rectify

train &
adapt

DS train

rectify & test

DT

Model

adapter

(c) Train an adapter to rectify diverse target domains (ours)
DS Source domain

DT Target domain

DSIM Simulated target domain

Figure 1. The comparison of our method with other approaches.
(a) Traditional few-shot segmentation (FSS) methods train and
test the model on the same domain. (b) Most domain generalization (DG) methods leverages multiple source domains to train
and adapt the large-parameter model simultaneously. (c) In contrast to conventional DG methods, we propose using a lightweight
adapter as a substitute. This adapter is designed to adapt to various domain data, thereby decoupling domain adaptation from the
source domain training process.

have undergone rapid development in recent years. However, obtaining enough labeled data is still a challenging
and resource-intensive process, particularly for tasks like instance and semantic segmentation. Unlike machine learning
approaches, human capacity to recognize novel concepts
from limited examples fuels considerable research interest.
Hence, few-shot segmentation (FSS) is proposed to meet
this challenge, developing a network that generalizes to new
domains with limited annotated data.
Nonetheless, most existing few-shot segmentation methods [12, 21, 31, 32, 34, 41, 51, 53, 54] often exhibit subpar
performance when confronted with domain shifts [25, 37,
50]. The cross-domain few-shot segmentation (CD-FSS) is
thus proposed for generalizing few-shot segmentation models from the source domain to other domains [20, 47]. CD-

24036

