This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Video Frame Interpolation via Direct Synthesis with the Event-based Reference
Yuhan Liu1
1
2

Yongjian Deng1 *

Hao Chen2

Zhen Yang1

College of Computer Science, Beijing University of Technology

Key Lab of Computer Network and Information Integration, Southeast University

{liuyuhan@emails., yjdeng@, yangzhen@}bjut.edu.cn, haochen303@seu.edu.cn

Abstract
Video Frame Interpolation (VFI) has witnessed a surge
in popularity due to its abundant downstream applications.
Event-based VFI (E-VFI) has recently propelled the advancement of VFI. Thanks to the high temporal resolution
benefits, event cameras can bridge the informational void
present between successive video frames. Most state-ofthe-art E-VFI methodologies follow the conventional VFI
paradigm, which pivots on motion estimation between consecutive frames to generate intermediate frames through a
process of warping and refinement. However, this reliance
engenders a heavy dependency on the quality and consistency of keyframes, rendering these methods susceptible to
challenges in extreme real-world scenarios, such as missing
moving objects and severe occlusion dilemmas.
This study proposes a novel E-VFI framework that
directly synthesize intermediate frames leveraging eventbased reference, obviating the necessity for explicit motion estimation and substantially enhancing the capacity
to handle motion occlusion. Given the sparse and inherently noisy nature of event data, we prioritize the reliability of the event-based reference, leading to the development of an innovative event-aware reconstruction strategy
for accurate reference generation. Besides, we implement
a bi-directional event-guided alignment from keyframes to
the reference using the introduced E-PCD module. Finally,
a transformer-based decoder is adopted for prediction refinement. Comprehensive experimental evaluations on both
synthetic and real-world datasets underscore the superiority of our approach and its potential to execute high-quality
VFI tasks.

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation (VFI) is an important direction in
current computer vision research and finds widespread applications in various domains, including slow-motion gen* : Corresponding author

Frame 0

(a)RIFE

(b)UPRNet

Frame 1

(c)TimeLens (d)CBMNet

Events

(e)Ours

(f)GT

Figure 1. Qualitative comparison of the occlusion handling. (a)
and (b) estimate occlusion mappings by frames, (c) use events for
occlusion judgments, and (d) make occlusion judgments for optical flow at the feature level. Our method (e) achieves the best
results by no longer estimating the occlusion mapping but giving
a direct structural reference.

eration [1, 16, 46], and video compression [44]. It is primarily used to generate non-existent intermediate frames
in video sequences, enabling various effects such as video
smoothing and high frame rate conversion. Existing VFI
methods mostly employ motion-based strategies, estimating pixel-level motion from keyframes and using warping
techniques to obtain interpolated frames. However, these
methods have certain limitations when dealing with occlusion and non-linear motion, often struggling to accurately
predict motion in complex scenes, thus affecting the quality
of interpolated frames.
In recent years, the emergence of event cameras has
brought new possibilities to address this challenge. Event
cameras, detecting brightness changes asynchronously at
the micro-second level [8–10, 34], can fill the information
blank of the inter-frame gap. By leveraging event data,
researchers can obtain more accurate motion estimation,
resulting in higher-quality interpolated frames through a
motion-based warping process [13, 21, 40, 45]. However,
despite significant progress brought by more accurate motion estimation, another tricky issue in VFI tasks, namely
occlusion problems such as severe occlusions (Fig. 1) and
situations that the interpolation scene is not visible in the
keyframes (Fig. 6), still remains unresolved.
We suggest the core challenge in achieving reliable

8477

