This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Hyperbolic Anomaly Detection
Huimin Li, Zhentao Chen, Yunhao Xu, Junlin Hu*
School of Software, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{lihuimin, hujunlin}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Anomaly detection is a challenging computer vision task
in industrial scenario. Advancements in deep learning constantly revolutionize vision-based anomaly detection methods, and considerable progress has been made in both
supervised and self-supervised anomaly detection. The
commonly-used pipeline is to optimize the model by constraining the feature embeddings using a distance-based
loss function. However, these methods work in Euclidean
space, and they cannot well exploit the data lied in nonEuclidean space. In this paper, we are the first to explore
anomaly detection task in hyperbolic space that is a representative of non-Euclidean space, and propose a hyperbolic
anomaly detection (HypAD) method. Specifically, we first
extract image features and then map them from Euclidean
space to hyperbolic space, where the hyperbolic distance
metric is employed to optimize the proposed HypAD. Extensive experiments on the benchmarking datasets including MVTec AD and VisA show that our HypAD approach
obtains the state-of-the-art performance, demonstrating the
effectiveness of our HypAD and the promise of investigating
anomaly detection in hyperbolic space.

1. Introduction
Automatic anomaly detection is one of the key issues in production intelligence [41]. Over the past few years, visionbased automated defect detection has been widely used in
semiconductor manufacturing, textile industry, aerospace
and other fields, and timely detection of defects is of great
significance for quality control in the production process.
Early anomaly detection of industrial image is usually
done manually. Since the inherent limitations of the human
visual system, it is easy to occur visual fatigue in the face of
large-scale data to be detected in a long-term, high-intensity
working environment. In this case, as shown in Fig. 1, subtle anomalies such as scratches and cracks are very easy
to miss. Hence, automatic anomaly detection based on vi* Corresponding author.

bottle

metal nut

grid

pcb

Figure 1. Several examples with/ without anomalies. Images of
the first row are anomaly samples, where the red box indicates the
region exists subtle anomalies, and the second row showcases their
normal samples.

sion has become the focus of research. Compared with
the traditional methods [18, 42, 45], supervised learningbased anomaly detection methods [31] have demonstrated a
substantial improvement in both detection accuracy and robustness. Yet, supervised detection methods inevitably require a huge collection of labeled data for the model training
to learn effective feature representations, which allows the
model an improved generalization capability. However, the
actual situation is exactly the opposite, and the anomaly detection task has its intrinsic characteristics and challenges.
For instance, the available anomalous data is scarce and it is
hardly to collect sufficient defect samples. In addition, the
proportion of defective pixels in the image is relatively low,
with less available defective features. Furthermore, there
are various types and shapes of defects, and we cannot manually describe all defects. In order to solve these problems,
self-supervised anomaly detection methods are constantly
developed [2, 4, 33]. Recently, teacher-student networks
[1, 5, 38] based on knowledge distillation have performed
well on publicly available datasets, and image-level detection metrics have been close to saturation. However, pixellevel anomaly detection is still very challenging.
The existing anomaly detection methods are introduced
in Euclidean space to measure the image embeddings, as

17511

