This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Arbitrary Motion Style Transfer with Multi-condition Motion Latent Diffusion
Model
Wenfeng Song1 , Xingliang Jin1 , Shuai Li2,3 *, Chenglizhao Chen4†, Aimin Hao3,5 ,
Xia Hou1 , Ning Li1 , Hong Qin6
1

Beijing Information Science and Technology University, China 2 Zhongguancun Laboratory, China
3
4

5
6

State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University

College of Computer Science and Technology, China University of Petroleum (East China)

Research Unit of Virtual Human and Virtual Surgery (2019RU004), Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences

Department of Computer Science, Stony Brook University (SUNY at Stony Brook), Stony Brook, New York 11794-2424, USA

Trajectory
Content

Style

MCM-LDM

B. Content Motion

A. Style Motion

C. Stylized Motion

Figure 1. Arbitrary motion style transfer with our MCM-LDM. The black arrows point to the highlighted style features. These results
illustrate our method’s capability to maintain the essence of original content while seamlessly infusing it with new stylistic characteristics
and trajectory considerations.

Abstract
Computer animation’s quest to bridge content and style
has historically been a challenging venture, with previous
efforts often leaning toward one at the expense of the other.
This paper tackles the inherent challenge of content-style
duality, ensuring a harmonious fusion where the core narrative of the content is both preserved and elevated through
stylistic enhancements. We propose a novel Multi-condition
Motion Latent Diffusion Model (MCM-LDM) for Arbitrary
Motion Style Transfer (AMST). Our MCM-LDM significantly emphasizes preserving trajectories, recognizing their
fundamental role in defining the essence and fluidity of mo-

tion content. Our MCM-LDM’s cornerstone lies in its ability first to disentangle and then intricately weave together
motion’s tripartite components: motion trajectory, motion
content, and motion style. The critical insight of MCMLDM is to embed multiple conditions with distinct priorities. The content channel serves as the primary flow, guiding the overall structure and movement, while the trajectory and style channels act as auxiliary components and
synchronize with the primary one dynamically. This mechanism ensures that multi-conditions can seamlessly integrate into the main flow, enhancing the overall animation
without overshadowing the core content. Empirical evaluations underscore the model’s proficiency in achieving fluid

*,† Corresponding authors

821

