This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Training Like a Medical Resident: Context-Prior Learning Toward Universal
Medical Image Segmentation
Yunhe Gao
Rutgers University

Abstract
A major focus of clinical imaging workflow is disease
diagnosis and management, leading to medical imaging
datasets strongly tied to specific clinical objectives. This
scenario has led to the prevailing practice of developing
task-specific segmentation models, without gaining insights
from widespread imaging cohorts. Inspired by the training
program of medical radiology residents, we propose a shift
towards universal medical image segmentation, a paradigm
aiming to build medical image understanding foundation
models by leveraging the diversity and commonality across
clinical targets, body regions, and imaging modalities. Towards this goal, we develop Hermes, a novel context-prior
learning approach to address the challenges of data heterogeneity and annotation differences in medical image segmentation. In a large collection of eleven diverse datasets (2,438
3D images) across five modalities (CT, PET, T1, T2 and cine
MRI) and multiple body regions, we demonstrate the merit
of the universal paradigm over the traditional paradigm on
addressing multiple tasks within a single model. By exploiting the synergy across tasks, Hermes achieves state-of-theart performance on all testing datasets and shows superior
model scalability. Results on two additional datasets reveals
Hermes’ strong performance for transfer learning, incremental learning, and generalization to downstream tasks.
Hermes’s learned priors demonstrate an appealing trait to
reflect the intricate relations among tasks and modalities,
which aligns with the established anatomical and imaging
principles in radiology. The code is available1 .

1. Introduction
Medical image segmentation methods generate accurate delineations of anatomical structures which are crucial for disease diagnosis [15, 55] and treatment planning [18, 20, 47].
To date, the prevailing paradigm for medical image segmentation promotes the development of separate models for
specific medical objects (e.g., organs or tumors) and image
modalities (e.g., CT or MR) [8, 19, 22, 33, 43, 65]. This
1 https://github.com/yhygao/universal-medical-image-segmentation

A) Partially labeled & Multi-modal & Multi-region datasets
Dataset 1

Dataset 2

Dataset 3

Dataset k

CT Abdomen
Organs

CT Abdomen
Liver & Tumor

T1 MRI Brain
Structures

PET Whole Body
Lesion

B) Training paradigm shift

v.s.
Model 1 Model 2 Model 3

Traditional paradigm:
one model per task

Model k

Universal paradigm:
one model for all

Figure 1. A) Clinical diagnostic workflows typically focus on
specific specialties and diseases, leading to the curation of image datasets that are partially annotated, multi-modal, and multiregional. B) Traditional training paradigms involve training separate models for each segmentation task (or dataset). In contrast,
we emphasize a universal medical image segmentation paradigm
aiming at one model for all, leading to a robust and generalizable
universal model for diverse tasks.

paradigm is often constrained by the limited training data
from the same domain, resulting in compromised model robustness and generalizability. Further scaling up data size
for specific segmentation tasks is challenging due to the high
cost of data acquisition, collection, and annotation [21, 50].
Moreover, the current paradigm is unable to exploit relationships among medical imaging tasks that are critical for
disease understanding. These hurdles together confine the
capability and scalability of medical image segmentation
models.
Inspired by radiology residency programs [1, 2, 53], we
recognize that radiologists’ expertise arises from routine
exposure to wide-ranging images across body regions, diseases, and imaging modalities. Despite the fact that the human body exhibits anatomical variability, it is fundamentally
composed of various types of tissues and structures whose appearance in images are often statistically similar [54]. These
tissues display specific visual characteristics under different imaging modalities [4, 31]. During the training process,

11194

