This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Spectral and Polarization Vision:
Spectro-polarimetric Real-world Dataset
Yujin Jeon1,∗
Eunsue Choi1,∗
Youngchan Kim1
Yunseong Moon1
2
3
Khalid Omer
Felix Heide
Seung-Hwan Baek1
1

POSTECH

2

Meta

Abstract
Image datasets are essential not only in validating existing methods in computer vision but also in developing new
methods. Many image datasets exist, consisting of trichromatic intensity images taken with RGB cameras, which are
designed to replicate human vision. However, polarization and spectrum, the wave properties of light that animals
in harsh environments and with limited brain capacity often rely on, remain underrepresented in existing datasets.
Although there are previous spectro-polarimetric datasets,
they have insufﬁcient object diversity, limited illumination
conditions, linear-only polarization data, and inadequate
image count. Here, we introduce two spectro-polarimetric
datasets, consisting of trichromatic Stokes images and hyperspectral Stokes images. These datasets encompass both
linear and circular polarization; they introduce multiple
spectral channels; and they feature a broad selection of
real-world scenes. With our dataset in hand, we analyze
the spectro-polarimetric image statistics, develop efﬁcient
representations of such high-dimensional data, and evaluate spectral dependency of shape-from-polarization methods. As such, the proposed dataset promises a foundation
for data-driven spectro-polarimetric imaging and vision research.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in computer vision can be largely attributed
to comprehensive studies of real-world image datasets, such
as ImageNet [14]. Foundation models [1, 35, 53, 64] further underscore data signiﬁcance. Most of these datasets
comprise trichromatic intensity images, inspired by human
visual perception, enabling machines to emulate human vision with trichromatic RGB cameras. As such, the datasets
have facilitated the development of low-cost, camera-based
autonomous agents capable of perceiving and interacting
* These authors contributed equally to this work.

3

Princeton University

with our world, as we do. However, the reliance on trichromatic intensity in existing image datasets also comes with
inherent limitations for analyzing objects in depth. Examples include textureless surface, low-albedo objects, and
transparent materials.
Light possesses wave properties, including polarization
and spectrum [9], which are not faithfully captured by
trichromatic intensity imaging. While these properties are
invisible to human, animals like honeybees and ants leverage the polarization and spectrum for navigation and other
tasks. Horvath and Varju [25] provide diverse examples
and mechanisms of spectral and polarimetric vision in animals. Partly drawing inspiration from nature, researchers
have extended the analysis of spectrum and polarization
to a variety of ﬁelds, including computer vision, robotics,
and astronomy. This has spurred interest in polarimetric [7, 8, 38, 49] and hyperspectral imaging [2, 10, 28], and
more recently, their integration into spectro-polarimetric
imaging [3, 17, 18, 23, 26, 45, 47, 50, 54, 67]. Prior work
using spectro-polarimetric images has shown potential for
skin analysis [67], vegetation classiﬁcation [63], shape reconstruction [27], object recognition [13], and segmentation [30, 55].
There are existing spectro-polarimetric datasets, summarized in Figure 2, that have been invaluable for these analysis [19, 38, 39, 52] and training neural networks [4, 11,
22, 36, 40–42, 46, 48]. However, these datasets unfortunately do not capture the diversity of real-world spectropolarimetric images as effectively as their trichromatic intensity counterparts do. They typically suffer from limited
object, scene, and illumination diversity, contain primarily
linear polarization information, and offer a small number
of images. To advance the ﬁeld, we propose a comprehensive spectro-polarimetric dataset that encompasses: (1) Full
Stokes polarimetric data, including both linear and circular polarization states, represented by Stokes vectors [9] for
each pixel and wavelength. (2) A diverse range of spectral
channels, facilitating in-depth exploration of the interplay
between spectrum and polarization. (3) A broad array of

22098

