This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Instance-Adaptive and Geometric-Aware Keypoint Learning
for Category-Level 6D Object Pose Estimation
Xiao Lin1 Wenfei Yang1,2 Yuan Gao1 Tianzhu Zhang1, *
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Jianghuai Advance Technology Center, Hefei, 230000, China
{llinxiao,wazs98}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

{yangwf,tzzhang}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Category-level 6D object pose estimation aims to estimate the rotation, translation and size of unseen instances within specific categories. In this area, dense
correspondence-based methods have achieved leading performance. However, they do not explicitly consider the local and global geometric information of different instances,
resulting in poor generalization ability to unseen instances
with significant shape variations. To deal with this problem, we propose a novel Instance-Adaptive and GeometricAware Keypoint Learning method for category-level 6D object pose estimation (AG-Pose), which includes two key designs: (1) The first design is an Instance-Adaptive Keypoint Detection module, which can adaptively detect a set
of sparse keypoints for various instances to represent their
geometric structures. (2) The second design is a GeometricAware Feature Aggregation module, which can efficiently
integrate the local and global geometric information into
keypoint features. These two modules can work together
to establish robust keypoint-level correspondences for unseen instances, thus enhancing the generalization ability of the model.Experimental results on CAMERA25 and
REAL275 datasets show that the proposed AG-Pose outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a large margin without
category-specific shape priors.

1. Introduction
The 6D object pose estimation task aims to predict the rotation, translation and size of objects with 2D/3D observations. Due to its great potential in many real-world applications such as robotic manipulation [25, 38, 39], augmented
reality [1, 23] and autonomous driving [3, 7, 22], this task
has been attracting increasing attention in the research community. While many previous methods [10, 11, 19, 27, 34,
41] have achieved significant performance on instance-level
6D object pose estimation, their reliance on instance-level
* Corresponding author.

Dense Correspondence
Prediction

Correspondence Error Map

Pose Estimation

a) Existing dense correspondence-based method DPDN

b) Local Geometric Information

c) Global Geometric Information

Figure 1. a) The visualization for the correspondence error
map and final pose estimation of the dense correspondence-based
method, DPDN [17]. Green/red indicates small/large errors and
GT/predicted bounding box. b) Points belonging to different parts
of the same instance may exhibit similar visual features. Thus, the
local geometric information is essential to distinguish them from
each other. c) Points belonging to different instances may exhibit
similar local geometric structures. Therefore, the global geometric information is crucial for correctly mapping them to the corresponding NOCS coordinates.

CAD models hinders their generalization to novel instances.
To deal with this problem, category-level 6D object pose
estimation has been introduced in [35], which aims to estimate the poses of unseen instances within specific categories without using their CAD models.
In the category-level 6D object pose estimation task, networks are trained with numerous CAD models of different instances and required to estimate the 6D poses of unseen instances which belong to the same category but have
different 3D shapes. Consequently, the main challenge of
this task lies in the significant intra-category shape variation. Most of the existing category-level methods aim to
establish dense correspondences between observed image
points (RGB or RGB-D) and the Normalized Object Coor-

21040

