This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Single-to-Dual-View Adaptation for Egocentric 3D Hand Pose Estimation
Ruicong Liu

Takehiko Ohkawa
Mingfang Zhang
The University of Tokyo, Japan

Yoichi Sato

{lruicong, ohkawa-t, mfzhang, ysato}@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The pursuit of accurate 3D hand pose estimation stands
as a keystone for understanding human activity in the realm
of egocentric vision. The majority of existing estimation
methods still rely on single-view images as input, leading
to potential limitations, e.g., limited field-of-view and ambiguity in depth. To address these problems, adding another
camera to better capture the shape of hands is a practical direction. However, existing multi-view hand pose estimation methods suffer from two main drawbacks: 1) Requiring multi-view annotations for training, which are expensive. 2) During testing, the model becomes inapplicable if camera parameters/layout are not the same as those
used in training. In this paper, we propose a novel Singleto-Dual-view adaptation (S2DHand) solution that adapts a
pre-trained single-view estimator to dual views. Compared
with existing multi-view training methods, 1) our adaptation process is unsupervised, eliminating the need for multiview annotation. 2) Moreover, our method can handle arbitrary dual-view pairs with unknown camera parameters,
making the model applicable to diverse camera settings.
Specifically, S2DHand is built on certain stereo constraints,
including pair-wise cross-view consensus and invariance
of transformation between both views. These two stereo
constraints are used in a complementary manner to generate pseudo-labels, allowing reliable adaptation. Evaluation results reveal that S2DHand achieves significant improvements on arbitrary camera pairs under both in-dataset
and cross-dataset settings, and outperforms existing adaptation methods with leading performance. Project page:
https://github.com/ut-vision/S2DHand.

1. Introduction
Delving into the realm of egocentric vision (first-person
view), the pursuit of refining 3D hand pose estimation
stands as a keystone for understanding human activity. This
quest not only forges new paths in human-computer interaction [31, 34, 38], but also empowers imitation learning
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number
JP20H04205 and JST ACT-X Grant Number JPMJAX2007.

(a)

Traditional
single view

Pre-trained

Single-to-dual-view pose1
adaptation
pose2
(Our method)

1) cross-view consensus
2) Invariance of
transformation

Adapted

(b)

Arbitrary
dual views

3D prediction

Input image

Estimation
error

Abstract

Before
After

View1 View2 Dualview

Shared
weights

View 1&2 images

Hand pose
estimator

View 1&2
predictions

Figure 1. From (a) to (b), our single-to-dual-view adaptation
method adapts a traditional single-view hand pose estimator to arbitrary dual views and achieves better accuracy. (a) Traditional
single-view hand pose estimation. (b) Inference process of the
adapted model under a dual-view setting.

[8, 13, 37]. Moreover, it enhances the immersive experience in augmented/virtual reality (AR/VR) to new heights
[15, 33]. Recently, with the advancements of AR/VR headsets, egocentric data has become increasingly prevalent
[5, 10], leading to an increasing demand for estimating 3D
hand poses from egocentric viewpoints.
To achieve better 3D hand pose estimation performance,
recent years have witnessed many networks with various
structures [7, 39, 46]. However, the majority of existing
hand pose estimation methods are still under a single-view
setting, which is convenient but leads to potential limitations, e.g., limited field-of-view and ambiguity in depth. To
address these problems, a potential solution is to add another camera to expand the field-of-view and reduce depth
ambiguity by capturing the hand shape from an additional
view angle. Furthermore, the use of multiple cameras also
aligns with industry trends, as demonstrated by the latest
AR/VR headsets such as the Apple Vision Pro and Meta
Quest, which feature multiple egocentric cameras. Overall,
an unavoidable trend towards multi-view settings in hand
pose estimation is emerging, driven by its technological advantages and the direction of industrial development.
Currently, several existing studies [4, 12, 19] have paid
attention to hand pose estimation under multi-view settings.

677

