This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DPHMs: Diffusion Parametric Head Models for Depth-based Tracking
Jiapeng Tang1
1

Angela Dai1

Yinyu Nie1

Lev Markhasin2

Justus Thies3

Matthias Nießner1

Technical University of Munich 2 Sony Semiconductor Solutions Europe
3
Technical University of Darmstadt
https://tangjiapeng.github.io/projects/DPHMs

t

DPHMs

t

regularize

Figure 1. We present DPHMs, a diffusion parametric head model that is used for robust head reconstruction and expression tracking
from monocular depth sequences. Leveraging the DPHM diffusion prior, we effectively constrain the identity and expression codes on the
underlying latent manifold when fitting to noisy and partial observations of commodity depth sensors.

Abstract
We introduce Diffusion Parametric Head Models
(DPHMs), a generative model that enables robust volumetric head reconstruction and tracking from monocular depth
sequences. While recent volumetric head models, such as
NPHMs, can now excel in representing high-fidelity head
geometries, tracking and reconstructing heads from realworld single-view depth sequences remains very challenging, as the fitting to partial and noisy observations is underconstrained. To tackle these challenges, we propose a latent
diffusion-based prior to regularize volumetric head reconstruction and tracking. This prior-based regularizer effectively constrains the identity and expression codes to lie on
the underlying latent manifold which represents plausible
head shapes. To evaluate the effectiveness of the diffusionbased prior, we collect a dataset of monocular Kinect sequences consisting of various complex facial expression
motions and rapid transitions. We compare our method
to state-of-the-art tracking methods and demonstrate improved head identity reconstruction as well as robust expression tracking.

1. Introduction
The fascination with 3D models of human heads spans
across millennia, evolving from sculptural artistry to the
realm of computer graphics. Creating a digital twin for each
person is poised to revolutionize entertainment and communication, potentially transforming applications in video
calls, augmented reality, virtual reality, animated movies,
and gaming. For this revolution, we have to use affordable hardware that is accessible to everyone like webcams
or Kinect-like depth sensors that are built into smartphones
and laptops. Especially to capture the metrical size of a
human, the depth sensors play an important role, as actual distances are measured. However, with a single depth
sensor, only a part of the person is visible and the visible part contains sensor and surface-dependent noise. This
leads to a generally under-constraint reconstruction problem which needs to be addressed with data priors [5–
8, 10, 11, 40, 51, 53].
The most common data priors for face reconstruction
are so-called 3D morphable models (3DMM) [5, 40] which
capture facial shape and expression variations using Principal Component Analysis. However, these 3DMMs use

1111

