This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SatSynth: Augmenting Image-Mask Pairs through Diffusion Models
for Aerial Semantic Segmentation
Aysim Toker1

Marvin Eisenberger1
1

Daniel Cremers1

Technical University of Munich
(b) OpenEarthMap [64]

NVIDIA

(c) LoveDA [60]

Mask y′

Image x′

(a) iSAID [61]

2

Laura Leal-Taixé2

Figure 1. We leverage generative image diffusion to synthesize novel training data instances (x′ , y′ ) ∼ p(x, y) for a given labeled earth
observation dataset [60, 61, 64]. In our experiments, we demonstrate that integrating such synthetic pairs as training data for downstream
semantic segmentation yields significant quantitative improvements.

Abstract
In recent years, semantic segmentation has become a
pivotal tool in processing and interpreting satellite imagery.
Yet, a prevalent limitation of supervised learning techniques
remains the need for extensive manual annotations by experts. In this work, we explore the potential of generative
image diffusion to address the scarcity of annotated data in
earth observation tasks. The main idea is to learn the joint
data manifold of images and labels, leveraging recent advancements in denoising diffusion probabilistic models. To
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to generate both
images and corresponding masks for satellite segmentation.
We find that the obtained pairs not only display high quality in fine-scale features but also ensure a wide sampling
diversity. Both aspects are crucial for earth observation
data, where semantic classes can vary severely in scale and
occurrence frequency. We employ the novel data instances
for downstream segmentation, as a form of data augmentation. In our experiments, we provide comparisons to prior
works based on discriminative diffusion models or GANs.
We demonstrate that integrating generated samples yields
significant quantitative improvements for satellite semantic
segmentation – both compared to baselines and when training only on the original data.

1. Introduction
Satellite imagery is a powerful tool to monitor the earth’s
surface, both in terms of specific events and global trends
in land use. This has direct implications for humanitarian challenges such as disaster response, food security, and
quantifying the impact of climate change. The United Nations summarizes a number of landmark objectives in its
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)1 , in which they include general long-term goals such as the accessibility of
clean water (SDG-6), reducing carbon emissions (SDG-13),
or maintaining forests and combating desertification (SDG15). In this context, satellite data can help provide crucial
insights for monitoring progress, facilitating more targeted
interventions. At the beginning of August 2023, the extent of Antarctic sea ice was observed to be 2.4 million km2
less than the mean value from previous records (1979 to
2022), an area larger than Greenland. Monitoring this
alarming trend, now commonly referred to as a five-sigma
event among experts, was largely made possible through the
wide-spread use of satellite observations.
While raw satellite data is readily available from various
sources, obtaining corresponding semantic labels is challenging and costly due to the need for extensive manual
1 https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/sustainabledevelopment-goals/

27695

