This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Matching Anything by Segmenting Anything
Siyuan Li1 Lei Ke1
Mattia Segu1
1

Martin Danelljan1 Luigi Piccinelli 1
Luc Van Gool1,2 Fisher Yu1

ETH Zürich

2

INSAIT

Abstract
The robust association of the same objects across video
frames in complex scenes is crucial for many applications,
especially multiple object tracking (MOT). Current methods predominantly rely on labeled domain-specific video
datasets, which limits the cross-domain generalization of
learned similarity embeddings. We propose MASA, a novel
method for robust instance association learning, capable of
matching any objects within videos across diverse domains
without tracking labels. Leveraging the rich object segmentation from the Segment Anything Model (SAM), MASA
learns instance-level correspondence through exhaustive
data transformations. We treat the SAM outputs as dense
object region proposals and learn to match those regions
from a vast image collection. We further design a universal
MASA adapter which can work in tandem with foundational
segmentation or detection models and enable them to track
any detected objects. Those combinations present strong
zero-shot tracking ability in complex domains. Extensive
tests on multiple challenging MOT and MOTS benchmarks
indicate that the proposed method, using only unlabeled
static images, achieves even better performance than stateof-the-art methods trained with fully annotated in-domain
video sequences, in zero-shot association. Our code is
available at github.com/siyuanliii/masa.

1. Introduction
Multiple object tracking (MOT) is one of the fundamental problems in computer vision. It plays a pivotal role
in numerous robotics systems such as autonomous driving. Tracking requires both detecting the objects of interest in videos and associating them across frames. While
recent advancements in segmentation and detection foundation models [28, 30, 35, 63, 71] have demonstrated an
exceptional ability to detect and segment any objects, associating those objects in videos remains challenging. Recent successful multiple object tracking approaches [31, 59]
have emphasized the importance of learning discriminative

Rich collection of unlabelled images from diverse domain

Bootstrap
Sampling

Segment Everything

φ(•)
SAM
Backbone Features

Ø(•)

MASA Adapter
Pixel Correspondence

Instance Correspondence

Dense
Similarity
Learning
Positive
Negative

Figure 1. Given an unlabeled image from any domain, we apply strong augmentations, φ(·) and ϕ(·), to the image, generating two different views with automatically established pixel correspondences. Then, we leverage the rich object-level information
encoded by the foundation segmentation model SAM to transfer
the pixel-level to dense instance-level correspondence. Such correspondences enable us to utilize a diverse collection of unlabelled
images to train a universal tracking adapter atop any segmentation
or detection foundation models e.g. SAM. This adapter empowers
the foundational models to track any objects they have detected,
and shows strong zero-shot tracking ability in complex domains.

instance embeddings for accurate association. Some [41]
even argued that it is the only necessary tracking component besides detection.
However, learning effective object association usually
requires a significant amount of annotated data. While collecting detection labels on a diverse set of images is laborious, obtaining tracking labels on videos is even more challenging. Consequently, current MOT datasets mostly focus
on objects from a specific domain with a small number of

18963

