This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Omni-Q: Omni-Directional Scene Understanding for Unsupervised Visual
Grounding
Sai Wang, Yutian Lin*, Yu Wu*
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
{wangsai23, yutian.lin, wuyucs}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised visual grounding methods alleviate the issue of expensive manual annotation of image-query pairs by
generating pseudo-queries. However, existing methods are
prone to confusing the spatial relationships between objects
and rely on designing complex prompt modules to generate query texts, which severely impedes the ability to generate accurate and comprehensive queries due to ambiguous
spatial relationships and manually-defined fixed templates.
To tackle these challenges, we propose a omni-directional
language query generation approach for unsupervised visual grounding named Omni-Q. Specifically, we develop a
3D spatial relation module to extend the 2D spatial representation to 3D, thereby utilizing 3D location information
to accurately determine the spatial position among objects.
Besides, we introduce a spatial graph module, leveraging
the power of graph structures to establish accurate and diverse object relationships and thus enhancing the flexibility
of query generation. Extensive experiments on five public
benchmark datasets demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art unsupervised
methods by up to 16.17%. In addition, when applied in the
supervised setting, our method can freely save up to 60%
human annotations without a loss of performance.

1. Introduction
Visual grounding [11, 15], also known as Referring Expression Comprehension (REC), has been rapidly developed in
recent years. Its purpose is to locate relevant objects in
an image based on a language query and serves as a fundamental component for various multi-modal tasks, such
as image captioning [10, 41] and visual question answering [2, 27, 47].
The mainstream visual grounding methods heavily rely
on manual-annotated dataset, which can be broadly categorized into two types: fully supervised [5, 9] and
* Corresponding author.

(a) original image

(b) query of different methods

Figure 1. Comparison of queries generated by Pseudo-Q and
Omni-Q. (a) The object locations with their descriptions. (b) The
generation mechanism of Pseudo-Q and Omni-Q are highlighted
by pink and blue boxes, respectively.

weakly-supervised [4, 32]. Fully supervised methods utilize region-query pairs provided in the dataset for training, while weakly-supervised methods solely rely on images and queries without any box information. Since clearly
describing the appearance and location of the object is timeconsuming and labor-intensive, annotating the language
query becomes the bottleneck of dataset labeling.
To alleviate the high annotation cost, some works attempt to address unsupervised REC without queries nor
object boxes. Pseudo-Q [13] is one of the most representative methods, which leverages off-the-shelf detector
and attribute classifiers to describe the object, and generate pseudo queries based on prompts. Since Pseudo-Q only
captures information within the same category, it lacks the
ability to model the inter-category object relationships. It
also designs a complex prompt module to refine generated
pseudo queries to tailor for visual grounding task.
However, the aforementioned method only models the
spatial relationships according to the 2D coordinate values,
e.g., using the relative spatial relations of 2D pixels to represent their 3D relations in the real world, which may lead
to wrong descriptions. As shown in Figure 1(a), the object
described in the red box should rely on front-rear spatial re-

14261

