This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Blind Image Deblurring Based on Self-Enhancement
Lufei Chen
Xiangpeng Tian
Shuhua Xiong
Yinjie Lei
Chao Ren*
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Sichuan University, China
{chenlufei, tianxp}@stu.scu.edu.cn, {xiongsh, yinjie, chaoren}@scu.edu.cn

CycleGAN

Abstract
Significant progress in image deblurring has been
achieved by deep learning methods, especially the remarkable performance of supervised models on paired synthetic
data. However, real-world quality degradation is more complex than synthetic datasets, and acquiring paired data in
real-world scenarios poses significant challenges. To address these challenges, we propose a novel unsupervised
image deblurring framework based on self-enhancement.
The framework progressively generates improved pseudosharp and blurry image pairs without the need for real paired
datasets, and the generated image pairs with higher qualities
can be used to enhance the performance of the reconstructor. To ensure the generated blurry images are closer to
the real blurry images, we propose a novel re-degradation
principal component consistency loss, which enforces the
principal components of the generated low-quality images to
be similar to those of re-degraded images from the original
sharp ones. Furthermore, we introduce the self-enhancement
strategy that significantly improves deblurring performance
without increasing the computational complexity of network
during inference. Through extensive experiments on multiple
real-world blurry datasets, we demonstrate the superiority
of our approach over other state-of-the-art unsupervised
methods.

1. Introduction
Image deblurring is a classical problem in the field of computer vision, which aims to recover a clear image from its
blurred version. The image deblurring tasks can be divided
into blind and non-blind deblurring, where the blind image
deblurring with unknown degradation is more challenging in
general. Conventional model-based methods for blind image
deblurring typically involve two main steps: estimating the
blur kernel, and then reconstructing the sharp image from
the blurred input [10, 26, 40, 42]. These methods’ performance is largely constrained by the accuracy of blur kernal
* Corresponding author

FCLGAN

UIDGAN

GoPro
HIDE

SEMGUD
(Ours)

USR-DA

RealBlur-J
RealBlur-R

USDF

UAUD

Figure 1. Performance comparison of our proposed SEMGUD with
other unsupervised methods [12, 23, 36, 39, 48, 50] on different
datasets.

estimation. For instance, in [27], the dark channel prior is
used to estimate the blur kernel and reconstruct the sharp
image. However, the blurry characteristics in real-world scenarios are quite complex, making it challenging to accurately
estimate the optimal blur kernel. In addition, these methods often require complex iterative optimisation processes,
which may lead to long inference time.
In recent years, with the rapid development of deep learning technology, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
been widely used in deblurring tasks, achieving significant
success. The supervised methods [4–6, 15, 16, 19, 29, 34, 44–
46] focus on training deep neural network models using a
large number of paired sharp and blurry images. This enables the network to learn the mapping from blurry images
to sharp images without the need for blur kernel estimation, achieving end-to-end reconstruction of the blurry and
sharp images. For example, DeepDeblur [24] proposes a
multi-scale CNN to implement a coarse-to-fine processing
pipeline and directly restores sharp images. However, in
the real world cases, for the supervised learning methods,
collecting paired datasets from the real world is challenging,
and manually synthesized datasets are difficult to simulate
the complex real image degradation processes.
Compared to supervised deep learning methods, unsupervised deep learning methods [3, 25, 49, 50] for real world

25691

