This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Blur-aware Spatio-temporal Sparse Transformer for Video Deblurring
Huicong Zhang1 , Haozhe Xie2 , Hongxun Yao 1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
https://vilab.hit.edu.cn/projects/bsstnet
K/V/Q

Optical flows

…
…

…

(c) Standard Spatio-temporal Transformer

Std. Transformer
Ours

…
12

24

36

48

…

…

60

Temporal Window Length

(b) FLOPs Comparison

Input

K/V
Top 50%
Btm. 50%

Q

(d) Blur-aware Spatio-temporal Sparse Transformer

VRT

RVRT

Shift-Net+

(e) Standard Flow-guided Feature Alignment

Flow-guided
DCN

…

Attention

Ordered by blur levels

FLOPs

(a) Blur Map Generation
400
350
300
250
200
150
100

Attention

…

Flow-guided
DCN

Blur map

Blur frame

(f) Blur-aware Feature Alignment

BSSTNet (Ours)

GT

(g) Visual Comparisons on the GoPro dataset

Figure 1. (a) Large motions in optical flows are highlighted in blur maps. (b) Comparison of FLOPs between the standard spatio-temporal
transformer and the blur-aware spatio-temporal transformer. (c-d) Summary of the standard spatio-temporal transformer and the blur-aware
spatio-temporal transformer. (e-f) Summary of the standard flow-guided feature alignment and blur-aware feature alignment. (g) In the
visual comparisons on the GoPro dataset, the proposed BSSTNet restores the sharpest frame.

Abstract
Video deblurring relies on leveraging information from
other frames in the video sequence to restore the blurred regions in the current frame. Mainstream approaches employ
bidirectional feature propagation, spatio-temporal transformers, or a combination of both to extract information
from the video sequence. However, limitations in memory and computational resources constraints the temporal
window length of the spatio-temporal transformer, preventing the extraction of longer temporal contextual information from the video sequence. Additionally, bidirectional
feature propagation is highly sensitive to inaccurate optical flow in blurry frames, leading to error accumula-

tion during the propagation process. To address these issues, we propose BSSTNet, Blur-aware Spatio-temporal
Sparse Transformer Network. It introduces the blur map,
which converts the originally dense attention into a sparse
form, enabling a more extensive utilization of information
throughout the entire video sequence. Specifically, BSSTNet
(1) uses a longer temporal window in the transformer, leveraging information from more distant frames to restore the
blurry pixels in the current frame. (2) introduces bidirectional feature propagation guided by blur maps, which reduces error accumulation caused by the blur frame. The experimental results demonstrate the proposed BSSTNet outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on the GoPro and
DVD datasets.

Corresponding author: h.yao@hit.edu.cn

2673

