This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Map-Relative Pose Regression for Visual Re-Localization
Shuai Chen1,2

Tommaso Cavallari1
1
Niantic

Victor Adrian Prisacariu1,2
2
University of Oxford

Eric Brachmann1

Abstract
Pose regression networks predict the camera pose of a
query image relative to a known environment. Within this
family of methods, absolute pose regression (APR) has recently shown promising accuracy in the range of a few centimeters in position error. APR networks encode the scene
geometry implicitly in their weights. To achieve high accuracy, they require vast amounts of training data that, realistically, can only be created using novel view synthesis
in a days-long process. This process has to be repeated
for each new scene again and again. We present a new
approach to pose regression, map-relative pose regression
(marepo), that satisfies the data hunger of the pose regression network in a scene-agnostic fashion. We condition the pose regressor on a scene-specific map representation such that its pose predictions are relative to the scene
map. This allows us to train the pose regressor across
hundreds of scenes to learn the generic relation between
a scene-specific map representation and the camera pose.
Our map-relative pose regressor can be applied to new
map representations immediately or after mere minutes of
fine-tuning for the highest accuracy. Our approach outperforms previous pose regression methods by far on two
public datasets, indoor and outdoor. Code is available:
https://nianticlabs.github.io/marepo.

1. Introduction
Today, neural networks have conquered virtually all sectors
of computer vision, but there is still at least one task that
they struggle with: visual relocalization. What is visual
relocalization? Given a set of mapping images and their
poses, expressed in a common coordinate system, build a
scene representation. Later, given a query image, estimate
its pose, i.e. position and orientation, relative to the scene.
Successful approaches to visual relocalization rely
on predicting image-to-scene correspondences, either via
matching [8, 21, 38–40, 42, 57] or direct regression [4–
6, 14, 56], then solving for the pose using traditional and
robust algorithms like PnP [18] and RANSAC [17].
Adopting a different perspective, approaches based on

20x

Figure 1. Camera pose estimation performance vs. mapping
time. The figure shows the median translation error of several
pose regression relocalization methods on the 7-Scenes dataset and
the time required (proportional to the bubble size) to train each
relocalizer on the target scenes. Our proposed approach, marepo,
achieves superior performance – by far – on both metrics, thanks
to its integration of scene-specific geometric map priors within an
accurate, map-relative, pose regression framework.

pose regression [12, 25, 32, 46] attempt to perform visual
relocalization without resorting to traditional pose solving,
by using a single feed-forward neural network to infer poses
from single images. The mapping data is treated as a
training set where the camera extrinsics serve as supervision. Generally, pose regression approaches come in two
flavors, but they both struggle with accuracy compared to
correspondence-based methods.
Absolute pose regression (APR) methods [7, 24, 25] involve training a dedicated pose regressor for each individual
scene, enabling the prediction of camera poses to that particular scene. Though the scene coordinate space can be implicitly encoded in the weights of the neural networks, absolute pose regressors exhibit low pose estimation accuracy,
primarily due to the often limited training data available for
each scene, and struggle to generalize to unseen views [43].
Relative pose regression is a second flavor of pose regression methods [10, 16, 26, 51, 54]. The regressor is
trained to predict the relative pose between two images. In a
typical inference scenario, the regressor is applied to a pair
formed by an unseen query and an image from the mapping
set (typically selected via a nearest neighbor-type match-

20665

