This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

CORE-MPI: Consistency Object Removal with Embedding MultiPlane Image
Donggeun Yoon1,2 and Donghyeon Cho3 *
1
Department of Electronics Engineering, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, South Korea
2
Korea Electronics Technology Institute (KETI), Seongnam, South Korea
3
Department of Computer Science, Hanyang University, Seoul, South Korea
ehdrms903@gmail.com, doncho@hanyang.ac.kr

Abstract
Novel view synthesis is attractive for social media, but it
often contains unwanted details such as personal information that needs to be edited out for a better experience.
Multiplane image (MPI) is desirable for social media
because of its generality but it is complex and computationally expensive, making object removal challenging. To
address these challenges, we propose CORE-MPI, which
employs embedding images to improve the consistency
and accessibility of MPI object removal. CORE-MPI
allows for real-time transmission and interaction with
embedding images on social media, facilitating object
removal with a single mask. However, recovering the
geometric information hidden in the embedding images
is a significant challenge. Therefore, we propose a dualnetwork approach, where one network focuses on color
restoration and the other on inpainting the embedding
image including geometric information. For the training of
CORE-MPI, we introduce a pseudo-reference loss aimed
at proficient color recovery, even in complex scenes or
with large masks. Furthermore, we present a disparity
consistency loss to preserve the geometric consistency of
the inpainted region. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
CORE-MPI on RealEstate10K and UCSD datasets.

1. Introduction
The importance of visual content in applications such as social media has grown exponentially, highlighting the need
for innovative visual features to enhance user engagement
and experience on these platforms. In this digital age,
novel view synthesis (NVS) has emerged as a key technology [10, 45] that enables users to experience immersive
changes in visual content from different perspectives. However, the presence of unwanted objects, such as personal information, in synthesized images can significantly degrade
* Corresponding author.

Encoding

MPI
generation Original MPI

Embedding image

Removing

User A

Images

Social media f
Rendering

Decoding
Removed embedding image
Removed MPI

3D Views

User B

User A
User B

Figure 1. An overview of CORE-MPI: We create an embedding
image that encodes MPI data into a commonly used RGB format.
The embedding image is transmitted over the Internet, allowing
users to interact with it to create a mask for object removal. The
embedding image, devoid of these objects, is then converted back
into MPI to render novel views without the unwanted objects.

the user experience, thus object removal techniques are important in the pursuit of smooth and realistic NVS. Recent
advancements in deep learning, such as the neural radiance
field (NeRF) [26] and multiplane image (MPI) [25, 54],
have shown remarkable achievements in NVS. Studies are
currently being conducted to improve these techniques for
fast [7, 12, 35, 43], and efficient [8] rendering aiming to expand their practical applications. As these methods become
more user-friendly, there is a growing interest in removing
objects within these 3D representations [27, 48].
SPIn-NeRF [27] performs object removal from NeRF
by generating a 3D object mask based on a viewpoint derived from the trained NeRF model. However, this approach
is time-consuming because it requires propagation of the
object mask to the other viewpoints to create a 3D mask
and requires training the NeRF model twice. To address
these issues, recent research [48] has focused on accelerating mask generation. Despite these efforts, they have not

20081

