This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

GaussianAvatars: Photorealistic Head Avatars with Rigged 3D Gaussians
Shenhan Qian1
1

Tobias Kirschstein1
Simon Giebenhain1

Technical University of Munich

2

Liam Schoneveld2
Matthias Nießner1

Woven by Toyota

3

Davide Davoli3

Toyota Motor Europe NV/SA
associated partner by contracted service

Figure 1. We introduce GaussianAvatars, a new method to create photorealistic head avatars from multi-view videos. Our avatar is
represented by 3D Gaussian splats rigged to a parametric face model. We can fully control and animate our avatars in terms of pose,
expression, and view point as shown in the example renderings above.

Abstract
We introduce GaussianAvatars1 , a new method to create photorealistic head avatars that are fully controllable in
terms of expression, pose, and viewpoint. The core idea is
a dynamic 3D representation based on 3D Gaussian splats
that are rigged to a parametric morphable face model. This
combination facilitates photorealistic rendering while allowing for precise animation control via the underlying
parametric model, e.g., through expression transfer from a
driving sequence or by manually changing the morphable
model parameters. We parameterize each splat by a local
coordinate frame of a triangle and optimize for explicit displacement offset to obtain a more accurate geometric representation. During avatar reconstruction, we jointly optimize for the morphable model parameters and Gaussian
splat parameters in an end-to-end fashion. We demonstrate
the animation capabilities of our photorealistic avatar in
several challenging scenarios. For instance, we show reenactments from a driving video, where our method outperforms existing works by a significant margin.

1. Introduction
Creating animatable avatars of human heads has been a
longstanding problem in computer vision and graphics.
1 Project page: https://shenhanqian.github.io/gaussian-avatars

In particular, the ability to render photorealistic dynamic
avatars from arbitrary viewpoints enables numerous applications in gaming, movie production, immersive telepresence, and augmented or virtual reality. For such applications, it is also crucial to be able to control the avatar, and
for it to generalize well to novel poses and expressions.
Reconstructing a 3D representation able to jointly capture the appearance, geometry and dynamics of human
heads represents a major challenge for high-fidelity avatar
generation. The under-constrained nature of this reconstruction problem significantly complicates the task of
achieving a representation that combines novel-view rendering photorealism with expression controllability. Moreover, extreme expressions and facial details, like wrinkles,
the mouth interior, and hair, are difficult to capture, and can
produce visual artifacts easily noticed by humans.
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF [28]) and its variants
[2, 6, 29] have shown impressive results in reconstructing static scenes from multi-view observations. Followup works have extended NeRF to model dynamic scenes
for both arbitrary [22, 30, 31] and human-tailored scenarios
[13, 18]. These works achieve impressive results for novel
view rendering; however, they lack controllability and as
such do not generalize well to novel poses and expressions.
The recent 3D Gaussian Splatting method [15] achieves
even higher rendering quality than NeRF for novel-view
synthesis with real-time performance, optimizing for discrete geometric primitives (3D Gaussians) throughout 3D

20299

