This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Higher-order Relational Reasoning for Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction
Sungjune Kim1 , Hyung-gun Chi2 , Hyerin Lim3 , Karthik Ramani4 , Jinkyu Kim1* , and Sangpil Kim1*
1

Korea University, 2 Hanwha Vision America, 3 Hyundai Motor Company, 4 Purdue University

Abstract
Social relations have substantial impacts on the potential trajectories of each individual. Modeling these dynamics has been a central solution for more precise and accurate trajectory forecasting. However, previous works ignore the importance of ‘social depth’, meaning the influences flowing from different degrees of social relations. In
this work, we propose HighGraph, a graph-based pedestrian relational reasoning method that captures the higherorder dynamics of social interactions. First, we construct
a collision-aware relation graph based on the agents’ observed trajectories. Upon this graph structure, we build
our core module that aggregates the agent features from
diverse social distances. As a result, the network is able
to model complex social relations, thereby yielding more
accurate and socially acceptable trajectories. Our HighGraph is a plug-and-play module that can be easily applied to any current trajectory predictors. Extensive experiments with ETH/UCY and SDD datasets demonstrate that
our HighGraph noticeably improves the previous state-ofthe-art baselines both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Human trajectory forecasting is vital for designing safer
engineering applications such as urban planning [24] and
autonomous vehicles [6, 8, 27]. However, human motion
is easily susceptible to heterogeneous external forces, and
handling these factors still remains a challenge. Undoubtedly, one of the most dominant forces that affect human behavior in a crowded scene is a ‘social force’, and many previous works attempt to model this by incorporating interagent relations for trajectory prediction.
Early works demonstrate the importance of modeling social relations by extracting pair-wise interaction features.
For example, Social-LSTM [2] and Social-GAN[9] develop pooling mechanisms that encode pair-wise attractions. Social-STGCNN [22] formulate inter-agent relations
as a graph and perform graph convolution to aggregate the
features of neighboring pairs. However, considering the
‘flocking behavior’ of humans, these methods are unavail* Corresponding authors ({jinkyukim, spk7}@korea.ac.kr)

Figure 1. Example of different types of social relations. Higherorder relations contrast from pair-wise and group-wise relations in
that they capture the indirect and long-ranging influences of socially distant interactions. To the best of our knowledge, our work
is the first to consider higher-order social relations for pedestrian
trajectory prediction. Best viewed in color.

able to capture the scaled interactions. Therefore, recent
works suggest group-wise relational reasoning for a more
comprehensive understanding of human behaviors [17, 36].
These methods construct hypergraphs that encode social
behaviors in diverse group sizes. Increasing the topological magnitude of the relations offers a wider perception of
the scenes. Nevertheless, directly pairing each neighbor or
speculating their behaviors as a group may overlook the importance of indirect higher-order influences of each agent.
Social relations are in-depth. Human decisions are affected not only by direct and nearing factors but also by
socially distant ones. A certain pair-wise interaction between the local neighbors influences their future behaviors,
and the decision they make may further affect the future behaviors of the third person in the distance, and so on. This
chain-rule effect can be easily found in an urban crowded
scene. For example, when two acquaintances walk toward
each other, the relationship affects the path of those whose
original destination is near the meeting point of the two.
This trivial modification of the trajectories may further escalate to influence the following pedestrians’ motions.
Despite its massive impact on future behaviors, incorporating higher-order social relations for trajectory forecasting
has not well been explored. In this work, for the first time
in the literature, we propose a novel method that models the
higher-order dynamics of social interactions. Our work emphasizes the substantial influences of indirect interactions

15251

