This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Frozen CLIP: A Strong Backbone for Weakly Supervised Semantic
Segmentation

1

Yao Zhao3
Jimin Xiao2 *
Bingfeng Zhang1
Siyue Yu2 * Yunchao Wei3
2
3
China University of Petroleum (East China)
XJTLU
Beijing Jiaotong University

bingfeng.zhang@upc.edu.cn, {siyue.yu02, jimin.xiao}@xjtlu.edu.cn, yunchao.wei@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

“dog” text

“dog”
cls.

Weakly supervised semantic segmentation has witnessed
great achievements with image-level labels. Several recent
approaches use the CLIP model to generate pseudo labels
for training an individual segmentation model, while there
is no attempt to apply the CLIP model as the backbone to directly segment objects with image-level labels. In this paper,
we propose WeCLIP, a CLIP-based single-stage pipeline,
for weakly supervised semantic segmentation. Specifically,
the frozen CLIP model is applied as the backbone for semantic feature extraction, and a new decoder is designed
to interpret extracted semantic features for final prediction. Meanwhile, we utilize the above frozen backbone to
generate pseudo labels for training the decoder. Such labels cannot be optimized during training. We then propose a refinement module (RFM) to rectify them dynamically. Our architecture enforces the proposed decoder and
RFM to benefit from each other to boost the final performance. Extensive experiments show that our approach significantly outperforms other approaches with less training
cost. Additionally, our WeCLIP also obtains promising results for fully supervised settings. The code is available at
https://github.com/zbf1991/WeCLIP.

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) [2, 48,
56] aims to learn a pixel-level segmentation model from
weak supervision so as to reduce the manual annotation efforts. The common weak supervision signals contain scribble [27], bounding-box [43], point [4] and image-level labels [1, 19, 47, 52]. Among these supervisions, image-level
annotation is the most popular one, as such annotations can
be easily obtained through web-crawling.
There are two training solutions for WSSS with imagelevel labels: multi-stage training and single-stage training.
For existing single-stage approaches, their backbones rely
* Corresponding author.

ImageNet

CLIP

cls.

P.S.

P.S.

seg.
seg.

ImageNet

(a)
“dog”

(b)
Frozen

cls.

text
CLIP

P.S.

seg.

(c)

Trained

P.S.

Pseudo label

Cls.

Classification process

Seg.

Segmentation process

Figure 1. Comparisons between our approach and other singlestage or CLIP-based approaches. (a) Previous single-stage approach, which uses a trainable ImageNet [11] pre-trained backbone with trainable classification and segmentation process. (b)
Previous CLIP-based approach, which is a multi-stage approach
that uses the Frozen CLIP model to produce pseudo labels and
trains an individual ImageNet pre-trained segmentation model. (c)
Our approach. Our approach is a single-stage approach that uses
a frozen CLIP model as the backbone with a trainable segmentation process, significantly reducing the training cost.

on pre-training on ImageNet [11] and fine-tuning during
training, as in Fig. 1(a). Such single-stage training [3, 55]
focuses on using one model to directly segment objects with
weak signals as supervision. The primary consideration of
previous single-stage architectures is to online refine the
Class Activation Map (CAM) [39] or to improve the segmentation branch [57, 61]. Due to the complicated architecture, single-stage approaches perform normally worse than
multi-stage approaches.
On the other hand, multi-stage training attempts to utilize
several individual models to form a training pipeline [23,
26, 47], where offline pixel-level pseudo labels are firstly
generated from weak labels using CAM [63] and then a segmentation model is trained with such pseudo labels. Since
CAM can only highlight discriminate regions, many previous approaches focus on improving the quality of CAM [14,
49, 54, 59] for better pseudo labels. Besides, some recent
multi-stage approaches [25, 29, 51] attempt to introduce

3796

