This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Step Differences in Instructional Video
Tushar Nagarajan, Lorenzo Torresani
FAIR, Meta

Abstract
Comparing a user video to a reference how-to video is
a key requirement for AR/VR technology delivering personalized assistance tailored to the user’s progress. However,
current approaches for language-based assistance can only
answer questions about a single video. We propose an approach that first automatically generates large amounts of
visual instruction tuning data involving pairs of videos from
HowTo100M by leveraging existing step annotations and accompanying narrations, and then trains a video-conditioned
language model to jointly reason across multiple raw videos.
Our model achieves state-of-the-art performance at identifying differences between video pairs and ranking videos
based on the severity of these differences, and shows promising ability to perform general reasoning over multiple videos.

1. Introduction
Instructional how-to videos are an important medium for
learning new skills that offer in-depth visual demonstrations
of complex procedural activities. In turn, they serve as a
valuable resource for building AR/VR assistants that can
guide a user through a procedural activity, by aligning user
activity to a reference how-to video. Instructional videos
have thus been the subject of several recent datasets and
benchmarks that are driving new research [6, 9, 41, 45, 48,
59, 68, 69].
A key requirement for such systems is the ability to compare and contrast the user’s execution of a step in the activity
with the reference video step, to highlight similarities and
differences between them. For example, to let the user know
that they used too much detergent (while doing laundry)
or that the gravy is too thick (while cooking). This ability has direct value for personalized assistance applications
such as progress tracking, mistake detection and surfacing
user-activity driven tips.
More generally, reasoning about a video with respect to a
reference video is a fundamental problem for video understanding that has value for fine-grained video retrieval [11,
53, 54, 57] (e.g., to browse internet videos for “this movie

Reference

Candidate

Q: What is the main difference in tools?
A: The person directly uses his hands to
add toppings instead of tongs.
Q: Do these videos show similar actions?
A: Yes, both show adding of toppings to
hotdogs, but with some variations in
ingredients and tools.

Q: Am I done stirring the onions?
A: No, keep stirring till they become
golden brown like the video.

Figure 1. Main idea. Top: We train models to compare two
videos showing the same high-level keystep and to describe their
differences (e.g., in tools, ingredients, technique). Bottom: Once
trained, such models can then help answer questions about a user’s
activity compared to a reference (e.g., an internet how-to video)
like “did I do this step right?” or “am I done yet?”.

scene, but in a forest”), step detection [6, 45, 46, 48, 69]
(e.g., to recognize subtle variations in keysteps) and multivideo question answering and reasoning [5, 36] (e.g., to
answer comparative questions like “which video uses the
least amount of oil?”).
Despite its importance, there has been limited work on
comparing videos. Prior work has explored change captioning in images [14, 16, 17, 34, 39, 70], however these
works typically consider pixel-level differences (e.g., missing or moved objects; changed background objects) in static
scenes (e.g., the same parking lot; the same tabletop), or in
synthetically generated datasets [34]. They do not consider
important semantic differences in activities (e.g., differences
in tool use, subtle variations in actions and techniques or
visual differences due to state changes), which together with
the low-level visual differences, form a complete picture of
human-object interactions.
To address these limitations, we propose a videoconditioned language model (VCLM) approach to directly
compare two videos of same step in a procedural activity.
Specifically, we propose the difference question answering
task: given a reference and a candidate video, a model must
answer a question that involves reasoning across both videos
(e.g., what are the differences in tools? techniques?; do the
two videos show the same activity?). Such a model that

18740

