This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

OVMR: Open-Vocabulary Recognition with Multi-Modal References
Zehong Ma1 Shiliang Zhang1‡ Longhui Wei2 Qi Tian2
1
National Key Laboratory for Multimedia Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Peking University, 2 Huawei Inc.
zehongma@stu.pku.edu.cn, slzhang.jdl@pku.edu.cn, weilh2568@gmail.com, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Ĝ

The challenge of open-vocabulary recognition lies in the
model has no clue of new categories it is applied to. Existing works have proposed different methods to embed category cues into the model, e.g., through few-shot ﬁne-tuning,
providing category names or textual descriptions to VisionLanguage Models. Fine-tuning is time-consuming and degrades the generalization capability. Textual descriptions
could be ambiguous and fail to depict visual details. This
paper tackles open-vocabulary recognition from a different perspective by referring to multi-modal clues composed
of textual descriptions and exemplar images. Our method,
named OVMR, adopts two innovative components to pursue a more robust category cues embedding. A multi-modal
classiﬁer is ﬁrst generated by dynamically complementing
textual descriptions with image exemplars. A preferencebased reﬁnement module is hence applied to fuse uni-modal
and multi-modal classiﬁers, with the aim to alleviate issues
of low-quality exemplar images or textual descriptions. The
proposed OVMR is a plug-and-play module, and works well
with exemplar images randomly crawled from the Internet.
Extensive experiments have demonstrated the promising
performance of OVMR, e.g., it outperforms existing methods across various scenarios and setups. Codes are publicly
available at https://github.com/Zehong-Ma/OVMR.

1. Introduction
Open-vocabulary recognition aims to recognize unseen objects beyond the training set. It is challenging because the
model has no clue of new categories in the testing set. Besides efforts on pre-training models having strong generalization capability [33, 36, 41], recent works have developed
more lightweight strategies by embedding novel category
clues into pre-trained backbone models [18, 59]. Among
those works, a popular strategy is ﬁne-tuning a generalizable model on a small task-speciﬁc dataset [48, 58, 59].
‡ Corresponding author.

×

Fused Classifier

Perference-Based Fusion

Text-based
Classifier

Vision-Text
Classifier

Vision-based
Classifier

Multi-modal Classifier Generation

bat
Text

Exemplar Images

Figure 1. Illustration of the pipeline of our OVMR. It refers to
textual description and exemplar images to generate classiﬁers for
novel categories. The textual description could be ambiguous and
fail to depict visual details. The exemplar images show diversiﬁed qualities. OVMR effectively complements visual and textual
features and fuses classiﬁers to alleviate issues of low quality exemplar images or textual description.

This few-shot ﬁne-tuning strategy is effective in optimizing
task-speciﬁc parameters, but is time-consuming, inﬂexible,
and degrades the generalization capabilities.
Another line of research is leveraging the strong generalization capability of Vision-Language Models (VLMs) by
providing images or textual descriptions as clues of novel
categories [17, 54]. Some works take text embeddings extracted from textual descriptions as the classiﬁer for novel
categories [48, 62]. Textual descriptions can be ambiguous
and lack detailed descriptions to visual cues. For example, the word “bat” could refer to either a piece of sports
equipment or an animal. Those issues scarify the discriminative power of resulting classiﬁers. Collecting exemplar
images could be another option for providing category cues
as shown in previous works [17, 50]. However, image samples could show diversiﬁed qualities easily affected by issues of domain gaps, cluttered backgrounds, etc.

16571

