This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Content-Style Decoupling for Unsupervised Makeup Transfer
without Generating Pseudo Ground Truth

1

Zhaoyang Sun1 Shengwu Xiong1,2,3,4 Yaxiong Chen1 Yi Rong1 †
Wuhan University of Technology 2 Wuhan Huaxia Institute of Technology
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 Qiongtai Normal University

zhaoyangsun0304@outlook.com, {xiongsw, chenyaxiong, yrong}@whut.edu.cn

Abstract
The absence of real targets to guide the model training is one of the main problems with the makeup transfer
task. Most existing methods tackle this problem by synthesizing pseudo ground truths (PGTs). However, the generated PGTs are often sub-optimal and their imprecision will
eventually lead to performance degradation. To alleviate
this issue, in this paper, we propose a novel Content-Style
Decoupled Makeup Transfer (CSD-MT) method, which
works in a purely unsupervised manner and thus eliminates the negative effects of generating PGTs. Specifically, based on the frequency characteristics analysis, we
assume that the low-frequency (LF) component of a face
image is more associated with its makeup style information, while the high-frequency (HF) component is more related to its content details. This assumption allows CSDMT to decouple the content and makeup style information in each face image through the frequency decomposition. After that, CSD-MT realizes makeup transfer by maximizing the consistency of these two types of information
between the transferred result and input images, respectively. Two newly designed loss functions are also introduced to further improve the transfer performance. Extensive quantitative and qualitative analyses show the effectiveness of our CSD-MT method. Our code is available at
https://github.com/Snowfallingplum/CSD-MT.

1. Introduction
Given a pair of source and reference face images, the main
goal of makeup transfer is to generate an image that simultaneously satisfies the following conditions: (1) Containing the makeup styles transferred from the reference image,
such as lipstick, eye shadow and powder blush. (2) Preserving the content details of the source image, including iden† Corresponding author.

tity, facial structure and background. This technique has
been widely studied and is attracting increasing attentions
from the computer vision and artificial intelligence communities, due to its great economic potential in the fields
of e-commerce, entertainment and beauty industries. However, considering the diversity and complexity of different
makeup styles, makeup transfer remains a challenging task.
One of the major problems with the makeup transfer task
is its unsupervised nature, which means that there is no real
transferred image that can be used as a target ground truth to
guide the model training. To address this problem, most existing methods [3, 7, 9, 13, 17, 21, 23, 27, 30, 32] propose to
synthesize a pseudo ground truth (PGT) image, from each
input source-reference image pair, as an alternative supervision target. After that, the model parameters are optimized
by minimizing the difference between each generated transferred output and its corresponding PGT (see Figure 1(a)).
As illustrated in Figure 2, according to the PGT generation strategy used, previous makeup transfer approaches
can be roughly divided into two categories: (1) Histogrammatching-based methods [3, 9, 13, 15, 32] attempt to align
the color distribution of each facial region (e.g., lip, eye and
face areas) in the source image with that of the same region
in the reference face. However, the PGT produced by this
strategy discards all spatial information of makeup styles,
and usually suffers from the large color difference (e.g., eye
shadow and powder blusher) between the source and reference images. (2) Geometric-distortion-based methods
[7, 21] synthesize the PGT by warping the reference face
so that its shape (typically represented by some facial landmarks) is matched to that of the source one. But such process often introduces undesired artifacts and also leads to
the loss of source content information. As a result, these
low-quality PGTs will consequently degrade the transfer
performance of all above-mentioned methods. Although a
recent effort [27] has been made to create more effective
PGTs through a hybrid strategy, the generated PGTs are
still sub-optimal and their imprecision will severely affect
the final transferred results.

7601

