This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Improving Single Domain-Generalized Object Detection: A Focus on
Diversification and Alignment
Muhammad Sohail Danish1

Muhammad Haris Khan1

M. Saquib Sarfraz3, 4
1

Muhammad Akhtar Munir1, 2

Mohsen Ali2
2

Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Information Technology University of Punjab,
3

Mercedes-Benz Tech Innovation, 4 Karlsruhe Institute of Technology

muhammad.sohail@mbzuai.ac.ae, muhammad.haris@mbzuai.ac.ae

Abstract
In this work, we tackle the problem of domain generalization for object detection, specifically focusing on the
scenario where only a single source domain is available.
We propose an effective approach that involves two key
steps: diversifying the source domain and aligning detections based on class prediction confidence and localization. Firstly, we demonstrate that by carefully selecting a
set of augmentations, a base detector can outperform existing methods for single domain generalization by a good
margin. This highlights the importance of domain diversification in improving the performance of object detectors.
Secondly, we introduce a method to align detections from
multiple views, considering both classification and localization outputs. This alignment procedure leads to better generalized and well-calibrated object detector models, which
are crucial for accurate decision-making in safety-critical
applications. Our approach is detector-agnostic and can
be seamlessly applied to both single-stage and two-stage
detectors. To validate the effectiveness of our proposed
methods, we conduct extensive experiments and ablations
on challenging domain-shift scenarios. The results consistently demonstrate the superiority of our approach compared to existing methods. Our code and models are available at: https://github.com/msohaildanish/DivAlign.

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed remarkable performance
improvements in supervised object detection [39, 47, 48,
53]. The success of these methods rely on the assumption that the training and testing data are sampled from the
same distribution. However, in many real-world applications, such as autonomous driving, this assumption is often violated and these object detectors usually show degraded performance due to a phenomenon called domain-

shift [3, 5, 49]. Shifts in real-world domains are typically
caused by environmental alterations, like varying weather
and time conditions. These changes manifest in diverse
contrasts, brightness levels, and textures among others.
A prominent line of research that attempts to alleviate the
impact of domain-shift is known as unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) [20, 24, 42, 49, 63, 68, 72]. Given the
labeled data from the source domain and unlabelled data
from the target domain, the aim of UDA methods is to align
the source and target data distributions so that the trained
model can generalize well to the target domain [67]. An
obvious limitation of UDA methods is that they require precollecting data and re-training the model for different target
domains. Collecting data, even without annotation, for all
possible domain shifts and training the model when shift
happens is difficult and sometime not possible.
To cope with the domain-shift problem, a more realistic albeit challenging problem is domain generalization
[2, 11, 23, 26, 32, 34, 35, 40, 58]. The goal of domain generalization (DG) is to learn a generalizable model
typically from multiple source domains, available during
training, that can perform well on the unseen target domain. A dominant class of DG methods attempts to learn
domain-invariant feature space across multiple source domains [1, 11, 33, 35]. The performance of these methods is sensitive to the number of available source domains
[7, 70]. In many realistic scenarios, acquiring labeled data
from multiple source domains is often costly and timeconsuming, eventually restricting the potential utilization
of such methods. For these reasons, generalizing from a
single-source domain is a more practical setting.
Recent surveys [29, 70] reveal that very little work has
been done on DG for object detection [38, 60], despite the
fact that object detectors occupy an important position in
many safety-critical and security-sensitive applications e.g.,
autonomous driving. An object detector should be able to
provide accurate as well as calibrated detections in different

17732

