This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LASIL: Learner-Aware Supervised Imitation Learning For Long-term
Microscopic Traffic Simulation
Ke Guo1,2,3 , Zhenwei Miao1 *, Wei Jing1 , Weiwei Liu1 , Weizi Li4 , Dayang Hao1 , Jia Pan2,3
1
Alibaba Group 2 The University of Hong Kong
3
Centre for Transformative Garment Production, Hong Kong 4 University of Tennessee, Knoxville
u3006612@connect.hku.hk, zhenwei.mzw@alibaba-inc.com
21wjing@gmail.com, 11932061@zju.edu.cn, weizili@utk.edu, jpan@cs.hku.hk

Abstract
Microscopic traffic simulation plays a crucial role in
transportation engineering by providing insights into individual vehicle behavior and overall traffic flow. However, creating a realistic simulator that accurately replicates human driving behaviors in various traffic conditions
presents significant challenges. Traditional simulators relying on heuristic models often fail to deliver accurate simulations due to the complexity of real-world traffic environments. Due to the covariate shift issue, existing imitation learning-based simulators often fail to generate stable
long-term simulations. In this paper, we propose a novel approach called learner-aware supervised imitation learning
to address the covariate shift problem in multi-agent imitation learning. By leveraging a variational autoencoder
simultaneously modeling the expert and learner state distribution, our approach augments expert states such that
the augmented state is aware of learner state distribution.
Our method, applied to urban traffic simulation, demonstrates significant improvements over existing state-of-theart baselines in both short-term microscopic and longterm macroscopic realism when evaluated on the real-world
dataset pNEUMA.

1. Introduction
Microscopic traffic simulation is a cornerstone in transportation engineering. It enables engineers to predict and
analyze individual vehicle behavior, providing crucial insights into how alterations in road structures or traffic management strategies might influence overall traffic flow; it allows for the testing of diverse scenarios without disrupting
real-world traffic; and it enhances safety by pinpointing potential hazards and devising strategies to mitigate risks. By
leveraging simulations, engineers can optimize traffic flow,
* Zhenwei Miao is the corresponding author.

reduce congestion, and enhance overall efficiency, proving
particularly advantageous in designing or enhancing road
networks. Using the simulation data, policymakers and
urban planners can make informed decisions aligned with
community needs regarding transportation infrastructure.
However, generating realistic and accurate simulations
that can simultaneously replicate the microscopic response
of human drivers in various traffic conditions and long-term
macroscopic traffic statistics is challenging. In recent years,
significant efforts have been invested in developing realistic traffic simulators with the goal to accurately model human driving behaviors. Traditional traffic simulators, such
as SUMO [24], AIMSUN [2], and MITSIM [44], typically
rely on heuristic car-following models like the Intelligent
Driver Model (IDM) [42]. However, despite carefully calibrating parameters, the rule-based models often fail to deliver accurate simulations due to the complexity of realworld traffic environments [12, 30]. Factors such as the road
structure, neighboring vehicles, and even driver psychology can influence the decisions of human drivers, making
it challenging to achieve accurate simulations [7, 27, 43].
In pursuit of realistic traffic simulations, researchers
have turned to neural networks to represent the driving
model through imitation learning (IL) from human demonstrations. Most traffic simulation approaches [4, 34, 41]
leverage behavior cloning (BC) [32] to learn a driving policy by minimizing the disparity between the model output and the human demonstrations in training data. However, BC is hindered by covariate shift [37], where the
state induced by the learner’s policy progressively diverges
from the expert’s distribution. Existing BC-based simulators have succeeded in short-term (less than 20 seconds)
simulation applications like autonomous driving tests but
often fail to generate stable long-term simulations.
To address covariate shift, existing methods such as
DAgger [37], DART [25], and ADAPS [28] incorporate
supervisor (humans or principled simulations) corrections

15386

