This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ECLIPSE: Efficient Continual Learning in Panoptic Segmentation
with Visual Prompt Tuning
Beomyoung Kim1,2

Joonsang Yu1

NAVER Cloud, ImageVision1

Sung Ju Hwang2
KAIST2

{beomyoung.kim,joonsang.yu}@navercorp.com, sjhwang82@kaist.ac.kr

Old Model (step t-1)

Abstract
Panoptic segmentation, combining semantic and instance segmentation, stands as a cutting-edge computer vision task. Despite recent progress with deep learning models, the dynamic nature of real-world applications necessitates continual learning, where models adapt to new classes
(plasticity) over time without forgetting old ones (catastrophic forgetting). Current continual segmentation methods often rely on distillation strategies like knowledge distillation and pseudo-labeling, which are effective but result in
increased training complexity and computational overhead.
In this paper, we introduce a novel and efficient method for
continual panoptic segmentation based on Visual Prompt
Tuning, dubbed ECLIPSE. Our approach involves freezing
the base model parameters and fine-tuning only a small set
of prompt embeddings, addressing both catastrophic forgetting and plasticity and significantly reducing the trainable parameters. To mitigate inherent challenges such as
error propagation and semantic drift in continual segmentation, we propose logit manipulation to effectively leverage common knowledge across the classes. Experiments
on ADE20K continual panoptic segmentation benchmark
demonstrate the superiority of ECLIPSE, notably its robustness against catastrophic forgetting and its reasonable plasticity, achieving a new state-of-the-art. The code is available at https://github.com/clovaai/ECLIPSE.

1. Introduction
Image segmentation is a fundamental computer vision task,
and it involves dividing an image into meaningful segments to facilitate easier analysis. One of the most advanced forms of image segmentation is panoptic segmentation, which merges semantic segmentation (categorizing
pixels into set categories) with instance segmentation (identifying individual objects within categories). Recent panoptic segmentation studies have made significant progress by

Pseudo-Labeling

Input Image
Distillation

Ground-Truth

New Model (step t)

(a) Previous methods
Ground-Truth

Input Image

Transformer
Decoder

Old Prompts New Prompts
(step t-1)
(step t)

(b) Our method

Figure 1. Comparison of the overview of (a) previous methods and (b) our method. Previous methods rely on distillation
strategies such as knowledge distillation and pseudo-labeling, demanding more training complexity and computational overhead.
In contrast, our method freezes all trained parameters and finetunes only a small set of prompt embeddings, robustly keeping the
previous knowledge and extending the scalability of the model.

leveraging convolutional neural networks [7, 22, 41, 46] and
transformer-based architectures [1, 8, 9, 17, 25].
Despite these advances, the dynamic nature of the real
world demands that models not only understand the present
but also evolve over time. Continual image segmentation
addresses this need by enabling models to learn new classes
incrementally over time without forgetting the old classes.
It is critical in real-world applications where new classes
emerge unpredictably, such as in robotics [37] and surveillance [36]. However, it is greatly challenging to preserve
the previous class knowledge (avoiding catastrophic forgetting [13]) and integrate new class information efficiently
(plasticity) simultaneously.

3346

