This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

READ: Retrieval-Enhanced Asymmetric Diffusion for Motion Planning
Takeru Oba† , Matthew Walter‡ , Norimichi Ukita†
†
Toyota Technological Institute, ‡ Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
sd21502@toyota-ti.ac.jp, mwalter@ttic.edu, ukita@toyota-ti.ac.jp

1

3

2

4

Gaussian

Failed

Reverse: Original-space
1

3

5

7

2

4

6

Input image
Retrieval

Image-Motion
Database
Retrieved motion

Successful

Forward: Latent-space interpolation

Figure 1. Given an image of the scene, READ retrieves a candidate initial motion from a database of image-motion pairs based on image
similarity. READ then refines this motion through asymmetric diffusion that models the forward process as interpolation in a latent space
and then performs one-step refinement via reverse diffusion in the original space. Alternating iterative forward and reverse processes,
indicated by encircled numbers, improve the final prediction (i.e., motion). While READ refines only motions, images are also displayed
for visualization. Temporal poses composing each motion are visualized as colored dots overlaid on the image.

Abstract
This paper proposes Retrieval-Enhanced Asymmetric
Diffusion (READ) for image-based robot motion planning.
Given an image of the scene, READ retrieves an initial motion from a database of image-motion pairs, and uses a diffusion model to refine the motion for the given scene. Unlike prior retrieval-based diffusion models that require long
forward-reverse diffusion paths, READ directly diffuses between the source (retrieved) and target motions, resulting in
an efficient diffusion path. A second contribution of READ
is its use of asymmetric diffusion, whereby it preserves the
kinematic feasibility of the generated motion by forward
diffusion in a low-dimensional latent space, while achieving high-resolution motion by reverse diffusion in the original task space using cold diffusion. Experimental results
on various manipulation tasks demonstrate that READ outperforms state-of-the-art planning methods, while ablation
studies elucidate the contributions of asymmetric diffusion.
Code: https://github.com/Obat2343/READ

1. Introduction
Image-based motion planning is the problem of producing
feasible motions that enable an agent, such as a robotic
arm [9, 20] or self-driving car [1, 11], to successfully perform a task (e.g., reach a goal) based on an image of
the scene. Typically, there is a diverse set of successful motions (homotopies), e.g., an arm can take different motions to reach the goal, which requires us to model
the distribution over successful motions. Generative models provide a promising means to represent these distributions. Among them, diffusion models [19, 34] have been
applied to achieve high sample diversity in various domains [13, 22, 32, 48, 49, 52]. For motion planning, however, high sample diversity is insufficient—it is critical that
the generated motion is kinematically feasible and successfully performs the task [9, 35, 36]. To achieve both, we propose Retrieval-Enhanced Asymmetric Diffusion (READ),
a framework that efficiently refines a candidate motion retrieved from an image-motion database towards a motion
that is both feasible and successful in the target scene.
READ does so through four key contributions.

17974

