This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Shadow-Enlightened Image Outpainting
Hang Yu1 , Ruilin Li2 , Shaorong Xie1 , Jiayan Qiu3 *
1
School of Computer Engineering and Science, Shanghai University, China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai University, China
3
School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, Univerisity of Leicester, United Kingdom
{yuhang, ruilinli, srxie}@shu.edu.cn, jiayan.qiu.1991@outlook.com

Abstract
Conventional image outpainting methods usually treat
unobserved areas as unknown and extend the scene only
in terms of semantic consistency, thus overlooking the hidden information in shadows cast by unobserved areas, such
as the invisible shapes and semantics. In this paper, we
propose to extract and utilize the hidden information of unobserved areas from their shadows to enhance image outpainting. To this end, we propose an end-to-end deep approach that explicitly looks into the shadows within the image. Specifically, we extract shadows from the input image
and identify instance-level shadow regions cast by the unobserved areas. Then, the instance-level shadow representations are concatenated to predict the scene layout of each
unobserved instance and outpaint the unobserved areas. Finally, two discriminators are implemented to enhance alignment between the extended semantics and their shadows.
In the experiments, we show that our proposed approach
provides complementary cues for outpainting and achieves
considerable improvement on all datasets by adopting our
approach as a plug-in module.

1. Introduction
Given an image of a complex scene, as shown in
Fig. 1(a), what will its right-side unobserved area look like?
Humans can, without much effort, infer the appropriate categories and rough shapes of invisible semantics (e.g. objects) and further imagine an adequately realistic overall
appearance. One critical cue humans utilize to reason invisible semantics is the shadows cast in the image. In this
regard, we identify the shadows of each visible object, on
top of which the shadows cast by the unobserved areas are
found. According to their shapes and relative spatial layout,
we may reasonably infer that there is a person in the unobserved area, as shown in Fig. 1(b), which aligns with its
* Corresponding author

Alignment Between the Extension and its Shadows:

?
(a) Input Image

√

×

(b) Alignment Result

(c) Misalignment Result

Shadow Extraction Challenges:
disjoin

overlap

source

removed

(d) Semantic Removal

(d) Disjoined Shadows

(e) Overlapped Shadows

(f) Semantics Attached

Figure 1. Given the image of a complex scene in (a) for outpainting, the extension needs to align with visible semantics. For example, the result shown in (b) is more aligned with the visible semantics from a global shadowing direction compared to the result
shown in (c). For better alignment, we overcome the challenges of
shadow extraction in complex scenes, such as disjoined shadows
(d), overlapped shadows (e), and shadows attaching unexpected
semantic information (f), respectively.

shadow and the given scene. However, existing outpainting
methods [7, 26, 57, 58, 69, 74] overlook shadows in the image, leading to inferior results, as shown in Fig. 1(c), where
misalignment exists between the extension and its shadows
from the shadowing direction in the scene.
Even though prior efforts on Shape-from-Shadow [22,
32, 36, 60] also aim to extract hidden information, such as
the shapes, of the semantics from their shadows in simple
scenes with an ideal light source and a given semantic category, they cannot perform complex image outpainting with
unknown semantics, due to there are three challenges of
shadow extraction in complex scenes. 1) Given the complex
spatial layout of the instances, the shadows are usually occluded by other instances, resulting in disjoined shadows of
a single object, as shown in Fig. 1(d), which leads to inaccu-

7850

