This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NeRF-HuGS: Improved Neural Radiance Fields in Non-static Scenes
Using Heuristics-Guided Segmentation
Jiahao Chen1

Lingjie Liu3

Jiangbo Lu4

Guanbin Li1 *

Sun Yat-sen University 2 Cardiff University 3 University of Pennsylvania 4 SmartMore Corporation
chenjh328@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, qiny16@cardiff.ac.uk, lingjie.liu@seas.upenn.edu
jiangbo.lu@gmail.com, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract

Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has been widely recognized for its excellence in novel view synthesis and 3D
scene reconstruction. However, their effectiveness is inherently tied to the assumption of static scenes, rendering
them susceptible to undesirable artifacts when confronted
with transient distractors such as moving objects or shadows. In this work, we propose a novel paradigm, namely
“Heuristics-Guided Segmentation” (HuGS), which significantly enhances the separation of static scenes from transient distractors by harmoniously combining the strengths
of hand-crafted heuristics and state-of-the-art segmentation
models, thus significantly transcending the limitations of
previous solutions. Furthermore, we delve into the meticulous design of heuristics, introducing a seamless fusion
of Structure-from-Motion (SfM)-based heuristics and color
residual heuristics, catering to a diverse range of texture
profiles. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority
and robustness of our method in mitigating transient distractors for NeRFs trained in non-static scenes. Project
page: https://cnhaox.github.io/NeRF-HuGS/

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [29] have garnered significant attention for their remarkable achievements in novel
view synthesis. Utilizing multiple-view images, NeRF conceptualizes the 3D scene as a neural field [54] and produces
highly realistic renderings through advanced volume rendering techniques. This capability has opened the door to
a wide array of downstream applications including 3D reconstruction [22, 43, 48], content generation [23, 33, 36],
* Corresponding author is Guanbin Li. This work was supported in part
by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NO. 62322608),
in part by the CAAI-MindSpore Open Fund, developed on OpenI Community, in part by the Open Project Program of State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
(No.VRLAB2023A01), in part by Shenzhen Science and Technology Program KQTD20210811090149095 and also the Pearl River Talent Recruitment Program 2019QN01X226.

Train
Images

1

Yipeng Qin2

···

(a) Segmentation-based Method

Seg. w/ Prior (“carton, bottle, car…”)

Static Map

NeRF Training and Rendering

Static Map

NeRF Training and Rendering

Static Map

NeRF Training and Rendering

(b) Heuristics-based Method

Heuristics (Color Residual)

(c) NeRF-HuGS (Ours)

HuGS (SfM + Color Residual)

Figure 1. Comparison between previous methods and the
proposed Heuristics-Guided Segmentation (HuGS) paradigm.
When training NeRF with static scenes disturbed by transient
distractors, (a) segmentation-based methods rely on prior knowledge and cannot identify unexpected transient objects (e.g., pizza);
(b) heuristics-based methods are more generalizable but inaccurate (e.g., tablecloth textures); (c) our method combines their
strengths and produces highly accurate transient vs. static separations, thereby significantly improving NeRF results.

semantic understanding [14, 42, 58], etc.
However, the images used as NeRF training data must
meet several strict conditions, one of which is the requirement for content consistency and stability. In other words,
the native NeRF model operates under the assumption of a
static scene. Any elements that exhibit motion or inconsistency throughout the entire data capture session, which we
refer to as “transient distractors”, can introduce undesirable
artifacts into the reconstructed 3D geometry. However, the
presence of transient distractors is nearly inevitable in realworld scenarios. For instance, in outdoor settings, random
appearances of pedestrians and vehicles may occur during

19436

