This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Lift3D: Zero-Shot Lifting of Any 2D Vision Model to 3D
Mukund Varma T1 , Peihao Wang2 , Zhiwen Fan2 , Zhangyang Wang2 , Hao Su1* , Ravi Ramamoorthi1*
1
University of California San Diego, 2 University of Texas at Austin
{tmukund, haosu, ravir}@ucsd.edu, {peihaowang, zhiwenfan, atlaswang}@utexas.edu
mukundvarmat.github.io/Lift3D/

Figure 1. Imagine we are using a 2D vision operator, such as semantic segmentation or scene editing, on multiple-view input images. This
often leads to inconsistent predictions across different views (as shown in the middle column). To address this, we introduce Lift3D, a
framework designed to transform these inconsistent 2D outputs into view-consistent 3D predictions (illustrated in the right column). Our
approach is both scene and operator-agnostic, meaning it can adapt to any downstream task or scene without additional adjustments. We
demonstrate how Lift3D effectively resolves inconsistencies in multi-view predictions across open vocabulary segmentation and text-driven
scene editing. Notice the color discrepancies in the same rightmost chair across two views (varying from reddish to greenish) in the 2D
results at the bottom row, and the inconsistencies in facial and hair color. For a clearer comparison between the 2D and 3D outcomes, we
recommend zooming into the electronic version of this image.

Abstract
In recent years, there has been an explosion of 2D vision
models for numerous tasks such as semantic segmentation,
style transfer or scene editing, enabled by large-scale 2D
image datasets. At the same time, there has been renewed
interest in 3D scene representations such as neural radiance
fields from multi-view images. However, the availability of
3D or multiview data is still substantially limited compared
to 2D image datasets, making extending 2D vision models to
3D data highly desirable but also very challenging. Indeed,
extending a single 2D vision operator like scene editing to
3D typically requires a highly creative method specialized to
that task and often requires per-scene optimization. In this
paper, we ask the question of whether any 2D vision model
can be lifted to make 3D consistent predictions. We answer
this question in the affirmative; our new Lift3D method trains
to predict unseen views on feature spaces generated by a few
visual models (i.e. DINO and CLIP), but then generalizes
to novel vision operators and tasks, such as style transfer,
super-resolution, open vocabulary segmentation and image
colorization; for some of these tasks, there is no comparable
previous 3D method. In many cases, we even outperform
* Equal advising

state-of-the-art methods specialized for the task in question.
Moreover, Lift3D is a zero-shot method, in the sense that
it requires no task-specific training, nor scene-specific optimization.

1. Introduction
Recent progress in 2D image understanding has been extraordinary, driven by the assembly of extensive image datasets
with intricate labels, and the innovation of varied network
architectures. This has led to remarkable advances in diverse
tasks such as semantic segmentation [24, 28], style transfer [67], scene editing [3], and super-resolution [63]. Yet,
the domain of 3D understanding, essential for sectors like
autonomous driving, robotics, and 3D asset creation, lags
in the development of versatile and robust neural networks.
A common requirement for 3D understanding is the processing of multi-view images, which is hindered by the lack
of expansive, well-labeled multi-view image datasets. This
limitation raises a critical question: Is it possible to modify
existing neural networks, initially intended for single-image
analysis, to accommodate multi-view inputs, and in doing
so, eliminate the inconsistencies typically encountered when
applying 2D operators to each view individually?
In this paper, we set an ambitious goal to universally
transfer an arbitrary pre-trained 2D feature backbone to

21367

