This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WaveMo: Learning Wavefront Modulations to See Through Scattering
Mingyang Xie1 * Haiyun Guo2∗
Ashok Veeraraghavan2
1

University of Maryland

2

3

Rice University

Abstract
Imaging through scattering media is a fundamental and
pervasive challenge in fields ranging from medical diagnostics to astronomy. A promising strategy to overcome this
challenge is wavefront modulation, which induces measurement diversity during image acquisition. Despite its importance, designing optimal wavefront modulations to image
through scattering remains under-explored. This paper introduces a novel learning-based framework to address the
gap. Our approach jointly optimizes wavefront modulations
and a computationally lightweight feedforward “proxy” reconstruction network. This network is trained to recover
scenes obscured by scattering, using measurements that are
modified by these modulations. The learned modulations
produced by our framework generalize effectively to unseen scattering scenarios and exhibit remarkable versatility.
During deployment, the learned modulations can be decoupled from the proxy network to augment other more computationally expensive restoration algorithms. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate our approach significantly advances the state of the art in imaging through scattering media. Our project webpage is at https://wavemo2024.github.io/.

1. Introduction
Imaging through scattering media presents a significant
challenge across diverse scenarios, ranging from navigating with fog [2, 28, 30], rain [9, 48, 49], or murky water to
recovering intricate structures through human skin and tissue [10, 42, 47]. The core of this challenge are the irregular
phase delays light experiences as it scatters. These phase
delays blur and warp any images captured through the scattering media. Effectively addressing this issue is crucial for
unlocking new computer vision capabilities in fields such as
medical imaging and astronomy.
From a frequency domain perspective, the effect of a
* Equal Contribution.

Brandon Y. Feng3 Lingbo Jin2
Christopher A. Metzler1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology

Imaging Through Scattering

Scene

Scattering

Learned Modulations

SLM

Lens

Sensor

Scene Reconstruction

with random
modulations

with learned
modulations

Figure 1. Learned Wavefront Modulations. Top: During acquisition, we can modulate the wavefront of scattered light by using
a spatial light modulator (SLM), and capture a set of image measurements useful for scene reconstruction. Bottom left: We propose learning modulations that enhance our ability to recover the
scattered scene. Bottom right: Our learned modulations drastically
improve the reconstruction quality of a state-of-the-art method [8]
that previously applies randomly chosen modulations.

scene passing through scattering is the destruction or filtering of frequency content. Recovering these lost frequencies
is very difficult using purely computational methods, which
are effectively forced to speculate on the missing frequencies based on those that have been preserved. A question
naturally arises: Can we modify the measurement process
to prevent the loss of information during acquisition?
A promising solution is to actively modulate the scattered wavefront during acquisition, in hopes that applying
multiple modulations increases the chance that a frequency
component is preserved. This approach is related to phase
diversity imaging [11, 15, 17, 25, 27, 37, 41, 45], which typically captures multiple scattered images of a static scene
with different modulations applied using deformable mirrors or spatial light modulators (SLM). However, phase diversity imaging traditionally was limited to imaging simple
scenes with mild optical aberrations, and the phase modulations were often selected based on simple heuristics. The recent development of neural wavefront shaping (NeuWS) [8]

25276

