This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Diffusion Handles
Enabling 3D Edits for Diffusion Models by Lifting Activations to 3D
Karran Pandey1

Paul Guerrero2
Karan Singh1
1
University of Toronto

Matheus Gadelha2
Yannick Hold-Geoffroy2
2,3
Niloy J. Mitra
2
3
Adobe Research
UCL

diffusionhandles.github.io
3D-Aware Edits With Persp. Changes

Plausible Lighting, Shadows, Occlusions, etc.

3D-Aware Edits on Real Images

Figure 1. Diffusion Handles enable 3D-aware object edits (e.g., 3D translations and rotations), on images generated by diffusion models.
Edited images exhibit plausible changes in perspective, occlusion, lighting, shadow, and other 3D effects, without explicitly solving the
inverse graphics problem. Our method does not require training or fine-tuning and can be applied to real images through image inversion.

Abstract
Diffusion Handles is a novel approach to enable 3D object edits on diffusion images, requiring only existing pretrained diffusion models depth estimation, without any finetuning or 3D object retrieval. The edited results remain
plausible, photo-real, and preserve object identity. Diffusion Handles address a critically missing facet of generative
image-based creative design. Our key insight is to lift diffusion activations for a selected object to 3D using a proxy
depth, 3D-transform the depth and associated activations,
and project them back to image space. The diffusion process
guided by the manipulated activations produces plausible
edited images showing complex 3D occlusion and lighting
effects. We evaluate Diffusion Handles: quantitatively, on a
large synthetic data benchmark; and qualitatively by a user
study, showing our output to be more plausible, and better
than prior art at both, 3D editing and identity control.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image diffusion models [45, 46, 48] are the state-ofthe-art in image generation. They produce photo-real out-

puts, effortlessly generate complex, high-resolution images,
and support various forms of conditional generation [58].
Pretrained diffusion models can be repurposed to support
many image processing tasks [47], such as, image in- or
out-painting, superresolution, and denoising. However,
there is limited support for object-centric editing in such
images, where the 3D composition of scene objects can
be changed, while preserving their identity. Existing approaches treat such edits in image space, including: cutting and pasting objects to desired locations using object
masks and regenerating the background [2]; using gradient domain edits with some identity control [13]; or leveraging novel view synthesis with fine-tuned diffusion models [30] that are costly to train and can reduce model generality. These approaches are particularly restrictive and
do not directly support 3D object edits involving translations, rotations, and changes in scene perspective. Moving
the car to a new location on the beach in Figure 1 for example, is non-trivial if the car’s identity has to be retained.
The 3D edit
should successfully capture
complex light
and shading
Our Output
Input
Target 3D Edit

7695

