This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Compositional Chain-of-Thought Prompting for Large Multimodal Models
Chancharik Mitra Brandon Huang Trevor Darrell
University of California, Berkeley

Roei Herzig

Abstract
The combination of strong visual backbones and Large
Language Model (LLM) reasoning has led to Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) becoming the current standard for
a wide range of vision and language (VL) tasks. However, recent research has shown that even the most advanced LMMs still struggle to capture aspects of compositional visual reasoning, such as attributes and relationships between objects. One solution is to utilize scene
graphs (SGs)—a formalization of objects and their relations and attributes that has been extensively used as a
bridge between the visual and textual domains. Yet, scene
graph data requires scene graph annotations, which are
expensive to collect and thus not easily scalable. Moreover, finetuning an LMM based on SG data can lead to
catastrophic forgetting of the pretraining objective. To
overcome this, inspired by chain-of-thought methods, we
propose Compositional Chain-of-Thought (CCoT), a novel
zero-shot Chain-of-Thought prompting method that utilizes
SG representations in order to extract compositional knowledge from an LMM. Specifically, we first generate an SG
using the LMM, and then use that SG in the prompt to
produce a response. Through extensive experiments, we
find that the proposed CCoT approach not only improves
LMM performance on several vision and language (VL)
compositional benchmarks but also improves the performance of several popular LMMs on general multimodal
benchmarks, without the need for fine-tuning or annotated
ground-truth SGs. Code: https://github.com/
chancharikmitra/CCoT.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) such
as LLaVA [46], GPT-4V [55], and InstructBLIP [16] have
demonstrated impressive results in the field of vision and
language (VL), especially in multimodal reasoning and visual question-answering (VQA) [5, 39, 47, 48, 52]. However, recent empirical studies [18, 28, 51] show that the
best-performing VL models tend to view images as a “bag
of objects”. Consider the following example in Figure 1.
Suppose a VL model is asked to describe the provided im-

Figure 1. A high-level overview of our Compositional Chainof-Thought (CCoT) approach. Our CCoT method consists of
a two-step prompting process: (1) First, the LMM is prompted
to generate a scene graph relevant to the image and task prompt,
such as the task in the figure “Describe the image”. (2) Following
this, the LMM is prompted with the generated scene graph, the
image, and the task prompt as context for responding in a way that
incorporates the compositional information in the scene graph to
provide a correct description of the complex scene.

age. The provided image contains many objects: a laptop, a
mouse, some books, and a table. It is a challenging question
to describe exactly how these objects are situated in relation
to one another as well as their notable characteristics. Thus,
we are motivated to utilize the SG, which captures the objects’ important relationships and attributes. For example,
the LMM uses the generated SG to produce the description:
“On a table, there is a stack of books on a laptop.”
Comprehending the structure of visual scenes is a core
issue in machine perception. Visual scenes consist not only
of objects but also include relevant characteristics and relationships that are significant to understanding the scenes’
compositionality better. In this paper, we consider how
to best improve the compositionality of LMMs. Recently,
scene graph (SG) annotations—structured graph representations of visual scenes–have been introduced as powerful

14420

