This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

ProTeCt: Prompt Tuning for Taxonomic Open Set Classification
Tz-Ying Wu* Chih-Hui Ho* Nuno Vasconcelos
University of California, San Diego
{tzw001, chh279, nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
Visual-language foundation models, like CLIP, learn generalized representations that enable zero-shot open-set classification. Few-shot adaptation methods, based on prompt
tuning, have been shown to further improve performance
on downstream datasets. However, these methods do not
fare well in the taxonomic open set (TOS) setting, where
the classifier is asked to make prediction from label set
across different levels of semantic granularity. Frequently,
they infer incorrect labels at coarser taxonomic class levels, even when the inference at the leaf level (original class
labels) is correct. To address this problem, we propose
a prompt tuning technique that calibrates the hierarchical
consistency of model predictions. A set of metrics of hierarchical consistency, the Hierarchical Consistent Accuracy (HCA) and the Mean Treecut Accuracy (MTA), are
first proposed to evaluate TOS model performance. A new
Prompt Tuning for Hierarchical Consistency (ProTeCt) technique is then proposed to calibrate classification across
label set granularities. Results show that ProTeCt can be
combined with existing prompt tuning methods to significantly improve TOS classification without degrading the leaf
level classification performance. The code is available at
https://github.com/gina9726/ProTeCt.

1. Introduction
Vision-language foundation models (FMs) have opened up
new possibilities for image classification. They are large
models, trained on large corpora, to learn aligned representations of images and text. For example, CLIP [30] combines text and image encoders trained with 400M image-text
pairs in an open vocabulary fashion, using a contrastive
loss [3, 4, 34, 35]. Zero-shot classification can then proceed
by leveraging the feature alignments. Each class name is
first converted to a text prompt, e.g., “a photo of [CLASS],"
which is fed to the text encoder. The resulting text feature is
then used as the parameter vector of a softmax classifier of
image feature vectors. Since the training does not emphasize
any particular classes, CLIP supports open set classification.
Several works [17, 42, 45, 46] have shown that classification

object
mammal
placental
tiger

A photo of
<CLASS>

abstraction

physical entity

Text
Encoder
Φ𝑡𝑒𝑥𝑡

𝐰< 𝐂𝐋𝐀𝐒𝐒 >

Visual
Encoder
Φ𝑣𝑖𝑠

𝐯

person matter

marsupial

ground truth
prediction
other nodes

w/o ProTeCt
L=5
bird
L=6
koala
𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑓 fox squirrel
w/ ProTeCt
L=5
mammal
L=6
placental
𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑓 fox squirrel

w/o ProTeCt
L=3 natural object
L=4
bath towel
𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑓 washing machine
w/ ProTeCt
L=3
artifact
L=4 consumer goods
𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑓 washing machine

Figure 1. (Top) An example of class hierarchy, where CLIP predicts
the tiger image as “person" at the internal hierarchy level. (Bottom)
Correct/incorrect model predictions (green/red) of CoOp w/ and
w/o ProTeCt on ImageNet variants. L denotes the tree level.

Method
CLIP [30]
CoOp [46]
MaPLe [17]

Accleaf
68.36
71.23
70.70

HCA
3.32
2.99
4.15

MTA
48.21
46.98
48.29

Table 1. TOS classification performance of CLIP-based classifiers.

accuracy can be enhanced by fine-tuning the FM on the fewshot setting (i.e. few examples per class). To adapt the model
and maintain image-text alignment, these works augment
the FM with a few learnable prompts [17, 42, 45, 46]. The
model parameters are then frozen and only the prompts are
optimized. This process is known as prompt tuning and can
outperform zero-shot performance, on the dataset of interest.
While prompting enables classifiers to be designed for
virtually any classes with minimal dataset curation effort,
it should not compromise the open set nature and generality of the FM representation. In this work, we consider
the setting where “open set" means the ability to refer to
concepts at different levels of granularity. Consider, for
example, an educational application in biology. While at
grade school level it will teach students to classify animals
into (“cat", “dog", “lizard"), at the high-school level the
exact same images should be classified into much more
detailed classes, e.g. (“iguana", “anole", “komodo", etc.) for
lizards. A classifier that classifies an image as a “komodo"
lizard for high schoolers but “dog" for gradeschoolers is not
useful and trustworthy. Advanced biology students should

16531

