This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

6D-Diff: A Keypoint Diffusion Framework for 6D Object Pose Estimation
Li Xu1† Haoxuan Qu1† Yujun Cai2 Jun Liu1‡
1
Singapore University of Technology and Design
2
Nanyang Technological University
{li xu,haoxuan qu}@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, yujun001@e.ntu.edu.sg,
jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Estimating the 6D object pose from a single RGB image
often involves noise and indeterminacy due to challenges
such as occlusions and cluttered backgrounds. Meanwhile, diffusion models have shown appealing performance
in generating high-quality images from random noise with
high indeterminacy through step-by-step denoising. Inspired by their denoising capability, we propose a novel
diffusion-based framework (6D-Diff) to handle the noise
and indeterminacy in object pose estimation for better performance. In our framework, to establish accurate 2D-3D
correspondence, we formulate 2D keypoints detection as a
reverse diffusion (denoising) process. To facilitate such a
denoising process, we design a Mixture-of-Cauchy-based
forward diffusion process and condition the reverse process
on the object appearance features. Extensive experiments
on the LM-O and YCB-V datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework.

1. Introduction
6D object pose estimation aims to estimate the 6D pose
of an object including its location and orientation, which
has a wide range of applications, such as augmented reality
[39, 47], robotic manipulation [3, 45], and automatic driving [62]. Recently, various methods [4, 5, 19, 22, 27, 44,
53, 61, 64] have been proposed to conduct RGB-based 6D
object pose estimation since RGB images are easy to obtain. Despite the increased efforts, a variety of challenges
persist in RGB-based 6D object pose estimation, including
occlusions, cluttered backgrounds, and changeable environments [8, 40, 44, 60, 63]. These challenges can introduce
significant noise and indeterminacy into the pose estimation
process, leading to error-prone predictions [8, 40, 44].
Meanwhile, diffusion models [18, 52] have achieved ap† Equal contribution; ‡ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed 6D-Diff framework. As
shown, given the 3D keypoints from the object 3D CAD model, we
aim to detect the corresponding 2D keypoints in the image to obtain the 6D object pose. Note that when detecting keypoints, there
are often challenges such as occlusions (including self-occlusions)
and cluttered backgrounds that can introduce noise and indeterminacy into the process, impacting the accuracy of pose prediction.

pealing results in various generation tasks such as image
synthesis [7, 18] and image editing [41]. Specifically, diffusion models are able to recover high-quality determinate
samples (e.g., clean images) from a noisy and indeterminate input data distribution (e.g., random noise) via a stepby-step denoising process [18, 52]. Motivated by such a
strong denoising capability [11, 12, 18], we aim to leverage
diffusion models to handle the RGB-based 6D object pose
estimation task, since this task also involves tackling noise
and indeterminacy. However, it can be difficult to directly
use diffusion models to estimate the object pose, because
diffusion models often start denoising from random Gaussian noise [18, 52]. Meanwhile, in RGB-based 6D object
pose estimation, the object pose is often extracted from an
intermediate representation, such as keypoint heatmaps [5],
pixel-wise voting vectors [44], or object surface keypoint
features [4]. Such an intermediate representation encodes
useful distribution priors about the object pose. Thus starting denoising from such an representation shall effectively
assist the diffusion model in recovering accurate object
poses [11]. To achieve this, we propose a novel diffusionbased object pose estimation framework (6D-Diff) that can
exploit prior distribution knowledge from the intermediate
representation for better performance.

9676

