This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Is Vanilla MLP in Neural Radiance Field Enough for Few-shot View Synthesis?
Hanxin Zhu1 , Tianyu He2 , Xin Li1 , Bingchen Li1 , Zhibo Chen1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
hanxinzhu@mail.ustc.edu.cn, tianyuhe@microsoft.com,
{lixin666, lbc31415926}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has achieved superior
performance for novel view synthesis by modeling the scene
with a Multi-Layer Perception (MLP) and a volume rendering procedure, however, when fewer known views are given
(i.e., few-shot view synthesis), the model is prone to overfit
the given views. To handle this issue, previous efforts have
been made towards leveraging learned priors or introducing additional regularizations. In contrast, in this paper, we
for the first time provide an orthogonal method from the perspective of network structure. Given the observation that
trivially reducing the number of model parameters alleviates the overfitting issue, but at the cost of missing details,
we propose the multi-input MLP (mi-MLP) that incorporates the inputs (i.e., location and viewing direction) of the
vanilla MLP into each layer to prevent the overfitting issue without harming detailed synthesis. To further reduce
the artifacts, we propose to model colors and volume density separately and present two regularization terms. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets demonstrate that:
1) although the proposed mi-MLP is easy to implement, it
is surprisingly effective as it boosts the PSNR of the baseline from 14.73 to 24.23. 2) the overall framework achieves
state-of-the-art results on a wide range of benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) has emerged as one of the
most promising methods for novel view synthesis, owing
to its remarkable ability to represent 3D scenes. By utilizing a Multi-Layer Perception (MLP) in conjunction with
classical volume rendering, NeRF can produce photorealistic novel views from multiple 2D images captured from
different views [21]. Various works extends NeRF to different tasks such as surface reconstruction [39, 42, 44, 54],
dynamic scenes [11, 24, 25, 27] and 3D generation [6, 16,
26, 37, 49, 53], etc. However, these NeRF-based methods
require a large number of input views (e.g., 100) [21]. In

Figure 1. Illustration of vanilla MLP vs. mi-MLP. Although miMLP is easy to implement, it is surprisingly effective as it boosts
the PSNR of the baseline from 14.73 to 24.23.

cases where only a few input views are available (i.e., fewshot view synthesis), NeRF brings severe artifacts and thus
leads to a dramatic performance drop [12, 28].
Two primary challenges arise in the context of few-shot
view synthesis. Firstly, due to the limited amount of training data available, the model is prone to overfitting input
views, resulting in the estimated geometry being distributed
on 2D planes instead of 3D volumes [12, 14, 23]. Secondly,
the presence of artifacts such as ghosting and floating effects significantly limit the fidelity and 3D consistency of
rendered novel views [23, 50].
To address the aforementioned issues, mainstream approaches can be categorized into two strategies: priorbased [4, 8, 43, 51] and regularization-based [12, 14,

20288

