This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

PracticalDG: Perturbation Distillation on Vision-Language Models for Hybrid
Domain Generalization
Zining Chen1 , Weiqiu Wang1 , Zhicheng Zhao1,2,3 * Fei Su1,2,3 , Aidong Men1 , Hongying Meng4
1
The school of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Network System and Network Culture, China
3
Key Laboratory of Interactive Technology and Experience System Ministry
of Culture and Tourism, Beijing, China
4
Brunel University Uxbridge
chenzn@bupt.edu.cn, {wangweiqiu, zhaozc, sufei, menad}@bupt.edu.cn, hongying.meng@brunel.ac.uk

Abstract
Domain Generalization (DG) aims to resolve distribution shifts between source and target domains, and current DG methods are default to the setting that data from
source and target domains share identical categories. Nevertheless, there exists unseen classes from target domains
in practical scenarios. To address this issue, Open Set
Domain Generalization (OSDG) has emerged and several
methods have been exclusively proposed. However, most existing methods adopt complex architectures with slight improvement compared with DG methods. Recently, visionlanguage models (VLMs) have been introduced in DG following the fine-tuning paradigm, but consume huge training overhead with large vision models. Therefore, in this
paper, we innovate to transfer knowledge from VLMs to
lightweight vision models and improve the robustness by
introducing Perturbation Distillation (PD) from three perspectives, including Score, Class and Instance (SCI), named
SCI-PD. Moreover, previous methods are oriented by the
benchmarks with identical and fixed splits, ignoring the divergence between source domains. These methods are revealed to suffer from sharp performance decay with our
proposed new benchmark Hybrid Domain Generalization
(HDG) and a novel metric H 2 -CV, which construct various splits to comprehensively assess the robustness of
algorithms. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art algorithms on multiple datasets, especially improving the robustness when confronting data scarcity.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has attained remarkable success on various downstream tasks in computer vision, typically un* Corresponding author
† Source code is available at https://github.com/znchen666/HDG.

Figure 1. The balance between model performance and training
time consumption. Model performance is evaluated on the average
H-score of different splits based on the proposed HDG benchmark.
Our method achieves superior performance with less training time
compared with state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods in OSDG.

der the presumption that both training and test samples
are Independent and Identically Distributed (IID) with the
same label space. However, real-world data often exhibits
unpredictable distributions, leading to the failure of deep
neural networks. To address such distribution shifts, Domain Generalization (DG) is first introduced to leverage
data from multiple source domains to achieve generalization on unseen target domains, from the perspective of
domain-invariant learning [16, 27, 32, 37, 39, 43], data
augmentation [8, 23, 52, 58, 59], and learning strategies
[2, 6, 20, 30, 48, 56]. However, it has been observed
that most existing domain generalization methods assume
a closed-set distribution, where the label space remains
identical across the source and target domain. To address
this limitation, Open Set Domain Generalization (OSDG)

23501

