This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Text-Enhanced Data-free Approach for Federated Class-Incremental Learning
Minh-Tuan Tran1 , Trung Le1 , Xuan-May Le2 , Mehrtash Harandi1 , Dinh Phung1
1
Monash University, 2 University of Melbourne
{tuan.tran7,trunglm,mehrtash.harandi,dinh.phung}@monash.edu
xuanmay.le@student.unimelb.edu.au

Abstract
Federated Class-Incremental Learning (FCIL) is an underexplored yet pivotal issue, involving the dynamic addition of new classes in the context of federated learning.
In this field, Data-Free Knowledge Transfer (DFKT) plays
a crucial role in addressing catastrophic forgetting and
data privacy problems. However, prior approaches lack
the crucial synergy between DFKT and the model training
phases, causing DFKT to encounter difficulties in generating high-quality data from a non-anchored latent space
of the old task model. In this paper, we introduce LANDER (Label Text Centered Data-Free Knowledge Transfer) to address this issue by utilizing label text embeddings
(LTE) produced by pretrained language models. Specifically, during the model training phase, our approach treats
LTE as anchor points and constrains the feature embeddings of corresponding training samples around them, enriching the surrounding area with more meaningful information. In the DFKT phase, by using these LTE anchors,
LANDER can synthesize more meaningful samples, thereby
effectively addressing the forgetting problem. Additionally,
instead of tightly constraining embeddings toward the anchor, the Bounding Loss is introduced to encourage sample embeddings to remain flexible within a defined radius.
This approach preserves the natural differences in sample
embeddings and mitigates the embedding overlap caused
by heterogeneous federated settings. Extensive experiments
conducted on CIFAR100, Tiny-ImageNet, and ImageNet
demonstrate that LANDER significantly outperforms previous methods and achieves state-of-the-art performance in
FCIL. The code is available at https://github.com/
tmtuan1307/lander.

1. Introduction
Federated Learning (FL) is a decentralized and privacypreserving technique enabling collaboration among diverse
entities, such as organizations or devices [23, 31, 39, 65]. In
FL, multiple users (clients) train a common (server) model

in coordination with a server without sharing personal data.
FL in has recently gained attention in various fields like
healthcare [58], IoT [42], and autonomous driving [14].
While conventional FL studies assume static data classes
and domains, the reality is that new classes can emerge, and
data domains can change over time [3, 7, 34, 64]. For example, [6] reveals shifting customer interests in an online store
with seasons, and [60] discusses the need for healthcare
models to adapt to detect new diseases. Handling continuously emerging data classes through entirely new models is
impractical due to substantial computational resources. Alternatively, transfer learning from pre-existing models may
be considered, but it faces the issue of catastrophic forgetting [24, 25], degrading performance on previous classes.
To tackle catastrophic forgetting in FL, recent studies
[9, 12, 36, 60] propose the concept of Federated Continual Learning (FCL) which incorporate Continual Learning (CL) principles [3, 11, 54, 64] into Federated Learning. In that, the most popular setting is Federated ClassIncremental Learning (FCIL) [5, 12, 60, 63, 66], providing
the flexibility to add new classes at any time.
The key challenges in FCIL are to mitigate catastrophic
forgetting and ensure data privacy. To tackle these challenges, the common FCIL process unfolds in two main
phases: client/server (model) training and the Data-Free
Knowledge Transfer (DFKT) phase. In this context, unlike classic knowledge distillation methods [18, 43, 44, 46],
DFKT [16, 33, 53, 59] has emerged as a pivotal technique
since it can transfer the knowledge from the last task model
(as a teacher) to the current model (as a student) to mitigate
the forgetting problem but without accessing raw training
data, thus ensuring privacy. The core idea behind DFKT is
to generate synthetic data with confident predictions from
the teacher. In other words, these synthetic data points reside in the high-confidence region of the teacher’s predictions. Subsequently, this synthetic data is utilized to train
the student model, effectively addressing the issue of forgetting.
However, the utilization of DFKT in previous methods has frequently resulted in unsatisfactory outcomes

23870

