This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

C2 RV: Cross-Regional and Cross-View Learning for Sparse-View
CBCT Reconstruction
Yiqun Lin1 Jiewen Yang1 Hualiang Wang1 Xinpeng Ding1
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Wei Zhao2 * Xiaomeng Li1∗
2
Beihang University

{ylindw, jyangcu, hwangfd, xdingaf}@connect.ust.hk,
zhaow20@buaa.edu.cn, eexmli@ust.hk

Abstract
Cone beam computed tomography (CBCT) is an important imaging technology widely used in medical scenarios, such as diagnosis and preoperative planning.
Using fewer projection views to reconstruct CT, also
known as sparse-view reconstruction, can reduce ionizing radiation and further benefit interventional radiology. Compared with sparse-view reconstruction for traditional parallel/fan-beam CT, CBCT reconstruction is more
challenging due to the increased dimensionality caused
by the measurement process based on cone-shaped X-ray
beams. As a 2D-to-3D reconstruction problem, although
implicit neural representations have been introduced to
enable efficient training, only local features are considered and different views are processed equally in previous works, resulting in spatial inconsistency and poor
performance on complicated anatomies. To this end,
we propose C2 RV by leveraging explicit multi-scale volumetric representations to enable cross-regional learning in the 3D space. Additionally, the scale-view crossattention module is introduced to adaptively aggregate
multi-scale and multi-view features. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our C2 RV achieves consistent and significant improvement over previous state-of-the-art methods
on datasets with diverse anatomy. Code is available at
https://github.com/xmed-lab/C2RV-CBCT.

1. Introduction
Computed tomography (CT) has become an indispensable
technique used for medical diagnostics, providing accurate
and non-invasive visualization of internal anatomical structures. Compared with conventional CT (fan/parallel-beam),
cone-beam CT (CBCT) offers advantages, including faster
acquisition and improved spatial resolution [28]. Typically,
hundreds of projections are required to produce a high* Corresponding Authors

Detector
X-Ray
Source

(a) Cone-Beam CT

(b) Cross-Regional & View

Figure 1. (a) Cone-shaped X-ray beams are emitted from the scanning source and a 2D array of detectors measures the transmitted
radiation. (b) Cross-regional (red) and cross-view (green) feature
learning to enhance point-wise representation.

quality CT scan involving high radiation doses from X-rays.
However, high radiation dose exposure to patients can be
a concern in clinical practice, limiting its use in scenarios
like interventional radiology. Hence, reducing the number
of projections can be one of the ways to reduce the radiation
doses, which is also known as sparse-view reconstruction.
Over the past decades, there have been many research
works studying the sparse-view problem for conventional
CT by formulating the reconstruction as a mapping from 1D
projections to a 2D CT slice, where generation-based techniques [6, 7, 10, 13, 20, 20, 35, 37, 45] are proposed to operate on the image or projection domains. However, the measurements of cone-beam CT are 2D projections (Figure 1a),
resulting in increased dimensionality compared with conventional CT. This means that extending previous conventional CT reconstruction methods to CBCT will encounter
issues [18] such as high computational cost.
Recently, implicit neural representations (INRs) have
been widely used in 3D reconstruction, including novel
view synthesis and object reconstruction. To handle sparseview or even single-view scenarios, geometric priors (e.g.,
surface points [40] and normals [41]) or parametric shape
models [11, 38, 39, 46] (e.g., SMPL [19] and SMPL-X [24])
are incorporated to improve the robustness and generalization ability. However, unlike visible light, X-rays have a

11205

