This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LAMP: Learn A Motion Pattern for Few-Shot Video Generation
Ruiqi Wu1, 3 * Liangyu Chen3 Tong Yang3 Chunle Guo2, 1 † Chongyi Li2, 1 Xiangyu Zhang3
1
VCIP, CS, Nankai University 2 NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian 3 MEGVII Technology
wuruiqi@mail.nankai.edu.cn, {chenliangyu, yangtong, zhangxiangyu}@megvii.com
{guochunle, lichongyi}@nankai.edu.cn

Helicopter / A helicopter over the sea

Horse run / A horse runs on the Mars

Turn to smile / Head photo of a cute girl, comic style, turns to smile

Firework / Fireworks over the mountains

Birds fly / Many birds fly over a plaza

Figure 1. Our text-to-video results. The motion prompts / video prompts are listed under each set of frames. Our LAMP works effectively
on diverse motion cases. The generated videos show notable temporal consistency and are close to the video prompts. Moreover, two
advantages of LAMP can be reflected in the presented results. (1) The proposed motion-content decoupled pipeline allows us to use the
powerful capabilities of SD-XL for the generation of highly detailed content. (2) The excellent semantic generalization properties of the
diffusion model are preserved (e.g. imposing smile’s motion on unseen comic style) because of our innovative tuning approach.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a few-shot text-to-video framework, LAMP, which enables a text-to-image diffusion
model to Learn A specific Motion Pattern with 8 ∼16
videos on a single GPU. Unlike existing methods, which require a large number of training resources or learn motions
that are precisely aligned with template videos, it achieves
a trade-off between the degree of generation freedom and
the resource costs for model training. Specifically, we de* This work is done during Ruiqi Wu’s internship at MEGVII Technology.
† Correspondence author.

sign a motion-content decoupled pipeline that uses an offthe-shelf text-to-image model for content generation so that
our tuned video diffusion model mainly focuses on motion
learning. The well-developed text-to-image techniques can
provide visually pleasing and diverse content as generation
conditions, which highly improves video quality and generation freedom. To capture the features of temporal dimension, we expand the pre-trained 2D convolution layers of the T2I model to our novel temporal-spatial motion learning layers and modify the attention blocks to the
temporal level. Additionally, we develop an effective inference trick, shared-noise sampling, which can improve
the stability of videos without computational costs. Our

7089

