This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Generative Unlearning for Any Identity
Tae-Young Lee1 *
Sung-Hoon Lee1 *
Gyeong-Moon Park1†

Juwon Seo1 *
1

Seungjun Moon2

Kyung Hee University, Yongin, Republic of Korea
2
KLleon Tech., Seoul, Republic of Korea

{jwseo001, sunghoonlee961, slcks1, gmpark}@khu.ac.kr
seungjun.moon@klleon.io

Abstract
Recent advances in generative models trained on largescale datasets have made it possible to synthesize highquality samples across various domains. Moreover, the
emergence of strong inversion networks enables not only
a reconstruction of real-world images but also the modification of attributes through various editing methods. However, in certain domains related to privacy issues, e.g., human faces, advanced generative models along with strong
inversion methods can lead to potential misuses. In this paper, we propose an essential yet under-explored task called
generative identity unlearning, which steers the model not
to generate an image of specific identity. In the generative identity unlearning, we target the following objectives: (i) preventing the generation of images with a certain identity, and (ii) preserving the overall quality of the
generative model. To satisfy these goals, we propose a
novel framework, Generative Unlearning for Any IDEntity
(GUIDE), which prevents the reconstruction of a specific
identity by unlearning the generator with only a single image. GUIDE consists of two parts: (i) finding a target
point for optimization that un-identifies the source latent
code and (ii) novel loss functions that facilitate the unlearning procedure while less affecting the learned distribution.
Our extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed
method achieves state-of-the-art performance in the generative machine unlearning task. The code is available at
https://github.com/KHU-AGI/GUIDE.

1. Introduction
Recently, 2D or 3D Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [4, 19–21] pre-trained on large datasets, e.g., FFHQ
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Source

Unlearned

Figure 1. Given a single source image containing a specific identity, we remove that identity from the pre-trained 3D generative
adversarial network (e.g., EG3D [4]). Our method effectively unlearns identity even from in-the-wild images where the source image is absent in the pre-training dataset.

[19] or AFHQ [5], have drawn substantial attention due to
their remarkable generation performance and highly disentangled representation space. However, their advancements
have raised privacy concerns [15], especially regarding the
potential misuse of generative models to represent and exploit individual identities. For instance, deepfakes [48, 49]
can create very believable images or videos of people in
made-up situations, causing major concerns about ethics
and privacy.
To alleviate privacy issues in generative models, machine
unlearning task has been actively studied. Machine unlearning involves the process of selectively removing specific knowledge or erasing the influence of certain data from
the training dataset of pre-trained models. It is beneficial
especially when the data are harmful, private, or biased

9151

