This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Meta-Point Learning and Refining for Category-Agnostic Pose Estimation
Li Niu2
Junjie Chen1
Jiebin Yan1 * Yuming Fang1
1
Jiangxi University of Finance and Economics,
2
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{chenjunjie,yanjiebin,fangyuming}@jxufe.edu.cn, ustcnewly@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Category-agnostic pose estimation (CAPE) aims to predict keypoints for arbitrary classes given a few support images annotated with keypoints. Existing methods only rely
on the features extracted at support keypoints to predict or
refine the keypoints on query image, but a few support feature vectors are local and inadequate for CAPE. Considering that human can quickly perceive potential keypoints
of arbitrary objects, we propose a novel framework for
CAPE based on such potential keypoints (named as metapoints). Specifically, we maintain learnable embeddings to
capture inherent information of various keypoints, which
interact with image feature maps to produce meta-points
without any support. The produced meta-points could serve
as meaningful potential keypoints for CAPE. Due to the
inevitable gap between inherency and annotation, we finally utilize the identities and details offered by support keypoints to assign and refine meta-points to desired keypoints
in query image. In addition, we propose a progressive deformable point decoder and a slacked regression loss for
better prediction and supervision. Our novel framework not
only reveals the inherency of keypoints but also outperforms
existing methods of CAPE. Comprehensive experiments and
in-depth studies on large-scale MP-100 dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework. Code is avaiable
at https://github.com/chenbys/MetaPoint

1. Introduction
Pose estimation is a fundamental and significant computer
vision task, which aims to produce the locations of predefined semantic part of object instance in 2D image. Recently, it has received increasing attention in the computer
vision community due to its wide applications in virtual reality, augmented reality, human-computer interaction, robot
and automation. However, most pose estimation methods
are trained with category-specific data and thus cannot be
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Overview of existing methods and our method. (a):
Existing methods only rely on the local features at support keypoints to predict or refine the keypoints. (b): Our method employs learnable embeddings to capture inherent information and
produces meta-points without support. Then our method assigns
and refines meta-points according to support keypoints.

applied for novel classes, especially when they have different keypoint classes. Therefore, category-agnostic pose
estimation (CAPE) [41, 48] is recently proposed to localize desired keypoints for arbitrary classes given one or few
support images annotated with keypoints.
Unlike the standard pose estimation task where the keypoint classes are pre-defined, the desired keypoints in CAPE
are defined by support keypoints. Therefore, existing methods [41, 48] intuitively extract features at support keypoints
and then rely on them to predict or refine the keypoints
on query image, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). Although such
straightforward pipeline has achieved considerable success,
the information provided by a few feature vectors are local

23534

