This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

DetDiffusion: Synergizing Generative and Perceptive Models for
Enhanced Data Generation and Perception
Yibo Wang1* Ruiyuan Gao2* Kai Chen3* Kaiqiang Zhou4 Yingjie Cai4
Lanqing Hong4 Zhenguo Li4 Lihui Jiang4B Dit-Yan Yeung3 Qiang Xu2 Kai Zhang1,5B
1
Tsinghua University 2 CUHK 3 HKUST
4
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab 5 Research Institute of Tsinghua, Pearl River Delta
wyb22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

∗

Equal Contribution

B Corresponding authors

General L2I
person
car

Current perceptive models heavily depend on resourceintensive datasets, prompting the need for innovative solutions. Leveraging recent advances in diffusion models,
synthetic data, by constructing image inputs from various
annotations, proves beneficial for downstream tasks. While
prior methods have separately addressed generative and
perceptive models, DetDiffusion, for the first time, harmonizes both, tackling the challenges in generating effective
data for perceptive models. To enhance image generation with perceptive models, we introduce perception-aware
loss (P.A. loss) through segmentation, improving both quality and controllability. To boost the performance of specific perceptive models, our method customizes data augmentation by extracting and utilizing perception-aware attribute (P.A. Attr) during generation. Experimental results
from the object detection task highlight DetDiffusion’s superior performance, establishing a new state-of-the-art in
layout-guided generation. Furthermore, image syntheses
from DetDiffusion can effectively augment training data,
significantly enhancing downstream detection performance.

1. Introduction
The effectiveness of current perceptive models is heavily contingent on extensive and accurately labeled datasets.
However, the acquisition of such datasets is often resourceintensive. Recent advancements in generative models, especially diffusion models [35], make it possible to generate
high-quality images, and thus pave the way for constructing synthetic datasets. By providing annotations such as
the class labels [35], segmentation maps [41], and object
bounding boxes [4], synthetic data for generative models is
proved to be useful to improve the performance on downstream tasks (e.g., classification [11], object detection [2, 4]
and segmentation [24, 42]).

Generative
Model

(class, location)

Perception-aware L2I
P.A. Attr
<hard/easy>
+
(class, location)

Perceptive
Model

person
car

P.A.
loss

Generative
Model

Figure 1. Pipeline comparison between general L2I models (e.g.,
GeoDiffusion [4]) and our DetDiffusion (perception-aware L2I).
Utilizing perception-aware loss (P.A. loss) and perception-aware
attributes (P.A. Attr), DetDiffusion improves generation quality
and controllability of L2I task. Perception-aware attributes further
boost performance on downstream perceptive models. Moreover,
perceptive model only added 1.3% of parameters.

While most methods focus on improving generative
models or perceptive models separately, the synergy between generative and perceptive models warrants a closer
integration for mutual enhancement of generation and perception capabilities. In perceptive models, the challenge
lies in effective data generation or augmentation, a topic
previously approached mainly from a data perspective (e.g.
OoD generalization [18, 20] and domain adaptation [10, 16,
31]). Its potential to enhance perceptive models performance in general cases remains underexplored. Conversely,
generative model research has focused on refining models
for better output quality and controllability [4, 8]. Nonetheless, it is essential to recognize that perceptive models can
also provide valuable additional insights to assist generative models in achieving better control capabilities. This
synergy between the generative and perceptive models offers a promising avenue for advancement, suggesting a need
for more integrated approaches.

7246

