This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Noisy One-point Homographies are Surprisingly Good
Yaqing Ding1,2 , Jonathan Astermark1 , Magnus Oskarsson1 , and Viktor Larsson1
1
Centre for Mathematical Sciences, Lund University
2
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
yaqing.ding@cvut.cz, {jonathan.astermark, magnus.oskarsson, viktor.larsson}@math.lth.se

Abstract
Two-view homography estimation is a classic and fundamental problem in computer vision. While conceptually
simple, the problem quickly becomes challenging when multiple planes are visible in the image pair. Even with correct
matches, each individual plane (homography) might have
a very low number of inliers when comparing to the set
of all correspondences. In practice, this requires a large
number of RANSAC iterations to generate a good model
hypothesis. The current state-of-the-art methods therefore
seek to reduce the sample size, from four point correspondences originally, by including additional information such
as keypoint orientation/angles or local affine information.
In this work, we continue in this direction and propose a
novel one-point solver that leverages different approximate
constraints derived from the same auxiliary information. In
experiments we obtain state-of-the-art results, with execution time speed-ups, on large benchmark datasets and show
that it is more beneficial for the solver to be sample efficient
compared to generating more accurate homographies.

1. Introduction
Scenes with dominant planes are common in man-made environments, and also provide strong cues on the 3D scene
geometry. In these scenarios, finding the two-view camera
geometry can be formulated as an image homography estimation task. Assuming the cameras’ intrinsic calibrations
are known, each homography can be directly factorized into
the 3D plane parameters and the relative camera pose. This
allows for a very compact representation of the entire geometric setup, using only a single 3 × 3 matrix without any
additional internal constraints.
The standard approach for finding homographies relies
on first detecting a sparse set of tentative matching keypoints, followed by robust estimation in some variant of
RANdom SAmple Consensus (RANSAC) [25]. At the core
of these frameworks is the process of repeatedly generating homography proposals from small subsets of the data,

Figure 1. One-point Homography Estimation. A plane from
the source image (green patch to the left) is transformed using
homographies. Ground truth patch is shown in green in the target image to the right. Blue shows (noisy) transformed patches
for the top five inlier samples using the proposed 1-SIFT solver.
Red corresponds to the estimated homography resulting from GCRANSAC [9] with the proposed 1-SIFT solver.

followed by verification and scoring using the full set of
correspondences. To minimize the risk of including an
outlier correspondence, it is preferred to estimate the homographies from as few correspondences as possible, so
called minimal samples. For homography estimation, this
is particularly important as “outliers” might come from correct matches that simply belong to a different plane (and
thus do not support the sought homography), i.e. solving
the model selection problem. So, even in favorable matching conditions, this can result in extremely low inlier ratios
when considering all available correspondences between
two images. In the recent large-scale Homography Estimation Benchmark (HEB) [14], this trend is clear where
the top performing methods leverage additional information
(e.g. orientation/angle or affine correspondences) to reduce
the number of points necessary to generate the homography
proposals inside RANSAC.
In this paper, we further delve into the trade-off between
model accuracy and model complexity. We combine seemingly redundant (and dependent) additional constraints from
auxiliary information to derive a homography solver that
only requires a single point. In our experiments we show
that this solver, while yielding very noisy homography estimates, improves over the current state-of-the-art due to being extremely sample efficient.

5125

