This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

A Conditional Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Model for Point Cloud
Upsampling
Wentao Qu1 , Yuantian Shao1 , Lingwu Meng1 , Xiaoshui Huang2∗ , Liang Xiao1∗
Nanjing University of Science and Technology1 , Shanghai AI Laboratory2
{quwentao, alvin s, menglw815}@njust.edu.cn, huangxiaoshui@163.com, xiaoliang@mail.njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Point cloud upsampling (PCU) enriches the representation of raw point clouds, significantly improving the performance in downstream tasks such as classification and
reconstruction. Most of the existing point cloud upsampling methods focus on sparse point cloud feature extraction and upsampling module design. In a different way, we
dive deeper into directly modelling the gradient of data distribution from dense point clouds. In this paper, we proposed a conditional denoising diffusion probabilistic model
(DDPM) for point cloud upsampling, called PUDM. Specifically, PUDM treats the sparse point cloud as a condition,
and iteratively learns the transformation relationship between the dense point cloud and the noise. Simultaneously,
PUDM aligns with a dual mapping paradigm to further improve the discernment of point features. In this context,
PUDM enables learning complex geometry details in the
ground truth through the dominant features, while avoiding
an additional upsampling module design. Furthermore, to
generate high-quality arbitrary-scale point clouds during
inference, PUDM exploits the prior knowledge of the scale
between sparse point clouds and dense point clouds during
training by parameterizing a rate factor. Moreover, PUDM
exhibits strong noise robustness in experimental results. In
the quantitative and qualitative evaluations on PU1K and
PUGAN, PUDM significantly outperformed existing methods in terms of Chamfer Distance (CD) and Hausdorff Distance (HD), achieving state of the art (SOTA) performance.

1. Introduction
Point clouds, as a most fundamental 3D representation,
have been widely used in various downstream tasks such as
3D reconstruction [19, 24], autonomous driving [4, 16, 49],
and robotics technology [42, 46]. However, raw point
clouds captured from 3D sensors often exhibit sparsity,
∗ Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. Most existing methods achieving satisfactory results for
input sparse point clouds with clear geometric structures (such as
the hole on the green cover rear), but performing poorly for those
with fuzzy geometric details (like the eyes of the red pig). However, our results, with close proximity to the ground truth.

noise, and non-uniformity. This is substantiated across diverse publicly available benchmark datasets, such as KITTI
[8], ScanNet [5]. Hence, point cloud upsampling, which involves the transformation of sparse, incomplete, and noisy
point clouds into dense, complete, and artifact-free representations, has garnered considerable research interest.
Inspired by deep learning, the pioneering work PUNet [44] is the first to utilize deep neural networks to address this problem. This first divides the input point cloud
into multiple patches and then extracts multi-scale features. Subsequently, these features are aggregated and fed
into an upsampling module to approximate the dense point
cloud coordinates. Building this approach, many works
[17, 18, 21, 30, 43] optimize neural networks by focusing on
sparse point cloud feature extraction and upsampling module design.
However, while these methods have achieved improved
results, predicting dense point cloud coordinates via sparse
point cloud features is an indirect approximating approach.
Typically, these methods first utilize an encoder to extract
sparse point cloud features, and then use a carefully designed upsampling module to fit dense point cloud coordinates. This approach has three limitations. First, the non-

https://github.com/QWTforGithub/PUDM

20786

