This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoHM: Robust Human Motion Reconstruction via Diffusion
Siwei Zhang1,2∗

Bharat Lal Bhatnagar2 Yuanlu Xu2 Alexander Winkler2
Siyu Tang1 Federica Bogo2
1
ETH Zürich 2 Meta Reality Labs Research

Petr Kadlecek2

{siwei.zhang, siyu.tang}@inf.ethz.ch
{bharatbhatnagar, yuanluxu, winklera, petr.kadlecek, fbogo}@meta.com

Noisy/occluded Input

HuMoR

Ours

Ours

Figure 1. Our method robustly reconstructs smooth and complete 3D human motion from different inputs, such as incomplete and noisy
motion estimates (left), RGB-D (middle) and RGB (right) monocular videos. We learn diffusion-based models to denoise and infill both
root trajectory in global space and local motion in body-root space for visible and occluded joints, predicting whether feet are in contact
or not with the ground for improved physical plausibility. Compared with baselines such as HuMoR [67], our method reconstructs more
plausible motions that faithfully match image evidence, especially under heavy occlusions.

Abstract
We propose RoHM, an approach for robust 3D human
motion reconstruction from monocular RGB(-D) videos in
the presence of noise and occlusions. Most previous approaches either train neural networks to directly regress
motion in 3D or learn data-driven motion priors and combine them with optimization at test time. The former do
not recover globally coherent motion and fail under occlusions; the latter are time-consuming, prone to local minima,
and require manual tuning. To overcome these shortcomings, we exploit the iterative, denoising nature of diffusion
models. RoHM is a novel diffusion-based motion model
that, conditioned on noisy and occluded input data, reconstructs complete, plausible motions in consistent global coordinates. Given the complexity of the problem – requiring
one to address different tasks (denoising and infilling) in
different solution spaces (local and global motion) – we decompose it into two sub-tasks and learn two models, one
for global trajectory and one for local motion. To capture the correlations between the two, we then introduce
a novel conditioning module, combining it with an iterative inference scheme. We apply RoHM to a variety of tasks
* The work was done during an internship at Meta.

– from motion reconstruction and denoising to spatial and
temporal infilling. Extensive experiments on three popular datasets show that our method outperforms state-of-theart approaches qualitatively and quantitatively, while being faster at test time. The code is available at https:
//sanweiliti.github.io/ROHM/ROHM.html.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we tackle the problem of 3D human motion reconstruction from monocular RGB(-D) videos in real scenarios – i.e., in the presence of noise and occlusions. Reconstructing 3D human motions is crucial for many applications, ranging from augmented and virtual reality to
robotics. Many methods in the literature tackle the problem by training deep neural networks to directly regress 3D
body pose and shape from monocular input [10, 19, 34, 39,
59]. However, these approaches commonly suffer from two
major shortcomings: 1) they estimate only local motion,
representing pose in body-root relative coordinates without plausible global motion, in world coordinates consistent
over time; 2) they lack robustness when the body undergoes
occlusions, in either the spatial or temporal dimension.
In such scenarios, optimization-based methods [67, 72,
100] have shown better performance. For instance, Hu-

14606

