This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Dual Prior Unfolding for Snapshot Compressive Imaging
Jiancheng Zhang 1,∗ , Haijin Zeng 2, * , Jiezhang Cao 3 , Yongyong Chen 4,† ,
Dengxiu Yu 1 , Yin-Ping Zhao 1,†
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, 2 IMEC-UGent, 3 ETH Zürich,
4
Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)

Abstract
Recently, deep unfolding methods have achieved remarkable success in the realm of Snapshot Compressive Imaging
(SCI) reconstruction. However, the existing methods all follow the iterative framework of a single image prior, which
limits the efficiency of the unfolding methods and makes it a
problem to use other priors simply and effectively. To break
out of the box, we derive an effective Dual Prior Unfolding
(DPU), which achieves the joint utilization of multiple deep
priors and greatly improves iteration efficiency. Our unfolding method is implemented through two parts, i.e., Dual
Prior Framework (DPF) and Focused Attention (FA). In
brief, in addition to the normal image prior, DPF introduces
a residual into the iteration formula and constructs a degraded prior for the residual by considering various degradations to establish the unfolding framework. To improve
the effectiveness of the image prior based on self-attention,
FA adopts a novel mechanism inspired by PCA denoising to
scale and filter attention, which lets the attention focus more
on effective features with little computation cost. Besides,
an asymmetric backbone is proposed to further improve the
efficiency of hierarchical self-attention. Remarkably, our
5-stage DPU achieves state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance
with the least FLOPs and parameters compared to previous
methods, while our 9-stage DPU significantly outperforms
other unfolding methods with less computational requirement. https://github.com/ZhangJC-2k/DPU

1. Introduction
The advent of compressed sensing has introduced a hardware encoder known as Snapshot Compressive Imaging
(SCI) [16, 30, 38]. This encoder offers characteristics like
low bandwidth, rapid acquisition, and high data throughput, garnering substantial attention in the domains of lowlevel vision and computational imaging. SCI employs a
two-dimensional (2D) detector to capture modulated threedimensional (3D) hyperspectral images (HSIs) through
* Equal Contribution. † Corresponding Authors

Figure 1. The PSNR-FLOPs-Params analysis comparing the proposed Dual Prior Unfolding (DPU) with latest state-of-the-art
methods. Notably, our DPU achieves superior performance while
demanding cheaper FLOPs and Parameters, making it a more costeffective solution for spectral SCI reconstruction.

snapshot measurements [48]. Equipped with this hardware
encoder, the development of a high-quality algorithmic decoder becomes imperative for practical SCI systems.
In response to this challenge, both model-based [1, 23,
24, 36, 42, 46] and learning-based [3, 4, 6, 18, 28, 33, 44,
45, 54] approaches have been specifically designed. Notably, deep unfolding methods [5, 14, 19, 32, 41, 52], leveraging deep networks as image priors in iterative algorithms
and then implementing end-to-end training, have demonstrated notable success. As researchers pay attention to the
important role of other priors such as mediation knowledge
[3] and degradation information [5, 14] in the imaging process, the single image prior design can no longer meet their
requirements. More and more frameworks such as GAP
[32], DAUF [5], and RDLF [14] have been proposed to consider other prior information to assist reconstruction. However, the existing unfolding methods all follow the iterative
framework of a single image prior, which limits the efficiency of the unfolding methods and makes it a problem to
use other priors simply and effectively. In addition, previous
methods [3, 5, 14] identify the critical role of mask degradation while ignoring the effects of shift and compression
degradation in the imaging process.
Considering the need for more effective utilization of image priors and degradation-associated priors, we have de-

25742

