This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SchurVINS: Schur Complement-Based Lightweight Visual Inertial Navigation
System
Yunfei Fan, Tianyu Zhao, Guidong Wang
PICO, ByteDance
{frank.01, zhaotianyu.1998, guidong.wang}@bytedance.com

Abstract
Accuracy and computational efficiency are the most
important metrics to Visual Inertial Navigation System
(VINS). The existing VINS algorithms with either high
accuracy or low computational complexity, are difficult
to provide the high precision localization in resourceconstrained devices. To this end, we propose a novel
filter-based VINS framework named SchurVINS (SV),
which could guarantee both high accuracy by building a
complete residual model and low computational complexity
with Schur complement. Technically, we first formulate
the full residual model where Gradient, Hessian and
observation covariance are explicitly modeled. Then Schur
complement is employed to decompose the full model
into ego-motion residual model and landmark residual
model. Finally, Extended Kalman Filter (EKF) update
is implemented in these two models with high efficiency.
Experiments on EuRoC and TUM-VI datasets show that
our method notably outperforms state-of-the-art (SOTA)
methods in both accuracy and computational complexity.
The experimental code of SchurVINS is available at
https://github.com/bytedance/SchurVINS.

1. Introduction
High-precision localization technologies have become
a cornerstone in various industrial fields, playing an
indispensable role particularly in robotics, augmented
reality (AR), and virtual reality (VR). In recent decades,
visual inertial navigation system (VINS) has attracted
significant attentions due to its advantages of low-cost and
ubiquitousness. Composed of only cameras and inertial
measurement units (IMU), the VINS module can provide
six-degree-of-freedom (6-DOF) positioning as accurate as
expensive sensors such as Lidar, and is more competent
in being installed in portable devices like smartphone and
micro aerial vehicles (MAV).
It has been reported that kinds of excellent open-

Figure 1. Comparison of run time, CPU usage and RMSE
evaluated on EuRoC dataset. Different shapes and colors indicate
different methods and precision, respectively.

source VINS algorithms could achieve high-precision pose
estimation, which mainly includes two methodologies:
optimization-based and filter-based methods.
Typical
optimization-based methods [4, 17, 21, 24, 33, 34]
model poses and the corresponding observed landmarks
jointly. Benefitting from Schur complement technique [1],
this high-dimensional model with special sparsity could
be solved efficiently by bundle adjustment (BA [32]).
In theory [11], although notable in high-precision of
localization, optimization-based methods may suffer from
high computational complexity.
In contrast, mainstream filter-based methods [2, 7, 10, 30] derived from
MSCKF [22] utilize the left nullspace method to simplify
the residual model. EKF [29] update is then executed
on the simplified residual model to estimate corresponding
poses. Finally, they achieve high efficiency but compromise
accuracy, since landmarks are not optimized with camera
poses jointly and all observations are utilized only once. To
sum up, optimization-based methods are advantageous in
accuracy while filter-based methods are more efficient.
Therefore, it is urgent to develop a framework combines
their high precision and efficiency.
As discussed

17964

