This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Practical Measurements of Translucent Materials with Inter-Pixel
Translucency Prior
Zhenyu Chen1 , Jie Guo1∗ , Shuichang Lai1 , Ruoyu Fu1 , Mengxun Kong1 , Chen Wang1
Hongyu Sun2 , Zhebin Zhang2 , Chen Li2 , Yanwen Guo1
1
Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
OPPO, Seattle, USA
{chenzy, sclai, 502022330022, chenwang}@smail.nju.edu.cn
{hongyu.sun, zhebin.zhang, chen.li}@oppo.com
{guojie,fry,ywguo}@nju.edu.cn

Figure 1. Different types of translucent materials recovered from ordinary photographs (insets) by our practical method.

Abstract

Material appearance is a key component of photorealism, with a pronounced impact on human perception. Although there are many prior works targeting at measuring
opaque materials using light-weight setups (e.g., consumerlevel cameras), little attention is paid on acquiring the optical properties of translucent materials which are also quite
common in nature. In this paper, we present a practical
method for acquiring scattering properties of translucent
materials, based solely on ordinary images captured with
unknown lighting and camera parameters. The key to our
method is an inter-pixel translucency prior which states
that image pixels of a given homogeneous translucent material typically form curves (dubbed translucent curves) in
the RGB space, of which the shapes are determined by the
parameters of the material. We leverage this prior in a
specially-designed convolutional neural network comprising multiple encoders, a translucency-aware feature fusion
module and a cascaded decoder. We demonstrate, through
both visual comparisons and quantitative evaluations, that
high accuracy can be achieved on a wide range of realworld translucent materials.

1. Introduction
A core demand in 3D content generation is to recover
physically-plausible material properties from photographs.
Knowledge of the recovered material properties is valuable in a broad range of applications including virtual/augmented reality [24], visual perception [18], 3D
printing [33], robot control [57] and aesthetic medicine
[44]. Over the past years, much effort has been devoted
to acquiring materials from opaque objects that only contain surface reflection [2, 3, 16, 25–27, 32, 41, 42, 48, 51],
excluding many real-world translucent materials (e.g., wax,
soaps, plastics and beverages shown in Fig. 1) in which subsurface scattering dominates [6, 36]. For these translucent
objects, light will not only reflect at the boundaries, but also
undergo a considerable number of scattering or absorption
events inside media, resulting in a very complex light field.
Often, each pixel of a photograph capturing a translucent
object receives light from all points along the line of sight
inside the volume [23].
To alleviate the problem, most early works analyze only
single scattering in optically thin media [23, 29, 49], covering a very limited range of translucent material in nature.
To deal with optically thick media, dedicated hardware systems are necessary, including structured lighting devices,
lasers and expensive high-end cameras [20, 33, 47]. Generally, repetitive calibrations are carried out every few min-

20932

