This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Revisiting the Domain Shift and Sample Uncertainty in
Multi-source Active Domain Transfer
Wenqiao Zhang 1†
1

Zhejiang University, China

2

Zheqi Lv 1,2†‡

National University of Singapore, Singapore

{wenqiaozhang, zheqilv}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Active Domain Adaptation (ADA) aims to maximally
boost model adaptation in a new target domain by actively
selecting a limited number of target data to annotate. This
setting neglects the more practical scenario where training
data are collected from multiple sources. This motivates us to
extend ADA from a single source domain to multiple source
domains, termed Multi-source Active Domain Adaptation
(MADA). Not surprisingly, we find that most traditional ADA
methods cannot work directly in such a setting, mainly due
to the excessive domain gap introduced by all the source domains. Considering this, we propose a Detective framework
that comprehensively considers the domain shift between
multi-source domains and target domains to detect the informative target samples. Specifically, the Detective leverages
a dynamic Domain Adaptation (DA) model that learns how
to adapt the model’s parameters to fit the union of multisource domains. This enables an approximate single-source
domain modeling by the dynamic model. We then comprehensively measure both domain uncertainty and predictive
uncertainty in the target domain to detect informative target
samples using evidential deep learning, thereby mitigating
uncertainty miscalibration. Experiments demonstrate that
our solution outperforms existing methods by a considerable margin on three domain adaptation benchmarks. Our
project is available at https://github.com/wannature/MADA.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) aims to transfer
knowledge learned from labeled data in the original domain
(source Ds ) to the new domain (target Dt ). Although UDA
is capable of alleviating the poor generalization of learned
deep neural networks when the data distribution significantly
deviates from the original domain [44, 49, 54], the unavailability of target labels greatly hinders its performance. This
* †These authors contributed equally to this research.
† ‡Corresponding authors.

presents a significant gap compared to its supervised counterpart [7, 43]. An appealing way to address this issue is
by actively collecting informative target samples within an
acceptable budget, thereby maximally benefiting the adaptation model. This promising adaptation paradigm integrates
the idea of active learning [37] into traditional UDA, known
as Active Domain Adaptation (ADA) [32].
While the existing ADA framework [9, 10, 31, 32, 38]
presumes that all labeled training data share the same distribution from a single source domain Ds , it conceals the
practicality that data is typically collected from various domains ({Ds,i }M
i=1 , with M representing the number of domains) in real-world scenarios [61]. This setting hinders
the model’s ability to learn from diverse domains, one of
the most precious capacity of human that adapting knowledge acquired from varied environments to unseen fields.
With this consideration, we introduce a challenging and realistic problem setting termed Multi-source Active Domain
Adaptation (MADA). As captured in Figure 1(a), MADA
posits the availability of several labeled source domains,
capable of annotating a small portion of valuable target samples for maximally benefiting the adaptation process. The
proposed MADA, while straightforward and promising, encounters multiple challenges when directly applying conventional ADA techniques to MADA task: i) Multi-grained
Domain Shift. In ADA, acquiring target labels involves
gauging the domain shift between a single Ds and the target
domain Dt to identify informative target samples. However, the significantly variant data distributions of {Ds,i }M
i=1
also pose challenges for MADA, as it encompasses multiple source domains with disparate distributions, i.e., the
alignment among multiple source domains should be carefully addressed for a reliable MADA model. ii) Uncertainty
Miscalibration. The uncertainty-aware selection criteria in
current ADA methods typically rely on predictions from deterministic models, which are prone to miscalibration when
faced with data exhibiting distribution shifts [12]. Relying
solely on predictive uncertainty proves to be unreliable, as
standard DNNs often give misplaced overconfidence in their
predictions on target data (Figure 1(c)), potentially impair-

16751

