This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Task-Driven Exploration: Decoupling and Inter-Task Feedback for Joint
Moment Retrieval and Highlight Detection
Jin Yang, Ping Wei∗ , Huan Li, Ziyang Ren
National Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Hybrid Augmented Intelligence
Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
{jin.yang, lh875056558, rzyrzy}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, pingwei@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Video moment retrieval and highlight detection are two
highly valuable tasks in video understanding, but until recently they have been jointly studied. Although existing
studies have made impressive advancement recently, they
predominantly follow the data-driven bottom-up paradigm.
Such paradigm overlooks task-specific and inter-task effects, resulting in poor model performance. In this paper, we propose a novel task-driven top-down framework TaskWeave for joint moment retrieval and highlight
detection. The framework introduces a task-decoupled
unit to capture task-specific and common representations.
To investigate the interplay between the two tasks, we
propose an inter-task feedback mechanism, which transforms the results of one task as guiding masks to assist the other task. Different from existing methods, we
present a task-dependent joint loss function to optimize
the model. Comprehensive experiments and in-depth ablation studies on QVHighlights, TVSum, and CharadesSTA datasets corroborate the effectiveness and flexibility of the proposed framework. Codes are available at
github.com/EdenGabriel/TaskWeave.

1. Introduction
As videos are prevailing in a wide range of applications, the diversity and massive scales of video content
have posed unprecedented challenges in finding relevant
moments based on user queries. To this end, the moment
retrieval (MR) [60, 63, 65] and highlight detection (HD)
[4, 56] tasks have emerged recently. MR aims to retrieve
video moments that are relevant to the given query [14, 62].
HD aims to predict the clip-level saliency scores in the
video [44].
As MR and HD tasks are closely related, they have
been jointly addressed and achieved breakthroughs recently
∗ Corresponding author

“Girl is standing by a white board with drawings on it.”

Query
Video
Time

Moment Retrieval
Annotations
Highlight Detection

Positive temporal interval

Figure 1. Although the positive temporal intervals of moment retrieval and highlight detection exhibit high overlap, they pursue
different objectives.

[20, 25, 29, 32, 36, 53]. The existing joint approaches
in general utilize a shared backbone to learn the multimodal features as the common representations for MR and
HD. Then a MR prediction head is employed for moments
localization and a HD prediction head predicts saliency
scores. These methods adhere to the bottom-up, data-driven
paradigm, i.e. they capture common features from the input
data and then utilize the features for different tasks. The
effectiveness of these methods is built upon the premise of
the high correlation between MR and HD. As illustrated in
Fig. 1, the task MR and HD share the identical query and
video inputs, additionally exhibiting a substantial temporal
overlap between their respective positive temporal intervals.
However, the bottom-up, data-driven paradigm tends to
excessively rely on the common features, but overlooks the
inherent specific characteristics of MR and HD. This tendency might simplify the joint modeling as a problem of
feature fusion, without considering the interplay between
the two tasks. The distinct objectives pursued by MR and
HD rely on distinct task-specific characteristics. Unfortunately, existing methods overlook the specificity.
To address the aforementioned issues, we believe it is
essential to leverage the fundamental multi-modal data to

18308

