This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Texture-Preserving Diffusion Models for High-Fidelity Virtual Try-On
Xu Yang1

Changxing Ding1∗ Zhibin Hong2 Junhao Huang2 Jin Tao1
1
South China University of Technology 2 S Research

ftyang xu@mail.scut.edu.cn
junhao.huang.77@gmail.com

Xiangmin Xu1

chxding@scut.edu.cn

zhib.hong@gmail.com

arjtao@scut.edu.cn

xmxu@scut.edu.cn

Figure 1. The sample try-on images synthesized by our Texture-Preserving Diffusion (TPD) model. In each triplet, the two left images are
the original person and garment images from VITON-HD [13] database. The right one depicts the synthesized image.

Abstract
Image-based virtual try-on is an increasingly important
task for online shopping. It aims to synthesize images of
a specific person wearing a specified garment. Diffusion
model-based approaches have recently become popular, as
they are excellent at image synthesis tasks. However, these
approaches usually employ additional image encoders and
rely on the cross-attention mechanism for texture transfer
from the garment to the person image, which affects the
try-on’s efficiency and fidelity. To address these issues,
we propose an Texture-Preserving Diffusion (TPD) model
for virtual try-on, which enhances the fidelity of the re∗ Corresponding author.

sults and introduces no additional image encoders. Accordingly, we make contributions from two aspects. First,
we propose to concatenate the masked person and reference garment images along the spatial dimension and utilize the resulting image as the input for the diffusion model’s
denoising UNet. This enables the original self-attention
layers contained in the diffusion model to achieve efficient
and accurate texture transfer. Second, we propose a novel
diffusion-based method that predicts a precise inpainting
mask based on the person and reference garment images,
further enhancing the reliability of the try-on results. In
addition, we integrate mask prediction and image synthesis
into a single compact model. The experimental results show
that our approach can be applied to various try-on tasks,
e.g., garment-to-person and person-to-person try-ons, and

7017

