This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

F RE SC O: Spatial-Temporal Correspondence for Zero-Shot Video Translation
Shuai Yang1 * Yifan Zhou2
1

Ziwei Liu2

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
williamyang@pku.edu.cn

Chen Change Loy2
2

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

{yifan006, ziwei.liu, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

Input
ControlNet
SDEdit
Customized model
Prompt: The Mona Lisa,
smile, oil painting by
Leonardo Da Vinci

Prompt: A beautiful
woman in CG style, pink
hair, tight hair

Prompt: A beautiful
grandma, white hair

Prompt: A beautiful
cartoon girl, 2D flat,
contour line,

Figure 1. Our framework enables high-quality and coherent video translation based on pre-trained image diffusion model. Given an input
video, our method re-renders it based on a target text prompt, while preserving its semantic content and motion. Our zero-shot framework
is compatible with various assistive techniques like ControlNet, SDEdit and LoRA, enabling more flexible and customized translation.

Abstract
The remarkable efficacy of text-to-image diffusion models has motivated extensive exploration of their potential
application in video domains. Zero-shot methods seek to
extend image diffusion models to videos without necessitating model training. Recent methods mainly focus on incorporating inter-frame correspondence into attention mechanisms. However, the soft constraint imposed on determining where to attend to valid features can sometimes be insufficient, resulting in temporal inconsistency. In this paper,
we introduce FRESCO, intra-frame correspondence alongside inter-frame correspondence to establish a more robust
spatial-temporal constraint. This enhancement ensures a
more consistent transformation of semantically similar content across frames. Beyond mere attention guidance, our
approach involves an explicit update of features to achieve
high spatial-temporal consistency with the input video, significantly improving the visual coherence of the resulting
translated videos. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed framework in producing highquality, coherent videos, marking a notable improvement
over existing zero-shot methods.
* Work done when Shuai Yang was RAP at S-Lab, NTU.

1. Introduction
In today’s digital age, short videos have emerged as a dominant form of entertainment. The editing and artistic rendering of these videos hold considerable practical importance.
Recent advancements in diffusion models [33, 34, 36] have
revolutionized image editing by enabling users to manipulate images conveniently through natural language prompts.
Despite these strides in the image domain, video manipulation continues to pose unique challenges, especially in ensuring natural motion with temporal consistency.
Temporal-coherent motions can be learned by training
video models on extensive video datasets [6, 18, 38] or
finetuning refactored image models on a single video [25,
37, 44], which is however neither cost-effective nor convenient for ordinary users. Alternatively, zero-shot methods [4, 5, 11, 23, 31, 41, 47] offer an efficient avenue
for video manipulation by altering the inference process of
image models with extra temporal consistency constraints.
Besides efficiency, zero-shot methods possess the advantages of high compatibility with various assistive techniques designed for image models, e.g., ControlNet [49]
and LoRA [19], enabling more flexible manipulation.
Existing zero-shot methods predominantly concentrate

8703

