This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MPOD123: One Image to 3D Content Generation Using Mask-enhanced
Progressive Outline-to-Detail Optimization
Jimin Xu1 Tianbao Wang1 Tao Jin1† Shengyu Zhang1† Dongjie Fu1 Zhe Wang2
Jiangjing Lyu2 Chengfei Lv1,2 Chaoyue Niu3 Zhou Yu4 Zhou Zhao1† Fei Wu1†
1

Zhejiang University, 2 Alibaba Group, 3 Shanghai Jiaotong University, 4 Hangzhou Dianzi University
{xujimin, jint zju, sy zhang, zhaozhou, wufei}@zju.edu.cn

Figure 1. MPOD123 generates high-quality 3D content from a single image (left column). We show the normal map and renderings from
full 360◦ viewpoint transformations, showcasing plausible geometry and visually pleasing textures at novel views. Visit our project page
https://mpod-123.github.io/ for an immersive visualization.

Abstract
Recent advancements in single image driven 3D content
generation have been propelled by leveraging prior knowledge from pretrained 2D diffusion models. However, the
3D content generated by existing methods often exhibits
distorted outline shapes and inadequate details. To solve
this problem, we propose a novel framework called Maskenhanced Progressive Outline-to-Detail optimization (aka.
MPOD123), which consists of two stages. Specifically,
in the first stage, MPOD123 utilizes the pretrained viewconditioned diffusion model to guide the outline shape optimization of the 3D content. Given certain viewpoint, we
estimate outline shape priors in the form of 2D mask from

the 3D content by leveraging opacity calculation. In the
second stage, MPOD123 incorporates Detail Appearance
Inpainting (DAI) to guide the refinement on local geometry and texture with the shape priors. The essence of DAI
lies in the Mask Rectified Cross-Attention (MRCA), which
can be conveniently plugged in the stable diffusion model.
The MRCA module utilizes the mask to rectify the attention
map from each cross-attention layer. Accompanied with this
new module, DAI is capable of guiding the detail refinement
of the 3D content, while better preserves the outline shape.
To assess the applicability in practical scenarios, we contribute a new dataset modeled on real-world e-commerce
environments. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments on this dataset and open benchmarks demonstrate

† Corresponding Authors.

10682

