This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HyperSDFusion: Bridging Hierarchical Structures in Language and Geometry
for Enhanced 3D Text2Shape Generation
Zhiying Leng 1,2 * Tolga Birdal 3
1

Xiaohui Liang 2,4† Federico Tombari 1
3

Technical University of Munich, Germany

2

Beihang University, China

4

Imperial College London, U.K.

Zhongguancun Laboratory, China

{zhiyingleng,liang xiaohui}@buaa.edu.cn, t.birdal@imperial.ac.uk, tombari@in.tum.de

Abstract

(b)

(a)

pobj

det

3D shape generation from text is a fundamental task in
3D representation learning. The text-shape pairs exhibit a
hierarchical structure, where a general text like “chair”
covers all 3D shapes of the chair, while more detailed
prompts refer to more specific shapes. Furthermore, both
text and 3D shapes are inherently hierarchical structures.
However, existing Text2Shape methods, such as SDFusion,
do not exploit that. In this work, we propose HyperSDFusion, a dual-branch diffusion model that generates 3D
shapes from a given text. Since hyperbolic space is suitable
for handling hierarchical data, we propose to learn the hierarchical representations of text and 3D shapes in hyperbolic
space. First, we introduce a hyperbolic text-image encoder
to learn the sequential and multi-modal hierarchical features of text in hyperbolic space. In addition, we design a
hyperbolic text-graph convolution module to learn the hierarchical features of text in hyperbolic space. In order to
fully utilize these text features, we introduce a dual-branch
structure to embed text features in 3D feature space. At last,
to endow the generated 3D shapes with a hierarchical structure, we devise a hyperbolic hierarchical loss. Our method
is the first to explore the hyperbolic hierarchical representation for text-to-shape generation. Experimental results
on the existing text-to-shape paired dataset, Text2Shape,
achieved state-of-the-art results. We release our implementation under HyperSDFusion.github.io.

1. Introduction
Text-to-Shape synthesis [5, 7, 26, 31, 36] involves the task
of generating high-quality and faithful shapes given a text
prompt and holds significant promise for a wide range
of applications including augmented/virtual reality and design, offering the potential for automated, diverse, and cost* This work was done when the author was at TUM.
† corresponding author

A

DET

num
mod

prep

chair with
NOUN

ADP

four

NUM

legs

NOUN

(c)
“a classic wooden “It's a chair have a
“A revolving office
chair that has four centralized leg, suit chair grey in colour
legs ”
for office purposes.” and big back rest”
“a chair with a back and
legs”

“an office chair with a
back”

“a chair with a back”

Deep feature

Middle feature

Shallow feature

Figure 1. Hyperbolic text-shape representations. (a) The hierarchical structure between text and 3D shape. (b) The syntactic tree of
text. (c) The hierarchical part-to-whole relationships of 3D shape.

effective 3D content. Unlike image-based media [1, 18, 60],
natural language provides a more direct means of expression. However, effectively marrying the realms of 3D geometry and natural language is challenging, leading to no
established standard for text-guided 3D shape generation.
We argue that hierarchy, preordering elements of a set
in increasing complexity is fundamental to linking geometry and language as illustrated in Fig. 1. 3D shapes inherently exhibit compositionality [33, 44], possessing hierarchical part-to-whole relationships [32]. On the other hand,
language exhibits a hierarchical tree-like syntactic structure [8, 12, 57], rooted in inter-word relationships. Recognizing these parallel hierarchical natures requires rethinking
text-to-shape correspondence also within a similar hierarchical framework. For example, a general prompt like “a
chair” can correspond to thousands of 3D shapes. In contrast, a more detailed description like “a wooden chair with
armrests and four legs” narrows down the possible shapes to
those with specific attributes. Fully embracing and leveraging such hierarchical nuances can significantly improve the
fidelity and specificity of generated shapes, making strides
in the field of text-to-shape synthesis.
Existing text-to-shape methods can be divided into two
categories depending on the data type they handle: one for

19691

