This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

VAREN: Very Accurate and Realistic Equine Network
Silvia Zuffi1 , Ylva Mellbin2 , Ci Li3 , Markus Hoeschle4 , Hedvig Kjellström3,2 , Senya Polikovsky4 ,
Elin Hernlund2 , and Michael J. Black4
1

IMATI-CNR, Milan, Italy, 2 SLU, Uppsala, Sweden, 3 KTH, Stockholm, Sweden,
4
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

Figure 1. VAREN is learned from real horses and models pose-dependent deformations at the muscle level, enabling the generation of 3D
horses with high realism. Inspired by Muybridge [24], we show a sequence of frames of horses in motion, generated by VAREN, where the
first frame illustrates, for each row, the horse in the rest pose. We show three different shapes, obtained by sampling the VAREN model.

Abstract
Data-driven three-dimensional parametric shape models of the human body have gained enormous popularity
both for the analysis of visual data and for the generation of synthetic humans. Following a similar approach
for animals does not scale to the multitude of existing animal species, not to mention the difficulty of accessing subjects to scan in 3D. However, we argue that for domestic
species of great importance, like the horse, it is a highly
valuable investment to put effort into gathering a large
dataset of real 3D scans, and learn a realistic 3D articulated shape model. We introduce VAREN, a novel 3D articulated parametric shape model learned from 3D scans
of many real horses. VAREN bridges synthesis and analysis
tasks, as the generated model instances have unprecedented
realism, while being able to represent horses of different
sizes and shapes. Differently from previous body models,
VAREN has two resolutions, an anatomical skeleton, and
interpretable, learned pose-dependent deformations, which
are related to the body muscles. We show with experiments
that this formulation has superior performance with respect
to previous strategies for modeling pose-dependent defor-

mations in the human body case, while also being more
compact and allowing an analysis of the relationship between articulation and muscle deformation during articulated motion. The VAREN model and data are available at
https://varen.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Horses are arguably the most valuable domestic animal and
there is a large industry focused on their breeding, care,
training, and use in sports. Buying a horse is a large investment, and keeping a horse requires resources and time.
Although they are large animals, horses are delicate. The
accumulated loads from training and competition frequently
result in unrecoverable injuries in their skeletal or tendinous
limb structures, ultimately leading to euthanasia. Consequently, among domestic animals, horses are widely studied
from a behavioral and biomechanical perspective, with the
aim of evaluating their performance, interpreting their state
of pain, and preventing injuries. To facilitate such analysis using computer vision, our goal is to develop a highly
accurate and detailed 3D model of horses that can be articulated, fit to data, and animated. Here we learn such a model

5374

