This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

StyLitGAN: Image-based Relighting via Latent Control
Anand Bhattad
James Soole
D.A. Forsyth
University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
https://anandbhattad.github.io/stylitgan/
Generated Image

Relit - 1 (w+ + d1 )

Relit - 2 (w+ + d2 )

Relit - 3 (w+ + d3 )

Relit - 4 (w+ + d4 )

Relit - 5 (w+ + d5 )

Figure 1. StyLitGAN identifies directional vectors (di ) within StyleGAN’s style space (W + ) which, when added to the w+ style code,
effectively modify the lighting of generated images while preserving their geometry and albedo. This process eliminates the need for
per-image search or model fine-tuning. The first column displays images generated from StyleGAN2; subsequent columns illustrate the same
scene, each relit using a specific direction. These relighting directions (di ) are derived through a forward selection method, ensuring diversity
and avoiding cherry-picking. The directional effects are consistent across different scenes: for instance, d1 activates an orange-tinged
bedside lamp, d2 a less intense white-tinged lamp, d3 introduces strong directional light from the window, and so on, demonstrating diverse
relighting capabilities of StyLitGAN.

Abstract
We describe a novel method, StyLitGAN, for relighting
and resurfacing images in the absence of labeled data. StyLitGAN generates images with realistic lighting effects, including cast shadows, soft shadows, inter-reflections, and glossy
effects, without the need for paired or CGI data. StyLitGAN uses an intrinsic image method to decompose an image,
followed by a search of the latent space of a pretrained StyleGAN to identify a set of directions. By prompting the model
to fix one component (e.g., albedo) and vary another (e.g.,
shading), we generate relighted images by adding the identified directions to the latent style codes. Quantitative metrics
of change in albedo and lighting diversity allow us to choose
effective directions using a forward selection process. Qualitative evaluation confirms the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Scene appearance shifts dramatically with varying lighting
conditions - a sunlit room takes on a different character as
daylight fades, and interior spaces transform with the flick of
a switch. Similarly, surface changes, like a wall’s paint color,
change not only the wall’s appearance but also the overall
image due to light reflection. Despite the impressive realism
achieved by current generative models like StyleGAN [22–
24], they fall short in dynamically controlling scene lighting,
a key aspect of realistic image generation.
In this work, we present StyLitGAN, a novel approach
that extends the editing capabilities of StyleGAN [38, 45,
46, 53]. StyLitGAN uniquely manipulates style codes to
selectively change lighting while preserving other image
attributes like albedo and geometry. This selective editing

4231

