This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

G-HOP: Generative Hand-Object Prior
for Interaction Reconstruction and Grasp Synthesis
Yufei Ye1

Abhinav Gupta1
Kris Kitani1,2
Shubham Tulsiani1
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
MetaAI
https://judyye.github.io/ghop-www

Figure 1. G-HOP can generate plausible hand-object interactions across a wide variety of objects (top). The learned generative prior can
also guide inference for tasks such as reconstructing everyday interaction clips and synthesizing human grasps given object meshes.

Abstract
We propose G-HOP, a denoising diffusion based generative prior for hand-object interactions that allows modeling
both the 3D object and a human hand, conditioned on the
object category. To learn a 3D spatial diffusion model that
can capture this joint distribution, we represent the human
hand via a skeletal distance field to obtain a representation
aligned with the (latent) signed distance field for the object. We show that this hand-object prior can then serve as
generic guidance to facilitate other tasks like reconstruction
from interaction clip and human grasp synthesis. We believe that our model, trained by aggregating seven diverse
real-world interaction datasets spanning across 155 categories, represents a first approach that allows jointly gen-

erating both hand and object. Our empirical evaluations
demonstrate the benefit of this joint prior in video-based
reconstruction and human grasp synthesis, outperforming
current task-specific baselines.

1. Introduction
Imagine holding a bottle, or a knife, or a pair of scissors.
Not only can you picture the differing shapes of these objects e.g. a cylindrical bottle or a flat knife, but you can also
easily envision the varying configurations your hand would
adopt when interacting with each of them. Even though the
form of these hand-object interactions may vary widely depending on factors such as geometry (e.g. we will hold a pen

1911

