This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Low-Res Leads the Way:
Improving Generalization for Super-Resolution by Self-Supervised Learning
Haoyu Chen1 , Wenbo Li2 , Jinjin Gu3 , Jingjing Ren1 , Haoze Sun4 ,
Xueyi Zou2 , Zhensong Zhang2 , Youliang Yan2 , Lei Zhu1,5 *
1 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
4 Tsinghua University

2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

3 The University of Sydney

5 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Project page:

https://haoyuchen.com/LWay

Abstract
For image super-resolution (SR), bridging the gap between the performance on synthetic datasets and real-world
degradation scenarios remains a challenge. This work introduces a novel ”Low-Res Leads the Way” (LWay) training framework, merging Supervised Pre-training with Selfsupervised Learning to enhance the adaptability of SR models to real-world images. Our approach utilizes a lowresolution (LR) reconstruction network to extract degradation embeddings from LR images, merging them with superresolved outputs for LR reconstruction. Leveraging unseen
LR images for self-supervised learning guides the model
to adapt its modeling space to the target domain, facilitating fine-tuning of SR models without requiring paired
high-resolution (HR) images. The integration of Discrete
Wavelet Transform (DWT) further refines the focus on highfrequency details. Extensive evaluations show that our
method significantly improves the generalization and detail restoration capabilities of SR models on unseen realworld datasets, outperforming existing methods. Our training regime is universally compatible, requiring no network
architecture modifications, making it a practical solution
for real-world SR applications.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) aims to restore high-resolution
(HR) images from their low-resolution (LR) or degraded
counterparts. The inception of the deep-learning-based SR
model can be traced back to SRCNN [14]. Recently, advancements in deep learning models have substantially enhanced SR performance [1, 6, 8–10, 12, 25–27, 39, 51, 52,
54, 56], particularly in addressing specific degradation types
like bicubic downsampling. Nevertheless, the efficacy of
SR models is generally restricted by the degradation strategies employed during the training phase, posing great challenges in complex real-world applications.
* Lei Zhu (leizhu@ust.hk) is the corresponding author.

SL space on
synthetic data

Unseen
Real-world Image

High quality
Low fidelity
Zoom In

SSL space on
real test data

Low quality
High fidelity

Zoom In

Ground Truth
Zoom In

SL space on
synthetic data
pull

SSL space on
real test data

High quality
High fidelity

Zoom In
Zoom In

Ours

Figure 1. Our proposed training method combine the benefits
of supervised learning (SL) on synthetic data and self-supervised
learning (SSL) on the unseen test images, achieve high quality and
high fidelity SR results.

In the realm of real-world SR, as shown in Figure 2,
training approaches can primarily be categorized into three
main paradigms. (a) Unsupervised Learning with Unpaired Data: Methods within this paradigm [2, 3, 15, 38,
40, 45, 46, 55] commonly utilize Generative Adversarial
Networks (GAN) architecture to learn target distributions
without paired data. Using one or multiple discriminators,
they distinguish between generated images and actual samples, guiding the generator to model accurately. However,
as this approach heavily relies on external data, it encounters significant challenges when facing scarce target domain
data, particularly in real-world scenarios. The GAN framework for unsupervised learning also has some drawbacks.
Firstly, it inherently struggles with stability during training,
leading to noticeable artifacts in SR outputs. Secondly, it
is difficult for a single 0/1 plane modelled by a discriminator to accurately separate the target domain [31]. This can
result in imprecise distribution learning. (b) Supervised
Learning with Paired Synthetic Data: BSRGAN [47] and
Real-ESRGAN [42] have largely enhanced the SR model’s

25857

