This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Learn to Rectify the Bias of CLIP for Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation
Jingyun Wang
Beihang University

Guoliang Kang *
Beihang University, Zhongguancun Laboratory

19231136@buaa.edu.cn

kgl.prml@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent works utilize CLIP to perform the challenging unsupervised semantic segmentation task where only images
without annotations are available. However, we observe
that when adopting CLIP to such a pixel-level understanding task, unexpected bias occurs. Previous works don’t explicitly model such bias, which largely constrains the segmentation performance. In this paper, we propose to explicitly model and rectify the bias existing in CLIP to facilitate the unsupervised semantic segmentation. Specifically,
we design a learnable “Reference” prompt to encode classpreference bias and project the positional embedding of vision transformer to represent space-preference bias. Via
a simple element-wise subtraction, we rectify the logits of
CLIP classifier. Based on the rectified logits, we generate a segmentation mask via a Gumbel-Softmax operation.
Then a contrastive loss between masked visual feature and
the text features of different classes is imposed to facilitate
the effective bias modeling. To further improve the segmentation, we distill the knowledge from the rectified CLIP
to the advanced segmentation architecture via minimizing
our designed mask-guided, feature-guided and text-guided
loss terms. Extensive experiments on standard benchmarks
demonstrate that our method performs favorably against
previous state-of-the-arts. The implementation is available
at https://github.com/dogehhh/ReCLIP.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to attach a semantic label to
each pixel of an image. Since the rising of deep learning [27, 28, 45, 54], semantic segmentation has been widely
adopted in real-world applications, e.g., autonomous driving, medical image segmentation, etc. Conventional approaches [6, 9, 10, 37, 38, 53, 60] for semantic segmentation
have achieved remarkable performance. However, the superior performance of those methods relies heavily on large
amounts of fully annotated masks. Collecting such high* Corresponding author

quality pixel-level annotations can be both time-consuming
and expensive, e.g., some annotations for specialized tasks
require massive expert knowledge, some are even inaccessible due to privacy reasons, etc. Therefore, it is necessary
to explore unsupervised semantic segmentation where only
images without annotations are available.
Unsupervised semantic segmentation (USS) has been
studied for years. Many non-language-guided USS methods
have been proposed, e.g., clustering-based methods [11, 25,
29, 34, 42], contrastive-learning-based methods [21, 51],
boundary-based methods [23], etc. Despite promising
progress achieved, there still exhibits a large performance
gap between USS and the supervised segmentation methods. Besides, these methods typically obtain class-agnostic
masks and have to depend on additional processing (e.g.,
Hungarian matching) to assign semantic labels to the masks,
rendering them less practical in real scenarios.
Recently, large-scale visual-language pre-trained models, e.g., CLIP [45], demonstrate superior zero-shot classification performance by comparing the degree of alignment
between image feature and text features of different categories. A few CLIP-based USS approaches [22, 46, 49, 62]
emerge and show remarkable performance improvement
compared with the non-language-guided USS methods.
These models require no access to any types of annotations,
and directly assign a label to each pixel, benefiting from the
aligned vision and text embedding space of CLIP. However,
good alignment between image-level visual feature and textural feature doesn’t necessarily mean good alignment between pixel-level visual feature and textural feature. Thus,
for CLIP, unexpected bias may inevitably appear. Previous
works didn’t explicitly model such bias, which may largely
constrain their segmentation performance.
We observe two kinds of bias existing in CLIP. From
one aspect, as shown in Fig. 1(a), CLIP exhibits spacepreference bias. CLIP performs apparently better for segmenting central objects than the ones distributed near the
image boundary. It can be reflected by the fact that mIoU
decreases as the distance between the centroids of object
and the image increases. From the other aspect, as shown in
Fig. 1(b), there exists class-preference bias between similar

4102

