This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Rotation-Agnostic Image Representation Learning for Digital Pathology
Saghir Alfasly Abubakr Shafique Peyman Nejat Jibran Khan Areej Alsaafin Ghazal Alabtah
H.R.Tizhoosh*
KIMIA Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence & Informatics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
{alfasly.saghir, tizhoosh.hamid}@mayo.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses complex challenges in histopathological image analysis through three key contributions.
Firstly, it introduces a fast patch selection method, FPS,
for whole-slide image (WSI) analysis, significantly reducing computational cost while maintaining accuracy. Secondly, it presents PathDino, a lightweight histopathology feature extractor with a minimal configuration of five
Transformer blocks and only ≈ 9 million parameters,
markedly fewer than alternatives. Thirdly, it introduces a
rotation-agnostic representation learning paradigm using
self-supervised learning, effectively mitigating overfitting.
We also show that our compact model outperforms existing
state-of-the-art histopathology-specific vision transformers
on 12 diverse datasets, including both internal datasets
spanning four sites (breast, liver, skin, and colorectal) and
seven public datasets (PANDA, CAMELYON16, BRACS,
DigestPath, Kather, PanNuke, and WSSS4LUAD). Notably,
even with a training dataset of ≈6 million histopathology patches from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), our
approach demonstrates an average 8.5% improvement in
patch-level majority vote performance. These contributions
provide a robust framework for enhancing image analysis
in digital pathology, rigorously validated through extensive
evaluation. 1

1. Introduction
The advent of whole slide image (WSI) scanning in digital pathology has revolutionized the research in computational pathology [1–3]. While digital pathology enables
both researchers and clinicians to enjoy the ease of access
to the WSIs, processing and storing these gigapixel images
are still quite challenging.
Motivation: Large image size and scarce or lack of patchlevel labels (annotations) pose two main challenges in
WSI analysis [4]. As a result, most state-of-the-art meth* Corresponding author
1 The project page: https : / / KimiaLabMayo . github . io /

PathDino-Page/

Figure 1. HistoRotate. A 360◦ rotation augmentation for
training models on histopathology images. Unlike training on natural images where the rotation may change the context of the visual data, rotating a histopathology image improves the learning
process for discriminative embedding learning.

ods adopt Multi-instance Learning (MIL) with weak supervision [5–13]. While these approaches may eliminate
the need for pixel-level annotations, MIL significantly increases computational loads and potentially lowers the quality of results compared to fully supervised approaches.
While some attempts have been made to select representative patches [5, 6, 14, 15], many such methods remain computationally intensive, leaving the desire for efficient, accurate solutions an unmet need.
The field of image analysis in digital pathology has
predominantly adopted deep models designed for natural
image analysis without further customization to the field
[16–19]. While showing good performance on natural image analysis, pre-trained deep models may not fully exploit the unique characteristics of histopathology images.
Furthermore, most current training recipes for histopathological embedding learning adopt conventional training and
common augmentation techniques for natural images [18].
However, histopathology images have arguably very different features compared to natural images and even radiology
images. This gap motivated us to design an improved training approach for histopathology images.

11683

