This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

HardMo: A Large-Scale Hardcase Dataset for Motion Capture
Jiaqi Liao1∗ , Chuanchen Luo2∗ , Yinuo Du1 , Yuxi Wang2,3 ,
B
B
Xucheng Yin5 , Man Zhang1,6 , Zhaoxiang Zhang2,3,4 , Junran Peng5
1

Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications 2 Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI, CAS 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
University of Science and Technology Beijing 6 Qinghai University of Science and Technology
{liaojiaqi, duyinuo99, zhangman}@bupt.edu.cn, zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn
{chuanchenluo,yuxiwang93,jrpeng4ever}@gmail.com, xuchengyin@ustb.edu.cn

(a)

(b)

(c)

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Comparisons between vanilla 4DHumans [10] and our HardMo-4DHumans. The teaser comprises four sub-figures. Each subfigure, from left to right, corresponds to (a) the input image, (b) the prediction of HardMo-4DHumans, and (c) the prediction of vanilla
4DHumans. In comparison, our HardMo-4DHumans is superior in the alignment of hand and foot posture.

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed rapid progress in monocular human mesh recovery. Despite their impressive
performance on public benchmarks, existing methods are
vulnerable to unusual poses, which prevents them from
deploying to challenging scenarios such as dance and
martial arts. This issue is mainly attributed to the domain
gap induced by the data scarcity in relevant cases. Most
existing datasets are captured in constrained scenarios and
lack samples of such complex movements. For this reason,
we propose a data collection pipeline comprising automatic
crawling, precise annotation, and hardcase mining. Based
on this pipeline, we establish a large dataset in a short
time. The dataset, named HardMo, contains 7M images

along with precise annotations covering 15 categories of
dance and 14 categories of martial arts. Empirically, we
find that the prediction failure in dance and martial arts
is mainly characterized by the misalignment of hand-wrist
and foot-ankle. To dig deeper into the two hardcases, we
leverage the proposed automatic pipeline to filter collected
data and construct two subsets named HardMo-Hand and
HardMo-Foot. Extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of the annotation pipeline and the data-driven
solution to failure cases. Specifically, after being trained
on HardMo, HMR, an early pioneering method, can even
outperform the current state of the art, 4DHumans, on our
benchmarks. Dataset will be publicly available at https:
//ljqnb.github.io/HardMo.github.io.

∗ Equal contribution.

1629

