This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MAGICK: A Large-scale Captioned Dataset from Matting Generated Images
using Chroma Keying
Ryan D. Burgert
Stony Brook University

Brian L. Price
Adobe Research

Jason Kuen
Adobe Research

Yijun Li
Adobe Research

rburgert@cs.stonybrook.edu

bprice@adobe.com

jkuen@adobe.com

yijli@adobe.com

Michael S. Ryoo
Stony Brook University
mryoo@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
We introduce MAGICK, a large-scale dataset of generated objects with high-quality alpha mattes. While image generation methods have produced segmentations, they
cannot generate alpha mattes with accurate details in hair,
fur, and transparencies. This is likely due to the small size
of current alpha matting datasets and the difficulty in obtaining ground-truth alpha. We propose a scalable method
for synthesizing images of objects with high-quality alpha
that can be used as a ground-truth dataset. A key idea
is to generate objects on a single-colored background so
chroma keying approaches can be used to extract the alpha. However, this faces several challenges, including that
current text-to-image generation methods cannot create images that can be easily chroma keyed and that chroma keying is an underconstrained problem that generally requires
manual intervention for high-quality results. We address
this using a combination of generation and alpha extraction methods. Using our method, we generate a dataset
of 150,000 objects with alpha. We show the utility of our
dataset by training an alpha-to-rgb generation method that
outperforms baselines. Please see our project website at
https://ryanndagreat.github.io/MAGICK/.

1. Introduction
Recent breakthroughs in diffusion models have led to an
abundance of new research in text-to-image generation [22,
25, 27, 29]. Given a short text prompt, an entire image can
quickly be generated. These images can contain complex
foreground objects against complex backgrounds. However, they do not handle use cases in which a user may want
an isolated object with an accurate alpha channel.
For example, a user may want to guide the generation of
an image with not only a text prompt but also with an accurate alpha mask. While segmentation maps have been used
to guide diffusion models [47], these maps are rough and do

Figure 1. An alpha matte (inverted for visibility) is used to generate an rgb image using ControlNet trained by our dataset (center)
verses the original (right). Note our version trained with our data
closely follows the alpha matte.

not contain precise details like human hair or transparencies
like in a wine glass. Our attempts to use alpha to condition
the off-the-shelf ControlNet v1.1 yielded results that did not
follow the alpha channel (Fig. 1). Other applications could
include generating objects to insert into images and generating training data for matting datasets.
The inability of current methods to address generation involving alpha may be due to the lack of training
data. While many large-scale segmentation datasets exist [6, 12, 18, 23, 50], they do not contain accurate soft
boundaries, usually because they were segmented manually using boundary-tracing tools. Matting datasets contain high-quality alpha ground-truth but are too small for
training generation methods due to the difficulty in obtaining ground-truth alpha. For example, the alphamatting.com
dataset [26] only contains 27 images, the Adobe Deep Image Matting (DIM) dataset [44] contains 431 objects, and
the Semantic Matting dataset [35] expands DIM to 726 objects. Without a suitable large-scale alpha dataset, training
models with accurate boundaries will remain difficult.
To address this lack of data, we proposed MAGICK, a
large-scale dataset of generated objects with high-quality
alpha mattes for use in training future generation models.
MAGICK contains 150,000 generated objects across a wide

22595

