This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

NICE: Neurogenesis Inspired Contextual Encoding for Replay-free Class
Incremental Learning
Mustafa Burak Gurbuz
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA

Jean Michael Moorman
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA

mgurbuz6@gatech.edu

jmoorman9@gatech.edu

Constantine Dovrolis
The Cyprus Institute, Cyprus
Georgia Institute of Technology, USA
constantine@gatech.edu

Abstract
Deep neural networks (DNNs) struggle to learn in dynamic settings because they mainly rely on static datasets.
Continual learning (CL) aims to overcome this limitation by
enabling DNNs to incrementally accumulate knowledge. A
widely adopted scenario in CL is class-incremental learning (CIL), where DNNs are required to sequentially learn
more classes. Among the various strategies in CL, replay
methods, which revisit previous classes, stand out as the
only effective ones in CIL. Other strategies, such as architectural modifications to segregate information across
weights and protect them from change, are ineffective in
CIL. This is because they need additional information during testing to select the correct network parts to use. In this
paper, we propose NICE, Neurogenesis Inspired Contextual Encoding, a replay-free architectural method inspired
by adult neurogenesis in the hippocampus. NICE groups
neurons in the DNN based on different maturation stages
and infers which neurons to use during testing without any
additional signal. Through extensive experiments across 6
datasets and 3 architectures, we show that NICE performs
on par with or often outperforms replay methods. We also
make the case that neurons exhibit highly distinctive activation patterns for the classes in which they specialize, enabling us to determine when they should be used. The code
is available at https://github.com/BurakGurbuz97/NICE.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are typically trained on static
data distributions, where training batches are drawn from
a fixed dataset adhering to the independent and identically
distributed (i.i.d.) assumption. While this approach has ad-

vanced the field, it overlooks a key facet of intelligence:
the ability to continuously learn from non-stationary distributions over time. In such continual learning (CL) scenarios, when DNNs process new data, they tend to suffer from
catastrophic forgetting (CF) of prior knowledge [25, 44].
Recent interest in CL has led to various scenarios [21, 48,
71]. Widely adopted are class-incremental learning (CIL)
and task-incremental learning (TIL) [67, 68]. In both, learners process series of datasets and classify test samples into
previously seen classes. The difference between them lies
in the handling of test samples. In TIL, a task identifier
indicates the originating dataset of the test sample. In contrast, CIL lacks this information, requiring learners to also
distinguish classes appearing at different timepoints.
This subtle distinction leads to significant variations in
performance. Many TIL approaches either fail or show substantial drops in performance when adapted to CIL. Among
the various strategies to address CL, replay stand out as the
only effective ones in the CIL setting [23, 31, 36, 67]. In
their basic form, replay methods retain a subset of samples
from all previously seen classes [19]. When introduced to a
new class, they augment the training batches with samples
from earlier classes and train on all classes simultaneously.
Despite the success of replay methods, they have faced
some criticism. For example, [50] proposed the GDumb
algorithm, which keeps a subset of samples and retrains
a model from scratch on these samples at test time, as a
critique of prevailing replay methods. Surprisingly, this
straightforward approach often outperforms well-known replay methods, suggesting that the performance of these
methods may largely depend on the samples retained in
memory. Another work [16] indicates that in the Experience
Replay (ER) algorithm [19], which has inspired numerous
replay methods, representations of older classes are rapidly
disrupted when training on new classes. Consequently, the

23659

