This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

WildlifeMapper: Aerial Image Analysis for Multi-Species Detection and
Identification
Satish Kumar1* Bowen Zhang1* Chandrakanth Gudavalli1 Connor Levenson1 Lacey Hughey2
Jared A. Stabach2 Irene Amoke3 Gordon Ojwang’4 Joseph Mukeka5 Stephen Mwiu5
Joseph Ogutu6 Howard Frederick7 B.S. Manjunath1
1
University of California Santa Barbara 2 Smithsonian National Zoo and Conservation Biology
Institute 3 Kenya Wildlife Trust, 4 University of Groningen, 5 Wildlife Research and Training Institute
6
University of Hohenheim, 7 Tanzania Wildlife Research Institute
(satishkumar,bowen68,chandrakanth,clevenson,manj)@ucsb.edu,
(stabachj, hugheyl)@si.edu, irene.amoke@kenyawildlifetrust.org,
(gordonojwang, simbamangu)@gmail.com, (jmukeka, smwiu)@wrti.go.ke

Abstract
We introduce WildlifeMapper (WM), a flexible model
designed to detect, locate, and identify multiple species
in aerial imagery. It addresses the limitations of traditional, labor-intensive wildlife population assessments that
are central to advancing environmental conservation efforts
worldwide. While a number of methods exist to automate
this process, they are often limited in their ability to generalize to different species or landscapes due to the dominance
of homogeneous backgrounds and/or poorly captured local
image structures. WM introduces two novel modules that
help to capture the local structure and context of objects of
interest to accurately localize and identify them, achieving
a state-of-the-art (SOTA) detection rate of 0.56 mAP. Further, we introduce a large aerial imagery dataset with more
than 11k Images and 28k annotations verified by domain
experts. WM also achieves SOTA performance on 3 other
publicly available aerial survey datasets collected across 4
different countries, improving mAP by 42%. Source code
and trained models are available at Github 1 .

1. Introduction
This paper introduces WildlifeMapper (WM) - an automated and scalable method for counting wildlife in aerial
imagery. Aerial wildlife surveys are recognized as a cornerstone of modern conservation biology. By facilitating
large-scale biological monitoring in remote landscapes, this
technique has underpinned the ability to track changes in
the abundance and distribution of wildlife across open landscapes for decades. However, traditional survey approaches
1 https://github.com/UCSB-VRL/WildlifeMapper
* refers to equal contribution

often rely on manual observers to identify, count, and validate species of interest. This labor-intensive process can be
time-consuming and error-prone, with potential to limit the
utility of final results [27, 35, 38].
Automated approaches offer a promising alternative for
efficient and accurate detection of wildlife in aerial survey
images. Recent work, for example, illustrates how artificial intelligence has been used to count a variety of species
from the air, including antelope in grasslands [44], whales
in the ocean [11], and seals on the beach [42]. When combined with advancements in low-cost, high-resolution imaging platforms (e.g., UAVs), these case studies underscore
the potential for such data to significantly reduce the effort and cost of traditional wildlife census methods. However, the majority of these techniques struggle to generalize to new species or landscapes due to the dominance of
homogeneous backgrounds and poorly captured local structures [7, 12, 18, 39].
WildlifeMapper overcomes these limitations by adapting a novel application of the segment anything transformer
model [21]. This model combines high frequency component correlations and spatial correlations in the image data
to generate a map of potential locations of objects of interest
(i.e., wildlife, livestock). In addition, we address the challenge of identifying multiple species from a relatively small
footprint in these images.
To demonstrate the WM analysis workflow, we provide
a case study example across the Masai Mara Ecosystem in
southwestern Kenya. Renowned for its rich biological diversity, the abundance of large mammals (such as buffalo
(Syncerus caffer), giraffe (Giraffa tippelskirchi), and wildebeest (Connochaetes taurinus)) have declined precipitously
over the past few decades [34]. Importantly, our analy-

12594

