This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

LUWA Dataset: Learning Lithic Use-Wear Analysis on Microscopic Images
Jing Zhang1, ,* Irving Fang1, ,* Hao Wu1 , Akshat Kaushik1 , Alice Rodriguez1 , Hanwen Zhao1 ,
Juexiao Zhang1 , Zhuo Zheng2 , Radu Iovita1,†, Chen Feng1,†
1
New York University 2 Stanford University
https://ai4ce.github.io/LUWA/
① Wear Process

Plant Cutting

Tribometer Testing

a. Machine Wear
Load

② Microscopic Imaging

③ Coarse-Grained and Fine-Grained Categories

a. Magnifications

50X
objective

Worked
Materials

20X
Objective

Stone
Wear Track
Antler

b. Human Wear

50X
20X
b. Sensing Modalities

Where are wear regions?

④ Expert Knowledge

Region 2

Heightmap

High
Low

Region 1

Texture

Where to focus when
making decisions?

Expert Interpretations

Figure 1. LUWA poses a unique computer vision challenge due to: its complex wear formation and irregular wear patterns, ambiguous
sensing modalities and magnifications in microscopic imaging. Facing these challenges, the LUWA dataset encompasses both texture and
heightmap with different magnifications, encouraging the exploration of image classification beyond common objects.

Abstract
Lithic Use-Wear Analysis (LUWA) using microscopic images is an underexplored vision-for-science research area.
It seeks to distinguish the worked material, which is critical
for understanding archaeological artifacts, material interactions, tool functionalities, and dental records. However,
this challenging task goes beyond the well-studied image
classification problem for common objects. It is affected by
many confounders owing to the complex wear mechanism
and microscopic imaging, which makes it difficult even for
human experts to identify the worked material successfully.
In this paper, we investigate the following three questions
on this unique vision task for the first time:(i) How well
can state-of-the-art pre-trained models (like DINOv2) generalize to the rarely seen domain? (ii) How can few-shot
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author:

Radu Iovita(iovita@nyu.edu) and
Chen Feng(cfeng@nyu.edu)

learning be exploited for scarce microscopic images? (iii)
How do the ambiguous magnification and sensing modality influence the classification accuracy? To study these, we
collaborated with archaeologists and built the first opensource and the largest LUWA dataset containing 23,130 microscopic images with different magnifications and sensing
modalities. Extensive experiments show that existing pretrained models notably outperform human experts but still
leave a large gap for improvements. Most importantly, the
LUWA dataset provides an underexplored opportunity for
vision and learning communities and complements existing
image classification problems on common objects.

1. Introduction
Lithic Use-Wear Analysis (LUWA) is a long-standing scientific problem (see Fig. 1) to identify the functions of
stone tools by examining wear traces at the microscopic
level on the tool’s surface [30, 41]. It seeks to distinguish
the worked material (like bone, wood, ivory and antler) us-

22563

