This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Logarithmic Lenses: Exploring Log RGB Data for Image Classification
Bruce A. Maxwell, Sumegha Singhania, Avnish Patel, Rahul Kumar, Heather Fryling,
Sihan Li, Haonan Sun, Ping He, Zewen Li
Northeastern University, Boston, USA
{b.maxwell, singhania.s, patel.avni, kumar.rahul4, fryling.h, }@northeastern.edu
{li.siha, sun.haon, hi.pin, li.zewen }@northeastern.edu

Abstract
The design of deep network architectures and training
methods in computer vision has been well-explored. However, in almost all cases the images have been used as provided, with little exploration of pre-processing steps beyond
normalization and data augmentation. Virtually all images
posted on the web or captured by devices are processed for
viewing by humans. Is the pipeline used for humans also
best for use by computers and deep networks?
The human visual system uses logarithmic sensors; differences and sums correspond to ratios and products. Features in log space will be invariant to intensity changes and
robust to color balance changes. Log RGB space also reveals structure that is corrupted by typical pre-processing.
We explore using linear and log RGB data for training
standard backbone architectures on an image classification
task using data derived directly from RAW images to guarantee its integrity. We found that networks trained on log
RGB data exhibit improved performance on an unmodified
test set and invariance to intensity and color balance modifications without additional training or data augmentation.
Furthermore, we found that the gains from using high
quality log data could also be partially or fully realized
from data in 8-bit sRGB-JPG format by inverting the sRGB
transform and taking the log. These results imply existing
databases may benefit from this type of pre-processing.
While working with log data, we found it was critical
to retain the integrity of the log relationships and that networks using log data train best with meta-parameters different than those used for sRGB or linear data.
Finally, we introduce a new 10-category 10k RAW image
data set (RAW10) for image classification and other purposes to enable further the exploration of log RGB as an
input format for deep networks in computer vision.

1. Introduction
Image classification is a fundamental task in computer
vision. The ImageNet database enabled the development of large scale deep networks which have been the
foundation of the machine learning revolution in computer vision and related areas [6]. The task has been
well studied and spawned numerous foundational architectures that have found utility in multiple applications
[21][41][14][42][16][38].
While many variations in network design, training methods, meta-parameters, and data augmentation have been
studied in-depth, very little effort has been directed towards
evaluating different image data spaces. This is likely, in
part, because most large scale databases like ImageNet,
COCO, Pascal VOC, Faces in the Wild, and Intrinsic Images in the Wild are built from images collected from the
web [6][22][8][17][1]. Therefore, the pre-processing steps
are unknown, and it is difficult to revert the data to true linear RGB. It may also be due to the fact that people have no
problem understanding these images.
However, people do not learn to see based on web images. Our visual systems learn from our own sensors, which
means they have access to the physical rules that govern
the interactions of light and matter. Furthermore, the human visual system uses a logarithmic sensor, which is part
of what gives us the capability of seeing across a wide dynamic range [37]. It also means that basic features–those
generated by adding and subtracting signals–are computing
products and ratios rather than differences.
In this work we evaluate the hypothesis that using log
of linear RGB, can provide improvements in performance
for convolutional networks orthogonal to prior work on network design, training methods, or meta-parameter adjustment. Furthermore, we demonstrate that networks trained
using log RGB provide natural invariance to intensity and
color balance variation.
There is some prior work on using RAW imagery for
object detection, and color constancy databases are linear

17470

