This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

RoMa: Robust Dense Feature Matching
Johan Edstedt1
1

Qiyu Sun2

Georg Bökman3

Mårten Wadenbäck1

Michael Felsberg1

Linköping University, 2 East China University of Science and Technology, 3 Chalmers University of Technology

Figure 1. RoMa is robust, i.e., able to match under extreme changes. We propose RoMa, a model for dense feature matching that
is robust to a wide variety of challenging real-world changes in scale, illumination, viewpoint, and texture. We show correspondences
estimated by RoMa on the extremely challenging benchmark WxBS [37], where most previous methods fail, and on which we set a new
state-of-the-art with an improvement of 36% mAA. The estimated correspondences are visualized by grid sampling coordinates bilinearly
from the other image, using the estimated warp, and multiplying with the estimated confidence.

Abstract

Feature matching is an important computer vision task
that involves estimating correspondences between two images of a 3D scene, and dense methods estimate all such
correspondences. The aim is to learn a robust model, i.e., a
model able to match under challenging real-world changes.
In this work, we propose such a model, leveraging frozen
pretrained features from the foundation model DINOv2. Although these features are significantly more robust than local features trained from scratch, they are inherently coarse.
We therefore combine them with specialized ConvNet fine
features, creating a precisely localizable feature pyramid.
To further improve robustness, we propose a tailored transformer match decoder that predicts anchor probabilities,
which enables it to express multimodality. Finally, we propose an improved loss formulation through regression-byclassification with subsequent robust regression. We conduct a comprehensive set of experiments that show that our
method, RoMa, achieves significant gains, setting a new
state-of-the-art. In particular, we achieve a 36% improvement on the extremely challenging WxBS benchmark. Code
is provided at github.com/Parskatt/RoMa.

1. Introduction
Feature matching is the computer vision task of from
two images estimating pixel pairs that correspond to the
same 3D point. It is crucial for downstream tasks such
as 3D reconstruction [47] and visual localization [43].
Dense feature matching methods [17, 38, 53, 56] aim to
find all matching pixel-pairs between the images. These
dense methods employ a coarse-to-fine approach, whereby
matches are first predicted at a coarse level and successively
refined at finer resolutions. Previous methods commonly
learn coarse features using 3D supervision [17, 44, 48, 56].
While this allows for specialized coarse features, it comes
with downsides. In particular, since collecting real-world
3D datasets is expensive, the amount of available data is
limited, which means models risk overfitting to the training set. This in turn limits the models robustness to scenes
that differ significantly from what has been seen during
training. A well-known approach to limit overfitting is
to freeze the backbone used [31, 51, 58]. However, using frozen backbones pretrained on ImageNet classification,
the out-of-the-box performance is insufficient for feature
matching (see experiments in Table 1). A recent promising direction for frozen pretrained features is large-scale
self-supervised pretraining using Masked image Modeling (MIM) [25, 39, 60, 66]. The methods, including DI-

19790

