This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Endow SAM with Keen Eyes: Temporal-spatial Prompt Learning for Video
Camouflaged Object Detection
Wenjun Hui1,2 , Zhenfeng Zhu1,2 *, Shuai Zheng1,2 , Yao Zhao1,2
1
2

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University

Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
{wenjunhui, zhfzhu, zs1997, yzhao}@bjtu.edu.cn

(a) Explicit motion-based methods

Abstract
The Segment Anything Model (SAM), a prompt-driven
foundational model, has demonstrated remarkable performance in natural image segmentation. However, its application in video camouflaged object detection (VCOD) encounters challenges, chiefly stemming from the overlooked
temporal-spatial associations and the unreliability of userprovided prompts for camouflaged objects that are difficult
to discern with the naked eye. To tackle the above issues,
we endow SAM with keen eyes and propose the Temporalspatial Prompt SAM (TSP-SAM), a novel approach tailored
for VCOD via an ingenious prompted learning scheme.
Firstly, motion-driven self-prompt learning is employed to
capture the camouflaged object, thereby bypassing the need
for user-provided prompts. With the detected subtle motion
cues across consecutive video frames, the overall movement
of the camouflaged object is captured for more precise spatial localization. Subsequently, to eliminate the prompt bias
resulting from inter-frame discontinuities, the long-range
consistency within the video sequences is taken into account to promote the robustness of the self-prompts. It is
also injected into the encoder of SAM to enhance the representational capabilities. Extensive experimental results on
two benchmarks demonstrate that the proposed TSP-SAM
achieves a significant improvement over the state-of-the-art
methods. With the mIoU metric increasing by 7.8% and
9.6%, TSP-SAM emerges as a groundbreaking step forward
in the field of VCOD.

1. Introduction
Camouflaged object detection, a pivotal task in computer
vision, aims to identify the target object seamlessly blending with its surroundings in images [19, 44]. This task
plays an important role in various fields, including surveillance and security [29], wildlife protection [28], and medi* Corresponding author

(b) Implicit motion-based methods

Compensation/
Registration
Frames

Short-term
Architecture
Motion flow

Segmentation
Motion flow

Prediction

Pseudo
mask

Frames
Pseudo
Pseudo 
mask
mask Cat

Long-term
Architecture
Prediction

(c) The proposed TSP-SAM
Segment anything model (SAM)
Frame I(t)

Prediction M(t)
Temporal-spatial
prompt learning

Prompts
Robust prompt learning

Representation enhancement

long-range consistency

Self-prompt learning
short-term motion

...

Frame I(t-T+1)

...

Frame I(t)

Frame I(t-1)

Frame I(t)

Figure 1. Illustration of previous VCOD methods (a-b) and the
proposed TSP-SAM (c). In contrast to previous methods with twostage architecture, the proposed TSP-SAM is trained in an end-toend manner, incorporating short-long term temporal-spatial relationships to collaboratively learn the reliable prompts. Meanwhile,
the long-range consistency is also used to enhance the representational capability of SAM.

cal image processing [11, 41]. In recent years, single-image
camouflaged object detection has made significant progress
[16, 19, 45]. However, studies [26, 43] have discerned that
observers exhibit heightened perception towards the camouflaged object in motion compared to the static scenarios.
This observation has sparked a growing interest in video
camouflaged object detection (VCOD) [5].
Existing VCOD methods [1, 2, 5, 26] commonly employ
a two-step framework to model the inter-frame correlations
implicitly or explicitly for camouflage breaking, as shown
in Fig. 1(a)(b). Despite yielding promising results, they are
noticeably limited in certain aspects:
- (i) Primarily, their two-stage architecture exposes them to
cumulative errors, thus impacting their overall accuracy.
- (ii) Moreover, they exhibit weak generalization ability
due to the limited training data.
Consequently, there is a growing demand for universal models in video camouflaged object detection.

19058

