This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

MRC-Net: 6-DoF Pose Estimation with MultiScale Residual Correlation
Yuelong Li *
Amazon Inc.

Yafei Mao *
Amazon Inc.

Raja Bala
Amazon Inc.

Sunil Hadap
Amazon Inc.

yuell@amazon.com

yafeimao@amazon.com

rajabl@amazon.com

hadsunil@lab126.com

Abstract
We propose a single-shot approach to determining
6-DoF pose of an object with available 3D computer-aided
design (CAD) model from a single RGB image. Our
method, dubbed MRC-Net, comprises two stages. The
first performs pose classification and renders the 3D
object in the classified pose.
The second stage
performs regression to predict fine-grained residual pose
within class. Connecting the two stages is a novel
multi-scale residual correlation (MRC) layer that captures
high-and-low level correspondences between the input
image and rendering from first stage. MRC-Net employs a
Siamese network with shared weights between both stages
to learn embeddings for input and rendered images. To
mitigate ambiguity when predicting discrete pose class
labels on symmetric objects, we use soft probabilistic
labels to define pose class in the first stage.
We
demonstrate state-of-the-art accuracy, outperforming all
competing RGB-based methods on four challenging BOP
benchmark datasets: T-LESS, LM-O, YCB-V, and ITODD.
Our method is non-iterative and requires no complex
post-processing. Our code and pretrained models are
available at https://github.com/amzn/mrc-net-6d-pose.

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D object pose (rotation and translation) relative
to the camera from a single image is a fundamental problem
in many computer vision applications including robotics,
autonomous navigation, and augmented reality. This task is
challenging due to the complex shapes of real world objects,
and diversity in object appearance due to lighting, surface
color, background clutter, object symmetry, and occlusions.
A common solution is to directly regress object
poses from images using deep neural networks [28,
53]. Alternatively the problem can be framed as one
of classification, predicting a pose in terms of discrete
buckets [2, 25]. There have also been attempts to combine
the two approaches, predicting a coarse pose class and
* Equal contribution

Figure 1. MRC-Net features a single-shot sequential Siamese
structure of two stages, where the second stage conditions on
the first classification stage outcome through multi-scale residual
correlation of poses between input and rendered images.

then regressing residual pose within class [37]. While
residual regression helps reduce quantization errors from
classification to some extent, performance generally falls
short of state-of-the art, especially in challenging scenarios
where there is lack of object texture or heavy occlusion.
We believe a key reason is that in current approaches,
the problem is formulated as multitask learning, where
classification and regression tasks are trained in parallel
with shared top-level features. Such a design does not
enable the regression task to receive direct guidance from
the classification step.
We approach the problem differently. Since the tasks
of classification and residual pose regression are inherently
sequential, we hypothesize that it is more effective and
natural to also learn them sequentially. We thus propose
a two stage deep learning pipeline. In the first stage
a classifier predicts pose in terms of a set of pose
buckets. In the second stage, a deep regressor predicts
residual pose within-bucket using features from the first
stage. The classifier and regressor are implemented as
Siamese networks with shared weights. Bridging the two
stages is a novel multiscale residual correlation (MRC)
layer that draws on the well known render-and-compare
paradigm to capture correspondences between the input
pose and the pose rendered from the first classification

10476

