This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

SelfOcc: Self-Supervised Vision-Based 3D Occupancy Prediction
Yuanhui Huang* Wenzhao Zheng* Borui Zhang Jie Zhou Jiwen Lu†
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
{huangyh22,zhang-br21}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; wenzhao.zheng@outlook.com;
{jzhou,lujiwen}@tsinghua.edu.cn
Only Video Sequences As Supervision

Geometry

Self-Supervised 3D Occupancy Prediction

Semantics

……
Optional
2D Segmentor

SelfOcc

lower

higher

driveable surface

car

terrain

vegetation

truck

sidewalk

manmade

Figure 1. Trained with only video sequences as supervision, our model can predict meaningful geometry for the scene given surroundcamera RGB images, which can be further extended to semantic occupancy prediction if 2D segmentation maps are available e.g. from an
off-the-shelf segmentor. This task is challenging because it completely depends on video sequences to reconstruct scenes without any 3D
supervision. We observe that our model can produce dense and consistent occupancy prediction and even infer the back side of cars.

Abstract
3D occupancy prediction is an important task for the robustness of vision-centric autonomous driving, which aims
to predict whether each point is occupied in the surrounding
3D space. Existing methods usually require 3D occupancy
labels to produce meaningful results. However, it is very laborious to annotate the occupancy status of each voxel. In
this paper, we propose SelfOcc to explore a self-supervised
way to learn 3D occupancy using only video sequences. We
first transform the images into the 3D space (e.g., bird’s eye
view) to obtain 3D representation of the scene. We directly
impose constraints on the 3D representations by treating
them as signed distance fields. We can then render 2D images of previous and future frames as self-supervision signals to learn the 3D representations. We propose an MVSembedded strategy to directly optimize the SDF-induced
weights with multiple depth proposals. Our SelfOcc outperforms the previous best method SceneRF by 58.7% using a single frame as input on SemanticKITTI and is the
first self-supervised work that produces reasonable 3D occupancy for surround cameras on nuScenes. SelfOcc produces high-quality depth and achieves state-of-the-art results on novel depth synthesis, monocular depth estimation,
and surround-view depth estimation on the SemanticKITTI,
KITTI-2015, and nuScenes, respectively. Code: https:
//github.com/huang-yh/SelfOcc.
* Equal contribution. †Corresponding author.

1. Introduction
The vision-centric paradigm has demonstrated its potential
for efficient autonomous driving [29, 31, 32, 40], where
the key procedure is to obtain a perceptual 3D representation, e.g. the bird’s eye view (BEV) [50] or tri-perspective
view (TPV) [31] of the surrounding scene given only 2D
images [40, 54]. Most existing methods achieve this using 3D annotations as supervision and achieve promising
results on various tasks including semantic map construction [28, 50, 54], 3D object detection [30, 39, 40, 81], and
3D semantic occupancy prediction [6, 31, 63, 66].
Despite the strong performance of supervised 3D representation that facilitates accurate subsequent prediction and
planning [29, 32, 64], it is very laborious to annotate 3D labels and thus difficult to scale to large-scale training data.
As one workaround, data auto-labeling creates data cycles
and train large networks to assist human annotation, yet it is
still time-consuming and resource-hungry [11, 55, 74]. It is
also noticed to be the bottleneck towards building and updating large models for autonomous driving [9]. Therefore,
it is desired to learn meaningful 3D representations only
from recorded video sequences without 3D labels. While
existing works have explored learning 3D information (e.g.,
depth) from images [7, 23, 71], they are still based on 2D
representations in each monocular camera space. It remains challenging to obtain reasonable and comprehensive
3D representations useful for further autonomous driving
prediction and planning [29] in a self-supervised manner.
In this paper, we explore the problem of learning self-

19946

