This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Disentangled Prompt Representation for Domain Generalization
De Cheng1∗ , Zhipeng Xu1 ,* Xinyang Jiang2† , Nannan Wang1†, Dongsheng Li2 , Xinbo Gao3
1
Xidian University, 2 Microsoft Research Asia, 3 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{nnwang,dcheng}@xidian.edu.cn, xu zhipeng@stu.xidian.edu.cn
{xinyangjiang, dongsli}@microsoft.com, gaoxb@cqupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Domain Generalization (DG) aims to develop a versatile model capable of performing well on unseen target domains. Recent advancements in pre-trained Visual Foundation Models (VFMs), such as CLIP, show significant potential in enhancing the generalization abilities of deep models. Although there is a growing focus on VFM-based domain prompt tuning for DG, effectively learning prompts
that disentangle invariant features across all domains remains a major challenge. In this paper, we propose addressing this challenge by leveraging the controllable and
flexible language prompt of the VFM. Observing that the
text modality of VFMs is inherently easier to disentangle,
we introduce a novel text feature guided visual prompt tuning framework. This framework first automatically disentangles the text prompt using a large language model
(LLM) and then learns domain-invariant visual representation guided by the disentangled text feature. Moreover,
we also devise domain-specific prototype learning to fully
exploit domain-specific information to combine with the invariant feature prediction. Extensive experiments on mainstream DG datasets, namely PACS, VLCS, OfficeHome,
DomainNet and TerraInc, demonstrate that the proposed
method achieves superior performances to state-of-the-art
DG methods.

1. Introduction
Most of the machine learning methods are built on the
assumption that training and testing data are independently
and identically distributed (i.i.d.) [7, 7, 26, 42]. However, in
real-world scenarios, this assumption does not always hold
where distribution shift between training and testing data
occurs frequently. As a result, Domain Generalization (DG)
task has been proposed, aiming to learn a generalized model
to perform well on unseen target domain only using limited
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.

A photo of a sheep has a round,
woolly body, four sturdy legs,
sketch
gentle eyes, a small nose, and
protruding ears. The image Domain Shift
may also include sample lines
and white or grayscale color.
real

A photo of a sheep has a round woolly
body, four sturdy legs, two gentle eyes,
a small nose, and and protruding ears.
The image includes rich colors like

green or brown, with a strong contrast
between light and dark. Sheep usually
live on green grassland.

Disentangle
Domain-specific
Description ( sketch )
The

color

of

the

sheep in sketch are

mostly white or in
grey scale. It usually
stands on grassland.

Domain-invariant
description

Domain-specific
Description ( real )

a sheep typically has a round
wolly body, four sturdy legs,
two gentle eyes, a small nose,
and a pair of ears that stick
out to the sides.

The color of the sheep
are mostly white, black
and brown. It usually
stands
on
green
grassland

Figure 1. The upper portion of the image illustrates the differences among various domains, which are subsequently disentangled into domain-invariant and domain-specific descriptions via
our text disentanglement process, as depicted in the lower portion
of the image.

source domain data for training. The DG has long been
an essential topic in the machine learning field and attracts
considerable attention.
The main challenge for DG is to learn a model with
good generalization ability, to extract domain-invariant representations across source domain datasets. Fortunately,
latest researches show clear evidence that large-scale pretrained model could greatly enhance the domain generalization power. Specially for the pre-trained VFMs (e.g.,
CLIP), they are trained by utilizing large-scale (image, text)
pairs for robust visual representation, which is inherently
rich in semantic information of prior knowledge. Hence,
such VFMs are able to encode the semantic meanings of visual descriptions, regardless of the image styles, which is
in line with the goal of DG, i.e., learning uniform visual
semantic representations across different domains.
Most current DG methods use multi-domain training
datasets to train a model generalizes to unseen domains. It
is intuitive that we can also enhance the ability of foundation models by fine-tuning them using these datasets. Recent developments have introduced the idea of fine-tuning

23595

