This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Unsupervised Occupancy Learning from Sparse Point Cloud
Amine Ouasfi
Adnane Boukhayma
Inria, Univ. Rennes, CNRS, IRISA, M2S, France

Abstract
Implicit Neural Representations have gained prominence as a powerful framework for capturing complex data
modalities, encompassing a wide range from 3D shapes to
images and audio. Within the realm of 3D shape representation, Neural Signed Distance Functions (SDF) have demonstrated remarkable potential in faithfully encoding intricate
shape geometry. However, learning SDFs from 3D point
clouds in the absence of ground truth supervision remains
a very challenging task. In this paper, we propose a method
to infer occupancy fields instead of SDFs as they are easier
to learn from sparse inputs. We leverage a margin-based
uncertainty measure to differentiably sample from the decision boundary of the occupancy function and supervise the
sampled boundary points using the input point cloud. We
further stabilise the optimization process at the early stages
of the training by biasing the occupancy function towards
minimal entropy fields while maximizing its entropy at the
input point cloud. Through extensive experiments and evaluations, we illustrate the efficacy of our proposed method,
highlighting its capacity to improve implicit shape inference
with respect to baselines and the state-of-the-art using synthetic and real data.

1. Introduction
Capturing full 3D shape from limited and corrupted data is
a long standing problem. In this regard, one of the data type
instances that has received increasing attention and investigation from computer vision, graphics and machine learning is point clouds. This interest emanates primarily from
the ubiquity of this light, although topologically incomplete
3D representation, either as acquired e.g. through industrial
and commodity depth sensors, or as an intermediate representation within computational photogrammetry [66, 67]
pipelines for instance. While classical optimization methods such as Poisson Reconstruction [36] or Moving Least
Squares [30] can be effective with dense, clean point sets
and accurate normal pre-estimations, recent deep learningbased alternatives provide more robust predictions, particularly for noisy and sparse inputs, eliminating the need for

normal data in many cases.
Several methods rely on priors learned from large fully
labeled data such as the synthetic dataset ShapeNet [14].
However, this strategy entails computationally expensive
trainings, and the resulting models can still be prone to outof-distribution generalization issues, as pointed in [15, 55],
whether caused by change in the input size or domain shift.
For instance, Table 2 shows that our unsupervised method
outperforms supervised generalizable models when testing
on data that is sparser and different in nature from their
training corpus. Hence, it is important to design learning frameworks that can lead to robust reconstruction under
such extreme constraints.
Neural implicit representaions (INR) were established
recently as a powerful representation for 3D shape, generally taking the form of coordinate based MLPs. They
have been applied to model various shape presentations, the
most popular ones of which remain arguably signed distance functions (SDF) [58] and binary occupancy fields [52]
for watertight shapes. For the task of point cloud reconstruction, there is a wide literature on learning SDFs from
dense labels, as well as from point clouds solely (unsupervised), either in the generalizable setting or in instance specific optimization. However, apart from its applications in
the supervised generalizable setting [8, 20, 60], it seems that
occupancy learning from point sets has not been as widely
considered in other scenarios. In particular, to the best of
our knowledge, using occupancy fields to learn shapes from
sparse noisy unoriented point clouds (i.e. unsupervisedly)
has not been explored thoroughly. This is even the more
intriguing as it seems to be easier to learn a binary classification task as opposed to regressing a continuous field that
must additionally respect specific properties [28].
Concordantly, we introduce occupancy in this work for
learning shape from a sparse point cloud. While other representations such as SDF can readily incorporate surface sample supervision directly (e.g. [28]), among other strategies,
it is not entirely straightforward to define such supervision
for occupancy fields. Hence, we propose a novel strategy
for our training that combines a loss applied near the boundary decision, harnessing the input point samples, and an accompanying regularization. For the first loss, we encourage

21729

