This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

TI2V-Zero: Zero-Shot Image Conditioning for Text-to-Video Diffusion Models
Bernhard Egger2
Haomiao Ni1 *
Toshiaki Koike-Akino3
1

The Pennsylvania State University, USA
3

1

Suhas Lohit3
Anoop Cherian3
Ye Wang3
Sharon X. Huang1
Tim K. Marks3
2

Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany

Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), USA

{hfn5052, suh972}@psu.edu

2

bernhard.egger@fau.de

3

{slohit,cherian,yewang,koike,tmarks}@merl.com

https://merl.com/demos/TI2V-Zero

Abstract
Text-conditioned image-to-video generation (TI2V) aims
to synthesize a realistic video starting from a given image
(e.g., a woman’s photo) and a text description (e.g., “a
woman is drinking water.”). Existing TI2V frameworks often require costly training on video-text datasets and specific model designs for text and image conditioning. In
this paper, we propose TI2V-Zero, a zero-shot, tuningfree method that empowers a pretrained text-to-video (T2V)
diffusion model to be conditioned on a provided image,
enabling TI2V generation without any optimization, finetuning, or introducing external modules. Our approach
leverages a pretrained T2V diffusion foundation model as
the generative prior. To guide video generation with the
additional image input, we propose a “repeat-and-slide”
strategy that modulates the reverse denoising process, allowing the frozen diffusion model to synthesize a video
frame-by-frame starting from the provided image. To ensure
temporal continuity, we employ a DDPM inversion strategy to initialize Gaussian noise for each newly synthesized
frame and a resampling technique to help preserve visual
details. We conduct comprehensive experiments on both
domain-specific and open-domain datasets, where TI2VZero consistently outperforms a recent open-domain TI2V
model. Furthermore, we show that TI2V-Zero can seamlessly extend to other tasks such as video infilling and prediction when provided with more images. Its autoregressive
design also supports long video generation.

1. Introduction
Image-to-video (I2V) generation is an appealing topic with
various applications, including artistic creation, entertainment, and data augmentation for machine learning [39].
Given a single image x0 and a text prompt y, textconditioned image-to-video (TI2V) generation aims to syn* Work done during an internship at MERL.

“A man with the expression of slight happiness on his face.”

“A person is drumming.”

“A serene mountain cabin covered in a fresh blanket of snow.”

Figure 1. Examples of generated video frames using our proposed
TI2V-Zero. The given first image x0 is highlighted with the red
box, and the text condition y is shown under each row of the video.
The remaining columns show the 6th, 11th, and 16th frames of the
generated output videos. Each generated video has 16 frames with
a resolution of 256 × 256.

thesize M new frames to yield a realistic video, x̂ =
⟨x0 , x̂1 , . . . , x̂M ⟩, starting from the given frame x0 and satisfying the text description y. Current TI2V generation
methods [59, 63, 70] typically rely on computationallyheavy training on video-text datasets and specific architecture designs to enable text and image conditioning.
Some [12, 25] are constrained to specific domains due to
the lack of training with large-scale open-domain datasets.
Other approaches, such as [14, 67], utilize pretrained foundation models to reduce training costs, but they still need to
train additional modules using video data.
In this paper, we propose TI2V-Zero, which achieves
zero-shot TI2V generation using only an open-domain pretrained text-to-video (T2V) latent diffusion model [60].
Here “zero-shot” means that when using the diffusion

9015

