This CVPR paper is the Open Access version, provided by the Computer Vision Foundation.
Except for this watermark, it is identical to the accepted version;
the final published version of the proceedings is available on IEEE Xplore.

Deep Imbalanced Regression via Hierarchical Classification Adjustment
Haipeng Xiong
Angela Yao
National University of Singapore
haipeng,ayao@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Regression tasks in computer vision, such as age estimation or counting, are often formulated into classification
by quantizing the target space into classes. Yet real-world
data is often imbalanced – the majority of training samples lie in a head range of target values, while a minority of samples span a usually larger tail range. By selecting the class quantization, one can adjust imbalanced regression targets into balanced classification outputs, though
there are trade-offs in balancing classification accuracy
and quantization error. To improve regression performance
over the entire range of data, we propose to construct
hierarchical classifiers for solving imbalanced regression
tasks. The fine-grained classifiers limit the quantization
error while being modulated by the coarse predictions to
ensure high accuracy. Standard hierarchical classification
approaches, when applied to the regression problem, fail to
ensure that predicted ranges remain consistent across the
hierarchy. As such, we propose a range-preserving distillation process that effectively learns a single classifier from
the set of hierarchical classifiers. Our novel hierarchical
classification adjustment (HCA) for imbalanced regression
shows superior results on three diverse tasks: age estimation, crowd counting and depth estimation. Code is available at https://github.com/xhp-hust-20182011/HCA.

1. Introduction
Data imbalance is a critical issue in deep learning. When
learning from long-tail distributions, deep networks may be
biased toward frequent head classes and perform poorly on
tail classes. To ensure strong performance on the entire output space, many balancing strategies have been developed,
such as reweighting [31, 44] and logit adjustment [24].
While these approaches improve tail performance, they invariably do so at the expense of head classes. Moreover,
tail classes may also suffer from data insufficiency, leading
to over-fitting on the limited training samples.
While many methods have been developed for imbal-

anced classification, few works have tackled the imbalanced
regression problem [12, 26, 37]. The few existing works
naively adopt imbalanced classification techniques directly
into a regression setting, by extending reweighting [37] or
logit adjustment [26] into the regression loss. However,
such approaches do not address the inherent data imbalance
at the heart of the problem. Therefore, they suffer similar
drawbacks as the original long-tail classification techniques
and also trade off head or tail performance.
In this work, we advocate for the reformulation of regression into classification. This is already done for many
tasks in computer vision, such as depth estimation [6], age
estimation [27] and crowd-counting [21], with good performance because classification is more tolerant to label
noise [40]. Most commonly, the continuous output is quantized, and each bin is treated as a class. A key benefit that
has been overlooked for the conversion is the ability to rebalance the class distribution. An imbalanced distribution
of targets can be adjusted into a balanced one by applying
a distribution specific quantization. For example, a longtail distribution can be balanced by adopting a logarithmic
quantization [9].
In the quantization process, the number of classes should
be selected to ensure sufficient samples to avoid overfitting
the minority class. However, the larger the interval, i.e.
to ensure balanced and sufficient class samples, the greater
the quantization error when recovering the target regression
values. In practice, the number of classes and quantization
scheme is chosen to trade off classification and quantization
errors [6, 40] to minimize regression errors. With a single
class quantization, it is impossible to ensure both balance
(sufficiency) and small quantization error. A coarse quantization may produce an accurate classifier but suffer from extreme quantization errors; a fine-grained quantization limits
quantization errors, but may not be so accurate.
Can we merge different classifiers such that we benefit from the higher performance of coarse classifiers while
preserving the resolution of fine classifiers? In this work,
we explore the adjustment of fine-grained classifiers with
progressively coarser ones, where the output resolution is
preserved while the activated range is adjusted to be more

23721

