Self-Supervised Video GANs:
Learning for Appearance Consistency and Motion Coherency
Sangeek Hyun, Jihwan Kim, Jae-Pil Heo*
Sungkyunkwan University

Abstract
A video can be represented by the composition of appearance and motion. Appearance (or content) expresses
the information invariant throughout time, and motion describes the time-variant movement. Here, we propose selfsupervised approaches for video Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) to achieve the appearance consistency
and motion coherency in videos. Specifically, the dual discriminators for image and video individually learn to solve
their own pretext tasks; appearance contrastive learning
and temporal structure puzzle. The proposed tasks enable
the discriminators to learn representations of appearance
and temporal context, and force the generator to synthesize
videos with consistent appearance and natural flow of motions. Extensive experiments in facial expression and human action public benchmarks show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art video GANs. Moreover, consistent improvements regardless of the architecture of video
GANs confirm that our framework is generic.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [16] are one
of the major research topics in the spotlight, due to their
impressive capability to model the data distribution in an
unsupervised way. The recent advances in the aspects of
objectives [5, 4, 26] and architectures [20, 21, 22] alleviate
the chronic problems of GANs such as the mode collapse
and training instability. Thanks to these sustained research
efforts, the latest techniques enable us to synthesize visually
plausible and diverse images.
With these advances in the image domain, the problem of
generating videos has emerged in recent years. Pioneering
attempts [37, 30] have started with mapping a latent vector
to a video with spatio-temporal convolutions. On the other
hand, the following methods [35, 38] have proposed the
video generation frameworks mainly targeting to decompose spatio-temporal latent space into motion and content
* Corresponding author

Appearance Space

𝒕𝟎

𝒕𝒏

Motion Space

Which trajectory is reasonable?

Figure 1. Illustration of conditions for realistic videos. Video
can be represented as the composition of appearance and its motions. For the natural and realistic video, appearances and motions
in the same video have to be consistent throughout time. In other
words, appearance representation should be similar among frames
of the same video compared to the frames from different videos,
and the flow of the motion would be fit into the temporal context.

subspaces. Their efforts to disentangle the latent space to
appearance and motion ones have reduced the complexity
of generating videos.
In spite of the aforementioned successes, extending
GANs to the video domain is still challenging. One of the
main causes is high dimensionality of videos. Compared to
images, videos have one more dimension, time. The time
dimension exponentially expands the video space from the
image space with respect to the number of frames. In this
huge space, perceptually satisfying videos could account for
an extremely small portion because they have to fulfill not
only spatial realness but also temporal coherency. Therefore, it is obvious that mapping low-dimensional latent vectors to visually plausible videos is a lot more complex than
the case of images.
From this perspective, we suggest to reduce the video

10826

