Interpreting Super-Resolution Networks with Local Attribution Maps
Jinjin Gu1
Chao Dong2,3
1
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney.
2
Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Intelligence-Synergy Systems,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences.
3
SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
jinjin.gu@sydney.edu.au, chao.dong@siat.ac.cn

FSRCNN

1. Introduction
Deep learning has recently shown an explosive popularity in the field of image super-resolution (SR) due to its
superior performance and flexibility. Various SR networks
have been proposed to learn effective and abstract representations for SR, expecting to continuously improve the SR
performance. Despite their success, these SR networks remain mysterious because what has been learned and how
it contributes to their performance remain unclear. For example, whether larger receptive fields and multi-scale struc-

LR Image

LAM
Attribution

HR Image

Non-local SRN

Area of
Contribution

Image super-resolution (SR) techniques have been developing rapidly, benefiting from the invention of deep networks and its successive breakthroughs. However, it is acknowledged that deep learning and deep neural networks
are difficult to interpret. SR networks inherit this mysterious
nature and little works make attempt to understand them. In
this paper, we perform attribution analysis of SR networks,
which aims at finding the input pixels that strongly influence
the SR results. We propose a novel attribution approach
called local attribution map (LAM), which inherits the integral gradient method yet with two unique features. One is to
use the blurred image as the baseline input, and the other is
to adopt the progressive blurring function as the path function. Based on LAM, we show that: (1) SR networks with
a wider range of involved input pixels could achieve better performance. (2) Attention networks and non-local networks extract features from a wider range of input pixels.
(3) Comparing with the range that actually contributes, the
receptive field is large enough for most deep networks. (4)
For SR networks, textures with regular stripes or grids are
more likely to be noticed, while complex semantics are difficult to utilize. Our work opens new directions for designing
SR networks and interpreting low-level vision deep models.

EDSR

SR Results

Abstract

Figure 1: Demo results of the proposed attribution method LAM
for SR network interpretation. The LAM maps represent the importance of each pixel in the input LR image w.r.t. the SR of the
patch marked with a red box. We also illustrate the area of contribution in the third line. Our LAM results indicate that FSRCNN
[12] only utilizes very limited information, EDSR [26] increases
the range of information utilization but still fails to reconstruct accurate texture, and non-local network RNAN [50] can utilize a
wider range of information for better SR result.

tures are effective for SR networks? Why the attention and
non-local schemes can help improve the SR results? How
could different network architectures affect the information
usage and the final performance? We lack a systematic understanding, and even research tools, towards these open
questions.
In this paper, we propose to conduct attribution analysis
of SR networks, aiming at finding input pixels that strongly
influence the network outputs. The results are often visualized in the attribution maps where the most important pixels
are highlighted. In this manner, we can analyze the pattern
of information usage for SR networks, and evaluate whether
a SR network could extract high-level semantic information. We show some representative results in Figure 1. In
contrast to the attribution methods that are widely studied in
19199

