Defending Multimodal Fusion Models against Single-Source Adversaries
Karren Yang1 Wan-Yi Lin2 Manash Barman3 Filipe Condessa2 Zico Kolter2,3
1
Massachusetts Institute of Technology 2 Bosch Center for AI∗ 3 Carnegie Mellon University
karren@mit.edu , wan-yi.lin@us.bosch.com , mbarman@andrew.cmu.edu
filipe.condessa@us.bosch.com , zkolter@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Beyond achieving high performance across many vision tasks, multimodal models are expected to be robust
to single-source faults due to the availability of redundant information between modalities. In this paper, we
investigate the robustness of multimodal neural networks
against worst-case (i.e., adversarial) perturbations on a
single modality. We first show that standard multimodal
fusion models are vulnerable to single-source adversaries:
an attack on any single modality can overcome the correct information from multiple unperturbed modalities and
cause the model to fail. This surprising vulnerability holds
across diverse multimodal tasks and necessitates a solution. Motivated by this finding, we propose an adversarially robust fusion strategy that trains the model to compare information coming from all the input sources, detect
inconsistencies in the perturbed modality compared to the
other modalities, and only allow information from the unperturbed modalities to pass through. Our approach significantly improves on state-of-the-art methods in singlesource robustness, achieving gains of 7.8-25.2% on action
recognition, 19.7-48.2% on object detection, and 1.6-6.7%
on sentiment analysis, without degrading performance on
unperturbed (i.e., clean) data.

1. Introduction
Consider a multimodal neural network, illustrated in Figure 1(a), that fuses inputs from k different sources to identify objects for an autonomous driving system. If one of
the modalities (e.g., RGB) receives a worst-case or adversarial perturbation, does the model fail to detect the truck
in the scene? Or does the model make a robust prediction
using the remaining k − 1 unperturbed modalities (e.g., LIDAR, audio, etc.)? This example illustrates the importance
of single-source adversarial robustness [17] for avoiding
∗ KY and MB completed work during an internship at BCAI. Work is
sponsored by DARPA (Grant number HR11002020006).

Figure 1. (a) Example of a single source, worst-case (i.e., adversarial) perturbation on a multimodal model. (b) Standard multimodal models are vulnerable to worst-case perturbations on any
single modality (“Vulnerable”). Our adversarially robust fusion
strategy (“Robust”) leverages multimodal consistency to defend
against such perturbations without degrading clean performance.

catastrophic failures in real-world multimodal systems. In
a realistic setting, any single modality may be affected by a
worst-case perturbation, whereas multiple modalities usually do not fail simultaneously particularly if the physical sensors are not coupled. Since multimodal models are
being increasingly developed for real-world vision tasks
[5, 35, 24, 18], it is imperative to investigate whether they
are robust to worst-case errors that may affect any single
modality and, if they are not, to develop strategies to improve robustness.
Despite the importance of this problem, we found to
the best of our knowledge that empirical studies of singlesource adversarial robustness are lacking. Previous empirical works on multimodal robustness have so far only considered single-source corruptions (e.g., dropout, blurring, etc.)
[16, 15, 17], and although Kim & Ghosh [17] formulate the
problem for the adversarial setting, they do not perform an

3340

