Polygonal Building Extraction by Frame Field Learning
Nicolas Girard1 Dmitriy Smirnov2 Justin Solomon2 Yuliya Tarabalka3
1
Université Côte d’Azur, Inria 2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology 3 LuxCarta Technology

Abstract
While state of the art image segmentation models typically output segmentations in raster format, applications
in geographic information systems often require vector
polygons. To help bridge the gap between deep network
output and the format used in downstream tasks, we
add a frame field output to a deep segmentation model
for extracting buildings from remote sensing images.
We train a deep neural network that aligns a predicted
frame field to ground truth contours. This additional
objective improves segmentation quality by leveraging
multi-task learning and provides structural information
that later facilitates polygonization; we also introduce
a polygonization algorithm that that utilizes the frame
field along with the raster segmentation. Our code
is available at https://github.com/Lydorn/
Polygonization-by-Frame-Field-Learning.

1. Introduction
Due to their success in
processing large collections
of noisy images, deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) have achieved stateof-the-art in remote sensing
segmentation. Geographic information systems like Open
Figure 1: A frame field
Street Map (OSM) [29], howoutput by our network.
ever, require segmentation
data in vector format (e.g., polygons and curves) rather
than raster format, which is generated by segmentation networks. Additionally, methods that extract objects from remote sensing images require especially high throughput to
handle the volume of high-resolution aerial images captured
daily over large territories of land. Thus, modifications to
the conventional CNN pipeline are necessary.
Existing work on deep building segmentation generally falls into one of two general categories. The first
vectorizes the probability map produced by a network

a posteriori, e.g., by using contour detection (marching squares [25]) followed by polygon simplification
(Ramer–Douglas–Peucker [30, 13]). Such approaches suffer when the classification maps contain imperfections such
as smoothed out corners, a common artifact of conventional deep segmentation methods. Moreover, as we show
in Fig. 2, even perfect probability maps are challenging to
polygonize due to shape information being lost from the
discretization of the raster output. To improve the final
polygons, these methods employ expensive and complex
post-processing procedures. ASIP polygonization [20] uses
polygonal partition refinement to approximate shapes from
the output probability map based on a tunable parameter
controlling the trade-off between complexity and fidelity.
In [42], a decoder and a discriminator regularize output
probability maps adversarially. This requires computing
large matrices of pairwise discontinuity costs between pixels and involves adversarial training, which is less stable
than conventional supervised learning.
Another category of deep segmentation methods learns
a vector representation directly. For example, CurveGCN [23] trains a graph convolutional network (GCN) to
deform polygons iteratively, and PolyMapper [21] uses a
recurrent neural network (RNN) to predict vertices one at
a time. While these approaches directly predict polygon
parameters, GCNs and RNNs suffer from several disadvantages. Not only are they more difficult to train than
CNNs, but also their output topology is restricted to simple
polygons without holes—a serious limitation in segmenting complex buildings. Additionally, adjoining buildings
with common walls are common, especially in city centers.
Curve-GCN and PolyMapper are unable to reuse the same
polyline in adjoining buildings, yielding overlaps and gaps.
We introduce a building extraction algorithm that avoids
the challenges above by adding a frame field output to a
fully-convolutional network (see Fig. 1). While this has imperceptible effect on training or inference time, the frame
field not only increases segmentation performance, e.g.,
yielding sharper corners, but also provides useful information for vectorization. Additional losses learn a valid frame
field that is consistent with the segmentation. These losses
regularize the segmentation, similar to [37], which includes

5891

