VideoMoCo: Contrastive Video Representation Learning with
Temporally Adversarial Examples
Tian Pan1∗

Yibing Song1∗
Tianyu Yang1
Wenhao Jiang2
1
2
Tencent AI Lab
Tencent Data Platform

pantianauraro@foxmail.com

yibingsong.cv@gmail.com

cswhjiang@gmail.com

Wei Liu2

tianyu-yang@outlook.com

wl2223@columbia.edu

Abstract
MoCo [11] is effective for unsupervised image representation learning. In this paper, we propose VideoMoCo
for unsupervised video representation learning. Given a
video sequence as an input sample, we improve the temporal feature representations of MoCo from two perspectives. First, we introduce a generator to drop out several
frames from this sample temporally. The discriminator is
then learned to encode similar feature representations regardless of frame removals. By adaptively dropping out
different frames during training iterations of adversarial
learning, we augment this input sample to train a temporally robust encoder. Second, we use temporal decay to
model key attenuation in the memory queue when computing the contrastive loss. As the momentum encoder updates
after keys enqueue, the representation ability of these keys
degrades when we use the current input sample for contrastive learning. This degradation is reflected via temporal
decay to attend the input sample to recent keys in the queue.
As a result, we adapt MoCo to learn video representations
without empirically designing pretext tasks. By empowering the temporal robustness of the encoder and modeling the
temporal decay of the keys, our VideoMoCo improves MoCo
temporally based on contrastive learning. Experiments on
benchmark datasets including UCF101 and HMDB51 show
that VideoMoCo stands as a state-of-the-art video representation learning method.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised (i.e., self-supervised) feature representation learning receives tremendous investigations along with
the development of convolutional neural networks (CNNs).
This learning scheme does not require cumbersome man∗ T. Pan and Y. Song contribute equally. Y. Song is the corresponding
author. The code is available at https://github.com/tinapanpt/VideoMoCo.

Figure 1. VideoMoCo improves MoCo [11] temporally from two
perspectives. First, by taking a video sequence as a training sample, we introduce adversarial learning to augment this sample temporally. Second, we use a temporal decay (i.e., ti ) to attenuate the
contributions from older keys in the queue. To this end, the encoder is learned via temporal augmentation within each sample
and temporally contrastive learning across different samples.

ual label collections and produces deep features representing general visual contents. These features can be further adapted to suit downstream visual recognition scenarios including image classification [21, 53], object detection [48, 20], visual tracking [44, 45], and semantic segmentation [33]. Among various unsupervised representation learning studies, contrastive learning [9] is developed extensively. By treating one sample as positive and
the remaining ones as negative (i.e., instance discrimination), contrastive learning improves feature discrimination
by considering the massive sample storage [48, 11, 40, 28]
and data augmentation [2]. To effectively handle large-scale
samples, MoCo [11] builds an on-the-fly dictionary with a
queue and a moving-averaged encoder. The learned feature representations have significantly improved a series of
downstream recognition performances to approach those by
using supervised feature representations.
The evolution of contrastive learning heavily focuses

11205

