Hilbert Sinkhorn Divergence for Optimal Transport
Qian Li1 *

Zhichao Wang 2 *†

Gang Li3

Jun Pang4

Guandong Xu1

1

Faculty of Engineering and Information Technology, University of Technology Sydney, Australia
School of Electrical Engineering and Telecommunications, University of New South Wales, Australia
3
Centre for Cyber Security Research and Innovation, Deakin University, Geelong, VIC 3216, Australia
4
Faculty of Science, Technology and Medicine, University of Luxembourg
{qian.li, guandong.xu}@uts.edu.au, zchaoking@gmail.com, gang.li@deakin.edu.au, jun.pang@uni.lu
2

Abstract
The Sinkhorn divergence has become a very popular metric to compare probability distributions in optimal
transport. However, most works resort to the Sinkhorn divergence in Euclidean space, which greatly blocks their applications in complex data with nonlinear structure. It is
therefore of theoretical demand to empower the Sinkhorn
divergence with the capability of capturing nonlinear structures. We propose a theoretical and computational framework to bridge this gap. In this paper, we extend the
Sinkhorn divergence in Euclidean space to the reproducing kernel Hilbert space, which we term “Hilbert Sinkhorn
divergence” (HSD). In particular, we can use kernel matrices to derive a closed form expression of the HSD that
is proved to be a tractable convex optimization problem.
We also prove several attractive statistical properties of the
proposed HSD, i.e., strong consistency, asymptotic behavior and sample complexity. Empirically, our method yields
state-of-the-art performances on image classification and
topological data analysis.

1. Introduction
As an important tool to compare probability distributions, optimal transport theory [52] has found many successful applications in machine learning. Examples include
generative modeling [56, 19], domain adaptation [17], dictionary learning [42], text mining [29], sampling [54, 55]
and single-cell genomics [41]. Optimal transport aims at
minimizing the cost of moving a source distribution to a
target distribution. The minimal transportation cost defines a divergence between the two distributions, which is
called the Wasserstein or Earth-Mover distance [51, 40].
Roughly speaking, the Wasserstein distance measures the
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

minimal cost required to deform a distribution to another
distribution. Different from other divergence, such as Kullback–Leibler divergence and the L2 distance, the Wasserstein distance could compare probability distributions in a
geometrically faithful manner. This entails a rich geometric
structure on the space of probability distributions.
Related work. Existing optimal transport schemes can
be mainly categorized into three classes. Methods in
the first class are the regularization-based Wasserstein
distance. Such numerical schemes add a regularization
penalty to the original optimal transport problem. For
instance, the Sinkhorn divergence [12, 13] provides a
fast approximation to the Wasserstein distance by regularizing the original optimal transport with an entropy
term. Greedy [2], Nystrom [1] and stochastic [18] versions of Sinkhorn algorithm with better empirical performance have also been explored. Other representative contributions towards regularization-based optimal transport include quantum regularization [35], sparse regularization [7]
and Boltzmann-Shannon entropy [16].
An alternative principle for approximating the Wasserstein distance comes from Radon transform: to project
high-dimensional distribution to one-dimensional distributions. One representative example is the sliced Wasserstein
distance [8, 23, 14, 24], which is defined as the average
Wasserstein distance obtained between random one dimensional projections. In other words, the sliced Wasserstein
distance is calculated via linear slicing of the probability
distribution. Its important extensions, such as [34, 31], are
proposed recently to search for the k-dimensional subspace
that would maximize the Wasserstein distance between two
measures after projection. The sample complexity of such
estimators is investigated [15, 14] between two measures
and their empirical counterparts.
Methods in the third class include the GromovWasserstein distance, it extends optimal transport to scenario where heterogeneous distributions are involved, i.e.,

3835

