Probabilistic Modeling of Semantic Ambiguity for Scene Graph Generation
Gengcong Yang1∗†, Jingyi Zhang2∗ ,

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University,
Tencent AI Lab,

2

Ascend Lab, Huawei Technologies.

School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,

Secure Computing Lab of Big Data, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data

ygc19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,

jgg jingyizhang@foxmail.com, zhangyong201303@gmail.com

wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn,

yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
To generate “accurate” scene graphs, almost all existing methods predict pairwise relationships in a deterministic manner. However, we argue that visual relationships
are often semantically ambiguous. Specifically, inspired by
linguistic knowledge, we classify the ambiguity into three
types: Synonymy Ambiguity, Hyponymy Ambiguity, and
Multi-view Ambiguity. The ambiguity naturally leads to the
issue of implicit multi-label, motivating the need for diverse
predictions. In this work, we propose a novel plug-andplay Probabilistic Uncertainty Modeling (PUM) module. It
models each union region as a Gaussian distribution, whose
variance measures the uncertainty of the corresponding visual content. Compared to the conventional deterministic methods, such uncertainty modeling brings stochasticity
of feature representation, which naturally enables diverse
predictions. As a byproduct, PUM also manages to cover
more fine-grained relationships and thus alleviates the issue of bias towards frequent relationships. Extensive experiments on the large-scale Visual Genome benchmark show
that combining PUM with newly proposed ResCAGCN can
achieve state-of-the-art performances, especially under the
mean recall metric. Furthermore, we show the universal effectiveness of PUM by plugging it into some existing models
and provide insightful analysis of its ability to generate diverse yet plausible visual relationships.

(a) Synonymy Ambiguity

5

4

(b) Hyponymy Ambiguity

3

Yujiu Yang1‡

(c) Multi-view Ambiguity

1

Yong Zhang3‡, Baoyuan Wu4,5‡ ,

Figure 1. Examples of semantic ambiguity in Visual Genome
dataset. The first two columns show the comparisons between
two plausible predicates for similar visual scenes and the rightmost column illustrates the corresponding phenomenons in semantic space. (a) carrying and holding share overlapping definitions and are interchangeable to describe the relationship between
a man and an umbrella. (b) Both on and laying on are reasonable to describe the scene where a cat is on top o a bench, despite
their semantic specificity difference. (c) Different human annotators focus on different points of view, i.e. using (actional) vs. in
front of (spatial), to describe a working man and a laptop.

1. Introduction
∗ Equal contribution.
† Work done in part during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
‡ Yong Zhang, Baoyuan Wu and Yujiu Yang are the corresponding authors. This research was partially supported by the Key Program of National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. U1903213
and the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (No.
2019A1515011387). Baoyuan Wu is supported by the Natural Science
Foundation of China under grant No. 62076213, the university development fund of the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen under grant
No. 01001810, and the special project fund of Shenzhen Research Institute
of Big Data under grant No. T00120210003.

Scene graph generation (SGG) has been an important
task in computer vision, serving as an intermediate task
to bridge the gap between upstream object detection [21]
and downstream high-level visual understanding tasks, such
as image captioning [33, 42] and visual question answering [36]. Intuitively, the latter would get greater benefit
from more human-like scene graphs.
Almost all existing works [30, 35, 4, 24] view SGG as
an objective task and predict pairwise relationships in a de-

12527

