Contrastive Embedding for Generalized Zero-Shot Learning
Zongyan Han1†, Zhenyong Fu1 *†, Shuo Chen2,1 and Jian Yang1 *†
1
PCALab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
2
RIKEN Center for Advanced Intelligence Project, Japan
{hanzy, z.fu, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn shuo.chen.ya@riken.jp

Abstract
Generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL) aims to recognize objects from both seen and unseen classes, when only
the labeled examples from seen classes are provided. Recent feature generation methods learn a generative model
that can synthesize the missing visual features of unseen
classes to mitigate the data-imbalance problem in GZSL.
However, the original visual feature space is suboptimal for
GZSL classification since it lacks discriminative information. To tackle this issue, we propose to integrate the generation model with the embedding model, yielding a hybrid
GZSL framework. The hybrid GZSL approach maps both
the real and the synthetic samples produced by the generation model into an embedding space, where we perform the
final GZSL classification. Specifically, we propose a contrastive embedding (CE) for our hybrid GZSL framework.
The proposed contrastive embedding can leverage not only
the class-wise supervision but also the instance-wise supervision, where the latter is usually neglected by existing
GZSL researches. We evaluate our proposed hybrid GZSL
framework with contrastive embedding, named CE-GZSL,
on five benchmark datasets. The results show that our CEGZSL method can outperform the state-of-the-arts by a significant margin on three datasets. Our codes are available
on https://github.com/Hanzy1996/CE-GZSL.

1. Introduction
Object recognition is a core problem in computer vision.
This problem on a fixed set of categories with plenty of
training samples has progressed tremendously due to the ad* Corresponding authors.
† Zongyan Han, Zhenyong Fu and Jian Yang are with PCA Lab, Key

Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and Video
Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China.

class-level
semantic descriptor
Laysan
Albatross

Laysan Albatross:

white throat
white forehead
black eyes
...
black wing
black back
white leg
white belly
...

?

California
Gull

?

Red Legged
Kittiwake

?

Figure 1: Existing semantic embedding methods merely utilize the class-wise supervision, which may be unsuitable for
some examples as they do not match exactly with the classlevel semantic descriptor. The proposed contrastive embedding can utilize not only the class-wise supervision but also
the instance-wise supervision.

vent of deep convolutional neural networks [37]. However,
realistic object categories often follow a long-tail distribution, where some categories have abundant training samples
and the others have few or even no training samples available. Recognizing the long-tail distributed object categories
is challenging, mainly because of the imbalanced training
sets of these categories. Zero-Shot Learning (ZSL) [39, 54]
holds the promise of tackling the extreme data imbalance
between categories, thus showing the potential of addressing the long-tail object recognition problem. Zero-shot
learning aims to classify objects from previously unseen
categories without requiring the access to data from those
categories. In ZSL, a recognition model is first learned on
the seen categories, of which the training samples are provided. Relying on the category-level semantic descriptors,
such as visual attributes [16, 39] or word vectors [47, 48],
ZSL can transfer the recognition model from seen to unseen
object categories in a data-free manner.
In zero-shot learning, we have the available data from
seen classes for training. Conventional zero-shot learn-

2371

