Discriminative Appearance Modeling with Multi-track Pooling for Real-time
Multi-object Tracking
Chanho Kim 1∗
1

Li Fuxin 2

Mazen Alotaibi 2
2

Georgia Institute of Technology

Abstract
In multi-object tracking, the tracker maintains in its
memory the appearance and motion information for each
object in the scene. This memory is utilized for finding
matches between tracks and detections, and is updated
based on the matching. Many approaches model each target
in isolation and lack the ability to use all the targets in the
scene to jointly update the memory. This can be problematic
when there are similarly looking objects in the scene. In this
paper, we solve the problem of simultaneously considering
all tracks during memory updating, with only a small spatial
overhead, via a novel multi-track pooling module. We additionally propose a training strategy adapted to multi-track
pooling which generates hard tracking episodes online. We
show that the combination of these innovations results in
a strong discriminative appearance model under the bilinear LSTM tracking framework, enabling the use of greedy
data association to achieve online tracking performance.
Our experiments demonstrate real-time, state-of-the-art online tracking performance on public multi-object tracking
(MOT) datasets. The code and trained models are available
at https://github.com/chkim403/blstm-mtp.

1. Introduction
In the typical tracking-by-detection setting of multiobject tracking, a trained target detector is assumed to exist,
and the goal of the tracking algorithm is to solve the data
association problem: associating detections from different
frames into tracks. The standard approach involves building
an appearance model and a motion model for each target being tracked. The appearance model stores features from past
appearances, which are compared against detections in each
new frame, and the motion model predicts where the target
will be located in the next frame. Because of the ambiguity
in appearance, many previous trackers utilized sophisticated
* Part of this work was conducted while Chanho Kim was visiting
Oregon State University.

James M. Rehg 1

Oregon State University

data association schemes that relied on evidence from multiple frames to determine the correct track. These choices
result in a tracker which is not capable of real-time online
performance, i.e. it cannot generate a result without delay
after processing a new frame in the video. This is unfortunate, because real-time online tracking is critically important for numerous practical applications in AI. For example,
in robotics applications such as autonomous driving, online
processing is critical to support real-time decision-making.
One issue that has necessitated sophisticated data association schemes is that the appearance models are usually
built to match tracks and detections individually, without
considering other tracks and detections in the matching process. This approach does not have sufficient discriminative
power to address the ambiguities arising when several similar targets move adjacent to each other in the video, e.g.
multiple men in black suits. In this situation, either more
subtle features need to be utilized for target discrimination,
or the likelihood of the matching needs to be decreased to
accommodate this uncertainty. This in turn requires the
matching approach to utilize the appearance information
from other nearby tracks in making a determination.
This paper introduces a novel approach to appearance
modeling that takes all tracked objects into account when
matching detections. Suppose each track has a stored online memory about all of its past appearances, we propose
a novel multi-track pooling module which stores a maxpooled version of the memory from all other tracks. This
extension allows the appearance model to take into account
online negative examples from other objects within the
same video (see Fig. 1). We show that multi-track pooling
greatly enhances the discriminative power of the appearance
model for track scoring and improves overall performance.
We leverage the additional discriminative power of our
matching approach to achieve real-time online tracking by
means of a simple, greedy data association method: Each
track is matched with the detection that has the highest likelihood of belonging to the track. Greedy association is extremely efficient, resulting in fast performance. In this work
we test the hypothesis that our discriminative appearance
and motion modeling can enable this simple data associa19553

