DG-Font: Deformable Generative Networks for Unsupervised Font Generation

Yangchen Xie

Xinyuan Chen*

Li Sun

Yue Lu

Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing,
East China Normal University, 200241 Shanghai, China

Abstract
Font generation is a challenging problem especially for
some writing systems that consist of a large number of
characters and has attracted a lot of attention in recent
years. However, existing methods for font generation are
often in supervised learning. They require a large number of paired data, which is labor-intensive and expensive
to collect. Besides, common image-to-image translation
models often define style as the set of textures and colors, which cannot be directly applied to font generation.
To address these problems, we propose novel deformable
generative networks for unsupervised font generation (DGFont). We introduce a feature deformation skip connection
(FDSC) which predicts pairs of displacement maps and employs the predicted maps to apply deformable convolution
to the low-level feature maps from the content encoder. The
outputs of FDSC are fed into a mixer to generate the final results. Taking advantage of FDSC, the mixer outputs
a high-quality character with a complete structure. To further improve the quality of generated images, we use three
deformable convolution layers in the content encoder to
learn style-invariant feature representations. Experiments
demonstrate that our model generates characters in higher
quality than state-of-art methods. The source code is available at https://github.com/ecnuycxie/DG-Font.

1. Introduction
Every day, people consume a massive amount of texts
for information transfer and storage. As the representation
of texts, the font is closely related to our daily life. Font generation is critical in many applications, e.g., font library creation, personalized handwriting, historical handwriting imitation, and data augmentation for optical character recognition and handwriting identification. Traditional font library
creating methods heavily rely on expert designers by draw* Corresponding author: xychen@cee.ecnu.edu.cn

Figure 1. Unsupervised font generation results. The reference
calligraphy is a Tang poem written by a calligrapher, and imitation result is another famous Tang poem generated from our model
which are with rich details, such as stroke tips, joined-up writing,
and thickness of strokes.

ing each glyph individually, which is especially expensive
and labor-intensive for logographic languages such as Chinese (more than 60,000 characters), Japanese (more than
50,000 characters), and Korean (11,172 characters).
Recently, the development of convolutional neural networks enables automatic font generation without human experts. There have been some attempts to explore font generation and achieve promising results. [49, 1, 18] utilize deep
neural networks to generate entire sets of letters for certain
alphabet languages. Two notable projects, “Rewrite" [40]
and “zi2zi" [61], generate logographic language characters
by learning a mapping from one style to another with thousands of paired characters. After that, EMD [58] and SAVAE [44] design neural networks to separate the content
and style representation, which can extend to generate character of new styles or contents. However, these methods are

5130

