VirTex: Learning Visual Representations from Textual Annotations
Karan Desai
Justin Johnson
University of Michigan
{kdexd,justincj}@umich.edu

Abstract
The de-facto approach to many vision tasks is to start
from pretrained visual representations, typically learned via
supervised training on ImageNet. Recent methods have
explored unsupervised pretraining to scale to vast quantities of unlabeled images. In contrast, we aim to learn
high-quality visual representations from fewer images. To
this end we revisit supervised pretraining, and seek dataefficient alternatives to classification-based pretraining. We
propose VirTex – a pretraining approach using semantically
dense captions to learn visual representations. We train
convolutional networks from scratch on COCO Captions,
and transfer them to downstream recognition tasks including image classification, object detection, and instance segmentation. On all tasks, VirTex yields features that match
or exceed those learned on ImageNet – supervised or unsupervised – despite using up to ten times fewer images.

1. Introduction
The prevailing paradigm for learning visual representations is first to pretrain a convolutional network [1, 2] to
perform image classification on ImageNet [3, 4], then transfer the learned features to downstream tasks [5, 6]. This approach has been wildly successful, and has led to significant
advances on a wide variety of computer vision problems
such as object detection [7], semantic [8] and instance [9]
segmentation, image captioning [10–12], and visual question answering [13, 14]. Despite its practical success, this
approach is expensive to scale since the pretraining step relies on images annotated by human workers.
For this reason, there has been increasing interest in unsupervised pretraining methods that use unlabeled images
to learn visual representations which are then transferred to
downstream tasks [15–21]. Some recent approaches have
begun to match or exceed supervised pretraining on ImageNet [22–26], and have been scaled to hundreds of millions [22, 25, 27, 28] or billions [24] of images.
Continuing to scale unsupervised pretraining to everlarger sets of unlabeled images is an important scientific

Language Supervised Pretraining

A brown and white puppy lying on
green lawn looking at apples.

Transformers
ConvNet

Downstream Transfer

Task: Image Captioning
Example: Object Detection
cat

Faster
R-CNN

cake

Figure 1: Learning visual features from language: First,
we jointly train a ConvNet and Transformers using imagecaption pairs, for the task of image captioning (top). Then,
we transfer the learned ConvNet to several downstream vision tasks, for example object detection (bottom).
goal. But we may also ask whether there are alternate ways
of pretraining that learn high-quality visual representations
with fewer images. To do so, we revisit supervised pretraining and seek an alternative to traditional classification
pretraining that uses each image more efficiently.
In this paper we present an approach for learning Visual
representations from Textual annotations (VirTex). Our approach is straightforward: first, we jointly train a ConvNet
and Transformer [29] from scratch to generate natural language captions for images. Then, we transfer the learned
features to downstream visual recognition tasks (Figure 1).
We believe that using language supervision is appealing
due to its semantic density. Figure 2 compares different pretraining tasks for learning visual representations. Captions
provide a semantically denser learning signal than unsupervised contrastive methods and supervised classification.
Hence, we expect that using textual features to learn visual
features may require fewer images than other approaches.
Another benefit of textual annotations is simplified data
collection. To collect classification labels, typically human
experts first build an ontology of categories [3, 4, 30, 31],
then complex crowdsourcing pipelines are used to elicit labels from non-expert users [32, 33]. In contrast, natural language descriptions do not require an explicit ontology and
can easily be written by non-expert workers, leading to a

11162

