PMP-Net: Point Cloud Completion by Learning Multi-step Point Moving Paths
Xin Wen1 , Peng Xiang1 , Zhizhong Han2 , Yan-Pei Cao3 , Pengfei Wan3 , Wen Zheng3 , Yu-Shen Liu1 *
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, USA
3
Y-tech, Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
{x-wen16,xp20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn h312h@wayne.edu caoyanpei@gmail.com
{wanpengfei,zhengwen}@kuaishou.com liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The task of point cloud completion aims to predict
the missing part for an incomplete 3D shape. A widely
used strategy is to generate a complete point cloud from
the incomplete one. However, the unordered nature of
point clouds will degrade the generation of high-quality 3D
shapes, as the detailed topology and structure of discrete
points are hard to be captured by the generative process
only using a latent code. In this paper, we address the above
problem by reconsidering the completion task from a new
perspective, where we formulate the prediction as a point
cloud deformation process. Specifically, we design a novel
neural network, named PMP-Net, to mimic the behavior of
an earth mover. It moves move each point of the incomplete
input to complete the point cloud, where the total distance
of point moving paths (PMP) should be shortest. Therefore, PMP-Net predicts a unique point moving path for each
point according to the constraint of total point moving distances. As a result, the network learns a strict and unique
correspondence on point-level, and thus improves the quality of the predicted complete shape. We conduct comprehensive experiments on Completion3D and PCN datasets,
which demonstrate our advantages over the state-of-the-art
point cloud completion methods. Code will be available at
https://github.com/diviswen/PMP-Net.

1. Introduction
As one of the widely used 3D shape representations,
point cloud can be easily obtained through depth cameras or
other 3D scanning devices. Due to the limitations of viewangles or occlusions of 3D scanning devices, the raw point
clouds are usually sparse and incomplete [41]. Therefore, a
* Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Key
R&D Program of China (2020YFF0304100, 2018YFB0505400), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62072268), and in part by
Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data.

Step1

Step2

Step3

Output

Figure 1. Illustration of completion by multi-step point cloud deformation. The point moving paths are denoted by grey lines. At
each step, the source point cloud is colored by orange and the target point cloud is colored by yellow, respectively.

shape completion/consolidation process is usually required
to generate the missing regions of 3D shape for the downstream 3D computer vision applications like classification
[12, 6, 39, 10, 22, 21], segmentation [40, 17] and other visual analysis [47].
In this paper, we focus on the completion task for 3D
objects represented by point clouds, where the missing
parts are caused by self-occlusion due to the view angle
of scanner. Most of the previous methods formulate the
point cloud completion as a point cloud generation problem
[2, 41, 48, 34], where an encoder-decoder framework is usually adopted to extract a latent code from the input incomplete point cloud, and decode the extracted latent code into
a complete point cloud. Benefiting from the deep learning
based point cloud learning methods, the point cloud completion methods along this line have made huge progress in
the last few years [41, 34]. However, the generation of point
clouds remains a difficult task using deep neural network,
because the unordered nature of point clouds makes the generative model difficult to capture the detailed topology or
structure among discrete points [34]. Therefore, the completion quality of point clouds based on generative models
is still unsatisfying.
To address this issue, in this paper, we propose a novel
neural network, named PMP-Net, to formulate the task of
point cloud completion from a new perspective. Different
from the generative model that directly predicts the coordinations of all points in 3D space, the PMP-Net learns to

7443

