SDD-FIQA: Unsupervised Face Image Quality Assessment with
Similarity Distribution Distance
Fu-Zhao Ou†∗ ⊎ , Xingyu Chen‡∗ , Ruixin Zhang‡ , Yuge Huang‡ , Shaoxin Li‡ ,
Jilin Li‡ , Yong Li£ , Liujuan Cao§ℑ , and Yuan-Gen Wang†󰂒
†
School of Computer Science and Cyber Engineering, Guangzhou University ‡ Youtu Lab, Tencent
£
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
§
School of Informatics, Xiamen University ℑ Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Xiamen University

Abstract

1. Introduction
Face recognition is one of the well-researched areas of
biometrics [8, 11, 4]. Under controlled conditions, the
∗ indicates equal contribution of this work. 󰂒 indicates the corresponding author (e-mail: wangyg@gzhu.edu.cn). ⊎ Work done during an internship at Youtu Lab, Tencent. This work was supported in part by the NSFC
(Grant 61872099) and in part by the Science and Technology Program
of Guangzhou (Grant 201904010478). The code and model are publicly
available at https://github.com/Slinene/SDD-FIQA

Target Sample
Target Sample
Intra-class
Intra-class Sample
Sample

74.77
74.77
74.77

Inter-class
Inter-class Sample
Sample

WassersteinDistance
Distance
Wasserstein
70.34
70.34
74.77

Neg-Sim

Pos-Sim
Pos-Sim
Pseudo Label
= 53.64
Pseudo
Label = 53.64

57.89
57.89

编

辑

器

Figure 1: Our method simultaneously considers similarities of the target sample (red point) with intra-class samples
(green points), and with inter-class samples (yellow points).
The distribution distance between Pos-Sim and Neg-Sim is
calculated as the quality pseudo-label, which is more amicable to recognition performance. The visualized results are
shown on the right.

云

recognition system can usually achieve satisfactory performance. However, in some real-world applications, recognition systems need to work under unconstrained environments (e.g. surveillance camera and outdoor scenes), leading to signiﬁcant degradation of recognition accuracy and
unstable recognition performance. Many researchers make
progress in improving recognition accuracy under varying
conditions [4, 12], but sometimes the performance is still affected by the unpredictable environmental factors including
pose, illumination, occlusion, and so on. To keep the performance of face recognition system stable and reliable, Face
Image Quality Assessment (FIQA) has been developed to
support the recognition system to pick out high-quality images or drop low-quality ones for stable recognition performance [7, 1].
Existing FIQA methods can be roughly categorized into
two types: analytics-based [7, 22, 27] and learning-based
[1, 10, 23, 25, 29]. Analytics-based FIQA deﬁnes quality
metrics by Human Visual System (HVS) and evaluates face

风

In recent years, Face Image Quality Assessment (FIQA)
has become an indispensable part of the face recognition
system to guarantee the stability and reliability of recognition performance in an unconstrained scenario. For this
purpose, the FIQA method should consider both the intrinsic property and the recognizability of the face image.
Most previous works aim to estimate the sample-wise embedding uncertainty or pair-wise similarity as the quality
score, which only considers the partial information from the
intra-class. However, these methods ignore the valuable information from the inter-class, which is for estimating the
recognizability of face image. In this work, we argue that a
high-quality face image should be similar to its intra-class
samples and dissimilar to its inter-class samples. Thus, we
propose a novel unsupervised FIQA method that incorporates Similarity Distribution Distance for Face Image Quality Assessment (SDD-FIQA). Our method generates quality pseudo-labels by calculating the Wasserstein Distance
(WD) between the intra-class and inter-class similarity distributions. With these quality pseudo-labels, we are capable of training a regression network for quality prediction.
Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets demonstrate
that the proposed SDD-FIQA surpasses the state-of-the-arts
by an impressive margin. Meanwhile, our method shows
good generalization across different recognition systems.

Result
Results

7670

