Simpler Certified Radius Maximization by Propagating Covariances
Xingjian Zhen† , Rudrasis Chakraborty‡ , Vikas Singh†
†
University of Wisconsin-Madison ‡ University of California, Berkeley
xzhen3@wisc.edu

rudrasischa@gmail.com vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

Abstract
One strategy for adversarially training a robust model is
to maximize its certified radius – the neighborhood around
a given training sample for which the model’s prediction remains unchanged. The scheme typically involves analyzing
a “smoothed” classifier where one estimates the prediction
corresponding to Gaussian samples in the neighborhood of
each sample in the mini-batch, accomplished in practice by
Monte Carlo sampling. In this paper, we investigate the
hypothesis that this sampling bottleneck can potentially be
mitigated by identifying ways to directly propagate the covariance matrix of the smoothed distribution through the
network. To this end, we find that other than certain adjustments to the network, propagating the covariances must
also be accompanied by additional accounting that keeps
track of how the distributional moments transform and interact at each stage in the network. We show how satisfying
these criteria yields an algorithm for maximizing the certified radius on datasets including Cifar-10, ImageNet, and
Places365 while offering runtime savings on networks with
moderate depth, with a small compromise in overall accuracy. We describe the details of the key modifications that
enable practical use. Via various experiments, we evaluate when our simplifications are sensible, and what the key
benefits and limitations are.

1. Introduction
The prevailing approach for evaluating the performance
of a deep learning model involved assessing its overall accuracy profile on one or more benchmarks of interest. But the
realization that many models were not robust to even negligible adversarially-chosen perturbations of the input data
[44, 8, 23, 11], and may exhibit highly unstable behavior
[9, 28, 33] has led to the emergence of robust training methods (or robust models) that offer, to varying degrees, immunity to such adversarial perturbations. Adversarial trainCode is available at https://github.com/zhenxingjian/
Propagating_Covariance. An short video summary of this paper is
available at https://youtu.be/m1ya2oNf5iE

ing has emerged as a popular mechanism to train a given
deep model robustly [36, 45]. Each mini-batch of training
examples shown to the model is supplemented with adversarial samples. It makes sense that if the model parameter updates are based on seeing enough adversarial samples
which cover the perturbation space well, the model is more
robust to such adversarial examples at test time [16, 22, 31].
The approach is effective although it often involves paying a
premium in terms of training time due to multiple gradient
calculations [42]. However, many empirical defenses can
fail when the attack is stronger [10, 46, 2].
While ideas to improve the efficiency of adversarial
training continue to evolve in the literature, a complementary line of work seeks to avoid adversarial sample generation entirely. One instead derives a certifiable robustness
guarantee for a given model [48, 50, 55, 34, 54, 43, 5].
The overall goal is to provide guarantees that no perturbation within a certain range will change the prediction of the
network. An earlier proposal, interval bound propagation
(IBP) [17], used convex relaxations at different layers of the
network to derive the guarantees. Unfortunately, the bounds
tend to get very loose as the network depth increases, see
Fig. 1 (a). Thus, the applicability to large high resolution
datasets remains under-explored at this time.
Recently, following the idea in [30, 28] at a high level,
Cohen et al. [12] introduced an interesting randomized
smoothing technique, which can be used to certify the robust radius CR . Assume that we have a base network fθ (·)
for classification. On a training image x ∈ Rd , the output
fθ (x) ∈ Y is the predicted label of the image x. Using
fθ (·), we can build a “smoothed” neural network gθ (·).
gθ (x) = arg max P(fθ (x + ε) = c), where ε ∼ N (0, σ 2 I)
c∈Y

Here, σ can be thought of as a trade-off between the robustness and the accuracy of the smoothed classifier gθ (·).
One can obtain a theoretical certified radius CR which states
that when ||δ||2 ≤ CR , the classifier gθ (x + δ) will have
same label y as gθ (x). MACER [52] nicely extended these
ideas and also presented a differentiable form of randomized smoothing showing how it enables maximizing the ra-

7292

