Blocks-World Cameras
Jongho Lee
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Mohit Gupta
University of Wisconsin-Madison

jongho@cs.wisc.edu

mohitg@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
For several vision and robotics applications, 3D geometry of man-made environments such as indoor scenes can be
represented with a small number of dominant planes. However, conventional 3D vision techniques typically first acquire dense 3D point clouds before estimating the compact
piece-wise planar representations (e.g., by plane-fitting).
This approach is costly, both in terms of acquisition and
computational requirements, and potentially unreliable due
to noisy point clouds. We propose Blocks-World Cameras,
a class of imaging systems which directly recover dominant
planes of piece-wise planar scenes (Blocks-World), without requiring point clouds. The Blocks-World Cameras are
based on a structured-light system projecting a single pattern with a sparse set of cross-shaped features. We develop
a novel geometric algorithm for recovering scene planes
without explicit correspondence matching, thereby avoiding
computationally intensive search or optimization routines.
The proposed approach has low device and computational
complexity, and requires capturing only one or two images.
We demonstrate highly efficient and precise planar-scene
sensing with simulations and real experiments, across various imaging conditions, including defocus blur, large lighting variations, ambient illumination, and scene clutter.

1. The 3D Revolution
We are in the midst of a 3D revolution. Robots enabled by 3D cameras are beginning to drive cars, explore
space, and manage our factories. While some of these applications require high-resolution 3D scans of the surroundings, several tasks do not explicitly need dense 3D point
clouds. Imagine a robot navigating an indoor space, or an
augmented reality (AR) system finding surfaces in a living
room for placing virtual objects. For such applications, particularly in devices with limited computational budgets, it is
often desirable to create compact, memory- and computeefficient 3D scene representations. For example, in piecewise planar indoor scenes, a popular approach is to first capture 3D point clouds with a depth or an RGBD camera, and
then estimate a piece-wise planar representation (Fig. 1).
Historically, point clouds have been the canonical representation for 3D scenes in the computer vision and robotics

communities. This is not surprising because almost all
depth imaging modalities capture 3D point clouds as the
raw data. Indeed, there are several applications which do require dense 3D representations (e.g., CAD modeling, facial
motion retargeting), for which points clouds are a good fit.
However, point clouds also have limitations: First, dense
point clouds are memory, compute and bandwidth intensive. Second, acquisition of point clouds by depth cameras
is prone to errors in non-ideal imaging conditions including
defocus, multi-path [23, 46, 43] and multi-camera interference [10, 63, 39], and ambient illumination [24, 3]. Finally,
extracting piece-wise planar representation by fitting planes
to a point cloud requires global reasoning, which may result
in inaccurate plane segmentation, especially if the underlying point-clouds are noisy to begin with (Fig. 1).
This raises a natural question: Why capture highresolution and noisy 3D point clouds at large acquisition
costs, only to compress it later into planar representations
at large computational cost? If we are going to perform
downstream reasoning in terms of planes, can we design
imaging modalities that directly capture compact and accurate plane-centric geometric representations of the world?
We propose Blocks-World Cameras, a class of imaging
systems which directly recover dominant plane parameters
for Blocks-World [57] (piece-wise planar) scenes without
creating 3D point clouds, enabling fast, low-cost and accurate reconstructions (Fig. 1). The Blocks-World Cameras are based on a structured-light system consisting of
a projector which projects a single pattern on the scene,
and a camera to capture the images. The pattern consists
of a sparse set of cross-shaped features (each with two linesegments) which get mapped to cross-shaped features in the
camera image via homographies induced by scene planes. If
correspondences between image and pattern features can be
established, the plane parameters can be estimated simply
by measuring the deformation (change of angles of the two
segments) between these features [28].
For scenes with high geometric complexity (e.g., a large
number of distinct dominant planes), the projected pattern
must have a sufficiently high feature density, requiring multiple features on each epipolar line, leading to ambiguities.
Resolving these ambiguities would require correspondence
matching via computationally intensive global reasoning,

11412

