Asymmetric metric learning for knowledge transfer
Mateusz Budnik

Yannis Avrithis

Inria, Univ Rennes, CNRS, IRISA

Abstract
Knowledge transfer from large teacher models to smaller
student models has recently been studied for metric learning,
focusing on fine-grained classification. In this work, focusing
on instance-level image retrieval, we study an asymmetric
testing task, where the database is represented by the teacher
and queries by the student. Inspired by this task, we introduce asymmetric metric learning, a novel paradigm of using
asymmetric representations at training. This acts as a simple
combination of knowledge transfer with the original metric
learning task.
We systematically evaluate different teacher and student
models, metric learning and knowledge transfer loss functions on the new asymmetric testing as well as the standard
symmetric testing task, where database and queries are represented by the same model. We find that plain regression is
surprisingly effective compared to more complex knowledge
transfer mechanisms, working best in asymmetric testing. Interestingly, our asymmetric metric learning approach works
best in symmetric testing, allowing the student to even outperform the teacher.
Our implementation is publicly available,1 including
trained student models for all loss functions and all pairs of
teacher/student models.2

1. Introduction
Originating in metric learning, loss functions based on
pairwise distances or similarities [18, 71, 46, 72, 5] are
paramount in representation learning. Their power is most
notable in category-level tasks where classes at inference are
different than classes at learning, for instance fine-grained
classification [46, 72], few-shot learning [69, 62] local descriptor learning [19] and instance-level retrieval [16, 53].
There are different ways to use them without supervision [31, 80, 6] and indeed, they form the basis for modern
1 https://github.com/budnikm/aml
2 This work was supported by Conseil Régional de Bretagne and

Rennes Métropole (Images & Réseaux AAP-PME-2017 grant MobilAI).
It was performed using HPC resources of GENCI–IDRIS (Grant 2019AD011011245).

unsupervised representation learning [44, 21, 8].
Powerful representations come traditionally with powerful network models [22, 28], which are expensive. The
search for resource-efficient architectures has lead to the design of lightweight networks for mobile devices [26, 58, 84],
neural architecture search [48, 41] and model scaling [64].
Training of small networks may be facilitated by knowledge
transfer from larger networks [23]. However, both network
design and knowledge transfer are commonly performed on
classification tasks, using standard cross-entropy.
Focusing on fine-grained classification and retrieval, several recent methods have extended metric learning loss functions to allow for knowledge transfer from teacher to student
models [9, 38, 82, 47]. However, two questions are in order:
(a) since transferring a representation from one model to
another is inherently a continuous task, can’t we just use
regression? (b) apart from knowledge transfer, is the original
metric learning task still relevant and what is a simple way
to combine the two?
In this work, we focus on the task of instance-level image
retrieval [49, 52], which is at the core of metric learning in
the sense of using pairwise distances or similarities. In its
most well-known form [16, 53], the task is supervised, but
the supervision is originating from automated data analysis
rather than humans. As such, apart from noisy, supervision
is often incomplete, in the sense that although class labels
per example may exist, not all pairs of examples of the same
class are labeled. Hence, one has to work with pairs rather
than examples, unlike e.g. face recognition [11].
Our work is motivated by the scenario where a database
(gallery) of images is represented and indexed according to a
large model, while queries are captured from mobile devices,
where a smaller model is the only option. In such scenario,
rather than re-indexing the entire database, it is preferable to
adapt different smaller models for different end-user devices.
In this case, knowledge transfer from the large (teacher) to
the small (student) model is not just helping, but the student
should really learn to map inputs to the same representation
space. We call this task asymmetric testing.
More importantly, even if we consider the standard symmetric testing task, where both queries and database examples are represented by the same model at inference, we

8228

