Scene Essence
Jiayan Qiu1 , Yiding Yang2 , Xinchao Wang3,2 , Dacheng Tao1
1
The University of Sydney, 2 Stevens Institute of Technology, 3 National University of Singapore
jiayan.qiu.1991@outlook.com, yyang99@stevens.edu, xinchao@nus.edu.sg, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Given an input image of a hotel room (a), we detect its scene objects in (b) and learn to identify the Scene Essence
that comprises a collection of essential elements for recognizing the scene, as labeled by the yellow bounding boxes. The
image with essential elements preserved but minor ones inpainted are shown in (c), which, still, would be visually recognized
as a hotel room. Should we further wipe off elements from the Scene Essence, in this case the bed, the scene will be
interpreted as a living room.

Abstract

What scene elements, if any, are indispensable for recognizing a scene? We strive to answer this question through
the lens of an exotic learning scheme. Our goal is to identify a collection of such pivotal elements, which we term as
Scene Essence, to be those that would alter scene recognition if taken out from the scene. To this end, we devise
a novel approach that learns to partition the scene objects
into two groups, essential ones and minor ones, under the
supervision that if only the essential ones are kept while the
minor ones are erased in the input image, a scene recognizer would preserve its original prediction. Specifically,
we introduce a learnable graph neural network (GNN) for
labelling scene objects, based on which the minor ones are
wiped off by an off-the-shelf image inpainter. The features of
the inpainted image derived in this way, together with those
learned from the GNN with the minor-object nodes pruned,
are expected to fool the scene discriminator. Both subjective and objective evaluations on Places365, SUN397,
and MIT67 datasets demonstrate that, the learned Scene
Essence yields a visually plausible image that convincingly
retains the original scene category.

1. Introduction
Looking at the image in Fig. 1(a), we may effortlessly
tell that it is a scene of a hotel room. But if we are asked to
pinpoint a few indispensable objects in the scene, if any, that
dedicate our recognition, it might take us some effort to figure them out: maybe the sofa, or the table, or a combination
of both? If we human observers find this to be a non-trivial
task, shall we expect deep networks to be competent?
In this paper, we target at learning to extract a collection of such scene objects, which, together with the scene
background, are coined as Scene Essence. In other words,
Scene Essence comprises the scene background and pivotal
scene objects, if any, that jointly make a scene a scene, and
hence serves as a scene signature. We show an example of
the learned Scene Essence, in Fig. 1(c), where only the sofa
and the bed are preserved while all other objects are wiped
off by an off-the-shelf image inpainter [91]. This derived
Scene Essence image successfully fools a state-of-the-art
scene recognizer [99], since it is still categorized as a hotel
room; in fact, even when we human observers look at this
image, likely we will not even doubt it is being a hotel-room
image. Should we, however, take one more object from the
Scene Essence, for example the bed as shown in Fig. 1(c),
the scene recognizer will immediately alter its prediction, in
this case to a living room, which indeed appears to be such

8322

