Contrastive Learning based Hybrid Networks for Long-Tailed Image
Classification
Peng Wang1 Kai Han2 Xiu-Shen Wei3 Lei Zhang4 Lei Wang1
1
University of Wollongong 2 University of Bristol
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology 4 Northwestern Polytechnical University

Abstract
Learning discriminative image representations plays a
vital role in long-tailed image classification because it can
ease the classifier learning in imbalanced cases. Given the
promising performance contrastive learning has shown recently in representation learning, in this work, we explore
effective supervised contrastive learning strategies and tailor
them to learn better image representations from imbalanced
data in order to boost the classification accuracy thereon.
Specifically, we propose a novel hybrid network structure being composed of a supervised contrastive loss to learn image
representations and a cross-entropy loss to learn classifiers,
where the learning is progressively transited from feature
learning to the classifier learning to embody the idea that better features make better classifiers. We explore two variants
of contrastive loss for feature learning, which vary in the
forms but share a common idea of pulling the samples from
the same class together in the normalized embedding space
and pushing the samples from different classes apart. One
of them is the recently proposed supervised contrastive (SC)
loss, which is designed on top of the state-of-the-art unsupervised contrastive loss by incorporating positive samples
from the same class. The other is a prototypical supervised
contrastive (PSC) learning strategy which addresses the intensive memory consumption in standard SC loss and thus
shows more promise under limited memory budget. Extensive experiments on three long-tailed classification datasets
demonstrate the advantage of the proposed contrastive learning based hybrid networks in long-tailed classification.

1. Introduction
In the real world, the image classes are normally presented in a long-tailed distribution [25]. While some common classes (head classes) can have sufficient image samples, some uncommon or rare categories (tail classes) can be
underrepresented by limited samples. The data imbalance
poses great challenge to learning unbiased classifiers.
Most existing work addresses the data imbalance issue by

Figure 1. Illustration of cross-entropy (upper), standard supervised
contrastive (SC) (bottom left), and prototypical supervised contrastive (PSC) (bottom right) loss based feature learning for longtailed image classification. Cross-entropy loss learns skewed features, which can result in biased classifiers. Supervised contrastive
learning (bottom two) learns more intra-class compact and interclass separable features, which ease classifier learning. In standard
SC learning, an anchor sample together with positive samples from
the same class are pulled together and the anchor is pushed away
from negatives from other classes. In PSC learning, each sample
is pulled towards the prototype (marked by star) of its class and
pushed away from prototypes of other classes.

mitigating the data shortage in tail classes in order to prevent
the model from being dominated by the head classes. Typical methods include data re-sampling [1, 8, 35, 4, 28], loss
re-weighting [26, 7, 30, 33], margin modification [3], and
data augmentation [19, 6, 29]. Recently a new line of work
is proposed which approaches long-tailed image classification by decoupling the representation learning and classifier
learning into two stages [15, 37, 36]. The shared motivation of such work [15, 37, 36] is that image feature learning
and classifier learning may favor different data sampling
strategies and thus the focus thereon is to identify suitable
sampling strategies for these two tasks. Specifically, they
find under cross-entropy loss, random data sampling can
benefit feature learning more while class-balanced sampling
1943

