SIPSA-Net: Shift-Invariant Pan Sharpening with Moving Object Alignment for
Satellite Imagery
Jaehyup Lee

Soomin Seo

Munchurl Kim*

Korea Advanced Institue of Science and Technology (KAIST)
{woguq365, ssm9462, mkimee} @kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Pan-sharpening is a process of merging a highresolution (HR) panchromatic (PAN) image and its corresponding low-resolution (LR) multi-spectral (MS) image
to create an HR-MS and pan-sharpened image. However,
due to the different sensors’ locations, characteristics and
acquisition time, PAN and MS image pairs often tend to
have various amounts of misalignment. Conventional deeplearning-based methods that were trained with such misaligned PAN-MS image pairs suffer from diverse artifacts
such as double-edge and blur artifacts in the resultant PANsharpened images. In this paper, we propose a novel framework called shift-invariant pan-sharpening with moving object alignment (SIPSA-Net) which is the first method to take
into account such large misalignment of moving object regions for PAN sharpening. The SISPA-Net has a feature
alignment module (FAM) that can adjust one feature to be
aligned to another feature, even between the two different PAN and MS domains. For better alignment in pansharpened images, a shift-invariant spectral loss is newly
designed, which ignores the inherent misalignment in the
original MS input, thereby having the same effect as optimizing the spectral loss with a well-aligned MS image. Extensive experimental results show that our SIPSA-Net can
generate pan-sharpened images with remarkable improvements in terms of visual quality and alignment, compared to
the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
The satellite images are being used in a wide range
of applications such as environmental monitoring, surveillance systems, and mapping services as well. Google
EarthTM is one of the most popular virtual globe applications. Such high-resolution multi-spectral images are ob* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Pan-sharpening results from different methods on
WorldView-3 dataset. Our proposed SIPSA-Net generates an
artifact-free pan-sharpened image, where other methods generate
blurry and distorted images.

tained from commercialized pan-sharpening software that
fuses low-resolution (LR) multi-spectral (MS) images and
high-resolution (HR) single channel panchromatic (PAN)
images to generate pan-sharpened (PS) images. The produced PS images should have similar high-frequency details
as the PAN images and similar colors as the MS images.
However, when the PS images in the virtual globe applications are compared with the original PAN and MS images,
many types of artifacts are often observed for which the details of PS images are not as sharp as those of the PAN images and colors appear to be distorted from the MS images.
Recently, many deep-learning-based pan-sharpening
methods [6, 12, 16, 25, 27] have been proposed and shown
to outperform previous state-of-the-art pan-sharpening
methods [3, 4, 8, 15, 19]. Most of these methods train their
networks by minimizing the difference between the pseudoground-truth MS images and the network output PS images

10166

