Model-based 3D Hand Reconstruction via Self-Supervised Learning
Yujin Chen1∗
Zhigang Tu1†
Di Kang2
Linchao Bao2
Ying Zhang3 Xuefei Zhe2 Ruizhi Chen1 Junsong Yuan4
1
Wuhan University 2 Tencent AI Lab 3 Tencent 4 State University of New York at Buffalo
{yujin.chen, tuzhigang, ruizhi.chen}@whu.edu.cn {di.kang, zhexuefei}@outlook.com
linchaobao@gmail.com yinggzhang@tencent.com jsyuan@buffalo.edu

Training Phase

Abstract
Reconstructing a 3D hand from a single-view RGB image is challenging due to various hand configurations and
depth ambiguity. To reliably reconstruct a 3D hand from
a monocular image, most state-of-the-art methods heavily rely on 3D annotations at the training stage, but obtaining 3D annotations is expensive. To alleviate reliance
on labeled training data, we propose S2 HAND, a selfsupervised 3D hand reconstruction network that can jointly
estimate pose, shape, texture, and the camera viewpoint.
Specifically, we obtain geometric cues from the input image
through easily accessible 2D detected keypoints. To learn
an accurate hand reconstruction model from these noisy
geometric cues, we utilize the consistency between 2D and
3D representations and propose a set of novel losses to rationalize outputs of the neural network. For the first time,
we demonstrate the feasibility of training an accurate 3D
hand reconstruction network without relying on manual annotations. Our experiments show that the proposed selfsupervised method achieves comparable performance with
recent fully-supervised methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/TerenceCYJ/S2HAND.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D human hands from a single image is
important for computer vision tasks such as hand-related
action recognition, augmented reality, sign language translation, and human-computer interaction [21, 33, 43]. However, due to the diversity of hands and the depth ambiguity
in monocular 3D reconstruction, image-based 3D hand reconstruction remains a challenging problem.
In recent years, we have witnessed fast progress in recovering 3D representations of human hands from images.
In this field, most methods were proposed to predict 3D
hand pose from the depth image [1, 10, 15, 22, 49] or the
∗ Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab.
† Corresponding author: tuzhigang@whu.edu.cn

Single-View Images

Detected 2D Keypoints

Testing Phase

Input Image

Output Joints

3D Reconstruction

Figure 1: Given a collection of unlabeled hand images, we learn a
3D hand reconstruction network in a self-supervised manner. Top:
the training uses a collection of unlabeled hand images and their
corresponding noisy detected 2D keypoints. Bottom: our model
outputs accurate hand joints and shapes, as well as vivid textures.

RGB image [2, 8, 24, 37, 52]. However, the surface information is needed in some applications such as grasping an
object by a virtual hand [21], where the 3D hand pose represented by sparse joints is not sufficient. To better display
the surface information of the hand, previous studies predict the triangle mesh either via regressing per-vertex coordinate [16, 29] or by deforming a parametric hand model
[19, 20]. Outputting such high-dimensional representation
from 2D input is challenging for neural networks to learn,
thus resulting in the training process relying heavily on 3D
annotations such as dense hand scans, model-fitted parametric hand mesh, or human-annotated 3D joints. Besides, the
hand texture is important in some applications, such as vivid
hands reconstruction in immersive virtual reality. But only
recently has a study exploring parametric texture estimation
in a learning-based hand recovery system [35], while most

10451

