Points as Queries: Weakly Semi-supervised Object Detection by Points
Liangyu Chen1,2 *

Tong Yang1 *
Xiangyu Zhang1
Wei Zhang2 †
1
2
MEGVII Technology
Fudan University

{chenliangyu,yangtong,zhangxiangyu,sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract
We propose a novel point annotated setting for the
weakly semi-supervised object detection task, in which the
dataset comprises small fully annotated images and large
weakly annotated images by points. It achieves a balance
between tremendous annotation burden and detection performance. Based on this setting, we analyze existing detectors and find that these detectors have difficulty in fully
exploiting the power of the annotated points. To solve this,
we introduce a new detector, Point DETR, which extends
DETR by adding a point encoder. Extensive experiments
conducted on MS-COCO dataset in various data settings
show the effectiveness of our method. In particular, when
using 20% fully labeled data from COCO, our detector
achieves a promising performance, 33.3 AP, which outperforms a strong baseline (FCOS) by 2.0 AP, and we demonstrate the point annotations bring over 10 points in various
AR metrics.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the fundamental problems in
computer vision. Modern object detectors [12, 14, 15, 22,
29] have achieved great success with the help of tremendous annotated data. However, it is very costly to annotate
a large amount of detection data. Specifically, for each object instance, a precise bounding box needs to be labeled
manually and carefully, which is quite time-consuming: it
takes 10-35 seconds [27, 24, 1] for labeling an object.
To reduce the cost of data annotation, weakly supervised object detection (WSOD) and semi-supervised object
detection (SSOD) methods are proposed. Weakly supervised object detection methods [2, 11, 25, 36] utilize large
data with weak annotations, such as image labels, which
is far easier to collect than precisely annotated bounding boxes. The semi-supervised object detection methods
[10, 17, 26, 28, 31] learn detectors with a small amount
of box-level labeled images and large unlabeled images,
* Equally contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Jian Sun1

weizh@fudan.edu.cn

where the cost of image annotation is small. Although
these methods can reduce the cost of annotation significantly, their performance is far inferior to their supervised
counterparts [14, 15, 29]. To make a trade-off between annotation cost and performance, weakly semi-supervised object detection methods (WSSOD) [33] are studied, which
use small box-level labeled images as well as large weakly
labeled images to learn detectors. However, image-level
annotations in weakly annotated data are not optimal for
object detection task since image labels do not contain the
instance-level information of all objects. Motivated by [1],
we annotate each instance in the image by one point (as
shown in Figure 1d) instead of image-level annotation, for
two main reasons. Firstly, compared with image-level annotation, points bring much richer information, not only the
category of the object but also the strong prior of object
location. Secondly, there is no strict requirement on point
annotations, such as center points of objects. Thus, the increase in the cost of labeling is marginal compared with
the image-level annotation [1]: 23.3 sec/image vs. 20.0
sec/image in VOC dataset [6].
Though the above new setting is better for weakly semisupervised object detection, most recent detectors [14, 15,
29] have difficulty in predicting object boxes based on point
annotations. In most detectors, FPN [14] is a basic component, which utilizes multi-level feature maps to predict object boxes. FPN can boost the performance of detectors, but
it is incompetent to predict object boxes using point annotations since it is difficult to select the optimal box prediction from multi-level ones, predicted for a point annotation.
For the single-level feature detectors, they may suffer from
bad performance [20, 21, 22] or strict requirement on point
annotations [5, 12, 35] even though they avoid choosing
feature map levels.
Inspired by DETR [4] which achieves competitive performance with a single-level feature map, we propose a
novel detector, Point DETR, by adding a point encoder to
DETR in this paper. It can predict object boxes precisely
from point annotations. Specifically, it uses a single-level
feature map to predict object boxes, avoiding the multi-level
selection problem and can predict object boxes with loose

8823

