A Quasiconvex Formulation for Radial Cameras
Carl Olsson1,2 , Viktor Larsson3 , Fredrik Kahl1
1

Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
2
Lund University, Sweden
3
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich, Switzerland

Abstract
In this paper we study structure from motion problems
for 1D radial cameras. Under this model the projection of
a 3D point is a line in the image plane going through the
principal point, which makes the model invariant to radial
distortion and changes in focal length. It can therefore effectively be applied to uncalibrated image collections without the need for explicit estimation of camera intrinsics.
We show that the reprojection errors of 1D radial cameras are examples of quasiconvex functions. This opens up
the possibility to solve a general class of relevant reconstruction problems globally optimally using tools from convex optimization. In fact, our resulting algorithm is based
on solving a series of LP problems. We perform an extensive
experimental evaluation, on both synthetic and real data,
showing that a whole class of multiview geometry problems
across a range of different cameras models with varying
and unknown intrinsic calibration can be reliably and accurately solved within the same framework. 1

1. Introduction and Related Work
Quasiconvexity in 3D reconstruction problems have
been studied since the work of [18]. The paper made the
crucial observation that with the pinhole projection, each
residual has convex sublevel sets. Since this property is
preserved by the max operation, it was proposed to solve
the triangulation problem by minimizing the maximal residual (the L∞ -norm) rather than the least squares error. The
above mentioned paper works with regular pinhole cameras
P3 → P2 . However, cameras with radial distortion introduce a mapping that is not projective, see Figure 1, and
hence they have to be pre-calibrated and their corresponding
1 This work has been funded by the Swedish Research Council (grants
no. 2016-04445, 2018-05375), the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research (Semantic Mapping and Visual Navigation), the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP) funded by the Knut and
Alice Wallenberg Foundation and an ETH Zurich Postdoctoral Fellowship.

Figure 1. Radial distortion of an image. Image points move along
lines going through the principal point.

images undistorted before we can apply the above framework. In this paper we instead study the 1D radial camera
model that is invariant to changes in focal length and radial
distortion [42]. The model encompasses any radially symmetric camera, which includes most camera types (e.g., pinhole, fisheye and catadioptric cameras). We show that this
model also belongs to the quasiconvex framework, which
opens up the possibility to solve a class of 3D reconstruction problems with unknown and varying focal length and
radial distortion parameters, while still being able to guarantee global optimality of the obtained solution.
In [20, 22, 24], the work of [18] for triangulation was extended to a more general class of optimization problems in
multiple view geometry. Some of the problems addressed
within the same framework were triangulation, homography estimation, camera resectioning. In addition to studying the standard pinhole residual, the above papers showed
how to handle angular errors as well as covariance weighted
distance measures. In followup works the theory has been
generalized to 1D cameras [12] and triangulation of planar structures [35]. The perhaps most interesting problem of this class is the so called known-rotation problem
[40, 22, 46] where the orientation part of the camera is assumed to be known and optimization is performed over the
positions of both the cameras and the 3D points. The ability to reliably solve this large scale problem lead to a new
class of non-sequential methods [31, 11, 35, 32, 5]. These
methods typically divide the reconstruction problem into
114576

