NeuralRecon: Real-Time Coherent 3D Reconstruction from Monocular Video
Jiaming Sun1,2∗

Yiming Xie1∗ Linghao Chen1 Xiaowei Zhou1
1
Zhejiang University 2 SenseTime Research

Abstract
We present a novel framework named NeuralRecon for
real-time 3D scene reconstruction from a monocular video.
Unlike previous methods that estimate single-view depth
maps separately on each key-frame and fuse them later, we
propose to directly reconstruct local surfaces represented
as sparse TSDF volumes for each video fragment sequentially by a neural network. A learning-based TSDF fusion
module based on gated recurrent units is used to guide the
network to fuse features from previous fragments. This design allows the network to capture local smoothness prior
and global shape prior of 3D surfaces when sequentially
reconstructing the surfaces, resulting in accurate, coherent, and real-time surface reconstruction. The experiments
on ScanNet and 7-Scenes datasets show that our system
outperforms state-of-the-art methods in terms of both accuracy and speed. To the best of our knowledge, this is
the first learning-based system that is able to reconstruct
dense coherent 3D geometry in real-time. Code is available at the project page: https://zju3dv.github.io/
neuralrecon/.

1. Introduction
3D scene reconstruction is one of the central tasks in 3D
computer vision with many applications. In augmented reality (AR) for example, to enable realistic and immersive
interactions between AR effects and the surrounding physical scene, 3D reconstruction needs to be accurate, coherent and performed in real-time. While camera motion can
be tracked accurately with state-of-the-art visual-inertial
SLAM systems [3, 35, 1], real-time image-based dense reconstruction remains to be a challenging problem due to low
reconstruction quality and high computation demands.
Most image-based real-time 3D reconstruction pipelines
[38, 52] adopt the depth map fusion approach, which resemble RGB-D reconstruction methods like KinectFusion
∗ The first two authors contributed equally. The authors are affiliated
with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG and ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D
Vision. † Corresponding author: Hujun Bao.

1

2

3

…

Hujun Bao1†

15

…
Reference View

Depth-based (38.78 s)
1

Source View

2

3

Ours (5.68 s)

Figure 1. Comparison between depth-based 3D reconstruction
methods and the proposed method. In depth-based methods,
key-frame depths are estimated separately from each key frame,
and later fused into a TSDF volume. In the proposed method, the
TSDF volume is directly predicted with all the key frames in a
local window. This design leads to a much more coherent reconstruction and real-time speed.

[31]. Single-view depth maps from each key frame are first
estimated with real-time multi-view depth estimation methods like [48, 24, 13, 46]. The estimated depth maps are later
filtered with criteria like multi-view consistency and temporal smoothness, and fused into a Truncated Signed Distance
Function (TSDF) volume. The reconstructed mesh can be
extracted from the fused TSDF volume with the Marching
Cubes algorithm [27]. This depth-based pipeline has two
major drawbacks. First, since single-view depth maps are
estimated individually on each key frame, each depth estimation is from scratch instead of conditioned on the previous estimations even the view-overlapping is substantial.
As a result, the scale-factor may vary even with the correct
camera ego-motion. Due to depth inconsistencies between
different views, the reconstruction result is prone to be either layered or scattered. One example is shown in the red
boxes in Fig. 1, where the depth-based method struggles to
produce coherent depth estimations on the chairs and wall.
Second, since key-frame depth maps need to be estimated
separately in overlapped local windows, geometry of the
same 3D surface is estimated multiple times in different key

15598

