Affective Processes: stochastic modelling of temporal context
for emotion and facial expression recognition
Enrique Sanchez1 Mani Kumar Tellamekala2 Michel Valstar2 Georgios Tzimiropoulos1,3
1
Samsung AI Center, Cambridge, UK
2
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
3
Queen Mary University London, London, UK
e.lozano@samsung.com {psxmkt, michel.valstar}@nottingham.ac.uk g.tzimiropoulos@qmul.ac.uk

Abstract
Temporal context is key to the recognition of expressions of
emotion. Existing methods, that rely on recurrent or selfattention models to enforce temporal consistency, work on
the feature level, ignoring the task-specific temporal dependencies, and fail to model context uncertainty. To alleviate
these issues, we build upon the framework of Neural Processes to propose a method for apparent emotion recognition with three key novel components: (a) probabilistic contextual representation with a global latent variable
model; (b) temporal context modelling using task-specific
predictions in addition to features; and (c) smart temporal context selection. We validate our approach on four
databases, two for Valence and Arousal estimation (SEWA
and AffWild2), and two for Action Unit intensity estimation
(DISFA and BP4D). Results show a consistent improvement
over a series of strong baselines as well as over state-ofthe-art methods.

1. Introduction
In this paper, we address the problem of facial behaviour
recognition from video, in particular, the problem of
recognising apparent emotions in terms of Valence and
Arousal [49], and facial expressions in terms of Action
Unit intensity [9]. This is a longstanding problem in video
recognition which has been extensively studied by the computer vision community [24, 62, 39, 19, 31, 26, 65, 72,
75, 69, 53, 51, 52, 37, 44]. Nevertheless, even recent
methods [25, 31, 75] struggle to achieve high accuracy
on the most difficult datasets including SEWA [32], AffWild2 [27], BP4D [73] and DISFA [40]. Hence, there is still
great progress to be made towards solving this challenging
problem. In this paper, we show that effective temporal context modelling is a key feature for significantly advancing
the state-of-the-art.

Figure 1. Different ways of modelling temporal context in the literature of emotion recognition: Recurrent Models (top), Attentionbased Models (middle), and our proposed approach based on
Neural Processes (bottom). Our method proposes a probabilistic modelling of temporal context through a global latent variable
z ∼ N (µ, σ), and includes a novel method for automatic context
selection. The global latent variable allows to sample temporal
functions fθ (., z) that are consistent with the captured context.

But what makes emotion (and facial expression) recognition such a difficult problem? There are many, often interrelated, reasons for this including: (a) annotation of emotions is often both subjective and laborious making it hard to
annotate it consistently [54]; (b) there exist only small- and
medium-size emotion video datasets and, due to point (a)
above, the annotations for these datasets are often noisy; (c)
emotions are subtle, acting as unobserved, latent variables
that only partially explain facial appearance over time [2].
They often require temporal as well as multi-modal context

9074

