Graph-based High-Order Relation Discovery for Fine-grained Recognition
Yifan Zhao1
Ke Yan2
Feiyue Huang2
Jia Li1,3∗
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, SCSE, Beihang University
2
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{zhaoyf, jiali}@buaa.edu.cn,

{kerwinyan, garyhuang}@tencent.com

Abstract
Fine-grained object recognition aims to learn effective
features that can identify the subtle differences between visually similar objects. Most of the existing works tend to
amplify discriminative part regions with attention mechanisms. Besides its unstable performance under complex backgrounds, the intrinsic interrelationship between
different semantic features is less explored. Toward this
end, we propose an effective graph-based relation discovery approach to build a contextual understanding of highorder relationships. In our approach, a high-dimensional
feature bank is first formed and jointly regularized with
semantic- and positional-aware high-order constraints, endowing rich attributes to feature representations. Second,
to overcome the high-dimension curse, we propose a graphbased semantic grouping strategy to embed this high-order
tensor bank into a low-dimensional space. Meanwhile, a
group-wise learning strategy is proposed to regularize the
features focusing on the cluster embedding center. With the
collaborative learning of three modules, our module is able
to grasp the stronger contextual details of fine-grained objects. Experimental evidence demonstrates our approach
achieves new state-of-the-art on 4 widely-used fine-grained
object recognition benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained object recognition focuses on distinguishing and classifying objects of a basic-level category into subclasses, which is a challenging task due to the subtle visual differences among different classes. Benefiting from the strong perceptual capability of deep neural networks, handling subtle variances using visual features [42, 34, 49, 19] has made significant progress. In
particular we consider two popular families of methods in
∗ Correspondence should be addressed to Jia Li. URL: http://
cvteam.net

Figure 1. The motivation of proposed approach. Our proposed
approach first exploits the structurally channel-aware relationship
b) into a high-dimensional graph embedding. Then these relation
nodes are grouped into low-dimensional space d) with a semantic
grouping strategy, forming the final grouped activations f).

tackling this problem, i.e., discriminative part learning and
feature representation learning.
Studies of the first family [48, 42, 34, 6] usually deal
with the fine-grained categorization problem by localizing
distinct parts. Some representative methods tend to utilize
the part detectors [13, 18] or segmentation parsers [19, 21]
in different categorization tasks. With accurate part parsing
results obtained, satisfactory performance for fine-grained
classifiers could also be achieved simultaneously. Besides methods using manual annotations, attention-based
approaches [19, 42, 34, 6, 31] show its ability in discovering
object parts during weakly-supervised training. However,
part localizations using attention mechanisms perform unreliable results under complex scenarios. As networks fail
to capture the correct part localizations, further strengthening these regions would lead to catastrophic overfitting.

15079

