Animating Pictures with Eulerian Motion Fields
Aleksander Holynski

Brian Curless

Steven M. Seitz

Richard Szeliski

University of Washington
eulerian.cs.washington.edu

Figure 1: Given a single input image (a), our method estimates an image-aligned motion field (b), and uses it to create a looping video (c).

Abstract
In this paper, we demonstrate a fully automatic method
for converting a still image into a realistic animated looping video. We target scenes with continuous fluid motion,
such as flowing water and billowing smoke. Our method relies on the observation that this type of natural motion can
be convincingly reproduced from a static Eulerian motion
description, i.e. a single, temporally constant flow field that
defines the immediate motion of a particle at a given 2D
location. We use an image-to-image translation network to
encode motion priors of natural scenes collected from online videos, so that for a new photo, we can synthesize a
corresponding motion field. The image is then animated
using the generated motion through a deep warping technique: pixels are encoded as deep features, those features
are warped via Eulerian motion, and the resulting warped
feature maps are decoded as images. In order to produce
continuous, seamlessly looping video textures, we propose
a novel video looping technique that flows features both forward and backward in time and then blends the results. We
demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of our method
by applying it to a large collection of examples including
beaches, waterfalls, and flowing rivers.

1. Introduction
For humans, a picture often contains much more than a
collection of pixels. Drawing from our previous observations of the world, we can recognize objects, structure, and
even imagine how the scene was moving when the picture

was taken. Using these priors, we can often envision the
image as if it were animated, with smoke billowing out of
a chimney, or waves rippling across a lake. In this paper,
we propose a system that learns these same motion priors
from videos of real scenes, enabling the synthesis of plausible motions for a novel static image and allowing us to
render an animated video of the scene.
General scene motion is highly complex, involving perspective effects, occlusions, and transience. For the purposes of this paper, we restrict our attention to fluid motions,
such as smoke, water, and clouds, which are well approximated by Eulerian motion, in particular, particle motion
through a static velocity field.
Our proposed method takes as input a single static image and produces a looping video texture. We begin by using an image-to-image translation network [29] to synthesize an Eulerian motion field. This network is trained using
pairs of images and motion fields, which are extracted from
a large collection of online stock footage videos of natural
scenes. Through Euler integration, this motion field defines
each source pixel’s trajectory through the output video sequence. Given the source pixel positions in a future frame,
we render the corresponding frame using a deep warping
technique: we use an encoder network to transform the input image into a deep feature map, warp those features using
a novel temporally symmetric splatting technique, and use a
decoder network to recover the corresponding warped color
image. Lastly, in order to ensure our output video loops
seamlessly, we apply a novel video looping technique that
operates in deep feature space.
4321
5810

