Lifting 2D StyleGAN for 3D-Aware Face Generation
Yichun Shi

Divyansh Aggarwal

Anil K. Jain

Michigan State University
{shiyichu,aggarw49}@msu.edu, jain@cse.msu.edu

(a) StyleGAN2

(b) Shape

(c) Rotation

(d) Relighting

Figure 1: Example results of LiftedGAN. Column (a) shows three random samples from the latent space of a pre-trained StyleGAN2 network.
Columns (b)-(d) show the results of LiftedGAN. The proposed method lifts a pre-trained StyleGAN2 to a 3D generator by predicting
additional depth information, which allows it to not only generate realistic face images, but also provides 3D control of the output, such as
rotation and relighting. Our method does NOT need any annotation nor 3DMM model for training.

Abstract

1. Introduction

quality face images with a wide variety of styles. However,
since these models are trained to generate random faces, they
do not offer direct manipulation over the semantic attributes
such as pose, expression etc. in the generated image. A
number of studies have been devoted to achieving control
over the generation process in order to be able to adjust pose
and other semantic attributes in the generated face images.
Among all these attributes, 3D information, such as pose,
is the most desirable due to its applicability in face recognition [26] and face synthesis [32]. To achieve this, most
existing approaches attempt to disentangle the latent feature
space of GANs by leveraging external supervision on the
semantic factors such as pose labels [26, 25], landmarks [9]
or synthetic images [2, 33, 15], while some others [17] have
explored an unsupervised approach for 3D controllability in
the latent space. Although these feature manipulation based
methods have shown ability to generate faces with high
visual quality under assigned poses, it is unclear whether
important content, such as identity, is indeed preserved when
we change the pose parameters. Potential errors could arise
from the generation process when the manipulated features
are parsed by the network parameters (see Section 5.2).

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), such as StyleGAN [13, 14] have been demonstrated to generate high

In contrast to solutions that only output 2D images, building generative models with explicit 3D shapes could give

We propose a framework, called LiftedGAN, that disentangles and lifts a pre-trained StyleGAN2 for 3D-aware face
generation. Our model is “3D-aware” in the sense that
it is able to (1) disentangle the latent space of StyleGAN2
into texture, shape, viewpoint, lighting and (2) generate 3D
components for rendering synthetic images. Unlike most previous methods, our method is completely self-supervised, i.e.
it neither requires any manual annotation nor 3DMM model
for training. Instead, it learns to generate images as well
as their 3D components by distilling the prior knowledge
in StyleGAN2 with a differentiable renderer. The proposed
model is able to output both the 3D shape and texture, allowing explicit pose and lighting control over generated images.
Qualitative and quantitative results show the superiority
of our approach over existing methods on 3D-controllable
GANs in content controllability while generating realistic
high quality images.

6258

