Towards Extremely Compact RNNs for Video Recognition with Fully
Decomposed Hierarchical Tucker Structure
Miao Yin1 , Siyu Liao2: , Xiao-Yang Liu3 , Xiaodong Wang3 and Bo Yuan1
1
Rutgers University, 2 Amazon, 3 Columbia University
miao.yin@rutgers.edu, liasiyu@amazon.com, {xl2427, xw2008}@columbia.edu,
bo.yuan@soe.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) have been widely
used in sequence analysis and modeling. However, when
processing high-dimensional data, RNNs typically require
very large model sizes, thereby bringing a series of deployment challenges. Although various prior works have been
proposed to reduce the RNN model sizes, executing RNN
models in the resource-restricted environments is still a very
challenging problem. In this paper, we propose to develop
extremely compact RNN models with fully decomposed hierarchical Tucker (FDHT) structure. The HT decomposition does not only provide much higher storage cost reduction than the other tensor decomposition approaches, but
also brings better accuracy performance improvement for
the compact RNN models. Meanwhile, unlike the existing
tensor decomposition-based methods that can only decompose the input-to-hidden layer of RNNs, our proposed fully
decomposition approach enables the comprehensive compression for the entire RNN models with maintaining very
high accuracy. Our experimental results on several popular
video recognition datasets show that, our proposed fully decomposed hierarchical tucker-based LSTM (FDHT-LSTM)
is extremely compact and highly efficient. To the best of
our knowledge, FDHT-LSTM, for the first time, consistently
achieves very high accuracy with only few thousand parameters (3,132 to 8,808) on different datasets. Compared
with the state-of-the-art compressed RNN models, such as
TT-LSTM, TR-LSTM and BT-LSTM, our FDHT-LSTM simultaneously enjoys both order-of-magnitude (3,985ˆ to
10,711ˆ) fewer parameters and significant accuracy improvement (0.6% to 12.7%).

1. Introduction
Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), especially their advanced variants such as Long-Short Term Memory (LSTM)
: This work was done when the author was with Rutgers University.

and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU), have achieved unprecedented success in sequence analysis and processing. Thanks
to their powerful capability of capturing and modeling the
temporary dependency and correlation in the sequential
data, the state-of-the-art RNNs have been widely deployed
in many important artificial intelligence (AI) fields, such as
natural language processing (NLP) [19], speech recognition
[15], and computer vision [25].
Despite their current prosperity, the efficient deployment
of RNNs is still facing several challenges, especially the
large model size problem. Due to the widespread existence
of high-dimensional input data in many applications, e.g.
NLP and video processing, the input-to-hidden weight matrices of RNNs are often extremely large. For instance, as
pointed out in [23], even with small-size hidden layer such
as 256 hidden states, an LSTM working on UCF11 video
recognition dataset [14] already requires more than 50 million parameters. Such ultra-high model size, consequently,
brings a series of deployment challenges for RNNs, including but not limited to high difficulty of training, susceptibility to overfitting, long processing latency and inefficient
energy consumption etc.
In order to address this problem, several prior works [4],
[27] use convolutional neural network (CNNs) as the frontend feature extractors to reduce the size of input data of
back-end RNNs. Although this strategy indeed reduces the
model size as compared to the pure RNN-based solution,
the back-end RNN part is still very large. Leveraging the
popular model compression approaches in CNNs, such as
pruning and quantization, is another alternative. However,
the compression ratio provided by these methods is still
insufficient, considering the very large size of the original
RNN models.
Tensor Decomposition-based RNNs. Due to the above
described limitations, recent RNN compression studies
have mainly focused on a new direction – building the compact RNN models using low-rank tensor decomposition. By
its nature, tensor decomposition can represent a very large
tensor with the combination of multiple very small tensor

12085

