Panoramic Image Reflection Removal
Yuchen Hong1# Qian Zheng2 #

Lingran Zhao1

Xudong Jiang2

Alex C. Kot2

Boxin Shi1,3,4 ∗

1

NELVT, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
yuchenhong.cn@gmail.com, {zhengqian, exdjiang, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg, {calvinzhao, shiboxin}@pku.edu.cn
2

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of panoramic image reflection removal, aiming at reliving the content ambiguity between reflection and transmission scenes. Although
a partial view of the reflection scene is included in the
panoramic image, it cannot be utilized directly due to its
misalignment with the reflection-contaminated image. We
propose a two-step approach to solve this problem, by first
accomplishing geometric and photometric alignment for
the reflection scene via a coarse-to-fine strategy, and then
restoring the transmission scene via a recovery network.
The proposed method is trained with a synthetic dataset and
verified quantitatively with a real panoramic image dataset.
The effectiveness of the proposed method is validated by the
significant performance advantage over single image-based
reflection removal methods and generalization capacity to
limited-FoV scenarios captured by conventional camera or
mobile phone users.

1. Introduction
Single-image reflection removal addresses a severely illposed problem of recovering the transmission T from a
reflection-contaminated or mixture image M. A general
image formation model of M is formulated as [11]
M = Ω ⊙ T + Φ ⊙ R,

(1)

where ⊙ is the element-wise multiplication operator, Ω
and Φ are the refractive and reflective amplitude coefficient
map, and R is the reflection scene [37]. The major challenge of this problem is that both T and R are part of different natural scenes, arousing the difficulty to differentiate
the dominant content for M. We call it content ambiguity
in this paper. Early methods address it through content-free
priors, e.g., sparse distribution of reflection gradients [17] or
ghosting cues [27], while state-of-the-art methods leverage
# Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

Mixture image

Reflection scene

Transmission scene

Ours

IBCLN

KH20

Figure 1. An example of our testing data and reflection removal
results from our method, IBCLN [14], and KH20 [9].

both content and content-free priors from a large scale of
training data, e.g., LBCLN [14] and Kim et al. [9] (denoted
as ‘KH20’ for brevity). Unfortunately, different distributions of T and R modeled by low-level or deep priors are
not always observed in real scenarios, especially for strong
reflections with sharp edges. Figure 1 displays an example
where state-of-the-art methods fail to remove strong reflections.
The content ambiguity could be significantly relieved
if we can (partially) capture the reflection scene. Fortunately, with the development of image stitching technology (e.g., [6]), capturing panoramic images (also called
’panorama’) becomes handily available, i.e., by either offthe-shelf panoramic cameras for professionals (e.g., Ricoh
Theta series and Insta360 Pro series etc.) or camera phones
for casual users (e.g., panorama photography is a standard function for almost all smartphones nowadays such
as Google Pixel and Apple iPhone etc.). A panoramic image has 360◦ field-of-view (FoV) and naturally contains a
partial view of the reflection scene within a single shot, as

7762

