RaScaNet: Learning Tiny Models by Raster-Scanning Images
Jaehyoung Yoo1,2
ByungIn Yoo1
1

Dongwook Lee1
Changkyu Choi1

Changyong Son1
Jae-Joon Han1

Sangil Jung1
Bohyung Han2

Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), South Korea
2
Computer Vision Lab., Seoul National University, South Korea

Abstract
Deploying deep convolutional neural networks on ultralow power systems is challenging due to the extremely limited resources. Especially, the memory becomes a bottleneck as the systems put a hard limit on the size of on-chip
memory. Because peak memory explosion in the lower layers is critical even in tiny models, the size of an input image should be reduced with sacrifice in accuracy. To overcome this drawback, we propose a novel Raster-Scanning
Network, named RaScaNet, inspired by raster-scanning in
image sensors. RaScaNet reads only a few rows of pixels
at a time using a convolutional neural network and then sequentially learns the representation of the whole image using a recurrent neural network. The proposed method operates on an ultra-low power system without input size reduction; it requires 15.9–24.3× smaller peak memory and 5.3–
12.9× smaller weight memory than the state-of-the-art tiny
models. Moreover, RaScaNet fully exploits on-chip SRAM
and cache memory of the system as the sum of the peak
memory and the weight memory does not exceed 60 KB,
improving the power efficiency of the system. In our experiments, we demonstrate the binary classification performance of RaScaNet on Visual Wake Words and Pascal VOC
datasets.

1. Introduction
With recent advances in deep learning, complex computer vision applications run on edge devices, which results in various benefits, including improving privacy, reducing power consumption, and personalizing predictions.
There has been emerging interest in expanding the scope
of machine learning to ultra-low power systems, called
TinyML [2]. The goal of TinyML is to perform various
always-on use-cases, typically in the mW range and below,
powered by general purpose microcontroller units (MCUs)
or application specific integrated circuits (ASICs) [1].

Cache(16KB)

SRAM(320KB)

Flash(1MB)

RaScaNet
RNNPool
MCUNet
MobileNetV2

Peak Memory (KB)

Weight Memory (KB)

Figure 1. Comparison between RaScaNet and existing tiny
models in terms of memory usage. RaScaNet not only fits
into SRAM but also takes advantage of cache memory.
Despite many successes of deep neural networks in computer vision applications [13, 20, 38], it is still challenging to deploy a convolutional neural network (CNN) on an
MCU due to the on-chip memory restrictions and the problems related to power consumption and latency [12, 21].
Typical microcontrollers only have limited on-chip memory
of 100–320 KB (SRAM), and the peak memory of TinyML
models should not exceed the on-chip SRAM. Moreover,
it is highly recommended to maintain the sum of the peak
memory and the weight memory below the size of onchip SRAM. Otherwise, we have to fetch the partial model
weights layer by layer from the flash storage (256 KB–1
MB), which increases both read access time and cache miss
ratio.
While previous works [22, 30] focused only on reducing
the peak memory below the on-chip SRAM (320 KB), our
method reduces both peak and weight memory significantly
even below 60 KB (Fig. 1). Such ultra-low memory footprint is crucial for low-power platforms, as it reduces the
number of accesses to memory.
Considering the objective of running TinyML with the
limited on-chip memory and power, the conventional CNNs
fetching a full-frame image at once would be inappropriate.

13673

