Universal Spectral Adversarial Attacks for Deformable Shapes
Arianna Rampini
Sapienza University of Rome

Franco Pestarini
Sapienza University of Rome

rampini@di.uniroma1.it

pestarini.1855627@studenti.uniroma1.it

Luca Cosmo
Sapienza University of Rome

Simone Melzi
Sapienza University of Rome

Emanuele Rodolà
Sapienza University of Rome

cosmo@di.uniroma1.it

melzi@di.uniroma1.it

rodola@di.uniroma1.it

Abstract
Machine learning models are known to be vulnerable
to adversarial attacks, namely perturbations of the data
that lead to wrong predictions despite being imperceptible.
However, the existence of “universal” attacks (i.e., unique
perturbations that transfer across different data points) has
only been demonstrated for images to date. Part of the reason lies in the lack of a common domain, for geometric data
such as graphs, meshes, and point clouds, where a universal perturbation can be defined. In this paper, we offer a
change in perspective and demonstrate the existence of universal attacks for geometric data (shapes). We introduce a
computational procedure that operates entirely in the spectral domain, where the attacks take the form of small perturbations to short eigenvalue sequences; the resulting geometry is then synthesized via shape-from-spectrum recovery.
Our attacks are universal, in that they transfer across different shapes, different representations (meshes and point
clouds), and generalize to previously unseen data.

horse

horse

horse

...

...
+

+

+

+0.02
0
−0.02

=

dog

...

=

=
cow

bigcat

...

Figure 1: Universal spectral attacks on 3D horses from the
SMAL dataset (only 3 out of 10 shapes are visualized). Top
row: Original shapes with their first ten Laplacian eigenvalues and the correct labels predicted by a state-of-the-art
classifier. The shapes undergo pose deformations, and have
different scale, orientation and location in 3D space. Middle
row: A universal perturbation is applied to the eigenvalues.
Bottom row: The resulting shape embeddings synthesized
from the perturbed spectra, which are now assigned wrong
labels by the classifier.

1. Introduction
As machine learning methods become more and more
pervasive, so their vulnerabilities are becoming more exposed. In recent years, it has been extensively shown that
classifiers are susceptible to so-called adversarial attacks,
i.e., misclassifications induced by feeding carefully perturbed data (adversarial examples) into the trained model.
Adversarial examples can be crafted for image, graph, point
cloud, and mesh data, as demonstrated by a thriving stream
of research output across the computer vision, geometry
processing, and machine learning communities.
Remarkably, universal perturbations are also known to
exist for image data. For a given classifier C acting on images of size w × h, a universal perturbation P ∈ Rw×h is
such that C(I + P ) 6= C(I) for a large number of images

I; crucially, P is small under some norm kP k so that it is
hard to perceive, and is fixed for all such images. In other
words, P is image-agnostic to some extent. This definition
of universal perturbations is made possible by the fact that
the operation I + P can be invariably defined for all possible I and P , since all w × h images share the same grid of
2D coordinates. As soon as one shifts the focus from images to geometric data, the existence of a common space is
no longer guaranteed; each individual graph G is a different domain in and by itself, and an operation of the form
“G + P ” can only be defined if G and P share the same
topology. Therefore, if universality is desired, one has to
define a way to transfer the perturbation P across different
graphs, while at the same time ensuring it induces misclas-

3216

