DetectoRS: Detecting Objects with Recursive Feature Pyramid
and Switchable Atrous Convolution
Siyuan Qiao1
1

Liang-Chieh Chen2
Alan Yuille1
Johns Hopkins University
2
Google Research

Abstract
Many modern object detectors demonstrate outstanding
performances by using the mechanism of looking and thinking twice. In this paper, we explore this mechanism in the
backbone design for object detection. At the macro level,
we propose Recursive Feature Pyramid, which incorporates
extra feedback connections from Feature Pyramid Networks
into the bottom-up backbone layers. At the micro level, we
propose Switchable Atrous Convolution, which convolves the
features with different atrous rates and gathers the results using switch functions. Combining them results in DetectoRS,
which significantly improves the performances of object detection. On COCO test-dev, DetectoRS achieves state-of-theart 55.7% box AP for object detection, 48.5% mask AP for
instance segmentation, and 50.0% PQ for panoptic segmentation. The code is made publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
To detect objects, human visual perception selectively
enhances and suppresses neuron activation by passing highlevel semantic information through feedback connections
[2, 20, 21]. Inspired by the human vision system, the mechanism of looking and thinking twice has been instantiated
in computer vision, and demonstrated outstanding performance [5, 6, 62]. Many popular two-stage object detectors,
e.g., Faster R-CNN [62], output object proposals first, based
on which regional features are then extracted to detect objects. Following the same direction, Cascade R-CNN [5]
develops a multi-stage detector, where subsequent detector
heads are trained with more selective examples. The success
of this design philosophy motivates us to explore it in the
neural network backbone design for object detection. In
particular, we deploy the mechanism at both the macro and
micro levels, resulting in our proposed DetectoRS which
significantly improves the performance of the state-of-art
object detector HTC [8] by a great margin while a similar
1 https://github.com/joe-siyuan-qiao/DetectoRS

Method

Backbone

APbox

APmask

FPS

HTC [8]
DetectoRS

ResNet-50
ResNet-50

43.6
51.3

38.5
44.4

4.3
3.9

Table 1: A glimpse of the improvements of the box and mask
AP by our DetectoRS on COCO test-dev.
inference speed is maintained, as shown in Tab. 1.
At the macro level, our proposed Recursive Feature Pyramid (RFP) builds on top of the Feature Pyramid Networks
(FPN) [48] by incorporating extra feedback connections from
the FPN layers into the bottom-up backbone layers, as illustrated in Fig. 1a. Unrolling the recursive structure to a
sequential implementation, we obtain a backbone for object
detector that looks at the images twice or more. Similar to
the cascaded detector heads in Cascade R-CNN trained with
more selective examples, our RFP recursively enhances FPN
to generate increasingly powerful representations. Resembling Deeply-Supervised Nets [39], the feedback connections bring the features that directly receive gradients from
the detector heads back to the low levels of the bottom-up
backbone to speed up training and boost performance. Our
proposed RFP implements a sequential design of looking
and thinking twice, where the bottom-up backbone and FPN
are run multiple times with their output features dependent
on those in the previous steps.
At the micro level, we propose Switchable Atrous Convolution (SAC), which convolves the same input feature with
different atrous rates [12,32,57] and gathers the results using
switch functions. Fig. 1b shows an illustration of the concept of SAC. The switch functions are spatially dependent,
i.e., each location of the feature map might have different
switches to control the outputs of SAC. To use SAC in the
detector, we convert all the standard 3x3 convolutional layers in the bottom-up backbone to SAC, which improves the
detector performance by a large margin. Some previous
methods adopt conditional convolution, e.g., [43, 80], which
also combines results of different convolutions as a single
output. Unlike those methods whose architecture requires

10213

