Learning Calibrated Medical Image Segmentation
via Multi-rater Agreement Modeling
Wei Ji1,2 , Shuang Yu1B , Junde Wu1 , Kai Ma1 , Cheng Bian1 , Qi Bi1
Jingjing Li2 , Hanruo Liu3 , Li Cheng2B , Yefeng Zheng1
1
Tencent Jarvis Lab, Shenzhen, China 2 University of Alberta, Canada
3
Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China
{wji3, lcheng5}@ualberta.ca, {shirlyyu, kylekma, yefengzheng}@tencent.com

Abstract
In medical image analysis, it is typical to collect multiple
annotations, each from a different clinical expert or rater,
in the expectation that possible diagnostic errors could be
mitigated. Meanwhile, from the computer vision practitioner viewpoint, it has been a common practice to adopt
the ground-truth labels obtained via either the majorityvote or simply one annotation from a preferred rater. This
process, however, tends to overlook the rich information
of agreement or disagreement ingrained in the raw multirater annotations. To address this issue, we propose to explicitly model the multi-rater (dis-)agreement, dubbed MRNet, which has two main contributions. First, an expertiseaware inferring module or EIM is devised to embed the
expertise level of individual raters as prior knowledge, to
form high-level semantic features. Second, our approach is
capable of reconstructing multi-rater gradings from coarse
predictions, with the multi-rater (dis-)agreement cues being
further exploited to improve the segmentation performance.
To our knowledge, our work is the first in producing calibrated predictions under different expertise levels for medical image segmentation. Extensive empirical experiments
are conducted across five medical segmentation tasks of diverse imaging modalities. In these experiments, superior
performance of our MRNet is observed comparing to the
state-of-the-arts, indicating the effectiveness and applicability of our MRNet toward a wide range of medical segmentation tasks. Source code is publicly available.

1. Introduction
Accurate anatomy and lesion segmentation is crucial in
clinical assessment of various diseases, including for examWei Ji, Shuang Yu and Junde Wu have equal contributions. Wei Ji
contributes to this work during internship at Tencent Jarvis Lab.
Shuang Yu and Li Cheng are the corresponding authors.

Rater2

Rater5

Grade
Rater6

Rater1
Fundus image
Rater3

Rater4

Optic cup annotations

Optic disc annotations

Figure 1. Top: an exemplar medical image grading scenario conducted by multiple raters with different expertise levels. Bottom:
visualization of optic cup and disc annotations of the above raters.

ple glaucoma [28, 36, 43], prostate diseases [30, 52], and
brain tumors [11, 17, 44]. It has been increasingly popular to develop automated segmentation systems, to facilitate a reliable reference for the quantification of disease
progression, which is especially accelerated by the exciting breakthroughs of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [7, 20, 34, 35, 49, 55, 56, 59] over the past decade.
Different from labelling natural images, medical images
are often independently annotated by a group of experts or
raters, to mitigate the subjective bias of a particular rater
due to factors such as the level of expertise, or possible negligence of subtle symptoms [13, 39, 23, 28]. Inter-observer
variability, as frequently reported by relevant research in
the clinical field, often leads to challenges in segmenting
highly uncertain regions [3, 23, 37]. Fig. 1 provides a representative illustration of the multi-rater grading process in

12341

