GLEAN: Generative Latent Bank for Large-Factor Image Super-Resolution
Kelvin C.K. Chan1

Xintao Wang2 Xiangyu Xu1 Jinwei Gu3,4 Chen Change Loy1∗
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
2
Applied Research Center, Tencent PCG 3 Tetras.AI. 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory

{chan0899, xiangyu.xu, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

(a) Low-Resolution

(b) ESRGAN

xintao.wang@outlook.com

(c) PULSE

gujinwei@tetras.ai

(d) GLEAN (ours)

(e) Ground-truth

Figure 1: Example of large-factor super-resolution (16×). (a) The low-resolution input (LR). (b) ESRGAN [33] trains the SR generator
from scratch, which often produces artifacts and unnatural textures. (c) PULSE [26] achieves more realistic results by GAN inversion,
which, however, cannot faithfully recover the structures of the ground-truth. (d) With the proposed generative latent bank, GLEAN is able
to generate output that not only is close to the ground-truth, but also possesses realistic textures. (e) The ground-truth (GT).

Abstract
We show that pre-trained Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), e.g., StyleGAN, can be used as a latent bank
to improve the restoration quality of large-factor image
super-resolution (SR). While most existing SR approaches
attempt to generate realistic textures through learning with
adversarial loss, our method, Generative LatEnt bANk
(GLEAN), goes beyond existing practices by directly leveraging rich and diverse priors encapsulated in a pre-trained
GAN. But unlike prevalent GAN inversion methods that require expensive image-specific optimization at runtime, our
approach only needs a single forward pass to generate
the upscaled image. GLEAN can be easily incorporated
in a simple encoder-bank-decoder architecture with multiresolution skip connections. Switching the bank allows the
method to deal with images from diverse categories, e.g.,
cat, building, human face, and car. Images upscaled by
GLEAN show clear improvements in terms of fidelity and
texture faithfulness in comparison to existing methods as
shown in Fig. 1.

1. Introduction
In this study, we explore a new way to employ GAN [9]
for image super-resolution. We are interested in the regime
of high magnification factors (8× to 64×), which typical SR
∗ Corresponding author

methods fail to handle since most details and textures are
lost during downsampling. Since the problem is severely
underspecified, informative priors become inevitable in this
setting, especially in restoring the textural details. Studying
large-factor image SR is meaningful as it can potentially
improve the state of the arts in SR, and more generally conditional generative models for images.
The notion of GAN has been extensively used in SR with
the aim to enrich texture details in an upscaled image. There
are two popular approaches to deploy GANs for this task.
The more common paradigm [21, 33, 32] trains a generator to handle the upscaling task, where adversarial training
is performed by using a discriminator to differentiate real
images from the upscaled images produced by the generator. Another possible way to exploit GAN for the task is by
GAN inversion [1, 11, 26, 27]. In this setting, one will need
to ‘invert’ the generation process of a pre-trained GAN by
mapping an image back to the latent space. A restored image can then be reconstructed from the optimal vector in the
latent space.
While both methods are capable of generating more realistic results than approaches that solely rely on ℓ2 loss, they
have some inherent shortcomings. The first paradigm typically trains the SR generator from scratch using a combined
objective function consisting of a fidelity term and an adversarial loss. In this setting, the generator is responsible for
both capturing the natural image characteristics and main-

14245

