Trajectory Prediction with Latent Belief Energy-Based Model
Bo Pang, Tianyang Zhao, Xu Xie, and Ying Nian Wu
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)
{bopang, tyzhao, xiexu}@ucla.edu, ywu@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
Human trajectory prediction is critical for autonomous
platforms like self-driving cars or social robots. We present
a latent belief energy-based model (LB-EBM) for diverse
human trajectory forecast. LB-EBM is a probabilistic model
with cost function defined in the latent space to account
for the movement history and social context. The lowdimensionality of the latent space and the high expressivity
of the EBM make it easy for the model to capture the multimodality of pedestrian trajectory distributions. LB-EBM is
learned from expert demonstrations (i.e., human trajectories)
projected into the latent space. Sampling from or optimizing
the learned LB-EBM yields a belief vector which is used
to make a path plan, which then in turn helps to predict a
long-range trajectory. The effectiveness of LB-EBM and the
two-step approach are supported by strong empirical results.
Our model is able to make accurate, multi-modal, and social
compliant trajectory predictions and improves over prior
state-of-the-arts performance on the Stanford Drone trajectory prediction benchmark by 10.9% and on the ETH-UCY
benchmark by 27.6%.

1. Introduction
Forecasting the future trajectories of pedestrians is critical for autonomous moving platforms like self-driving
cars or social robots with which humans are interacting.
It has recently attracted interest from many researchers
[15, 64, 25, 50, 3, 7, 28, 32]. See [49] for an overview.
Trajectory forecast is a challenging problem since human future trajectories depend on a multitude of factors such as past
movement history, goals, behavior of surrounding pedestrians. Also, future paths are inherently multimodal. Given the
past trajectories, there are multiple possible future paths. We
propose a latent belief energy-based model (LB-EBM) which
captures pedestrian behavior patterns and subtle social interaction norms in the latent space and make multimodal trajectory predictions. LB-EBM is learned from expert demonstrations (i.e., human trajectories) following the principle of
inverse reinforcement learning (IRL) [36, 11, 12, 17].

Traditional IRL approaches [36] first learn a cost function
from expert demonstrations in an outer loop and then use
reinforcement learning to extract the policy from the learned
cost function in an inner loop. These approaches are often
highly computationally expensive. To avoid such an issue,
GAIL (Generative Adversarial Imitation Learning) [21, 7]
optimizes a policy network directly. GAIL can generate
multimodal action predictions given an expressive policy
generator. The multimodality is however modeled implicitly
and completely relies on the policy generator. Our approach
strikes a middle ground between traditional IRL and GAIL.
We learn an energy-based model (EBM) as the cost function
in a low dimensional latent space and map the EBM distribution to actions with a policy generator. Similar to traditional
IRL, we learn a cost function but our cost function is defined
in a low dimensional space so that our cost function is easier to model and learn. Resembling GAIL, we also learn a
policy generator which allows for directly mapping a latent
vector to the action trajectory, while we explicitly learn a
multimodal cost function instead of learning it implicitly and
completely relying on the policy generator.
An EBM [59, 38, 40] in the form of Boltzmann or Gibbs
distribution maps a latent vector to its probability. It has
no restrictions in its form and can be instantiated by any
function approximators such as neural networks. Thus, this
model is highly expressive and learning from human trajectories allows it to capture the multimodality of the trajectory
distribution. Our proposed LB-EBM is defined in a latent
space. An encoder is jointly learned to project human trajectories into the latent space and hence provides expert
demonstrations to the latent cost function.
Furthermore, this cost function accounts for trajectory history and motion behavior of surrounding pedestrians. Thus
sampling from or optimizing the cost function yields a latent
belief, regarding future trajectory, which considers the centric agent’s behavior pattern and social context surrounding
this agent. A future trajectory is then forecasted in two steps.
We first use the social-aware latent belief vector to make
a rough plan for future path. It is intuitive that human do
not plan every single future step in advance but we often
have a rough idea about how to navigate through our future
111814

