Practical Wide-Angle Portraits Correction with Deep Structured Models
Jing Tan1 * Shan Zhao1 * Pengfei Xiong2 * Jiangyu Liu1

Haoqiang Fan1

Shuaicheng Liu3,1 †

1

Megvii Research 2 Tencent
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{tanjing, zhaoshan, liujiangyu, fhq}@megvii.com
xiongpengfei2019@gmail.com, liushuaicheng@uestc.edu.cn
https://github.com/TanJing94/Deep_Portraits_Correction

Abstract
Wide-angle portraits often enjoy expanded views. However, they contain perspective distortions, especially noticeable when capturing group portrait photos, where the background is skewed and faces are stretched. This paper introduces the first deep learning based approach to remove
such artifacts from freely-shot photos. Specifically, given
a wide-angle portrait as input, we build a cascaded network consisting of a LineNet, a ShapeNet, and a transition
module (TM), which corrects perspective distortions on the
background, adapts to the stereographic projection on facial regions, and achieves smooth transitions between these
two projections, accordingly. To train our network, we build
the first perspective portrait dataset with a large diversity
in identities, scenes and camera modules. For the quantitative evaluation, we introduce two novel metrics, line consistency and face congruence. Compared to the previous stateof-the-art approach, our method does not require camera
distortion parameters. We demonstrate that our approach
significantly outperforms the previous state-of-the-art approach both qualitatively and quantitatively.

1. Introduction
With the popularity of wide-angle cameras on smartphones, photographers can take pictures with broad vision.
However, a wider field-of-view often introduces a stronger
perspective distortion. All wide-angle cameras suffer from
distortion artifacts that stretch and twist buildings, road
ridges and faces, as shown in Fig. 1 (a).
There are relatively few works targeting on the perspective distortion correction in portrait photography[8, 7]. Previous methods apply perspective undistortion using cam* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

(a) Input Image

(b) Projection Image

(c) Shih’s Result

(d) Our Result

Figure 1. Examples of distorted and corrected photographs. (a)
the original distortion image with curved background and distorted
faces. (b) projection image with straight lines. (c) result by Shih et
al. [21], and (d) result of the proposed deep learning method. Both
the background and faces are corrected in (d).

era calibrated distortion parameters [18, 23, 2, 6], which
projects the image onto a plane for undistortion, as shown
in Fig. 1 (b). Compared with Fig. 1 (a), the lines at the
background become straight. Unfortunately, the faces are
also projected as a plane, becoming unnaturally wider and
asymmetric. It is then evident that background and faces require different types of corrections, to be separately handled
with different strategies. As traditional calibration-based
methods[1, 12, 19, 32] can only correct distortion in background regions, we need new ways to process faces.
Recently, Shih et al. [21] proposes to deform a mesh
which adapts to the stereographic projection [22] on facial
regions, and applies perspective projection over the background, enabling different handling of the background and
faces. However, a new problem arises, where the smooth
transition between faces and background regions is nontrivial. In addition, the method [21] requires camera distortion parameters as well as the portrait segmentation mask as
additional inputs. Fig. 1 (c) shows the result, where the face

3498

