Omni-supervised Point Cloud Segmentation via Gradual Receptive Field
Component Reasoning
Jingyu Gong1 Jiachen Xu1 Xin Tan1 Haichuan Song2
Yanyun Qu3 Yuan Xie2∗ Lizhuang Ma1,2 *
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
3
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, Fujian, China
{gongjingyu,xujiachen,tanxin2017}@sjtu.edu.cn
yyqu@xmu.edu.cn

yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

hcsong@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Receptive Field Component Reasoning

Hidden features in neural network usually fail to learn
informative representation for 3D segmentation as supervisions are only given on output prediction, while this can be
solved by omni-scale supervision on intermediate layers. In
this paper, we bring the first omni-scale supervision method
to point cloud segmentation via the proposed gradual Receptive Field Component Reasoning (RFCR), where target
Receptive Field Component Codes (RFCCs) are designed
to record categories within receptive fields for hidden units
in the encoder. Then, target RFCCs will supervise the decoder to gradually infer the RFCCs in a coarse-to-fine categories reasoning manner, and finally obtain the semantic
labels. Because many hidden features are inactive with tiny
magnitude and make minor contributions to RFCC prediction, we propose a Feature Densification with a centrifugal potential to obtain more unambiguous features, and it is
in effect equivalent to entropy regularization over features.
More active features can further unleash the potential of our
omni-supervision method. We embed our method into four
prevailing backbones and test on three challenging benchmarks. Our method can significantly improve the backbones
in all three datasets. Specifically, our method brings new
state-of-the-art performances for S3DIS as well as Semantic3D and ranks the 1st in the ScanNet benchmark among
all the point-based methods. Code is publicly available at
https://github.com/azuki-miho/RFCR.

Global Context Recognition

RFCC

. . .

. . .

c

floor

. . .

. . .

. . .

chair

table

wall

bookshelf

unlabeled

Figure 1: Illustration of Receptive Field Component Reasoning for a point cloud in ScanNet v2 from top to bottom.
The Receptive Field Component Code (RFCC) indicates the
category components in the receptive field. In the decoding stage, the segmentation problem is decomposed into a
much easier global context recognition problem (predicting the global RFCCs, see the top of figure) and a series of
receptive field component reasoning problems. During reasoning, the target RFCCs generated in the encoder are used
as the groundtruth in the decoder to guide the network to
gradually reason the RFCCs in a coarse-to-fine manner, and
finally obtain the semantic labels.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation of point cloud in which we need
to infer the point-level labels is a typical but still challenging
* Corresponding Author

task in 3D vision. Meanwhile, this technique can be widely
used in many applications like robotics, autonomous driving, and virtual/augmented reality.
To handle point cloud segmentation, previous works usu-

11673

