A Decomposition Model for Stereo Matching
Chengtang Yao, Yunde Jia, Huijun Di∗, Pengxiang Li, Yuwei Wu
Beijing Laboratory of Intelligent Information Technology
School of Computer Science, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
{yao.c.t,jiayunde,ajon,lipengxiang,wuyuwei}@bit.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Stereo matching aims to estimate the disparity from a
pair of images. It has various downstream applications,
such as 3D reconstruction, AR, autonomous driving, robot
navigation, etc. Despite years of research on stereo matching, many state-of-the-art methods still face the problem of
excessive growth in computational cost and memory consumption as the resolution increases. This problem limits
the ability of existing methods to process high-resolution
images, and restricts the use of stereo matching methods in
practical situations with memory/speed constraints.
In this paper, we propose a decomposition model for
stereo matching. Compared with the excessive growth
of many state-of-the-art methods, our model reduces the
growth rate by several orders of magnitude as shown in Figure 1. The design of our model is inspired by the following
two observations:
(1) It is not necessary to estimate the disparity of all pixels at the highest resolution, such as the disparities on the
∗ Corresponding author

6000

Time (ms)

In this paper, we present a decomposition model for
stereo matching to solve the problem of excessive growth
in computational cost (time and memory cost) as the resolution increases. In order to reduce the huge cost of stereo
matching at the original resolution, our model only runs
dense matching at a very low resolution and uses sparse
matching at different higher resolutions to recover the disparity of lost details scale-by-scale. After the decomposition of stereo matching, our model iteratively fuses the
sparse and dense disparity maps from adjacent scales with
an occlusion-aware mask. A refinement network is also applied to improving the fusion result. Compared with highperformance methods like PSMNet and GANet, our method
achieves 10 − 100× speed increase while obtaining comparable disparity estimation results.

Ours
DeepPruner-fast
PSMNet
GANet-deep
GWCNet
DSMNet

8000

4000

3000
2000
1500
1000
500
100

500 × 320

1000 × 650

1500 × 1000

2000 × 1300

Resolution

4500 × 3000

5000 × 3500

Figure 1: As the resolution increases, the growth in time
cost of state-of-the-art methods on one 1080 Ti GPU with
11GB of memory. The stopped growth of some curves is
because the corresponding method cannot run at the expected resolution on the GPU. Compared to GANet [48],
our model is 100 times faster. Compared to PSMNet [5],
our model achieves almost 15× speed increase. Compared
to DeepPruner [8], our model achieves almost twice the running speed and lower memory consumption.
wall and the floor. As long as the content is not significantly
lost during downsampling, the disparity of most areas can
be efficiently estimated at low resolution, and then refined
at high resolution.
(2) It only needs to consider the disparity estimation
of some image details that are lost during downsampling.
Fortunately, those lost details are sparse, and their stereo
matching is also sparse (i.e., the lost details in the left image
mostly only match the lost details in the right image). The
sparse matching means less time and memory cost compared to the dense matching.
Based on the first observation, our model only runs dense
matching at a very low resolution (such as 20 × 36, called
reference resolution), ensuring disparity estimation for most
regions that are not lost during downsampling. Based on
the second observation, our model uses a series of sparse

6091

