ProSelfLC: Progressive Self Label Correction for
Training Robust Deep Neural Networks
Xinshao Wang1, 2 , Yang Hua3 , Elyor Kodirov1 , David A. Clifton2, ,* Neil M. Robertson1, 3
1
Zenith Ai, UK
2
Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Oxford, UK
3
Institute of Electronics, Communications and Information Technology, Queen’s University Belfast, UK
{xinshao, elyor}@zenithai.co.uk, {y.hua, n.robertson}@qub.ac.uk, {xinshao.wang, david.clifton}@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
To train robust deep neural networks (DNNs), we systematically study several target modification approaches, which
include output regularisation, self and non-self label correction (LC). Two key issues are discovered: (1) Self LC
is the most appealing as it exploits its own knowledge and
requires no extra models. However, how to automatically
decide the trust degree of a learner as training goes is not
well answered in the literature? (2) Some methods penalise
while the others reward low-entropy predictions, prompting
us to ask which one is better?
To resolve the first issue, taking two well-accepted
propositions–deep neural networks learn meaningful patterns before fitting noise [3] and minimum entropy regularisation principle [10]–we propose a novel end-to-end
method named ProSelfLC, which is designed according to
learning time and entropy. Specifically, given a data point,
we progressively increase trust in its predicted label distribution versus its annotated one if a model has been trained
for enough time and the prediction is of low entropy (high
confidence). For the second issue, according to ProSelfLC,
we empirically prove that it is better to redefine a meaningful low-entropy status and optimise the learner toward it.
This serves as a defence of entropy minimisation.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of ProSelfLC through
extensive experiments in both clean and noisy settings. The
source code is available at https://github.com/
XinshaoAmosWang/ProSelfLC-CVPR2021.

1. Introduction
There exist many target (label) modiﬁcation approaches.
They can be roughly divided into two groups: (1) Output
regularisation (OR), which is proposed to penalise overconﬁdent predictions for regularising deep neural networks.
It includes label smoothing (LS) [42, 29] and conﬁdence
penalty (CP) [33]; (2) Label correction (LC). On the one
* Prof. David A. Clifton was supported by the National Institute for
Health Research (NIHR) Oxford Biomedical Research Centre (BRC).

hand, LC regularises neural networks by adding the similarity structure information over training classes into onehot label distributions so that the learning targets become
structured and soft. On the other hand, it can correct the
semantic classes of noisy label distributions. LC can be
further divided into two subgroups: Non-self LC and Self
LC. The former requires extra learners, while the latter relies on the model itself. A typical approach of Non-self
LC is knowledge distillation (KD), which exploits the predictions of other model(s), usually termed teacher(s) [17].
Self LC methods include Pseudo-Label [23], bootstrapping
(Boot-soft and Boot-hard) [35], Joint Optimisation (Jointsoft and Joint-hard) [43], and Tf-KDself [55]. According to
an overview in Figure 1 (detailed derivation is in Section 3
and Table 1), in label modification, the output target of a
data point is defined by combining a one-hot label distribution and its corresponding prediction or a predefined label
distribution.
Firstly, we present the drawbacks of existing approaches:
(1) OR methods naively penalise conﬁdent outputs without
leveraging easily accessible knowledge from other learners
or itself (Figure 1a); (2) Non-self LC relies on accurate auxiliary models to generate predictions (Figure 1b). (3) Self
LC is the most appealing because it exploits its own knowledge and requires no extra learners. However, there is a core
question that is not well answered:
In Self LC, how much should we trust a learner to leverage
its knowledge?
As shown in Figure 1b, in Self LC, for a data point, we
have two labels: a predeﬁned one-hot q and a predicted
structured p. Its learning target is (1 − ǫ)q + ǫp, i.e., a
trade-off between q and p, where ǫ deﬁnes the trust score
of a learner. In existing methods, ǫ is ﬁxed without considering that a model’s knowledge grows as the training progresses. For example, in bootstrapping, ǫ is ﬁxed throughout the training process. Joint Optimisation stage-wisely
trains a model. It fully trusts predicted labels and uses them
to replace old ones when a stage ends, i.e., ǫ = 1. TfKDself trains a model by two stages: ǫ = 0 in the ﬁrst one
while ǫ is tuned for the second stage. Note that p is gen-

752

