Unsupervised 3D Shape Completion through GAN Inversion
Junzhe Zhang1,3 Xinyi Chen2,3 Zhongang Cai3,4 Liang Pan1
Haiyu Zhao3,4 Shuai Yi3,4 Chai Kiat Yeo2 Bo Dai1 Chen Change Loy1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Nanyang Technological University
3
SenseTime Research 4 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{junzhe001,xchen032}@e.ntu.edu.sg,{liang.pan,asckyeo,bo.dai,ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
{caizhongang,zhaohaiyu,yishuai}@sensetime.com

https://junzhezhang.github.io/projects/ShapeInversion/

Abstract
Most 3D shape completion approaches rely heavily on
partial-complete shape pairs and learn in a fully supervised manner. Despite their impressive performances on indomain data, when generalizing to partial shapes in other
forms or real-world partial scans, they often obtain unsatisfactory results due to domain gaps. In contrast to previous fully supervised approaches, in this paper we present
ShapeInversion, which introduces Generative Adversarial
Network (GAN) inversion to shape completion for the first
time. ShapeInversion uses a GAN pre-trained on complete
shapes by searching for a latent code that gives a complete
shape that best reconstructs the given partial input. In this
way, ShapeInversion no longer needs paired training data,
and is capable of incorporating the rich prior captured in
a well-trained generative model. On the ShapeNet benchmark, the proposed ShapeInversion outperforms the SOTA
unsupervised method, and is comparable with supervised
methods that are learned using paired data. It also demonstrates remarkable generalization ability, giving robust results for real-world scans and partial inputs of various
forms and incompleteness levels. Importantly, ShapeInversion naturally enables a series of additional abilities thanks
to the involvement of a pre-trained GAN, such as producing
multiple valid complete shapes for an ambiguous partial input, as well as shape manipulation and interpolation.

1. Introduction
3D shape completion estimates the complete geometry from a partial shape in the form of a partial point
cloud, and is important to many downstream applications
such as robotics navigation [11, 24] and scene understanding [9, 14]. Most works [27, 21, 15, 29, 31] for shape
completion are trained in a fully supervised manner with
paired partial-complete data. While they obtain promising

results on in-domain data, it is challenging for these methods to generalize to out-of-domain data, which are realworld scans or data with different partial forms, as shown
in Fig. 1 (a)-(d).
We take an unsupervised approach in this study. Inspired
by the success of GAN inversion in 2D tasks such as image
restoration and editing, we propose to apply GAN inversion to 3D shape completion for the first time, which we
refer to as ShapeInversion. Specifically, given a partial input, ShapeInversion looks for a latent code in the GAN’s
latent space that gives a complete shape that best reconstructs the input. By incorporating prior knowledge stored
in the pre-trained GAN, no assumptions on the input partial
forms are made, thus ShapeInversion generalizes well to inputs of various partial forms and real-world scans. Moreover, the involvement of GAN in ShapeInversion brings
several side-benefits, including giving multiple reasonable
complete shapes for some partial input, as well as shape jittering and shape manipulation.
While ShapeInversion shares some similarity with GAN
inversion methods for 2D images, the former possesses several intrinsic challenges due to the nature of 3D data: (1)
Unlike 2D images that follow a grid-like structure, where
the positions of pixels are well defined, point clouds of different 3D shapes are highly unstructured. Often, GANs
trained on 3D shapes would generate point clouds with significant non-uniformity, i.e., points are unevenly distributed
over the shape surface. Such non-uniformity may lead to
shapes with undesired holes, undermining the completeness
of our predictions. (2) The unordered nature of point clouds
makes the completion task significantly different from 2D
image inpainting. In 2D image inpainting, one can easily
measure the reconstruction consistency between the visible regions of partial input and predicted output given the
lattice-aligned pixel correspondences. Such comparison is
challenging in 3D shape completion since the corresponding regions of two 3D shapes may reside at different locations in the 3D space. Without accurate point correspon-

1768

