VSPW: A Large-scale Dataset for Video Scene Parsing in the Wild
Jiaxu Miao1,2 Yunchao Wei3 Yu Wu2,3 Chen Liang1 Guangrui Li3 Yi Yang1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Baidu Research 3 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney
jiaxumiao.m@gmail.com, yunchao.wei@uts.edu.au, yi.yang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
In this paper, we present a new dataset with the target
of advancing the scene parsing task from images to videos.
Our dataset aims to perform Video Scene Parsing in the
Wild (VSPW), which covers a wide range of real-world scenarios and categories. To be specific, our VSPW is featured from the following aspects: 1) Well-trimmed longtemporal clips. Each video contains a complete shot, lasting around 5 seconds on average. 2) Dense annotation.
The pixel-level annotations are provided at a high frame
rate of 15 f/s. 3) High resolution. Over 96% of the captured videos are with high spatial resolutions from 720P
to 4K. We totally annotate 3,536 videos, including 251,633
frames from 124 categories. To the best of our knowledge, our VSPW is the first attempt to tackle the challenging
video scene parsing task in the wild by considering diverse
scenarios. Based on VSPW, we design a generic Temporal Context Blending (TCB) network, which can effectively
harness long-range contextual information from the past
frames to help segment the current one. Extensive experiments show that our TCB network improves both the segmentation performance and temporal stability comparing
with image-/video-based state-of-the-art methods. We hope
that the scale, diversity, long-temporal, and high frame
rate of our VSPW can significantly advance the research
of video scene parsing and beyond. The dataset is available
at https://www.vspwdataset.com/.

1. Introduction
Scene parsing aims to assign a unique semantic label
to every pixel in a given image, which is a fundamental research topic in the computer vision community and
has many potential applications such as image editing, autonomous driving and robotics. With the development of
the Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), many kinds of
fully convolutional neural networks [45, 72, 10, 26] have
† Corresponding author.
‡ Part of this work was done when Jiaxu Miao was an intern at Baidu
Research.

Figure 1. (a) The category cloud of our VSPW. (b) One example
for the video scene annotation.

been proposed to advance this research area. In addition,
several image-based datasets, e.g., Pascal-Context [18],
ADE20K [75], COCO-Stuff [5], Cityscapes [16], have also
been collected to evaluate the effectiveness of these scene
parsing approaches.
However, the real-world is actually video-based rather
than a static state, and learning to perform video scene
parsing is more reasonable and practical for realistic applications. Although remarkable progress has been made in
image-based scene parsing, few works have been proposed
to consider the video scene parsing, which is mainly limited
by the lack of suitable benchmarks. Although CamVID [2]
has been proposed to tackle the video scene parsing, this
dataset is heavily limited by its small scale (701 frames
from 6 videos), low frame rate (1 f/s), and single scenario
(only the street view is considered). Cityscapes [16] and
NYUv2 [55] are often used for the video scene parsing task.
However, they are actually image-based datasets because
only one frame or several nonadjacent frames in a video
clip are annotated.
To advance the scene parsing task from images to videos,

4133

