Towards Accurate 3D Human Motion Prediction from Incomplete Observations
Qiongjie Cui
Huaijiang Sun∗
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, PR China
cuiqiongjie@njust.edu.cn,

sunhuaijiang@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Predicting accurate and realistic future human poses
from historically observed sequences is a fundamental task
in the intersection of computer vision, graphics, and artificial intelligence. Recently, continuous efforts have been
devoted to addressing this issue, which has achieved remarkable progress. However, the existing work is seriously
limited by complete observation, that is, once the historical
motion sequence is incomplete (with missing values), it can
only produce unexpected predictions or even deformities.
Furthermore, due to inevitable reasons such as occlusion
and the lack of equipment precision, the incompleteness of
motion data occurs frequently, which hinders the practical
application of current algorithms.
In this work, we first notice this challenging problem,
i.e., how to generate high-fidelity human motion predictions from incomplete observations. To solve it, we propose a novel multi-task graph convolutional network (MTGCN). Specifically, the model involves two branches, in
which the primary task is to focus on forecasting future 3D
human actions accurately, while the auxiliary one is to repair the missing value of the incomplete observation. Both
of them are integrated into a unified framework to share
the spatio-temporal representation, which improves the final performance of each collaboratively. On three largescale datasets, for various data missing scenarios in the
real world, extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach is consistently superior to the state-of-the-art methods in which the missing values from incomplete observations are not explicitly analyzed.

1. Introduction
3D human motion prediction has present considerable
potential in many computer vision applications, such as human behavior understanding, machine intelligence, and autonomous driving [51, 31, 6, 42, 5, 41, 47]. For instance,
robots in our daily life plan their actions in advance to
perform seamless human-machine interaction by accurately
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Example results. In the upper part, the middle is an incomplete observation (single leg or arm is missing) of the original
motion. Our approach focuses particularly on generating the predicted poses directly from the incomplete data while repairing the
missing value incidentally.

anticipating the human actions [19, 30, 32].
Recently, due to its increasing significance, this fascinating topic has been extensively investigated by various
emerging technologies [16, 33, 23, 58, 2]. Researchers typically regard it as a sequence-to-sequence (seq2seq) generation task and then resort to RNNs to speculate the next
plausible human movement from the historical observation [26, 21]. Current approaches have attempted to exploit GCNs to effectively access the topological relationship
of 3D human skeleton for predicting future human motion
[41, 13, 34]. These solutions fully analyze the temporal and
spatial correlation of human motion sequences.
Although encouraging progress has been achieved, from
the actual scene of human motion prediction, we suggest
that the existing literature ignores an essential aspect, i.e.,
the incompleteness of historical observations has not been
considered. Stated in a different way, state-of-the-art approaches [21, 34, 10, 13] are over-sensitive to the missing
items of the observed data that are very common in realworld scenarios [16, 46, 22, 8]. For example, due to the
mutual occlusion of joints or the occlusion of objects in the
environment, the sensor measurement frequently involves
missing values, as shown in Figure 1. Even for professional
motion capture (MoCap) devices, the incompleteness of the

4801

