Prototypical Cross-domain Self-supervised Learning for Few-shot
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Xiangyu Yue1, * Zangwei Zheng2, * Shanghang Zhang1 Yang Gao3
Trevor Darrell1 Kurt Keutzer1 Alberto Sangiovanni Vincentelli1
1
UC Berkeley 2 Nanjing University 3 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) transfers predictive models from a fully-labeled source domain to an
unlabeled target domain. In some applications, however,
it is expensive even to collect labels in the source domain, making most previous works impractical. To cope
with this problem, recent work performed instance-wise
cross-domain self-supervised learning, followed by an additional fine-tuning stage. However, the instance-wise selfsupervised learning only learns and aligns low-level discriminative features. In this paper, we propose an endto-end Prototypical Cross-domain Self-Supervised Learning (PCS) framework for Few-shot Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (FUDA)1 . PCS not only performs cross-domain
low-level feature alignment, but it also encodes and aligns
semantic structures in the shared embedding space across
domains. Our framework captures category-wise semantic structures of the data by in-domain prototypical contrastive learning; and performs feature alignment through
cross-domain prototypical self-supervision. Compared with
state-of-the-art methods, PCS improves the mean classification accuracy over different domain pairs on FUDA by
10.5%, 3.5%, 9.0%, and 13.2% on Office, Office-Home,
VisDA-2017, and DomainNet, respectively.

1. Introduction
Deep Learning has achieved remarkable performance in
various computer vision tasks, such as image classification [30, 32] and semantic segmentation [43, 77, 8]. Despite high accuracy, deep neural networks trained on specific datasets often fail to generalize to new domains owing
to the domain shift problem [66, 15, 67]. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) transfers predictive models from a
fully-labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain.
Although it is challenging with no label information in the
* Equal contribution; correspondence to xyyue@berkeley.edu
1 Project page: http://xyue.io/pcs-fuda

Previous method

Deceive Domain
Classiﬁer

Train domain classiﬁer

Update features
Ours

PCS
source prototype
target prototype

After adaptation
unlabeled source
unlabeled target

labeled source

Figure 1: We address the task of few-shot unsupervised domain
adaptation. Top: Existing domain-classifier based methods align
source and target distributions but fail to extract discriminative features due to lack of labeled data. Bottom: Our method estimates
prototypes for in-domain and cross-domain self-supervised learning to extract domain-aligned discriminative features.

target domain, many UDA methods [67, 31, 44, 18] could
achieve high accuracy on the target domain using the abundant explicit supervision in source domain, together with
the unlabeled target samples for domain alignment.
In some real-world applications, however, providing
large-scale annotations even in the source domain is often
challenging due to the high cost and difficulty of annotation.
Taking medical imaging for instance, each image of the Diabetic Retinopathy dataset [28] is annotated by a panel of
7 or 8 U.S. board-certified ophthalmologists, with a total
group of 54 doctors. Thus practically it is too stringent to
assume the availability of source data with abundant labels.
In this paper, to cope with the labeling costs of the
source domain, we instead consider a few-shot unsupervised domain adaptation (FUDA) setting, where only an extremely small fraction of source samples are labeled, while

13834

