Unbiased Mean Teacher for Cross-domain Object Detection
Jinhong Deng1 Wen Li1 * Yuhua Chen2 Lixin Duan1
1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 2 Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich
{jhdeng1997, liwenbnu, lxduan}@gmail.com, yuhua.chen@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Cross-domain object detection is challenging, because
object detection model is often vulnerable to data variance,
especially to the considerable domain shift between two
distinctive domains. In this paper, we propose a new Unbiased Mean Teacher (UMT) model for cross-domain object detection. We reveal that there often exists a considerable model bias for the simple mean teacher (MT) model
in cross-domain scenarios, and eliminate the model bias
with several simple yet highly effective strategies. In particular, for the teacher model, we propose a cross-domain
distillation method for MT to maximally exploit the expertise of the teacher model. Moreover, for the student model,
we alleviate its bias by augmenting training samples with
pixel-level adaptation. Finally, for the teaching process, we
employ an out-of-distribution estimation strategy to select
samples that most fit the current model to further enhance
the cross-domain distillation process. By tackling the model
bias issue with these strategies, our UMT model achieves
mAPs of 44.1%, 58.1%, 41.7%, and 43.1% on benchmark datasets Clipart1k, Watercolor2k, Foggy Cityscapes,
and Cityscapes, respectively, which outperforms the existing state-of-the-art results in notable margins. Our implementation is available at https://github.com/kinredon/umt.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep domain adaptation has gained increasing attention in computer vision community, due to
that the supreme performances of deep models are normally
restricted only in the domain of training data. When those
trained models are applied to new environments, significant
performance drops have often been observed in many computer vision tasks [5, 6, 11, 37, 54].
In this work, we are specifically interested in the crossdomain object detection problem, because the strong demands from real-world scenarios. For instance, in autonomous driving, robust object detection is needed in dif* The corresponding author

ferent weathers and lighting conditions. Collecting annotations for all conditions can be extremely costly, and therefore models that can adapt to new environments without labeled data are highly desirable.
Designing such domain adaptive detection models can
be challenging. Compared to the image classification task,
the output of object detection is richer and more complex,
consisting of both the class labels and the bounding box locations. The two outputs are intrinsically coupled, making it more vulnerable towards data variance like scene
changes, weather conditions, camera diversity, etc. Various approaches have been proposed to address these issues,
including instance and image-level adversarial training [6],
strong and weak adversarial training [37], graph-based consistency [1], etc.
In this paper, we propose a new approach called Unbiased Mean Teacher (UMT) for cross-domain object detection. We build our approach based on the Mean Teacher
(MT) model [46], which is originally proposed for semisupervised learning. By enforcing the consistency over perturbed unlabeled samples between the teacher and student
models via distillation, it naturally gains improved robustness against data variance to some extent, and thus being
used as our starting point for cross-domain object detection.
However, solely using MT for cross-domain object detection often fails to produce promising results (see Section 4 for detailed experimental study). We conduct a further experimental investigation into this issue and observe
that there exists an essential model bias issue for MT in
cross-domain scenarios. Specifically, in the presence of a
large domain gap, the MT model can be easily biased towards the source domain, as the supervision is mainly from
the source domain.
To overcome such model bias occurred in the mean
teacher model for cross-domain object detection, we design the unbiased mean teacher model with three strategies.
Firstly, observing the biased teacher model often produces
more precise predictions for the source images, we design a
cross-domain distillation approach by using the source-like
target images translated with CycleGAN [55] as the input
for teacher model, and original target images as the input for

4091

