Monocular Reconstruction of Neural Face Reflectance Fields
Mallikarjun B R1 Ayush Tewari1 Tae-Hyun Oh2 Tim Weyrich3
Bernd Bickel4 Hans-Peter Seidel1 Hanspeter Pfister5
Wojciech Matusik6 Mohamed Elgharib1 Christian Theobalt1
1
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus 2 POSTECH
3
University College London 4 IST Austria 5 Harvard University 6 MIT CSAIL

Figure 1. Given a monocular image, our method can synthesize One Light At a Time (OLAT) relit images, relight the face using any
environment map (inset), and also transfer the light from another image (top) to the input (bottom). We can model view-dependent effects
and can thus generate results in any head pose.

Abstract
The reflectance field of a face describes the reflectance
properties responsible for complex lighting effects including diffuse, specular, inter-reflection and self shadowing.
Most existing methods for estimating the face reflectance
from a monocular image assume faces to be diffuse with
very few approaches adding a specular component. This
still leaves out important perceptual aspects of reflectance
such as higher-order global illumination effects and selfshadowing. We present a new neural representation for
face reflectance where we can estimate all components of
the reflectance responsible for the final appearance from
a monocular image. Instead of modeling each component
of the reflectance separately using parametric models, our
neural representation allows us to generate a basis set of
faces in a geometric deformation-invariant space, parameterized by the input light direction, viewpoint and face geometry. We learn to reconstruct this reflectance field of a
face just from a monocular image, which can be used to render the face from any viewpoint in any light condition. Our
method is trained on a light-stage dataset, which captures
300 people illuminated with 150 light conditions from 8

viewpoints. We show that our method outperforms existing
monocular reflectance reconstruction methods due to better capturing of physical effects, such as sub-surface scattering, specularities, self-shadows and other higher-order
effects.

1. Introduction
Monocular face reconstruction (i.e. dense reconstruction
of 3D face geometry, reflectance and illumination) has applications in visual effects, telepresence, portrait relighting,
facial reenactment, and interactions in virtual environments.
It has been an active area of research with tremendous
progress in all aspects of reconstruction, including both geometry and reflectance [7]. Our focus is on the reconstruction of the face reflectance, which captures the interaction
between the face and scene illumination, playing a very important role in perception. In the literature, one category
of methods [10, 37, 40], approximates faces as a Lambertian surface. Many of them use analysis-by-synthesis optimization to estimate the face geometry, spherical harmonics lighting, and diffuse face reflectance; the latter is a stark
simplification of the true face reflectance. This type of rep-

4791

