Unsupervised Learning of 3D Object Categories from Videos in the Wild
Philipp Henzler1 *

Jeremy Reizenstein2

Tobias Ritschel1

Patrick Labatut2

Andrea Vedaldi2

Roman Shapovalov2

David Novotny2

{reizenstein,plabatut,romansh,vedaldi,dnovotny}@fb.com
{p.henzler,t.ritschel}@cs.ucl.ac.uk
1

2

University College London

Training data: Object-centric videos

Facebook AI Research

Output: Monocular 3D reconstruction

Test input

NN

NN

NN

Figure 1: We present a novel deep architecture that contributes Warp-conditioned Ray Embedding (WCR) to reconstruct and
render new views (right) of object categories from one or few input images (middle). Our model is learned automatically from
videos of the objects (left) and works on difficult real data where competitor architectures fail to produce good results.

Abstract
Our goal is to learn a deep network that, given a small
number of images of an object of a given category, reconstructs it in 3D. While several recent works have obtained
analogous results using synthetic data or assuming the availability of 2D primitives such as keypoints, we are interested
in working with challenging real data and with no manual annotations. We thus focus on learning a model from multiple
views of a large collection of object instances. We contribute
with a new large dataset of object centric videos suitable for
training and benchmarking this class of models. We show
that existing techniques leveraging meshes, voxels, or implicit surfaces, which work well for reconstructing isolated
objects, fail on this challenging data. Finally, we propose
a new neural network design, called warp-conditioned ray
embedding (WCR), which significantly improves reconstruction while obtaining a detailed implicit representation of
1 Work completed during an internship at Facebook AI Research.

the object surface and texture, also compensating for the
noise in the initial SfM reconstruction that bootstrapped the
learning process. Our evaluation demonstrates performance
improvements over several deep monocular reconstruction
baselines on existing benchmarks and on our novel dataset.
For additional material please visit: https://henzler.
github.io/publication/unsupervised_videos/.

1. Introduction
Understanding and reconstructing categories of 3D objects from 2D images remains an important open challenge in
computer vision. Recently, there has been progress in using
deep learning methods to do so but, due to the difficulty of
the task, these methods still have significant limitations. In
particular, early efforts focused on clean synthetic data such
as ShapeNet [5], further simplifying the problem by assuming the availability of several images of each object instance,

4700

