What’s in the Image?
Explorable Decoding of Compressed Images
Yuval Bahat and Tomer Michaeli
Technion - Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
{yuval.bahat@campus,tomer.m@ee}.technion.ac.il

Abstract
The ever-growing amounts of visual contents captured
on a daily basis necessitate the use of lossy compression
methods in order to save storage space and transmission
bandwidth. While extensive research efforts are devoted to
improving compression techniques, every method inevitably
discards information. Especially at low bit rates, this information often corresponds to semantically meaningful visual cues, so that decompression involves significant ambiguity. In spite of this fact, existing decompression algorithms typically produce only a single output, and do not
allow the viewer to explore the set of images that map to the
given compressed code. In this work we propose the first
image decompression method to facilitate user-exploration
of the diverse set of natural images that could have given
rise to the compressed input code, thus granting users the
ability to determine what could and what could not have
been there in the original scene. Specifically, we develop
a novel deep-network based decoder architecture for the
ubiquitous JPEG standard, which allows traversing the set
of decompressed images that are consistent with the compressed JPEG file. To allow for simple user interaction,
we develop a graphical user interface comprising several
intuitive exploration tools, including an automatic tool for
examining specific solutions of interest. We exemplify our
framework on graphical, medical and forensic use cases,
demonstrating its wide range of potential applications.

1. Introduction
With surveillance systems so widely used and social networks ever more popular, the constant growth in the capacity of daily captured visual data necessitates using lossy
compression algorithms (e.g. JPEG, H.264), that discard
part of the recorded information in order to reduce storage space and transmission bandwidth. Over the years,
extensive research has been devoted to improving compression techniques, whether by designing better decoders

for existing encoders, or by devising new compressiondecompression (CODEC) pairs, that enable higher perceptual quality even at low bit-rates. However, in any lossy
compression method, the decoder faces inevitable ambiguity. This ambiguity is particularly severe at low bit-rates,
which are becoming more prevalent with the ability to maintain perceptual quality at extreme compression ratios [1].
This is exemplified in Fig. 1 in the context of the JPEG standard. Low bit-rate compression may prevent the discrimination between different animals, or the correct identification
of a shirt pattern, a barcode, or text. Yet, despite this inherent ambiguity, existing decoders do not allow the user to
explore the abundance of plausible images that could have
been the source of a given compressed code.
Recently, there has been growing research focus on models that can produce diverse outputs for any given input, for
image synthesis [2, 3, 4], as well as for image restoration
tasks, e.g. denoising [5], compression artifact reduction [6]
and super-resolution [7, 8, 9]. The latter group of works
took another step, and also allowed users to interactively
traverse the space of high-resolution images that correspond
to a given low-resolution input. In this paper, we propose
the first method to allow users to explore the space of natural
images that corresponds to a compressed image code. We
specifically focus on the ubiquitous JPEG standard, though
our approach can be readily extended to other image and
video compression formats.
A key component of our method is a novel JPEG decompression network architecture, which predicts the quantization errors of the DCT coefficients and is thus guaranteed to produce outputs that are consistent with the compressed code. This property is crucial for enabling reliable
exploration and examining what could and what could not
have been present in the underlying scene. Our scheme has
a control input signal that can be used to manipulate the
output. This, together with adversarial training, allows our
decoder to generate diverse photo-realistic outputs for any
given compressed input code.
We couple our network with a graphical user interface
(GUI), which lets the user interactively explore the space of

2908

