Real-Time Sphere Sweeping Stereo from Multiview Fisheye Images
Andreas Meuleman

Hyeonjoong Jang

Daniel S. Jeon

Min H. Kim

KAIST

Abstract
A set of cameras with fisheye lenses have been used to
capture a wide field of view. The traditional scan-line stereo
algorithms based on epipolar geometry are directly inapplicable to this non-pinhole camera setup due to optical
characteristics of fisheye lenses; hence, existing complete
360◦ RGB-D imaging systems have rarely achieved realtime performance yet. In this paper, we introduce an efficient sphere-sweeping stereo that can run directly on multiview fisheye images without requiring additional spherical
rectification. Our main contributions are: First, we introduce an adaptive spherical matching method that accounts
for each input fisheye camera’s resolving power concerning
spherical distortion. Second, we propose a fast inter-scale
bilateral cost volume filtering method that refines distance
in noisy and textureless regions with optimal complexity of
O(n). It enables real-time dense distance estimation while
preserving edges. Lastly, the fisheye color and distance images are seamlessly combined into a complete 360◦ RGB-D
image via fast inpainting of the dense distance map. We
demonstrate an embedded 360◦ RGB-D imaging prototype
composed of a mobile GPU and four fisheye cameras. Our
prototype is capable of capturing complete 360◦ RGB-D
videos with a resolution of two megapixels at 29 fps. Results demonstrate that our real-time method outperforms
traditional omnidirectional stereo and learning-based omnidirectional stereo in terms of accuracy and performance.

1. Introduction
Efficient and accurate understanding of the appearance
and structure of 3D scenes is a vital capability of computer
vision used in many applications, such as autonomous vehicle [38], robotics [60], augmented/mixed reality [51, 5],
etc. Conventional stereo cameras with ordinary lenses provide a narrow field of view, insufficient to capture scenes in
all directions. In order to capture scenes in all directions,
we can build a multi-camera setup like a light-field camera
array [6, 44], but it significantly increases manufacturing
cost, in addition to computational cost for processing multiple input, to obtain omnidirectional panorama and distance.

(b) Input fisheye images

(c) Our panorama result
29 fps

(a) Our prototype

(d) Our distance result

Figure 1: (a) Our prototype built on an embedded system.
(b) Four input fisheye images. (c) & (d) Our results of omnidirectional panorama and dense distance map (shown as
the inverse of distance). It took just 34 ms per frame on this
device. Refer to the supplemental video for real-time demo.
It is a natural choice to use a smaller number of fisheye
lenses to reduce the number of cameras while covering all
directions. The omnidirectional camera configuration with
multiple fisheye lenses suffers from an inevitable tradeoff
between performance and accuracy when computing full
360◦ panorama and distance due to the optical characteristics of fisheye lenses presented subsequently.
First, the conventional pinhole camera model is invalid
for field of views of 180◦ or more even when the calibration model can accommodate a wider FoV [25, 12, 53].
Accordingly, unlike ordinary stereo, we cannot find stereo
correspondence rapidly by sweeping plane candidates [24]
in wide angle fisheye images. Second, epipolar lines on
fisheye images are curved [39, 50], requiring warp-aware
correspondence search with spatial variation, significantly
increasing computational costs. An equirectangular or a
latitude-longitude projection can be employed to obtain
straight epipolar lines [52, 34]. However, it introduces se-

11423

