PLOP: Learning without Forgetting for Continual Semantic Segmentation
Arthur Douillard1,2 , Yifu Chen1 , Arnaud Dapogny3 , Matthieu Cord1,4
1
Sorbonne Université, 2 Heuritech, 3 Datakalab, 4 valeo.ai
arthur.douillard@heuritech.com, {yifu.chen, matthieu.cord}@lip6.fr, ad@datakalab.com

Abstract

old segmentation model (step t-1)
Gt at step t-1
class person

Deep learning approaches are nowadays ubiquitously
used to tackle computer vision tasks such as semantic segmentation, requiring large datasets and substantial computational power. Continual learning for semantic segmentation (CSS) is an emerging trend that consists in updating an old model by sequentially adding new classes.
However, continual learning methods are usually prone to
catastrophic forgetting. This issue is further aggravated
in CSS where, at each step, old classes from previous iterations are collapsed into the background. In this paper, we propose Local POD, a multi-scale pooling distillation scheme that preserves long- and short-range spatial relationships at feature level. Furthermore, we design an entropy-based pseudo-labelling of the background
w.r.t. classes predicted by the old model to deal with background shift and avoid catastrophic forgetting of the old
classes. Our approach, called PLOP, significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods in existing CSS scenarios, as
well as in newly proposed challenging benchmarks1 .

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental problem of
computer vision, that aims at assigning a label to each pixel
of an image. In recent years, the introduction of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) has addressed semantic
segmentation in a traditional framework, where all classes
are known beforehand and learned at once [61, 73, 11].
This setup, however, is quite limited for practical applications. In a more realistic scenario, the model should be able
to continuously learn new classes without retraining from
scratch. This setup, referred here as Continual Semantic
Segmentation (CSS), has emerged very recently for medical applications [51, 52] before being proposed for general
segmentation datasets [49, 7].
Deep learning approaches that deal with CSS face two
main challenges. The ﬁrst one, inherited from continual
1 Code is available at
https://github.com/arthurdouillard/CVPR2021_PLOP

Pred at step t
with model t-1
3 classes

Pseudo-Labelling
Local POD embedding

Multi-scale distillation
Local POD embedding

Gt at step t
class sofa

Pred at step t
with model t
4 classes

new segmentation model (step t)

Figure 1: Our two-part strategy aims at learning a segmentation network in a continual learning framework, where
old class pixels are collapsed into the background at current stage. We generate pseudo labels from old predictions
(blue) to deal with the background shift, and retain shortand long-range spatial dependencies by Local POD distillation (red) to prevent catastrophic forgetting.

learning, is called catastrophic forgetting [55, 21, 62], and
points to the fact that neural networks tend to completely
and abruptly forget previously learned knowledge when
learning new information [35]. Catastrophic forgetting
presents a real challenge for continual learning applications
based on deep learning methods, especially when storing
previously seen data is not allowed for privacy reasons.
The second issue, CSS speciﬁc, is the semantic shift of
the background class. In a traditional semantic segmentation setup, the background contains pixels that don’t belong
to any other class. However, in CSS, the background contains pixels that don’t belong to any of the current classes.
Thus, for a speciﬁc learning step, the background can contain both future classes, not yet seen by the model, as well
as old classes. Thus, if nothing is done to distinguish pixels
belonging to the real background class from old class pix-

4040

