STMTrack: Template-free Visual Tracking with Space-time Memory Networks
Zhihong Fu, Qingjie Liu∗, Zehua Fu, Yunhong Wang
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University, Beijing, China
Hangzhou Innovation Institute, Beihang University
{fuzhihong, qingjie.liu, yhwang}@buaa.edu.cn, zehua fu@163.com

Abstract
Boosting performance of the offline trained siamese
trackers is getting harder nowadays since the fixed information of the template cropped from the first frame has been
almost thoroughly mined, but they are poorly capable of resisting target appearance changes. Existing trackers with
template updating mechanisms rely on time-consuming numerical optimization and complex hand-designed strategies
to achieve competitive performance, hindering them from
real-time tracking and practical applications. In this paper,
we propose a novel tracking framework built on top of a
space-time memory network that is competent to make full
use of historical information related to the target for better
adapting to appearance variations during tracking. Specifically, a novel memory mechanism is introduced, which
stores the historical information of the target to guide the
tracker to focus on the most informative regions in the current frame. Furthermore, the pixel-level similarity computation of the memory network enables our tracker to generate much more accurate bounding boxes of the target.
Extensive experiments and comparisons with many competitive trackers on challenging large-scale benchmarks,
OTB-2015, TrackingNet, GOT-10k, LaSOT, UAV123, and
VOT2018, show that, without bells and whistles, our tracker
outperforms all previous state-of-the-art real-time methods
while running at 37 FPS. The code is available at https:
//github.com/fzh0917/STMTrack.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is an essential task in computer
vision with applications in various fields such as humancomputer interactions [29], video surveillance [54], and autonomous driving [22]. Significant efforts have been devoted to address this problem, yet there is still a great gap
to the practical applications due to the challenging factors
such as occlusions, fast motions, and non-rigid deforma∗ Corresponding author.

#229

#815

#836

#214

#247

#519

#419

#568

#1312

Ours

SiamFC++

DiMP-50

Ground Truth

Figure 1: Visualized comparisons of our method with representative trackers SiamFC++ [56] and DiMP-50 [2]. Our
method can estimate more accurate target state when targets
suffer from partial occlusions and non-rigid deformations.
tions [13, 53, 20], which urge us to develop trackers with
strong adaptiveness and robustness.
The goal of visual tracking is to locate an object in the
subsequent frames of a video given its initial annotation in
the first frame. In recent years, with the advancements of
deep learning techniques, deep trackers have dominated the
tracking field, among which two methodologies are widely
studied, and one popular methodology addresses object
tracking as a similarity matching problem between the target template and the search frames in an embedding space
offline trained. The representative template-matching methods are siamese trackers [1, 65, 61, 14, 50, 6, 24, 23, 56, 15].
These methods usually do not update the template and thus
are hard to adapt to appearance changes caused by occlusions, non-rigid deformations, etc.
To solve this problem, some trackers [2, 11] are equipped
with sophisticated template updating mechanisms and thus
show stronger robustness than siamese trackers. However, online template updating requires much more computational resources, which impends trackers from real-time
tracking. Furthermore, these customized updating strategies [16, 58, 65, 25, 59, 7] introduce hyper-parameters that
require tricky tuning.

13774

