Fair Attribute Classification through Latent Space De-biasing
Vikram V. Ramaswamy, Sunnie S. Y. Kim, Olga Russakovsky
Princeton University
{vr23, suhk, olgarus}@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
Fairness in visual recognition is becoming a prominent
and critical topic of discussion as recognition systems are
deployed at scale in the real world. Models trained from data
in which target labels are correlated with protected attributes
(e.g., gender, race) are known to learn and exploit those
correlations. In this work, we introduce a method for training
accurate target classifiers while mitigating biases that stem
from these correlations. We use GANs to generate realisticlooking images, and perturb these images in the underlying
latent space to generate training data that is balanced for
each protected attribute. We augment the original dataset
with this generated data, and empirically demonstrate that
target classifiers trained on the augmented dataset exhibit
a number of both quantitative and qualitative benefits. We
conduct a thorough evaluation across multiple target labels
and protected attributes in the CelebA dataset, and provide
an in-depth analysis and comparison to existing literature
in the space. Code can be found at https://github.
com/princetonvisualai/gan-debiasing.

1. Introduction
Large-scale supervised learning has been the driving force
behind advances in visual recognition. Recently, however,
there has been a growing number of concerns about the
disparate impact of these visual recognition systems. Face
recognition systems trained from datasets with an underrepresentation of certain racial groups have exhibited lower
accuracy for those groups [9]. Activity recognition models trained on datasets with high correlations between the
activity and the gender expression of the depicted person
have over-amplified those correlations [46]. Computer vision
systems are statistical models that are trained to maximize
accuracy on the majority of examples, and they do so by exploiting the most discriminative cues in a dataset, potentially
learning spurious correlations. In this work, we introduce
a new framework for training computer vision models that
aims to mitigate such concerns, illustrated in Figure 1.
One proposed path for building ‘fairer’ computer vision

Figure 1: Training a visual classifier for an attribute (e.g., hat) can be
complicated by correlations in the training data. For example, the presence
of hats can be correlated with the presence of glasses. We propose a dataset
augmentation strategy using Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) that
successfully removes this correlation by adding or removing glasses from
existing images, creating a balanced dataset.

systems is through a ‘fairer’ data collection process. Works
such as [9, 43] propose techniques for better sampling data to
more accurately represent all people. Creating a perfectly balanced dataset, however, is infeasible in many cases. With the
advances in Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [17],
several works propose using generated data to augment
real-world datasets [12, 35, 42]. These methods have been
growing in computational and algorithmic complexity (e.g.,
[35, 42] adding multiple loss functions to GAN training),
necessitating access to a sufficient number of inter-sectional
real-world samples. In contrast, we demonstrate a simple
and novel data augmentation technique that uses a single
GAN trained on a biased real-world dataset.
Illustrative example: Consider our example from Figure 1.
Our goal is to train a visual recognition model that recognizes the presence of an attribute, such as wearing a hat.
Suppose in the real world wearing a hat is correlated with
wearing glasses—for example, because people often wear
both hats and sunglasses outside and take them off inside.
This correlation may be reflected in the training data, and a
classifier trained to recognize a hat may rely on the presence
of glasses. Consequently, the classifier may fail to recognize
a hat in the absence of glasses, and vice versa.
We propose using a GAN to generate more images with
hats but not glasses and images with glasses but not hats,
such that WearingHat is de-correlated from Glasses in
the training data, by making perturbations in the latent space.
Building on work by Denton et al. [14], which demonstrates
19301

