Semantic Palette: Guiding Scene Generation with Class Proportions
Guillaume Le Moing∗
Inria†

Tuan-Hung Vu
Valeo.ai

Himalaya Jain
Valeo.ai

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [1, 8, 13, 21]
have become powerful tools to generate photo-realistic images based on a collection of examples. When trained on
real photo portraits in particular, they can produce stunning
results [14, 15]. However, for complex structured images
like urban scenes, they still struggle to produce satisfactory
results: not only do generated scenes exhibit various types
of artifacts, but they are also difficult to use for downstream
tasks. In automotive applications for instance, generating a
wide range of synthetic driving scenes to replace or complement limited amounts of real annotated data is expected to
help training better models in the future, for critical-safety
tasks such as object detection and segmentation. This is not
∗ Main part of this work was done during an internship at Valeo.ai
† Inria, École normale supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University

Matthieu Cord
Valeo.ai

35%

Abstract
Despite the recent progress of generative adversarial
networks (GANs) at synthesizing photo-realistic images,
producing complex urban scenes remains a challenging
problem. Previous works break down scene generation into
two consecutive phases: unconditional semantic layout synthesis and image synthesis conditioned on layouts. In this
work, we propose to condition layout generation as well for
higher semantic control: given a vector of class proportions, we generate layouts with matching composition. To
this end, we introduce a conditional framework with novel
architecture designs and learning objectives, which effectively accommodates class proportions to guide the scene
generation process. The proposed architecture also allows
partial layout editing with interesting applications. Thanks
to the semantic control, we can produce layouts close to the
real distribution, helping enhance the whole scene generation process. On different metrics and urban scene benchmarks, our models outperform existing baselines. Moreover, we demonstrate the merit of our approach for data
augmentation: semantic segmenters trained on real layoutimage pairs along with additional ones generated by our
approach outperform models only trained on real pairs.

Patrick Pérez
Valeo.ai

29%

5%

7%

7%

27%

27%

5% 5% 3%

9%
1% 1% 1% 1%

12%
4% 3% 3%

1%

4% 3%

2%

5%

Layout Synthesis
conditioned on
Class Proportions

Image Synthesis
conditioned on
Semantic Layout

Figure 1: Scene generation guided by semantic proportions.
The proposed approach, “Semantic Palette”, allows a tight control
of class proportions when generating semantic layouts and, conditioned on the latter, photo-realistic scenes such as urban scenes.

yet the case, and our work is motivated by this goal.
Our target application here is image semantic segmentation, the task of predicting semantic layouts, that is, a
class label (or a set of class probabilities) for each pixel of
a picture. State-of-the-art models being fully supervised,
their training requires scene examples with corresponding
semantic layouts. Hence, generating this type of data with
a GAN amounts to producing matching image-layout pairs.
To this end, recent works advocate decoupling the synthesis process into two consecutive phases: first generating semantic layouts with plausible object arrangements [2, 11],
then translating these layouts into realistic images [24, 33].
To improve the usability of such a pipeline, we mostly
focus here on the first layout generation step. Existing
works [2, 11] cast it as a standard generative process that
turns a random input code into a semantic map. While
simple to use, this approach offers no real control on the
modes of the output distribution [22], which is a limitation
for complex scenes. In contrast, we propose to control the
generation of layouts with a target distribution of semantic
classes in the scene. Depending on applications, this class
histogram can be manually defined, automatically derived
from a true one, or sampled from a suitable distribution.
To this end, we introduce a conditional layout GAN that
takes a class histogram (the semantic code or palette) as input beside the standard random noise. As a result, our full
image-layout generation pipeline (Figure 1) offers a simple yet powerful control over the scene composition. This
ability brings benefits in various applications, ranging from

9342

