Gradient-based Algorithms for Machine Teaching
Pei Wang
UC, San Diego

Kabir Nagrecha
UC, San Diego

Nuno Vasconcelos
UC, San Diego

pew062@ucsd.edu

kabir.nagrecha@gmail.com

nuno@ucsd.edu

Abstract
The problem of machine teaching is considered. A new
formulation is proposed under the assumption of an optimal
student, where optimality is defined in the usual machine
learning sense of empirical risk minimization. This is a sensible assumption for machine learning students and for human
students in crowdsourcing platforms, who tend to perform at
least as well as machine learning systems. It is shown that, if
allowed unbounded effort, the optimal student always learns
the optimal predictor for a classification task. Hence, the
role of the optimal teacher is to select the teaching set that
minimizes student effort. This is formulated as a problem of
functional optimization where, at each teaching iteration, the
teacher seeks to align the steepest descent directions of the
risk of (1) the teaching set and (2) entire example population.
The optimal teacher, denoted MaxGrad, is then shown to
maximize the gradient of the risk on the set of new examples
selected per iteration. MaxGrad teaching algorithms are
finally provided for both binary and multiclass tasks, and
shown to have some similarities with boosting algorithms.
Experimental evaluations demonstrate the effectiveness of
MaxGrad, which outperforms previous algorithms on the
classification task, for both machine learning and human
students from MTurk, by a substantial margin.

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning has been driven, in large
part, by the availability of large and carefully curated datasets
for tasks such as image recognition [8, 22], action recognition [19, 11], object detection [24], etc. These datasets
usually contain everyday objects, actions, or scenes and can
be scalably annotated on crowdsourcing platforms such as
Amazon Mechanical Turk (MTurk). This is, however, usually not true for expert domains, such as biology or medical
imaging. While data collection can still be easy in these
domains, annotations require highly specialized and domain
specific knowledge. This is beyond the reach of crowdsourcing annotators. On the other hand, annotation by specialists
is usually too expensive and rarely feasible at a large scale.

optimal model

compare

student model
update

select examples

teaching set

A large dataset
teacher

optimal student

Figure 1: MaxGrad is an iterative machine teaching algorithm. At
each iteration, the teacher selects new examples from a large dataset,
to complement a small teaching set used by a student to learn a task.
Examples are selected by comparing the current student model
to the optimal model for the large dataset. The optimal student
uses the teaching set to update his/her model and feeds back its
predictions to the teacher.

This has motivated extensive research in alternative and less
label-intensive forms of learning, including few-shot learning [42, 1], transfer learning [21, 46], semi-supervised learning [47, 23], and self-supervised learning [35, 20]. However,
these approaches usually underperform supervised learning
from large and fully labeled datasets. In result, there has
recently been interest in machine teaching algorithms capable of training crowdsource annotators to label data from
specialized domains.
The goal of machine teaching is to design systems that
can teach students efficiently and automatically. Machine
teaching is a broad research problem [52], where humans
can utilize domain knowledge to teach machines or viceversa. In this work, we restrict the discussion to the narrow
task of image classification, where a machine teaches human learners to discriminate between different image classes.
Although the proposed ideas are general, we target the application of teaching image annotators in crowd-sourcing
platforms. This exploits the fact that a relatively small annotated dataset can be leveraged to train crowd workers, which
can then annotate large numbers of images, enabling scalable
supervised learning of image classifiers. While classification
has been the task of choice for much machine teaching work,
it should be noted that several other tasks and applications
have also been investigated [6, 5, 44].
The machine teaching set-up considered in this work is

1387

