MonoRUn: Monocular 3D Object Detection by Reconstruction and
Uncertainty Propagation
Hansheng Chen, Yuyao Huang, Wei Tian*, Zhong Gao, Lu Xiong
Institute of Intelligent Vehicles, School of Automotive Studies, Tongji University
hanshengchen97@gmail.com {huangyuyao, tian wei, 1931604, xiong lu}@tongji.edu.cn

Abstract

2D

_dense correspondence_
object crd. map
(xyz as RGB)

image RGB

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D object detection is an active research area
in computer vision. Although deep-learning-based 2D object detection has achieved remarkable progress [3, 30], the
3D counterpart still poses a much greater challenge on accurate object localization, since a single image cannot provide
explicit depth information. To address this issue, a large
number of works leverage geometrical priors and solve the
object pose (position and orientation in camera frame) via
* Corresponding author: Wei Tian.
1 Code: https://github.com/tjiiv-cprg/MonoRUn.

Reconstruct

rendered as
point cloud

image crd. Map
(uv as RG)

Train

Reproject
Test

Object localization in 3D space is a challenging aspect in monocular 3D object detection. Recent advances
in 6DoF pose estimation have shown that predicting dense
2D-3D correspondence maps between image and object 3D
model and then estimating object pose via Perspective-nPoint (PnP) algorithm can achieve remarkable localization
accuracy. Yet these methods rely on training with ground
truth of object geometry, which is difficult to acquire in
real outdoor scenes. To address this issue, we propose
MonoRUn, a novel detection framework that learns dense
correspondences and geometry in a self-supervised manner, with simple 3D bounding box annotations. To regress
the pixel-related 3D object coordinates, we employ a regional reconstruction network with uncertainty awareness.
For self-supervised training, the predicted 3D coordinates
are projected back to the image plane. A Robust KL loss
is proposed to minimize the uncertainty-weighted reprojection error. During testing phase, we exploit the network
uncertainty by propagating it through all downstream modules. More specifically, the uncertainty-driven PnP algorithm is leveraged to estimate object pose and its covariance. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our proposed
approach outperforms current state-of-the-art methods on
KITTI benchmark.1

3D

camera
object

uncertainty map
(large uncertainty in
occluded region)

Pose
(with es!mated covariance)

Figure 1. 3D reconstruction is conducted by regressing the pixelrelated object coordinate map, which can be visualized as local
point cloud in object space. For self-supervision, the object coordinates are reprojected to recover the image coordinate map. To
focus on foreground pixels, we estimate the aleatoric uncertainty
of network prediction. The coordinate uncertainty can be further
propagated to estimate the pose covariance.

2D-3D constraints. These constraints either require extra
keypoint annotations [4, 13], or exploit centers, corners and
edges of ground truth bounding boxes [21, 27]. Yet the accuracy largely depends on the number and quality of available constraints, and the performance degrades in occlusion
and truncation cases with fewer visible keypoints. A more
robust approach is using dense 2D-3D correspondences, in
which every single foreground pixel is mapped to a 3D point
in the object space. This has proven successful in monocular 6DoF pose estimation tasks [15].
Current state-of-the-art dense correspondence methods [22, 28, 40] rely on both ground truth pose and 3D
object model, so that target 3D coordinate map and object mask can be rendered for training supervision. This
requirement restricts the training data to synthetic or simple laboratory scenes, where exact or pre-reconstructed 3D
models are readily available. However, 3D object detection in real scenes (e.g., driving scenes) mostly deals with
category-level objects, where acquiring accurate 3D models
for all instances is impractical. An intuitive idea could be

10379

