Sequence-to-Sequence Contrastive Learning for Text Recognition
Aviad Aberdam∗
Technion

Ron Litman∗
AWS

Shahar Tsiper
AWS

Oron Anschel
AWS

aaberdam@cs.technion.ac.il

litmanr@amazon.com

tsiper@amazon.com

oronans@amazon.com

Ron Slossberg
Technion

Shai Mazor
AWS

R. Manmatha
AWS

Pietro Perona
Caltech and AWS

ronslos@cs.technion.ac.il

smazor@amazon.com

manmatha@amazon.com

peronapp@amazon.com

Abstract
Representation
Space

We propose a framework for sequence-to-sequence contrastive learning (SeqCLR) of visual representations, which
we apply to text recognition. To account for the sequenceto-sequence structure, each feature map is divided into different instances over which the contrastive loss is computed. This operation enables us to contrast in a sub-word
level, where from each image we extract several positive
pairs and multiple negative examples. To yield effective visual representations for text recognition, we further suggest
novel augmentation heuristics, different encoder architectures and custom projection heads. Experiments on handwritten text and on scene text show that when a text decoder
is trained on the learned representations, our method outperforms non-sequential contrastive methods. In addition,
when the amount of supervision is reduced, SeqCLR significantly improves performance compared with supervised
training, and when fine-tuned with 100% of the labels, our
method achieves state-of-the-art results on standard handwritten text recognition benchmarks.

f(·)

f(·)

f(·)

Representation
Space

f(·)

f(·)

f(·)

1. Introduction
Contrastive learning techniques for self-supervised representation learning have recently demonstrated significant
improvements on several semi-supervised computer vision
applications, including image classification, object detection, and segmentation [9, 27, 18, 8, 26, 52, 10, 60, 49]. As
illustrated in Fig. 1(a) contrastive learning is performed by
maximizing agreement between representations of differently augmented views of the same image and distinguishing them from representations of other dataset images.
Despite obvious advantages, unsupervised and semisupervised schemes have hardly been explored for text
∗ Authors contribute equally and are listed in alphabetical order.

Figure 1: Sequence contrastive learning. (a) Current contrastive methods compare representations computed from
whole images. (b) We propose a sequence-to-sequence approach, by viewing the feature map as a sequence of separate representations. This is useful in text recognition,
where words are composed of sequences of characters.
recognition ([25, 68, 34]). For example, currently, most
handwritten text recognition approaches still rely on fully
supervised learning, requiring large amounts of annotated
data. The reason for this is simple: current contrastive
schemes for visual representation learning are tailored to-

15302

