HVPR: Hybrid Voxel-Point Representation for Single-stage 3D Object Detection
Jongyoun Noh

Sanghoon Lee

Bumsub Ham*

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University

Abstract
We address the problem of 3D object detection, that is,
estimating 3D object bounding boxes from point clouds.
3D object detection methods exploit either voxel-based or
point-based features to represent 3D objects in a scene.
Voxel-based features are efficient to extract, while they fail
to preserve fine-grained 3D structures of objects. Pointbased features, on the other hand, represent the 3D structures more accurately, but extracting these features is computationally expensive. We introduce in this paper a novel
single-stage 3D detection method having the merit of both
voxel-based and point-based features. To this end, we propose a new convolutional neural network (CNN) architecture, dubbed HVPR, that integrates both features into a
single 3D representation effectively and efficiently. Specifically, we augment the point-based features with a memory module to reduce the computational cost. We then aggregate the features in the memory, semantically similar to
each voxel-based one, to obtain a hybrid 3D representation in a form of a pseudo image, allowing to localize 3D
objects in a single stage efficiently. We also propose an Attentive Multi-scale Feature Module (AMFM) that extracts
scale-aware features considering the sparse and irregular
patterns of point clouds. Experimental results on the KITTI
dataset demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our
approach, achieving a better compromise in terms of speed
and accuracy.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is an essential technique for scene
understanding, which aims at predicting 3D bounding boxes
of objects in a scene. It can also be exploited as a basic building block for many applications, including autonomous driving and robotics. Recent approaches to 3D
object detection focus on learning discriminative 3D representations using point clouds acquired from a LiDAR sensor. Point clouds provide accurate depth information of objects, but they are sparse with the densities largely varying
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1: Runtime and accuracy comparison of detection results
on the KITTI [10] test set. We compare our model with voxelbased methods on the car class for three difficulty levels. Voxelbased methods using pseudo image representations (Voxel-PI) are
shown as circles, and 3D voxel-based methods (Voxel-3D) are
plotted as triangles. Our method gives a better compromise in
terms of accuracy and runtime for all cases. SE: SECOND [42];
PP: PointPillars [18]; TA: TANet [23]; AS: Associate-3D [7]; 3D:
3DIoULoss [49]; SA: SA-SSD [12]; HS: HotSpotNet [3]. Best
viewed in color.

w.r.t distances from the sensor.
There are many attempts to learn 3D feature representations using point clouds with deep neural networks, which
can be categorized into two groups: Voxel-based and pointbased methods. The first approaches [7, 12, 18, 35, 43, 46]
transform raw point clouds to structured grid representations, e.g., birds-eye-view (BEV) [35, 43] or voxels [12,
18, 33, 46, 50], to extract 3D representations using convolutional neural networks (CNNs). The voxelization and
downsampling operations in these methods allow to extract compact 3D features efficiently, but they fail to preserve fine-grained 3D structures of objects. The second approaches [29, 34, 38, 44, 45], on the other hand, exploit
raw point clouds directly to extract point-wise features using e.g., PointNet++ [30, 31]. They provide more discrim-

14605

