Learning to Recover 3D Scene Shape from a Single Image
Wei Yin† , Jianming Zhang‡ , Oliver Wang‡ , Simon Niklaus‡ , Long Mai‡ , Simon Chen‡ , Chunhua Shen† *
†

The University of Adelaide, Australia

‡

Adobe Research

Top View Point Cloud

RGB

Predicted Depth

Distorted Point Cloud

Recovered Shift

Recovered Shift & Focal Length

Figure 1: 3D scene structure distortion of projected point clouds. While the predicted depth map is correct, the 3D scene shape of the
point cloud suffers from noticeable distortions due to an unknown depth shift and focal length (third column). Our method recovers these
parameters using 3D point cloud networks. With recovered depth shift, the walls and bed edges become straight, but the overall scene is
stretched (fourth column). Finally, with recovered focal length, an accurate 3D scene can be reconstructed (ﬁfth column).

Abstract
Despite significant progress in monocular depth estimation in the wild, recent state-of-the-art methods cannot be
used to recover accurate 3D scene shape due to an unknown
depth shift induced by shift-invariant reconstruction losses
used in mixed-data depth prediction training, and possible
unknown camera focal length. We investigate this problem
in detail, and propose a two-stage framework that first predicts depth up to an unknown scale and shift from a single
monocular image, and then use 3D point cloud encoders
to predict the missing depth shift and focal length that allow us to recover a realistic 3D scene shape. In addition,
we propose an image-level normalized regression loss and
a normal-based geometry loss to enhance depth prediction
models trained on mixed datasets. We test our depth model
on nine unseen datasets and achieve state-of-the-art performance on zero-shot dataset generalization. Code is available at: https://git.io/Depth

1. Introduction
3D scene reconstruction is a fundamental task in computer vision. The established approach to address this task
is SLAM or SfM [16], which reconstructs 3D scenes based
on feature-point correspondence with consecutive frames or
multiple views. In contrast, this work aims to achieve dense
3D scene shape reconstruction from a single in-the-wild im* Correspondence should be addressed to C. Shen.

age. Without multiple views available, we rely on monocular depth estimation. However, as shown in Fig. 1, existing
monocular depth estimation methods [10, 38, 48, 40] alone
are unable to faithfully recover an accurate 3D point cloud.
Unlike multi-view reconstruction methods, monocular
depth estimation requires leveraging high level scene priors,
so data-driven approaches have become the de facto solution to this problem [24, 29, 37, 49, 47]. Recent works have
shown promising results by training deep neural networks
on diverse in-the-wild data, e.g. web stereo images and
stereo videos [5, 7, 29, 37, 43, 44, 49]. However, the diversity of the training data also poses challenges for the model
training, as training data captured by different cameras can
exhibit signiﬁcantly different image priors for depth estimation [11]. Moreover, web stereo images and videos can only
provide depth supervision up to a scale and shift due to the
unknown camera baselines and stereoscopic post processing [23]. As a result, state-of-the-art in-the-wild monocular
depth models use various types of losses invariant to scale
and shift in training. While an unknown scale in depth will
not cause any shape distortion, as it scales the 3D scene
uniformly, an unknown depth shift will (see Sec. 3.1 and
Fig. 1). In addition, the camera focal length of a given image may not be accessible at test time, leading to more distortion of the 3D scene shape. This scene shape distortion
is a critical problem for downstream tasks such as 3D view
synthesis and 3D photography.
To address these challenges, we propose a novel monocular scene shape estimation framework that consists of a

204

