Exploring Complementary Strengths of Invariant and Equivariant
Representations for Few-Shot Learning
Mamshad Nayeem Rizve†

Salman Khan‡

Fahad Shahbaz Khan‡

† Center for Research in Computer Vision, UCF, USA

Mubarak Shah†

‡ Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, UAE

nayeemrizve@knights.ucf.edu, {salman.khan, fahad.khan}@mbzuai.ac.ae, shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
In many real-world problems, collecting a large number
of labeled samples is infeasible. Few-shot learning (FSL) is
the dominant approach to address this issue, where the objective is to quickly adapt to novel categories in presence of
a limited number of samples. FSL tasks have been predominantly solved by leveraging the ideas from gradient-based
meta-learning and metric learning approaches. However,
recent works have demonstrated the significance of powerful feature representations with a simple embedding network that can outperform existing sophisticated FSL algorithms. In this work, we build on this insight and propose
a novel training mechanism that simultaneously enforces
equivariance and invariance to a general set of geometric
transformations. Equivariance or invariance has been employed standalone in the previous works; however, to the
best of our knowledge, they have not been used jointly. Simultaneous optimization for both of these contrasting objectives allows the model to jointly learn features that are
not only independent of the input transformation but also
the features that encode the structure of geometric transformations. These complementary sets of features help generalize well to novel classes with only a few data samples. We
achieve additional improvements by incorporating a novel
self-supervised distillation objective. Our extensive experimentation shows that even without knowledge distillation
our proposed method can outperform current state-of-theart FSL methods on five popular benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning methods have made great
strides on several challenging problems [29, 71, 28, 6, 7].
This success can be partially attributed to the availability
of large-scale labeled datasets [14, 6, 81, 43]. However,
acquiring large amounts of labeled data is infeasible in several real-world problems due to practical constraints such
as the rarity of an event or the high cost of manual annotation. Few-shot learning (FSL) targets this problem by

Enforcing
Equivariance

Enforcing
Invariance
Output Manifold (Baseline)

Equivariant Manifold

Output Manifold (Ours)

miniImageNet 5-way,1-shot

Invariant Manifold

miniImageNet 5-way,5-shot

Figure 1. Approach Overview: Shapes represent different transformations and colors represent different classes. While the invariant features provide better discrimination, the equivariant features help us learn the internal structure of the data manifold.
These complimentary representations help us generalize better to
new tasks with only a few training samples. By jointly leveraging the strengths of equivariant and invariant features, our method
achieves significant improvement over baseline (bottom row).

learning a model on a set of base classes and studies its
adaptability to novel classes with only a few samples (typically 1-5) [19, 76, 65, 70]. Remarkably, this setting is different from transfer and self/semi-supervised learning that
assumes the availability of pretrained models [63, 79, 36] or
large-amounts of unlabeled data [17, 9, 3].
FSL has been predominantly solved using ideas from
meta-learning. The two most dominant approaches are
optimization-based meta-learning [19, 32, 61] and metriclearning based methods [65, 70, 1]. Both sets of approaches
attempt to train a base learner which can be quickly adapted
in the presence of a few novel class examples. However, recently it has been shown in [55] that the quick adaptation of
the base learner crucially depends on feature reuse. Other
recent works [72, 15, 10] have also shown that a baseline
110836

