Variational Pedestrian Detection
Yuang Zhang1∗ , Huanyu He1∗ , Jianguo Li2 , Yuxi Li1 , John See3 , Weiyao Lin1†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China, 2 Ant Group, 3 Heriot-Watt University, Malaysia

Abstract
f
Pedestrian detection in a crowd is a challenging task
due to a high number of mutually-occluding human instances, which brings ambiguity and optimization difficulties to the current IoU-based ground truth assignment procedure in classical object detection methods. In this paper, we develop a unique perspective of pedestrian detection as a variational inference problem. We formulate a
novel and efficient algorithm for pedestrian detection by
modeling the dense proposals as a latent variable while
proposing a customized Auto-Encoding Variational Bayes
(AEVB) algorithm. Through the optimization of our proposed algorithm, a classical detector can be fashioned into
a variational pedestrian detector. Experiments conducted
on CrowdHuman and CityPersons datasets show that the
proposed algorithm serves as an efficient solution to handle the dense pedestrian detection problem for the case of
single-stage detectors. Our method can also be flexibly applied to two-stage detectors, achieving notable performance
enhancement.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection in a crowd, as a specific branch of
object detection, has been widely studied in recent years
[26, 4, 5, 39, 44, 21, 6, 36] due to massive applications.
However, heavy occlusion and high overlap among human
instances make extracting instance-wise object bounding
boxes a challenging task for pedestrian detectors.
A lot of deep learning based object detectors have been
proposed in the past few years in this field, and they are
typically categorized into two-stage detectors and singlestage detectors. Single-stage methods show fantastic efficiency and performance for general-purpose object detection. These detectors, in brief, operates as follows: an image f is first passed through a fully convolutional network
to predict a set of dense proposals z. A post-processing
step, which typically includes a non-maximum suppression
(NMS) and a score threshold, is then applied to predict the
* Equally-contributed first authors
† Corresponding author, Email:wylin@sjtu.edu.cn

f
pθ

f
qφ

pθ

z

z
gt

z
gt

pe

x

x

x

(a) Offline.

(b) Online.

(c) Ours.

Image

Dense Proposals

Final Boxes

pe

qφ

f

z

x

(d) The three variables in single-stage object detection.

Figure 1: Graph illustration of relation modeling in
single-stage object detection. Object detectors optimized
by: (a) offline ground truth assignment [22, 27, 19, 35];
(b) online ground truth assignment [45, 25]; (c) Variational
Pedestrian detector. Dashed line denote variational models;
the variable of interest is marked gray.
final detection results x.
Single-stage object detectors are usually trained over an
IoU related loss between pre-defined dense boxes (namely
anchors) z and ground truth boxes. We define this learning
offline as shown in Figure 1a; the method first assigns the
ground truth to anchors and then adjusts the anchor boxes
through regression. This may be ambiguous in crowded
scenes whereby a single anchor usually highly overlaps with
multiple object instances [1]. Thus, this could yield a suboptimal solution and greatly hinders the performance. To
handle this issue, a series of methods [45, 25] have been
proposed to adjust the object proposal before, or even simultaneously with the assignment procedure. We call this
kind of learning as online, as illustrated in Figure 1b. However, online pipelines still conform to a certain handcrafted

11622

