Deep Two-View Structure-from-Motion Revisited
Jianyuan Wang1 , * Yiran Zhong1 , Yuchao Dai2 , Stan Birchfield3 ,
Kaihao Zhang1 , Nikolai Smolyanskiy3 , Hongdong Li1
1
Australian National University, 2 Northwestern Polytechnical University, 3 NVIDIA
*

Abstract
Two-view structure-from-motion (SfM) is the cornerstone of 3D reconstruction and visual SLAM. Existing deep
learning-based approaches formulate the problem by either recovering absolute pose scales from two consecutive
frames or predicting a depth map from a single image, both
of which are ill-posed problems. In contrast, we propose
to revisit the problem of deep two-view SfM by leveraging
the well-posedness of the classic pipeline. Our method consists of 1) an optical flow estimation network that predicts
dense correspondences between two frames; 2) a normalized pose estimation module that computes relative camera poses from the 2D optical flow correspondences, and 3)
a scale-invariant depth estimation network that leverages
epipolar geometry to reduce the search space, refine the
dense correspondences, and estimate relative depth maps.
Extensive experiments show that our method outperforms
all state-of-the-art two-view SfM methods by a clear margin on KITTI depth, KITTI VO, MVS, Scenes11, and SUN3D
datasets in both relative pose and depth estimation.

1. Introduction
Two-view structure-from-motion (SfM) is the problem
of estimating the camera motion and scene geometry from
two image frames of a monocular sequence. As the foundation of both 3D reconstruction and visual simultaneous
localization and mapping (vSLAM), this important problem
finds its way into a wide range of applications, including autonomous driving, augmented/virtual reality, and robotics.
Classic approaches to two-view SfM follow a standard
pipeline of first matching features/edges between the two
images, then inferring motion and geometry from those
matches [8, 22, 30, 14, 12, 11, 47, 52]. When imaging
conditions are well-behaved (constant lighting, diffuse and
rigid surfaces, and non-repeating visual texture), the match* indicates equal contribution, listed in alphabetical order. Yiran is the
corresponding author. Work was partially done when Yiran was an intern
at NVIDIA, Redmond, WA.

ing process is well-posed. And, once the matches have been
found, the motion and geometry can be recovered.
For decades, researchers who work in this area have generally required at least two views, and their methods have
recovered only relative camera motion and relative scene
geometry (that is, shape up to an unknown scale factor).
Without a priori knowledge of scale or recognizable objects
in the scene, it is impossible to recover scene geometry from
a single view [18, 48, 44, 25]. Similarly, it is impossible to
infer absolute scale from two views of a scene [17].
With the rise of deep learning, a number of researchers
have recently explored neural network-based solutions to
two-view SfM. Most of these methods fall into one of two
categories. In the first category, which we shall call Type I,
the problem is treated as a joint optimization task of monocular depth and pose regression [53, 46, 32]. Two networks
are used: one to estimate the up-to-scale depth from a single
image, and the other one to predict the up-to-scale camera
pose from two input images. Both networks act independently during inference. In the second category, denoted
Type II, the scaled camera pose and the scaled depth are
inferred from the image pair, and are iteratively refined via
multi-view geometry [39, 35, 36]. While the power of deep
learning allows both Type I and Type II solutions to achieve
compelling results, we note that their formulations attempt
to solve one of the ill-posed [3] problems mentioned above.
In this paper, we revisit the use of deep learning for twoview SfM. Our framework follows the classic SfM pipeline
that features are matched between image frames to yield relative camera poses, from which relative depths are then estimated. By combining the strengths of deep learning within
a classic pipeline, we are able to avoid ill-posedness, which
allows our approach to achieve state-of-the-art results on
several benchmarks.
A comparison between our approach and existing
pipelines is shown in Fig. 1. Our method operates by first
estimating dense matching points between two frames using a deep optical flow network [50, 40], from which a set
of highly reliable matches are sampled in order to compute the relative camera pose via a GPU-accelerated classic
five-point algorithm [24] with RANSAC [13]. Since these

8953

