On Feature Normalization and Data Augmentation
Boyi Li∗12 Felix Wu∗3 Ser-Nam Lim4 Serge Belongie12
1
2
3
Cornell University
Cornell Tech
ASAPP
{bl728,sjb344,kilian}@cornell.edu

fwu@asapp.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image recognition and image generation are two corner stones of computer vision. While both are burgeoning fields, specialized techniques from both sub-areas can
sometimes form a dichotomy. Examples are mixup [69]
and squeeze-and-excitation [19] from the former, and adaptive instance normalization [22] from the latter, although
exceptions exist. Historically, the field of deep learning
was widely popularized in discriminative image classification with AlexNet [32], and image generation through
GANs [12] and VAEs [30].
One particular aspect of this dichotomy is that in image

sernamlim@fb.com

PONO std

Robin

PONO mean

Santorini

The moments (a.k.a., mean and standard deviation) of
latent features are often removed as noise when training
image recognition models, to increase stability and reduce
training time. However, in the field of image generation,
the moments play a much more central role. Studies have
shown that the moments extracted from instance normalization and positional normalization can roughly capture
style and shape information of an image. Instead of being
discarded, these moments are instrumental to the generation process. In this paper we propose Moment Exchange,
an implicit data augmentation method that encourages the
model to utilize the moment information also for recognition models. Specifically, we replace the moments of the
learned features of one training image by those of another,
and also interpolate the target labels—forcing the model to
extract training signal from the moments in addition to the
normalized features. As our approach is fast, operates entirely in feature space, and mixes different signals than prior
methods, one can effectively combine it with existing augmentation approaches. We demonstrate its efficacy across
several recognition benchmark data sets where it improves
the generalization capability of highly competitive baseline
networks with remarkable consistency.

Input

Kilian Q. Weinberger13
4
Facebook AI

Figure 1. PONO mean and std captures structural information.

recognition, popularized by batch normalization [24], the
first and second moments (a.k.a., mean and standard deviation) in image recognition are computed across instances in
a mini-batch and typically removed as noise [24, 60]. Studies have shown that this smoothes the optimization landscape [46] and enables larger learning rates [2], which leads
to faster convergence in practice. In contrast, for techniques like instance normalization [55] and positional normalization [34], moments play a central role in the image generation process. For example, exchanging moments of latent features across samples has become a popular way to control for the style or shape of generated images [22, 23, 27, 34, 41]. Here, moments are viewed as features, not noise, with research showing that they encode the
style of an image [22, 27], as well as the underlying structure [34]. To substantiate this point, we depict the first and
second moments of the features extracted in the first layer
of a ResNet [16] in Fig. 1 , using the technique described in
[34]. The class label can still be inferred visually from both
moments, which is a testament to the signal that remains in
these statistics. To further substantiate our observation, we
also show in Fig. 2 that simply using moments (from the
first ResNet layer) for image classification already yields
non-trivial performance (red bar) as compared to random
guessing (gray bar). Similarly, removing the moments from
positional normalization has a detrimental effect (blue bar
vs. green bar).
As there is evidently important signal in the moments
and in the normalized features, we would like to introduce a

∗: Equal contribution.

Example images are from Shutterstock.

12383

