Skip-Convolutions for Efficient Video Processing
Amirhossein Habibian

Davide Abati

Taco S. Cohen

Babak Ehteshami Bejnordi

Qualcomm AI Research*
{habibian,dabati,tacos,behtesha}@qti.qualcomm.com

𝒙𝑡−1

Abstract
We propose Skip-Convolutions to leverage the large
amount of redundancies in video streams and save computations. Each video is represented as a series of changes
across frames and network activations, denoted as residuals. We reformulate standard convolution to be efficiently
computed on residual frames: each layer is coupled with
a binary gate deciding whether a residual is important to
the model prediction, e.g. foreground regions, or it can be
safely skipped, e.g. background regions. These gates can either be implemented as an efficient network trained jointly
with convolution kernels, or can simply skip the residuals
based on their magnitude. Gating functions can also incorporate block-wise sparsity structures, as required for efficient implementation on hardware platforms. By replacing all convolutions with Skip-Convolutions in two state-ofthe-art architectures, namely EfficientDet and HRNet, we
reduce their computational cost consistently by a factor of
3 ∼ 4× for two different tasks, without any accuracy drop.
Extensive comparisons with existing model compression, as
well as image and video efficiency methods demonstrate
that Skip-Convolutions set a new state-of-the-art by effectively exploiting the temporal redundancies in videos.

1. Introduction
Is a video a sequence of still images or a continuous series of changes? We see the world by sensing changes, and
process information whenever the accumulated differences
in our neurons exceed some threshold. This trait has inspired many efforts to develop neuromorphic sensors and
processing algorithms, such as event-based cameras [40]
and spiking neural networks [12]. Despite their efficiency
for video processing, spiking nets have not been as successful as conventional models, mostly due to the lack of efficient training algorithms. There have been several works
on mapping spiking nets to conventional networks, but these
works have been mostly limited to shallow architectures and
* Qualcomm AI Research is an initiative of Qualcomm Technologies,

Inc.

𝒛𝑡−1

kernel 𝒘

-

+

skip gate

𝒙𝑡

𝒛𝑡

Figure 1: Skip-Convolution illustration for the input layer.
Convolutions are computed only on a few locations in the
residual features determined by a gate function (blue dots).
In other locations, output features are copied from the previous time step (yellow dots). Frames taken from [65].
simple problems, such as digit classification [66, 36, 35].
Representing videos by changes through residual frames is
common in video compression codecs, such as HEVC [46],
because residual frames normally have less information entropy and therefore require fewer bits to be compressed.
For stream processing applications, that require spatially
dense predictions for each input frame, deep convolutional
networks still process a sequence of still images as input.
Each frame is processed entirely by sliding convolutional
filters all over the frame, layer by layer. As a result, the
overall computational cost grows linearly with the number
of input frames, even though there might be not much new
information in the subsequent frames. This inherent inefficiency prohibits using accurate but expensive networks for
real-time tasks, such as object detection and pose estimation, on video streams.
This paper proposes Skip-Convolutions, in short, SkipConvs, to speed up any convolutional network for inference on video streams. Instead of considering a video as
a sequence of still images, we represent it as a series of
changes across frames and network activations, denoted as
residual frames. We reformulate standard convolution to be
efficiently computed over such residual frames by limiting
the computation only to the regions with significant changes
while skipping the others. Each convolutional layer is cou-

2695

