Divide-and-Conquer for Lane-Aware Diverse Trajectory Prediction
Sriram Narayanan1

Ramin Moslemi1
Francesco Pittaluga1
Manmohan Chandraker1,2
1

Buyu Liu1

NEC Labs America, 2 UC San Diego

Abstract
Trajectory prediction is a safety-critical tool for autonomous vehicles to plan and execute actions. Our work
addresses two key challenges in trajectory prediction, learning multimodal outputs, and better predictions by imposing
constraints using driving knowledge. Recent methods have
achieved strong performances using Multi-Choice Learning
objectives like winner-takes-all (WTA) or best-of-many. But
the impact of those methods in learning diverse hypotheses is
under-studied as such objectives highly depend on their initialization for diversity. As our first contribution, we propose
a novel Divide-And-Conquer (DAC) approach that acts as
a better initialization technique to WTA objective, resulting
in diverse outputs without any spurious modes. Our second contribution is a novel trajectory prediction framework
called ALAN that uses existing lane centerlines as anchors
to provide trajectories constrained to the input lanes. Our
framework provides multi-agent trajectory outputs in a forward pass by capturing interactions through hypercolumn
descriptors and incorporating scene information in the form
of rasterized images and per-agent lane anchors. Experiments on synthetic and real data show that the proposed
DAC captures the data distribution better compare to other
WTA family of objectives. Further, we show that our ALAN
approach provides on par or better performance with SOTA
methods evaluated on Nuscenes urban driving benchmark.

1. Introduction
Prediction of diverse multimodal behaviors is a critical
need to proactively make safe decisions for autonomous vehicles. A major challenge lies in predicting not only the
most dominant modes but also accounting for the less dominant ones that might arise sporadically. Hence, there is
need for models that can disentangle the plausible output
space and provide diverse futures for any given number of
samples. Further, a vast majority of actors execute socially
acceptable maneuvers that adhere with the underlying scene
structure. Predicting socially non-viable outputs can lead to

Figure 1: Depicts trajectory prediction problem in an intersection scenario with possible lane anchors for agents shown
as coloured dashed lines.

unsafe planning decisions with some more dangerous than
the others [7]. For example, a method that provides close
enough predictions that does not follow road semantics is
more dangerous compared to similar performing method that
adheres to the scene structure.
Traditionally, generative models have been widely
adapted to capture the uncertainties related to trajectory prediction problems [25, 22, 37, 21, 39]. However, generative
methods may suffer from mode collapse issues, which reduces their applicability for safety critical applications such
as self-driving cars. Recent methods [32, 28] use MultiChoice Learning objectives [26] like winner-takes-all (WTA)
but suffer from instability associated with network initialization [30, 34]. As a first contribution, we propose a Divide
and Conquer (DAC) approach that provides a better initialization to the WTA objective. Our method solves issues
related to spurious modes where some hypotheses are either
untrained in the training process, or reach equilibrium positions that do not represent any part of the data. We show
that the proposed DAC captures the data distribution better
on both real and synthetic scenes with multi-modal ground
truth, compared to baseline WTA objectives [30, 34].
115799

