UPFlow: Upsampling Pyramid for Unsupervised Optical Flow Learning
Kunming Luo1
1

Chuan Wang1

Shuaicheng Liu2,1∗ Haoqiang Fan1

Jue Wang1

Jian Sun1

Megvii Technology 2 University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
https://github.com/coolbeam/UPFlow_pytorch

Abstract
We present an unsupervised learning approach for optical flow estimation by improving the upsampling and learning of pyramid network. We design a self-guided upsample
module to tackle the interpolation blur problem caused by
bilinear upsampling between pyramid levels. Moreover, we
propose a pyramid distillation loss to add supervision for
intermediate levels via distilling the finest flow as pseudo
labels. By integrating these two components together, our
method achieves the best performance for unsupervised optical flow learning on multiple leading benchmarks, including MPI-SIntel, KITTI 2012 and KITTI 2015. In particular, we achieve EPE=1.4 on KITTI 2012 and F1=9.38% on
KITTI 2015, which outperform the previous state-of-the-art
methods by 22.2% and 15.7%, respectively.

1. Introduction
Optical flow estimation has been a fundamental computer vision task for decades, which has been widely used
in various applications such as video editing [14], behavior
recognition [31] and object tracking [3]. The early solutions
focus on minimizing a pre-defined energy function with optimization tools [4, 33, 30]. Nowadays deep learning based
approaches become popular, which can be classified into
two categories, the supervised [11, 26] and unsupervised
ones [29, 37]. The former one uses synthetic or humanlabelled dense optical flow as ground-truth to guide the
motion regression. The supervised methods have achieved
leading performance on the benchmark evaluations. However, the acquisition of ground-truth labels are expensive.
In addition, the generalization is another challenge when
trained on synthetic datasets. As a result, the latter category,
i.e. the unsupervised approaches attracts more attentions recently, which does not require the ground-truth labels. In
unsupervised methods, the photometric loss between two
images is commonly used to train the optical flow estima∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. An example from Sintel Final benchmark. Compared
with previous unsupervised methods including SelFlow [22], EpiFlow [44], ARFlow [20], SimFlow [12] and UFlow [15], our approach produces sharper and more accurate results in object edges.

tion network. To facilitate the training, the pyramid network
structure [34, 10] is often adopted, such that both global
and local motions can be captured in a coarse-to-fine manner. However, there are two main issues with respect to the
pyramid learning, which are often ignored previously. We
refer the two issues as bottom-up and top-down problems.
The bottom-up problem refers to the upsampling module
in the pyramid. Existing methods often adopt simple bilinear or bicubic upsampling [20, 15], which interpolates
cross edges, resulting in blur artifacts in the predicted optical flow. Such errors will be propagated and aggregated
when the scale becomes finer. Fig. 1 shows an example. The
top-down problem refers to the pyramid supervision. The
previous leading unsupervised methods typically add guidance losses only on the final output of the network, while
the intermediate pyramid levels have no guidance. In this
condition, the estimation errors in coarser levels will accumulate and damage the estimation at finer levels due to the
lack of training guidance.
To this end, we propose an enhanced pyramid learning
framework of unsupervised optical flow estimation. First,
we introduce a self-guided upsampling module that supports blur-free optical flow upsampling by using a selflearned interpolation flow instead of the straightforward in-

1045

