MongeNet: Efficient Sampler for Geometric Deep Learning
Léo Lebrat1,2 † , Rodrigo Santa Cruz1,2 † , Clinton Fookes2 and Olivier Salvado1,2
1
CSIRO, 2 Queensland University of Technology, † equal contribution
https://lebrat.github.io/MongeNet

Figure 1: Discretization of a mesh by a point cloud. Left: MongeNet discretization. Right: Classical random uniform
discretization. The resulting Voronoi Tessellations spawn on the triangles of the mesh are shown in red.

Abstract
Recent advances in geometric deep-learning introduce
complex computational challenges for evaluating the distance between meshes. From a mesh model, point clouds
are necessary along with a robust distance metric to assess surface quality or as part of the loss function for training models. Current methods often rely on a uniform random mesh discretization, which yields irregular sampling
and noisy distance estimation. In this paper we introduce
MongeNet, a fast and optimal transport based sampler that
allows for an accurate discretization of a mesh with better approximation properties. We compare our method to
the ubiquitous random uniform sampling and show that the
approximation error is almost half with a very small computational overhead.

1. Introduction
Recently, computer vision researchers have demonstrated an increasing interest in developing deep learning
models for 3D data understanding [42, 5]. As successful
applications of those models, we can mention single view
object shape reconstruction [45, 14], shape and pose estimation [22], point cloud completion and approximation [16],
and brain cortical surface reconstruction [38].
A ubiquitous and important component of these 3D deep

learning models is the computation of distances between
the predicted and ground-truth meshes either for loss computation during training or quality metric calculations for
evaluation. In essence, the mainstream approach relies on
sampling point clouds from any given meshes to be able
to compute point-based distances such as the Chamfer distance [3] or earth mover’s distance [37]. While there exist in-depth discussions about these distance metrics in the
literature [13, 27], the mesh sampling technique itself remains uncharted, where the uniform sampling approach is
widely adopted by most of the 3D deep learning models
[45, 31, 14]. This approach is computationally efficient
and is the only mesh sampling method available in existing 3D deep learning libraries like PyTorch3D [35] and
Kaolin [19]. However, it does not approximate the underlying surface accurately since it produces a clustering of
points (clamping) along the surface resulting in large undersampled areas and spurious artifacts for flat surfaces. For
instance, Figure 1 shows that the Voronoi Tessellation for
uniform sampled points is distributed irregularly, while Figure 2 highlights sampling artifacts in the tail and wings of
an airplane from ShapeNet.
In this paper, we revisit the mesh sampling problem and
propose a novel algorithm to sample point clouds from triangular meshes. We formulate this problem as an optimal
transport problem between simplexes and discrete Dirac
measures to compute the optimal solution. Due to the com-

16664

