Robust Representation Learning with Feedback for Single Image Deraining
Chenghao Chen1 and Hao Li∗1,2
1. Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU), Shanghai, 200240, China.
2. École d’Ingénieurs SJTU-ParisTech (SPEIT), Shanghai, 200240, China.
{1049164518, haoli}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
A deraining network can be interpreted as a conditional
generator that aims at removing rain streaks from image.
Most existing image deraining methods ignore model errors caused by uncertainty that reduces embedding quality. Unlike existing image deraining methods that embed
low-quality features into the model directly, we replace lowquality features by latent high-quality features. The spirit of
closed-loop feedback in the automatic control field is borrowed to obtain latent high-quality features. A new method
for error detection and feature compensation is proposed
to address model errors. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets as well as specific real datasets demonstrate
that the proposed method outperforms recent state-of-theart methods. Code is available at:
https://github.com/LI-Hao-SJTU/DerainRLNet

1. Introduction
Outdoor vision systems are used widely such as on intelligent vehicles and for surveillance. They sometimes suffer from rain pollution, which is undesirable in practice.
To handle this problem, study on image deraining has appeared, which aims at removing rain streaks from image.
Some methods exploit specific a priori knowledge to
clean images. For example, [8] introduces the dark channel;
[7] maximizes the contrast among different target image regions. However, sparse rain streaks cannot be well removed
by these methods. Some physical properties based deraining methods aim at separating the rain layer from the background layer via discriminative sparse coding [1, 20, 32],
dictionary learning [14], and Gaussian mixture models [18].
However, specific a priori knowledge based methods are
susceptible to complex, diverse, and changeable scenarios.
In recent years, deep learning based image deraining
methods are rising. A deraining network can be interpreted
as a conditional generator, and high-quality output images
Research supported by SJTU Young Talent Funding (WF220426002).
* Corresponding author: Hao Li (Email: haoli@sjtu.edu.cn)

Rainy image

DID [33]

Ours

Rainy image

RESCAN [17]

Ours

Figure 1. Image deraining. DID [33] tends to under-derain while
RESCAN [17] tends to remove details of clean image.

can be generated if conditional embedding features can
characterize target image contents [24]. Most deep learning
based deraining methods focus on designing novel network
structures and guided features, such as residual based DDN
[6], density based DID [33], recurrent structure based RESCAN [17], which can be regarded as strategies for embedding enhancement. Furthermore, [24] embeds mixed feature layers into the model and decode it into a clean image.
Methods that do not consider uncertainty-induced model errors tend to loss details and incur halo artefacts in the generated image (see Fig. 1).
To handle uncertainty-caused model errors, we propose a
robust representation learning with feedback for image deraining. Given an image with rain streaks, the objective is
to output the residual map. Then the clean image can be
obtained by subtracting the residual map from the rainy image as illustrated in Fig. 2. Since the embedding guides
residual map generation, according to the image representation theory in [16], we try to find a functional relationship
between basic embedding features and the optimal ones in
the latent mapping space. The error detector and the feature compensator are designed to address model errors, for
approximating the optimal embedding features. The contributions of the paper are three-fold:
1) We analyzed the impact of uncertainty in the training
process and the possibility of model error remapping via
convolutional neural networks.

7742

