Event-based Bispectral Photometry using Temporally Modulated Illumination*

†

Yuzuha Ito†

Ayaka Ebisu†

University of Tsukuba, Japan

‡

1. Introduction
Analysis of bispectral difference, i.e. difference of the
absorbance between two individual wavelengths, plays a
critical role in various applications that involve rays propagating in a light absorbing medium, such as water. Since the
absorbance of a medium depends on the wavelength of light
and the medium itself, bispectral analysis of the absorbance
allows to determine some quantities that might serve various purposes. For example, in analytical chemistry, a relative concentration of matter in a mixture is determined from
the bispectral difference [41], and in atmospheric science,
* This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers JP20H04215, JP20H05951 and JP17H04686. It has been conducted
when T. Takatani and Y. Zheng were affiliated with National Institute of
Informatics, Japan. The corresponding author is Y. Zheng (yqzheng@ai.utokyo.ac.jp).

Takahito Aoto†

The University of Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
Typical system

Data acquisition
Constant
illumination

Target
medium

Conventional
camera

Computation
Logarithmic
transformation
log

Subtraction

-

log
Modulated
illumination

Our system

Analysis of bispectral difference plays a critical role in
various applications that involve rays propagating in a light
absorbing medium. In general, the bispectral difference
is obtained by subtracting signals at two individual wavelengths captured by ordinary digital cameras, which tends
to inherit the drawbacks of conventional cameras in dynamic range, response speed and quantization precision. In
this paper, we propose a novel method to obtain a bispectral difference image using an event camera with temporally
modulated illumination. Our method is rooted in a key observation on the analogy between the bispectral photometry
principle of the participating medium and the event generating mechanism in an event camera. By carefully modulating the bispectral illumination, our method allows to read
out the bispectral difference directly from triggered events.
Experiments using a prototype imaging system have verified
the feasibility of this novel usage of event cameras in photometry based vision tasks, such as 3D shape reconstruction
in water.

Yinqiang Zheng‡

Target
medium

Event camera

Accumulation

Σ

Emitted light

Bispectral difference

Tsuyoshi Takatani†

Transmitted light Triggered events Accumulated events

Figure 1: Abstract of our method. Our system allows to
read out the bispectral difference directly as the number of
events triggered by the temporally modulated illumination,
in which the operations required in the typical system are
conducted by the event camera.
analysis of the bispectral difference is employed to trace
and classify gasses and particles [23].
In general, the bispectral difference is obtained by subtracting signals at the two wavelengths captured by ordinary
digital cameras. A typical system of bispectral photometry
uses a conventional camera, as shown in Fig. 1 (top). Light
at the two wavelengths illuminates a target medium and then
the camera captures transmitted light at each of the wavelengths. The logarithms of the captured signals and the subtraction of them result in the bispectral difference. Although
the operations in themselves are not complicated, the performance of obtaining the bispectral difference is affected
by the well-known drawbacks of conventional cameras in
dynamic range and quantization precision essentially. Thus,
a specific system is required to resolve these problems.
Recently, event cameras have emerged in robotics and
computer vision. Event cameras do not capture brightness
images at a fixed rate. Instead, each pixel inside an event
camera independently and asynchronously records a tem-

15638

