FSDR: Frequency Space Domain Randomization for Domain Generalization
Jiaxing Huang, Dayan Guan, Aoran Xiao, Shijian Lu∗
School of Computer Science Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
{Jiaxing.Huang, Dayan.Guan, Aoran.Xiao, Shijian.Lu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

Source Image

Randomized Input
Image Randomization

Domain generalization aims to learn a generalizable
model from a ‘known’ source domain for various ‘unknown’
target domains. It has been studied widely by domain randomization that transfers source images to different styles in
spatial space for learning domain-agnostic features. However, most existing randomization methods use GANs that
often lack of controls and even alter semantic structures
of images undesirably. Inspired by the idea of JPEG that
converts spatial images into multiple frequency components
(FCs), we propose Frequency Space Domain Randomization (FSDR) that randomizes images in frequency space
by keeping domain-invariant FCs (DIFs) and randomizing
domain-variant FCs (DVFs) only. FSDR has two unique
features: 1) it decomposes images into DIFs and DVFs
which allows explicit access and manipulation of them and
more controllable randomization; 2) it has minimal effects
on semantic structures of images and domain-invariant features. We examined domain variance and invariance property of FCs statistically and designed a network that can
identify and fuse DIFs and DVFs dynamically through iterative learning. Extensive experiments over multiple domain
generalizable segmentation tasks show that FSDR achieves
superior segmentation and its performance is even on par
with domain adaptation methods that access target data in
training.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has been a longstanding challenge in computer vision research, which aims to assign a
class label to each and every pixel of an image. Deep learning based methods [4, 38, 79, 84] have achieved great successes at the price of large-scale densely-annotated training
data [8] that are usually prohibitively expensive and timeconsuming to collect. One way of circumventing this constraint is to employ synthetic images with automatically
generated labels [52, 51] in network training. However,
∗ Corresponding author.

Spatial Space Domain Randomization (SSDR)
Target Image

Ground Truth

Source Image
DCT

SSDR

Keep DIFs
Unchanged

FSDR

Randomized
Input

Randomize DVFs
Frequency Space Domain Randomization (FSDR)

Figure 1. Our proposed frequency space domain randomization (FSDR) converts images into multiple frequency components
(FCs) with discrete cosine transform (DCT) and identifies domain
variant FCs (DVFs) and domain invariant FCs (DIFs). Such explicit isolation allows it to randomize DVFs while keeping DIFs
unchanged in training which often leads to more generalizable
models. Traditional spatial space domain randomization (SSDR)
tends to produce sub-optimal segmentation as it randomizes images as a whole without isolating and preserving domain invariant
features. Green, blue and red boxes denotes DIFs, DVFs and randomized DVFs, respectively (best viewed in color).

such models usually undergo a drastic performance drop
while applied to real-world images [78] due to the domain
bias and shift [55, 41, 67, 71, 56].
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has been studied widely to tackle the domain mismatch problem by learning domain invariant/aligned features from a labelled source
domain and an unlabelled target domain [22, 29, 30, 58,
66, 69, 40, 72, 5, 6]. However, its training requires targetdomain data which could be hard to collect during the training stage such as autonomous driving at various cities, robot
exploration of various new environments, etc. Additionally, it is not scalable as it requires network re-training or
fine-tuning for each new target domain. Domain generalization has attracted increasing attention as it learns domain

6891

