Encoder Fusion Network with Co-Attention Embedding
for Referring Image Segmentation
Guang Feng1,2 , Zhiwei Hu1,2 , Lihe Zhang1,2,†, Huchuan Lu1,2
1

School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
2

Ningbo Institute, Dalian University of Technology

fengguang.gg@gmail.com, hzw950822@mail.dlut.edu.cn,
{zhanglihe, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, referring image segmentation has aroused
widespread interest. Previous methods perform the multimodal fusion between language and vision at the decoding
side of the network. And, linguistic feature interacts with
visual feature of each scale separately, which ignores the
continuous guidance of language to multi-scale visual features. In this work, we propose an encoder fusion network
(EFN), which transforms the visual encoder into a multimodal feature learning network, and uses language to refine the multi-modal features progressively. Moreover, a coattention mechanism is embedded in the EFN to realize the
parallel update of multi-modal features, which can promote
the consistent of the cross-modal information representation in the semantic space. Finally, we propose a boundary enhancement module (BEM) to make the network pay
more attention to the fine structure. The experiment results
on four benchmark datasets demonstrate that the proposed
approach achieves the state-of-the-art performance under
different evaluation metrics without any post-processing.

1. Introduction
Referring image segmentation aims to extract the most
relevant visual region (object or stuff) in an image based on
the referring expression. Unlike the traditional semantic and
instance segmentation, which require to correctly segment
each semantic category or each object in an image, referring image segmentation needs to find a certain part of the
image according to the understanding of the given language
query. Therefore, it can be regarded as a pixel-wise foreground/background segmentation problem, and the output
result is not limited by the predefined semantic categories
or object classes. This task has a wide range of potential
applications in language-based human-robot interaction.
† Corresponding Author

(a). Decoder fusion for referring image segmentation

Query: child in red

(b). Encoder fusion for referring image segmentation

Query: child in red

Visual feature

Multi-modal feature

Linguistic progressive guidance

Figure 1: Two multi-modal fusion mechanisms. Existing methods achieve the fusion between language and vision in the decoder,
while the proposed method does it in the encoder.

The key of this task is to realize the cross-modal matching between visual and linguistic features. The deeplearning community has rapidly improved the results of
vision-language tasks over a short period of time. The
rapid development of convolutional neural network (CNN) and recurrent neural network (RNN) have made a qualitative leap in the ability of understanding vision and language, thereby they can solve more complex pixel-level
cross-modal prediction tasks. Early referring image segmentation methods [14, 26, 23, 33] mainly rely on the powerful learning ability of deep learning model. They directly
concatenate linguistic features with visual features of each
region, and then use the combined multi-modal features to
generate the segmentation mask. Due to the lack of sufficient interaction between two modalities, such solutions
can not meet the requirements of real-world applications.
Recently, some works [36, 38, 1, 16, 17, 19] began to consider the linguistic and visual attention mechanisms to better aggregate these two kinds of features.
Although some referring image segmentation methods
have been proposed in the last few years, there are still many
problems that have not been explored. On the one hand,
for the cross-modal fusion of vision and language. Previ-

15506

