Siamese Natural Language Tracker: Tracking by Natural Language
Descriptions with Siamese Trackers
Qi Feng
Boston University

Vitaly Ablavsky
University of Washington

Qinxun Bai
Horizon Robotics

Stan Sclaroff
Boston University

fung@bu.edu

vxa@uw.edu

qinxun.bai@gmail.com

sclaroff@bu.edu

Abstract

SiamFC(2017)

We propose a novel Siamese Natural Language
Tracker (SNLT), which brings the advancements in visual tracking to the tracking by natural language (NL)
descriptions task. The proposed SNLT is applicable to a
wide range of Siamese trackers, providing a new class
of baselines for the tracking by NL task and promising future improvements from the advancements of
Siamese trackers. The carefully designed architecture
of the Siamese Natural Language Region Proposal Network (SNL-RPN), together with the Dynamic Aggregation of vision and language modalities, is introduced to
perform the tracking by NL task. Empirical results over
tracking benchmarks with NL annotations show that the
proposed SNLT improves Siamese trackers by 3 to 7
percentage points with a slight tradeoff of speed. The
proposed SNLT outperforms all NL trackers to-date and
is competitive among state-of-the-art real-time trackers
on LaSOT benchmarks while running at 50 frames per
second on a single GPU. Code for this work is available
at https: // github. com/ fredfung007/ snlt .

Frames per Second (FPS)

80

40

with SNLT
SiamRPN(2018)
with SNLT
SiamRPN++(2019)
with SNLT
DiMP(2019)
PrDiMP(2020)

30

FENG(2020)

ATOM(2019)

LI(2017)

Siamese Trackers
Our SNLT Variants
NL Trackers
Other Visual Trackers

70
60
50

20
10
0

0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Precision on LaSOT test set

Figure 1: The proposed Siamese Natural Language
Tracker (SNLT) improves Siamese trackers by leveraging predictions from two modalities: vision and language. Our SNLT implementation runs at 50 frames
per second on an NVIDIA 2080 Ti GPU, and outperforms best published natural language trackers, i.e.
Feng [14] and Li [26], on the LaSOT [13] test set.

1. Introduction
Visual and language recognition skills evolve jointly
in children from a young age. For example, it was observed [33] that children at the age of twenty months
whose vocabulary size lags behind their peers have difficulty recognizing objects with sparse features (i.e.,
stylized versions of real-world objects). Conversely, a
child’s ability to engage in the play activity called object
substitution tends to be a predictor of healthy language
development [34].
By contrast, in computer vision, particularly in object tracking, appearance-based methods [24, 25] and
tracking via natural-language (NL) descriptions [14, 26]
evolve independently, without benefiting each other.
In this paper, we derive a formulation that links

the vision and language modalities in such a way
that improvements in appearance-based tracking yield
improvements in language-based tracking. Our formulation applies to Siamese trackers, a broad family
of trackers that includes SiamFC [1], SiamRPN [25],
SiamRPN++ [24], etc. Siamese trackers have proven
to be successful in many tracking scenarios and have
achieved state-of-the-art performance. We show that
by bringing the advancements of these Siamese trackers
to the tracking by NL task, we can build NL trackers
that outperform all prior NL trackers and promise to
see improvements over time with the advancements of
Siamese trackers.
Hence, we present the first practical and general so-

5851

