4D Hyperspectral Photoacoustic Data Restoration with Reliability Analysis
Weihang Liao 1,2 , Art Subpa-asa2 , Yinqiang Zheng3 , Imari Sato1,2,3
1
Tokyo Institute of Technology, 2 National Institute of Informatics, 3 The University of Tokyo
liao.w.ac@m.titech.ac.jp, art@nii.ac.jp, yqzheng@ai.u-tokyo.ac.jp, imarik@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
Hyperspectral photoacoustic (HSPA) spectroscopy is an
emerging bi-modal imaging technology that is able to show
the wavelength-dependent absorption distribution of the interior of a 3D volume. However, HSPA devices have to scan
an object exhaustively in the spatial and spectral domains;
and the acquired data tend to suffer from complex noise.
This time-consuming scanning process and noise severely
affects the usability of HSPA. It is therefore critical to examine the feasibility of 4D HSPA data restoration from an incomplete and noisy observation. In this work, we present a
data reliability analysis for the depth and spectral domain.
On the basis of this analysis, we explore the inherent data
correlations and develop a restoration algorithm to recover
4D HSPA cubes. Experiments on real data verify that the
proposed method achieves satisfactory restoration results.

1. Introduction
Discovered in 1880 [4], the photoacoustic (PA) effect is
a phenomenon in which materials emit acoustic signals under light irradiation. In the last few decades, photoacoustic imaging (PAI) [32] has emerged as a 3D imaging technology that combines light and ultrasound to form images.
It has the advantages of both optical imaging (high optical
contrast) and ultrasonic imaging (better penetration capability) [33] and thus is an alternative to X-ray exposure as
a way to visualize the interiors of objects in a noninvasive
manner. PAI uses light as an excitation source and an ultrasound sensor to detect sound waves generated by the optically excited targets. It can be used to analyze the properties
and interior structure of a 3D volume [32, 33, 34, 37].
Thanks to the evolution of wavelength-tunable lasers,
multispectral or hyperspectral photoacoustic (HSPA) imaging techniques have been developed. HSPA irradiates the
material with different wavelengths of light and provides
4D data cubes, e.g. a 3D volume for each wavelength, as
shown in Fig. 1. The amount of light absorbed by the material is determined by the spectral absorption coefficient of

Figure 1. 4D HSPA data of leaf (rendering by KURUMI viewer
[1]). The variance at each wavelength is clearly visible.

the material at each wavelength. HSPA has the capability
of providing spectral absorbance information on the interiors of a target material, which support many tasks such as
medical diagnosis, classification, and segmentation. Previous studies have shown that HSPA is promising in comprehensive clinical applications [35, 9, 20, 21].
A typical HSPA system is shown in Fig. 2, where an object is scanned by moving a wavelength-tunable laser and
ultrasonic transducer along the surface of the object. There
are two obstacles that severely limit practical use of HSPA:
long acquisition time and complex noise. The data scanning process is time-consuming because it is performed exhaustively in the spatial and spectral domains. The ability to use fewer samples would speed up the data acquisition. HSPA also suffers from a very low signal to noise
ratio (SNR) when the amount of received incident light is
weak and when the spectral absorption coefficient is low.
Thus, the SNR of HSPA should be adaptively enhanced.
This issue motivated us to devise a method to restore fullgrid, noise-free 4D HSPA data from incomplete and noisy
observations.
In this paper, we first conduct a reliability analysis for
different depths and spectrum wavelengths. Based on the
analysis, we formulate the 4D HSPA restoration task as an
optimization problem. We explore the data correlations, in-

4598

