Holistic 3D Human and Scene Mesh Estimation from Single View Images
Zhenzhen Weng, Serena Yeung
Stanford University
{zzweng, syyeung}@stanford.edu
Abstract
The 3D world limits the human body pose and the human body pose conveys information about the surrounding
objects. Indeed, from a single image of a person placed in
an indoor scene, we as humans are adept at resolving ambiguities of the human pose and room layout through our
knowledge of the physical laws and prior perception of the
plausible object and human poses. However, few computer
vision models fully leverage this fact. In this work, we propose a holistically trainable model that perceives the 3D
scene from a single RGB image, estimates the camera pose
and the room layout, and reconstructs both human body
and object meshes. By imposing a set of comprehensive
and sophisticated losses on all aspects of the estimations,
we show that our model outperforms existing human body
mesh methods and indoor scene reconstruction methods. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first model that outputs
both object and human predictions at the mesh level, and
performs joint optimization on the scene and human poses.

1. Introduction
Holistic scene perception is key to our human ability to
accurately interpret and interact with the 3D world. The human visual system naturally integrates context from actors,
objects, and scene layout to infer realistic, robust estimations of the world. Suppose a human is partially included
in an image because they are positioned behind a desk. We
can still effortlessly extract rich information from the static
scene to resolve ambiguities due to the occlusion. Likewise, the appearance of humans also provides useful information about scenes, such as the ground plane and depth of
surrounding objects. Humans and objects in scenes jointly
manifest spatial occupancies that constrain their relative positions. For computer vision systems to achieve high accuracy in recognizing and interpreting complex scenes, it is
therefore important to develop approaches for holistic scene
perception and reasoning.
In recent years, holistic scene understanding from single view images has gained increasing interest from com-

Figure 1. Given a single view RGB image of an indoor scene,
our model is able to (i) predict all aspects of the scene (3D object bounding boxes, object and human meshes, 3D room layout,
camera pose), and (ii) jointly optimize over a comprehensive set
of global consistency losses. The final result is more physically
plausible and accurate.

puter vision researchers. [34] [14] proposed methods for
joint reasoning over inanimate scenes, and recovered room
layout and 3D object bounding boxes using consistency
losses such as a constraint for objects to be enclosed within
the room bounding box. [4] additionally discouraged intersection between object bounding box estimations, and
was the first model to bring 3D human pose estimation into
the holistic scene understanding problem. It incorporated
human-object interaction priors to reason about approximate relations between humans and objects. However all
of these works still operate at the relatively coarser level of
bounding boxes and joint key points, and are therefore limited in their ability to use precise shapes, surfaces, and physical occupancies to design holistic scene constraints and improve estimation accuracy.
In this work we propose the first single-view, holistic
scene understanding method that jointly optimizes over all
aspects of 3D human pose, objects, and room layout at the
mesh level, to produce state-of-the-art mesh estimations of
the scene. Our approach builds on recent advances in mesh
prediction. [5] [7] [29] proposed methods for reconstructing the individual object meshes with varying topological
1334

