Building Reliable Explanations of Unreliable Neural Networks: Locally
Smoothing Perspective of Model Interpretation
Dohun Lim
Hyeonseok Lee
Sungchan Kim*
Division of Computer Science and Engineering, Jeonbuk National University, Korea

Abstract
We present a novel method for reliably explaining the
predictions of neural networks. We consider an explanation
reliable if it identifies input features relevant to the model
output by considering the input and the neighboring data
points. Our method is built on top of the assumption of
smooth landscape in a loss function of the model prediction: locally consistent loss and gradient profile. A theoretical analysis established in this study suggests that those locally smooth model explanations are learned using a batch
of noisy copies of the input with the L1 regularization for
a saliency map. Extensive experiments support the analysis results, revealing that the proposed saliency maps retrieve the original classes of adversarial examples crafted
against both naturally and adversarially trained models,
significantly outperforming previous methods. We further
demonstrated that such good performance results from the
learning capability of this method to identify input features
that are truly relevant to the model output of the input and
the neighboring data points, fulfilling the requirements of a
reliable explanation.

1. Introduction test
The recent progress of deep neural networks has led to
their adoption in various decision-critical applications, including medical, finance, and legal fields and autonomous
vehicles. However, the high modeling capacity of deep
models renders the inner operations of the models mostly
uninterpretable and demands human-understandable explanations for model predictions. For this purpose, the model
output attribution for input features is a popular idea. The
attribution aims to identify the importance of input features
using end-to-end relationships between inputs and model
predictions. We use a saliency map as the visual form of an
explanation. A saliency map is a common approach to visual tasks to implement pixel-level or regional attributions
for a given image [32, 25, 9, 37, 16, 22].
* Correspondence to: Sungchan Kim (s.kim@jbnu.ac.kr).

The susceptibility of neural networks can cause false
predictions for a given imperceptibly modified image [12],
which has emerged as a new challenge in explaining model
predictions [9, 3, 37, 10, 5, 14, 29, 33]. For instance, recent work has demonstrated that input can be manipulated,
resulting in different saliency maps without damaging the
classification accuracy [10, 5, 14, 33]. Such a false explanation is primarily due to the fragility of learned models that
have highly nonsmooth decision boundaries rather than due
to the explanation methods. Although adversarial training
has addressed these concerns [17, 39, 24, 7, 11, 36, 19], it
is not always applicable and still incomplete.
This discussion indicates the need to build a reliable
model explanation with two requirements if the goal is to
recover input features that are important in a local neighborhood: first, a reliable explanation method should be robust so that it generates consistent explanations along with
neighboring (and thus similar) data points; second, explanations generated by the method must have high fidelity for
model predictions.
We propose RelEx, a novel method to reliably explain
predictions of neural network-based classifiers. RelEx aims
to generate robust and yet accurate saliency maps of pixellevel importance for a given image. Inspired by recent work
on adversarial training [18, 17, 19], we built RelEx on top
of an assumption on a locally smooth explanation for the
vicinity of the input.
Although substantial work has proposed creating
saliency maps based on gradient [28, 34, 30, 1, 27, 25] or
perturbation [20, 9, 37, 16, 22], researchers have hardly addressed both robustness and accuracy in a single method.
Existing methods often fail to find out essential features of
the input and neighborhood for the model predictions despite being visually plausible, as shown in this study. Moreover, using either a random or adversarial perturbation of
data points can manipulate their explanations [10, 5]. Recent work has addressed such an issue partially [3, 9, 37, 5].
In contrast to the existing methods, we construct an analysis to characterize the behavior of the proposed explanation
method based on the assumption of the local explanation.
Specifically, the contributions of this paper are as follows.

6468

