De-rendering the World’s Revolutionary Artefacts
Shangzhe Wu1,4 *
Ameesh Makadia4
Jiajun Wu2
Noah Snavely4
Richard Tucker4
Angjoo Kanazawa3,4
1

3

2
University of Oxford
Stanford University
4
University of California, Berkeley
Google Research

Training

Inference

Single image collection

Input

Normal

Albedo

Diffuse

Specular Material Env. map Novel view Relight

Figure 1: De-rendering from single images. From only a real single-view image collection of “revolutionary” (i.e., solid of revolution)
artefacts with known silhouettes as training data (left), our framework learns to de-render a single image into shape, albedo and complex
lighting and material components, suitable for applications such as novel-view synthesis and relighting (right).

Abstract
Recent works have shown exciting results in unsupervised
image de-rendering—learning to decompose 3D shape, appearance, and lighting from single-image collections without explicit supervision. However, many of these assume simplistic material and lighting models. We propose a method,
termed RADAR, that can recover environment illumination
and surface materials from real single-image collections, relying neither on explicit 3D supervision, nor on multi-view
or multi-light images. Specifically, we focus on rotationally
symmetric artefacts that exhibit challenging surface properties including specular reflections, such as vases. We introduce a novel self-supervised albedo discriminator, which
allows the model to recover plausible albedo without requiring any ground-truth during training. In conjunction with
a shape reconstruction module exploiting rotational symmetry, we present an end-to-end learning framework that
is able to de-render the world’s revolutionary artefacts. We
conduct experiments on a real vase dataset and demonstrate
compelling decomposition results, allowing for applications
including free-viewpoint rendering and relighting. More results and code at: https://sorderender.github.io/.
* The work was primarily done during an internship at Google Research.

1. Introduction
Consider one of the vases shown in Fig. 1. From just a single image, we can tell a lot about the underlying properties
of that vase. Despite the image’s flatness, we can perceive an
instance of a 3D surface with various lights cast upon it. We
can distinguish between areas where the underlying color of
the vase changes and regions that reflect light, revealing the
glossiness of the surface and its local geometry.
We introduce a model that aims to de-render a single image into these factors—geometry, material, and
illumination—which we call RADAR (Revolutionary
Artefact De-rendering And Re-rendering). In particular, our
approach can decompose real images of vase-like objects under complex illumination and with glossy materials. Notably,
our approach can learn this ability just from collections of
single images (i.e., where each object is pictured once), without explicit 3D supervision or multiple images. This allows
us to analyze images obtained in real world settings, such
as artefact collections in museums, and subsequently apply
modifications including relighting, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
Making de-rendering tractable involves simplifying assumptions. In some methods, this means requiring explicit
supervision, e.g., with synthetic [24, 26] or specially captured data [25]. An alternative to direct supervision is to

6338

