AlphaMatch: Improving Consistency for Semi-supervised Learning with
Alpha-divergence
Chengyue Gong, Dilin Wang, Qiang Liu
University of Texas at Austin
{cygong, dilin, lqiang}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) is a key approach toward more data-efficient machine learning by jointly leverage both labeled and unlabeled data. We propose AlphaMatch, an efficient SSL method that leverages data augmentations, by efficiently enforcing the label consistency
between the data points and the augmented data derived
from them. Our key technical contribution lies on: 1) using alpha-divergence to prioritize the regularization on data
with high confidence, achieving similar effect as FixMatch
[32] but in a more flexible fashion, and 2) proposing an
optimization-based, EM-like algorithm to enforce the consistency, which enjoys better convergence than iterative regularization procedures used in recent SSL methods such as
FixMatch, UDA, and MixMatch. AlphaMatch is simple and
easy to implement, and consistently outperforms prior arts
on standard benchmarks, e.g. CIFAR-10, SVHN, CIFAR100, STL-10. Specifically, we achieve 91.3% test accuracy
on CIFAR-10 with just 4 labelled data per class, substantially improving over the previously best 88.7% accuracy
achieved by FixMatch.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) [7] is a powerful
paradigm for leveraging both labeled and unlabeled data
jointly in machine learning (ML). Effective SSL methods
can help build accurate prediction out of very limited labeled data, and can also boost state-of-the-art performance
and robustness in typical supervised learning by leveraging
extra unlabeled data [see e.g., 20, 39, 41]. Due to the high
cost of collecting labels and the availability of a vast amount
of unlabeled data, breakthroughs in SSL can dramatically
advance the application of ML in countless fields.
Recently, data augmentation has been shown a powerful
tool for developing state-of-the-art SSL methods, including unsupervised data augmentation (UDA) [38], FixMatch
[32], MixMatch [2], ReMixMatch [3] and Π-model [30].

All these methods are based on the similar idea of enforcing
the consistency between the label of a data point and that of
its perturbed version generated by data augmentation. This
encourages the learned models to be invariant under given
data augmentation transforms, hence incorporating inherent
structures of the data into semi-supervised learning.
The performance of these algorithms can be critically
influenced by what matching objective and matching algorithm are used to enforce the consistency. For the objective,
UDA applies a KL divergence penalty to enforce the consistency uniformly on all the data points. More recently,
FixMatch shows that it is useful to focus on matching the
consistency on the high confidence data points with a hard
thresholding approach, by applying regularization only on
data with confidence higher than a threshold and use the
hard label as the target. In terms of the matching algorithm, most of the existing methods, including UDA and
FixMatch, are based on a similar iterative regularization
procedure that uses the label distribution predicted from the
previous iteration as the target for the next step. Although
being simple and intuitive, a key problem is that this iterative procedure does not correspond to optimizing a fixed
objective function, and hence may suffer from instability
and non-convergence issues.
This work proposes two key algorithmic advances to improve the objective and algorithm for consistency matching
in SSL: 1) we propose to use alpha-divergence to measure
the label consistency. We show that, by using a large value
of α in alpha-divergence, we can focus more on high confidence instances in a way similar to the hard-thresholded
regularization of FixMatch, but in a more “soft” and flexible fashion. 2) We propose an optimization-based framework for consistency matching, which yields an EM-like
algorithm with better convergence property than the commonly used iterative regularization procedures. By combining these two key techniques, our main algorithm AlphaMatch yields better SSL with more effective and stable
consistency regularization.
Empirically, we find that AlphaMatch consistently outperforms recently-proposed SSL methods such as Fix113683

