Neural Side-By-Side: Predicting Human Preferences
for No-Reference Super-Resolution Evaluation
Valentin Khrulkov
Yandex, Russia
khrulkov.v@gmail.com

Artem Babenko
Yandex, Russia
National Research University Higher School of Economics
Moscow, Russia
artem.babenko@phystech.edu

Abstract
Super-resolution based on deep convolutional networks is currently gaining much attention from both
academia and industry. However, lack of proper evaluation measures makes it difficult to compare approaches, hampering progress in the field. Traditional
measures, such as PSNR or SSIM, are known to poorly
correlate with the human perception of image quality. Therefore, in existing works common practice is
also to report Mean-Opinion-Score (MOS) — the results of human evaluation of super-resolved images.
Unfortunately, the MOS values from different papers
are not directly comparable, due to the varying number of raters, their subjectivity, etc. By this paper,
we introduce Neural Side-By-Side — a new measure
that allows super-resolution models to be compared automatically, effectively approximating human preferences. Namely, we collect a large dataset of aligned
image pairs, which were produced by different superresolution models. Then each pair is annotated by several raters, who were instructed to choose a more visually appealing image. Given the dataset and the labels,
we trained a CNN model that obtains a pair of images
and for each image predicts a probability of being more
preferable than its counterpart. In this work, we show
that Neural Side-By-Side generalizes across both new
models and new data. Hence, it can serve as a natural approximation of human preferences, which can be
used to compare models or tune hyperparameters without raters’ assistance. We open-source the dataset and
the pretrained model1 and expect that it will become a
handy tool for researchers and practitioners.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) is a long-standing task
in image processing, which aims to recover high1 https://github.com/KhrulkovV/NeuralSBS

resolution images from low-resolution ones. During
the last decades, this task has attracted ever-growing
research attention, since super-resolution is a critical
component of many computer vision pipelines, including surveillance[15, 31], video enhancement[1], medical imaging[4] and others. Over the years, a plethora
of super-resolution methods has been developed, from
simple interpolation techniques to more powerful models, employing deep architectures, which currently
dominate the super-resolution landscape. Overall,
these days SR is an active research direction, and the
community constantly develops new model architectures, optimization objectives, regularization, and normalization techniques.
Given a large number of different SR models appearing in the literature, practitioners need an instrument to select the model that is the most effective
on the particular data. Furthermore, in many papers model hyperparameters are chosen based on the
performance on the academical benchmarks and can
be suboptimal for the real task in hand. In practice,
model selection and hyperparameter tuning are even
more challenging, since “ground truth” high-resolution
images can be absent for real data. This implies that
the established full-reference measures (such as PSNR,
SSIM[29], LPIPS[32]) cannot be used, and human evaluation is often the only option to choose the model.
The human evaluation is typically referred to as MeanOpinion-Score (MOS) and denotes the average rating
that human raters assigned to images produced by
the particular SR model. Being an adequate evaluation measure for SR, MOS, however, is both timeconsuming and expensive, which prevents its usage, e.g.
to tune hyperparameters.
In this paper, we introduce Neural Side-By-Side — a
new instrument for no-reference super-resolution evaluation that can be used for model comparison or hy4321
4988

