Global Transport for Fluid Reconstruction with Learned Self-Supervision
Erik Franz
Technical University of Munich

Barbara Solenthaler
ETH Zurich

Nils Thuerey
Technical University of Munich

erik.franz@tum.de

solenthaler@inf.ethz.ch

nils.thuerey@tum.de

Motion reconstruction

Self-supervision

Sparse-view input sequence

I60
0

I90
0

I135
0

Density transported with reconstructed motion

u0
ρ0

u1 … uF

Novel Views

…

…

I*̂t

Global Transport Optimization

…

I*̂t

I*̂t

…

Diﬀerentiable Rendering
Discriminator

I ̂0
0

t = 1.0s

t = 1.5s

I ̂1
0

Real/
Fake

… I ̂F
0

t = 1.0s

t = 2.25s

t = 1.5s

t = 2.25s

∇ρ 0, ∇u0, ∇u1, ⋯, ∇uF,

Figure 1: We propose a novel algorithm that reconstructs the motion u0..F of a single initial state ρ0 over the full course of
F frames of an input sequence, i.e., its global transport. Based on a learned self-supervision, our algorithm yields a realistic
motion for highly under-constrained scenarios such as a single input view.

Abstract
We propose a novel method to reconstruct volumetric
flows from sparse views via a global transport formulation.
Instead of obtaining the space-time function of the observations, we reconstruct its motion based on a single initial
state. In addition we introduce a learned self-supervision
that constrains observations from unseen angles. These visual constraints are coupled via the transport constraints
and a differentiable rendering step to arrive at a robust
end-to-end reconstruction algorithm. This makes the reconstruction of highly realistic flow motions possible, even from
only a single input view. We show with a variety of synthetic
and real flows that the proposed global reconstruction of the
transport process yields an improved reconstruction of the
fluid motion.

1. Introduction
The ambient space for many human activities and manufacturing processes is filled with fluids whose motion we
can only observe indirectly [53, 61, 72, 79]. Once passive
markers, e.g., in the form of ink or dye, are injected into the
fluid, it is possible to draw conclusions about the transport
induced by the motion of the fluid. This form of motion reconstruction is highly important for a large variety of applications, from medical settings [59], over engineering [67]
to visual effects [15], but at the same time poses huge challenges.

Fluids on human scales are typically turbulent, and exhibit a highly complex mixture of translating, shearing, and
rotating motions [60]. In addition, the markers by construction need to be sparse or transparent in order not to fully
occupy and occlude the observed volume. Several works
have alleviated these challenges with specialized hardware
[18, 77] or by incorporating the established physical model
for fluids, the Navier-Stokes equations, into the reconstruction [11, 21]. However, despite improvements in terms of
quality of the reconstruction, the high non-linearity of the
reconstruction problem coupled with ambiguous observations can cause the optimizations to find undesirable minimizers that deviate from ground truth motions.
In order to obtain a solution, existing approaches compute volumetric observations over time [21, 9, 79]. Hence,
despite including a physical model, the observed quantities
represent unknowns per time step, and are allowed to deviate from the constraints of the model. We make a central
observation: when enforcing the physical model over the
course of the complete trajectory of the observed fluid, the
corresponding reconstructions yield a motion that better adheres to the ground truth. Thus, instead of a sequence, our
reconstruction results in a single initial state of the density.
This state is evolved via a global transport over time purely
by the physical model and the temporal reconstruction of
the motion field. In addition to an improved reconstruction
of the motion, this strict differentiable physics prior [7, 28]
allows us to work with very sparse observations, with only
a single viewpoint in the extreme.

1632

