Function4D: Real-time Human Volumetric Capture from
Very Sparse Consumer RGBD Sensors
Tao Yu1 , Zerong Zheng1 , Kaiwen Guo2 , Pengpeng Liu3 , Qionghai Dai1 , Yebin Liu1
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China 2 Google, Switzerland
3
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China

Figure 1: Volumetric capture results of various challenging scenarios using Function4D.

Abstract
Human volumetric capture is a long-standing topic in
computer vision and computer graphics. Although highquality results can be achieved using sophisticated off-line
systems, real-time human volumetric capture of complex
scenarios, especially using light-weight setups, remains
challenging. In this paper, we propose a human volumetric capture method that combines temporal volumetric fusion and deep implicit functions. To achieve high-quality
and temporal-continuous reconstruction, we propose dynamic sliding fusion to fuse neighboring depth observations together with topology consistency. Moreover, for detailed and complete surface generation, we propose detailpreserving deep implicit functions for RGBD input which
can not only preserve the geometric details on the depth
inputs but also generate more plausible texturing results.
Results and experiments show that our method outperforms
existing methods in terms of view sparsity, generalization
capacity, reconstruction quality, and run-time efficiency.

1. Introduction
Real-time volumetric capture of human-centric scenarios is the key to a large number of applications ranging
from telecommunications, education, entertainment, and so
on. And the underlying technique, volumetric capture, is
a challenging and long-standing problem in both computer
vision and computer graphics due to the complex shapes,

fast motions, and changing topologies (e.g., human-object
manipulations and multi-person interactions) that need to
be faithfully reconstructed. Although high-end volumetric
capture systems [4, 13, 25, 5, 27, 36] based on dense camera
rigs (up to 100 cameras [8]) and custom-designed lighting
conditions [47, 14] can achieve high-quality reconstruction,
they all suffer from complicated system setups and are limited to professional studio usage.
In contrast, light-weight volumetric/performance capture
systems are more practical and attractive. Given a prescanned template, [22, 59, 15] track dense surface deformations from single-view RGB input [17, 18]. However, the prerequisite of a fixed-topology template restricts
their applications for general volumetric capture. In 2015,
DynamicFusion [33] proposed the first template-free and
single-view dynamic 3D reconstruction system. The following works [53, 54, 51, 42] further improve the reconstruction quality for human performance capture by incorporating semantic body priors. However, it remains challenging for them to handle large topological changes like
dressing or taking-off clothes. Recently, a line of research
[32, 37, 38, 23] leverages deep implicit functions for textured 3D human reconstruction only from a single RGB
image. However, they still suffer from off-line reconstruction performance [38, 37] or over-smoothed, temporally
discontinuous results [23]. State-of-the-art real-time volumetric capture systems are volumetric fusion methods like
Fusion4D [10] and Motion2Fusion [9]. But both of them
rely on custom-designed high-quality depth sensors (up to
15746

