œ

VLN

BERT: A Recurrent Vision-and-Language BERT for Navigation

Yicong Hong1 Qi Wu2 Yuankai Qi2 Cristian Rodriguez-Opazo1,2 Stephen Gould1
1
The Australian National University 2 The University of Adelaide
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision
{yicong.hong, cristian.rodriguez, stephen.gould}@anu.edu.au
qi.wu01@adelaide.edu.au, qykshr@gmail.com
Project URL: https://github.com/YicongHong/Recurrent-VLN-BERT

State

Abstract

[

Accuracy of many visiolinguistic tasks has benefited
significantly from the application of vision-and-language
(V&L) BERT. However, its application for the task of visionand-language navigation (VLN) remains limited. One reason for this is the difficulty adapting the BERT architecture
to the partially observable Markov decision process present
in VLN, requiring history-dependent attention and decision
making. In this paper we propose a recurrent BERT model
that is time-aware for use in VLN. Specifically, we equip
the BERT model with a recurrent function that maintains
cross-modal state information for the agent. Through extensive experiments on R2R and REVERIE we demonstrate
that our model can replace more complex encoder-decoder
models to achieve state-of-the-art results. Moreover, our
approach can be generalised to other transformer-based architectures, supports pre-training, and is capable of solving
navigation and referring expression tasks simultaneously.

1. Introduction
Asking a robot to navigate in complex environments following human instructions has been a long-term goal in AI
research. Recently, a great variety of vision-and-language
navigation (VLN) setups [3, 44, 52] have been introduced
for relevant studies and a large number of works explore
different methods to leverage visual and language clues to
assist navigation. For example, in the popular R2R navigation task [3], enhancing the learning of visual-textual correspondence is essential for the agent to correctly interpret
the instruction and perceive the environment.
On the other hand, recent work on vision-and-language
pre-training has achieved significant improvement over a
wide range of visiolinguistic problems. Instead of designing
complex and monolithic models for different tasks, those

𝑣1𝑡

𝑠𝑡

Observation 𝑉𝑡
3

𝑣2𝑡

𝑣𝑡

...

𝑣𝑛𝑡

]

Multi-Layer Transformer
Recurrence

[ 𝑑𝑡 ] Decision

Figure 1. Recurrent multi-layer Transformer for addressing partially observable inputs. A state token is defined along with the
input sequence. At each time step, a new state representation st
will be generated based on the new observation. Meanwhile, the
past information will help inferring a new decision dt .

methods pre-train a multi-layer Transformer [53] on a large
number of image-text pairs to learn generic cross-modal
representations [7, 26, 28, 30, 33, 48, 50], known as V&L
BERT (Bidirectional Encoder Representations from Transformers [10]). Such advances have inspired us to employ
V&L BERT for VLN, replacing the complicated modules
for modelling cross-modal relationships and allowing the
learning of navigation to adequately benefit from the pretrained visual-textual knowledge. Unlike recent works on
VLN, which apply a pre-trained V&L BERT only for encoding language [14, 29] or for measuring the instructionpath compatibility [37], we propose to use existing V&L
BERT models themselves for learning to navigate.
However, an essential difference between VLN and other
vision-and-language tasks is that VLN can be considered as
a partially observable Markov decision process, in which
future observations are dependent on the agent’s current
state and action. Meanwhile, at each navigational step, the
visual observation only corresponds to partial instruction,
requiring the agent to keep track of the navigation progress
and correctly localise the relevant sub-instruction to gain
useful information for decision making. Another difficulty
of applying V&L BERT for VLN is the high demand on
computational power; since the navigational episode could

1643

