Neighborhood Contrastive Learning for Novel Class Discovery
Zhun Zhong1 *, Enrico Fini1∗ , Subhankar Roy1,3 , Zhiming Luo2†, Elisa Ricci1,3 , Nicu Sebe1
2

Xiamen University 3 Fondazione Bruno Kessler

Abstract
In this paper, we address Novel Class Discovery (NCD),
the task of unveiling new classes in a set of unlabeled samples given a labeled dataset with known classes. We exploit
the peculiarities of NCD to build a new framework, named
Neighborhood Contrastive Learning (NCL), to learn discriminative representations that are important to clustering
performance. Our contribution is twofold. First, we find
that a feature extractor trained on the labeled set generates representations in which a generic query sample and
its neighbors are likely to share the same class. We exploit
this observation to retrieve and aggregate pseudo-positive
pairs with contrastive learning, thus encouraging the model
to learn more discriminative representations. Second, we
notice that most of the instances are easily discriminated
by the network, contributing less to the contrastive loss.
To overcome this issue, we propose to generate hard negatives by mixing labeled and unlabeled samples in the feature
space. We experimentally demonstrate that these two ingredients significantly contribute to clustering performance
and lead our model to outperform state-of-the-art methods by a large margin (e.g., clustering accuracy +13% on
CIFAR-100 and +8% on ImageNet).

1. Introduction
Learning from labeled data has been a widely studied
topic in the field of machine learning, and more recently
in deep learning [15, 21, 26]. Despite tremendous success,
supervised learning techniques largely rely on the availability of massive amounts of annotated data [8]. To get
rid of the difficulty and expensive cost of annotating, the
machine learning community has shifted the attention to
techniques that can learn with limited or completely nonannotated data. To this end, many semi-supervised [5, 35]
and unsupervised learning [4, 7, 14, 32] methods have been
proposed, which achieve promising results compared to supervised learning methods. Nonetheless, not much effort
has been made to exploit prior knowledge from existing la* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Labeled data

University of Trento

horse

horse

horse

dog

dog

dog

？

？

？

？

？

？

Novel Class Discovery
Joint
Training

Model

Unlabeled data

1

Hard Negative
Generation

pull
push

Ranking list of the query in the feature space
…

query

Classify Novel Classes

pseudo
positive

augmented
positive

…
synthetic
hard negative

…

…
negative

negative

Neighborhood Contrastive Learning

Figure 1. Illustration of novel class discovery (NCD) and the proposed neighborhood contrastive learning (NCL). In NCD, we are
given two datasets, a labeled one and an unlabeled one, with disjoint class sets. NCD aims to leverage all data to learn a model that
can cluster the unlabeled data. NCL tries to learn discriminative
representations by enforcing a query to be close to its correlated
view (augmented-positive) and its pseudo-positives (neighbors),
as well as to be far from the negatives. We also generate hard negatives by mixing between labeled and unlabeled features, which
can further facilitate our NCL.

beled datasets and use it to discover unknown classes that
are not present in the labeled data.
In this paper, we address one such relevant problem,
called Novel Class Discovery (NCD) [12, 13], where we
are given a labeled dataset and an unlabeled dataset, differing in class label space. The goal of NCD is to learn a
model that can cluster the unlabeled data by exploiting the
latent commonalities from the labeled data (see the top half
of Fig. 1). Importantly, the availability of labeled data does
not guarantee transferability because the patterns learned
from the labeled data with off-the-shelf models might not be
useful for the unlabeled data. This poses NCD apart from
semi-supervised learning paradigm, where the label space is
shared between labeled and unlabeled data, and also makes
it more challenging. The NCD task finds relevance in many
real-world scenarios where the volume of unlabeled data

10867

