PCLs: Geometry-aware Neural Reconstruction of 3D Pose
with Perspective Crop Layers
Frank Yu1

Mathieu Salzmann2

Pascal Fua2

Helge Rhodin1

1

2

UBC, Vancouver, Canada
EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland

{frankyu, rhodin}@cs.ubc.ca

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have proven
highly effective for image-based prediction tasks because of
their translation invariance and the locality of the computation they perform. For 3D pose estimation, this allows them
to focus on image locations that carry information about the

Crop
Label
Crop
Label

PCL

Match

1. Introduction

Mismatch

Local processing is an essential feature of CNNs and
other neural network architectures—it is one of the reasons why they work so well on images where relevant information is, to a large extent, local. However, perspective effects stemming from the projection in a conventional
camera vary for different global positions in the image.
We introduce Perspective Crop Layers (PCLs)—a form of
perspective crop of the region of interest based on the
camera geometry— and show that accounting for the perspective consistently improves the accuracy of state-of-theart 3D pose reconstruction methods. PCLs are modular neural network layers, which, when inserted into existing CNN and MLP architectures, deterministically remove the location-dependent perspective effects while leaving end-to-end training and the number of parameters of
the underlying neural network unchanged. We demonstrate that PCL leads to improved 3D human pose reconstruction accuracy for CNN architectures that use cropping
operations, such as spatial transformer networks (STN),
and, somewhat surprisingly, MLPs used for 2D-to-3D keypoint lifting. Our conclusion is that it is important to utilize camera calibration information when available, for
classical and deep-learning-based computer vision alike.
PCL offers an easy way to improve the accuracy of existing 3D reconstruction networks by making them geometryaware. Our code is publicly available at github.com/yufrank/PerspectiveCropLayers.

Rectangular

Abstract

Figure 1: Perspective effects and correction with PCL
crops. The skier looks as if she turns, from front to backwards facing, although recorded with a static camera and
going straight. PCLs correct the stretching originating from
the projection onto the image plane and matches the 3D
pose label to the local view direction of the crop.

pose while discarding other ones [43, 30, 6, 27, 32, 39, 44,
42, 20, 51, 17, 47].

9064

