End-to-End Learning for Joint Image Demosaicing, Denoising and
Super-Resolution
Wenzhu Xing and Karen Egiazarian
Computational Image Group, Tampere University, Finland
{wenzhu.xing, karen.eguiazarian}@tuni.fi

Abstract
Image denoising, demosaicing and super-resolution are
key problems of image restoration well studied in the recent
decades. Often, in practice, one has to solve these problems simultaneously. A problem of finding a joint solution
of the multiple image restoration tasks just begun to attract
an increased attention of researchers. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end solution for the joint demosaicing, denoising and super-resolution based on a specially designed
deep convolutional neural network (CNN). We systematically study different methods to solve this problem and compared them with the proposed method. Extensive experiments carried out on large image datasets demonstrate that
our method outperforms the state-of-the-art both quantitatively and qualitatively. Finally, we have applied various
loss functions in the proposed scheme and demonstrate that
by using the mean absolute error as a loss function, we can
obtain superior results in comparison to other cases.

1. Introduction
Image demosaicing, denoising, and super-resolution
(SR) are classical image restoration problems. With the
recent advancement of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and their application in image restoration, several
deep learning-based methods achieve the state-of-the-art
(SOTA) performance [19, 42, 37, 47].
In many practical applications an acquired image is distorted by multiple degradations, thus the above mentioned
individual image restoration problems have to be solved simultaneously. A most natural choice is to apply best methods of individual image restoration tasks in a sequence.
However, the existing solutions are not ideal. Addressing a
problem of image denoising, most of the algorithms smooth
out high-frequency content, such as image details and texture, while eliminating noise in flat areas. Image demosaicing and super-resolution algorithms often introduce color
artifacts especially in the texture regions and around image

edges. Thus, a sequential application of the individual image restoration methods will result in an accumulation of
errors produced by the individual methods. Another drawback of the sequential methods is an increased complexity
of a solution (considering both speed and memory).
As an alternative to this, joint solutions for the combined
problems have been proposed in the literature [3, 6, 7, 8, 18,
21, 26, 36, 44, 49]. However, the problem of finding a joint
solution for a triplet of problems of image demosaicing, denoising and SR has received much less attention [26, 29]. In
2019, Qian et al. [29] proposed a trinity network (TENet) to
jointly solve this composite problem. Although the TENet
is an end-to-end network, the execution order of different
tasks is fixed. To this end, Qian et al. have divided the
network into two modules and calculated the middle loss
to supervise the functionality of the first module and optimize the network. Recently, Liu et al. proposed another
solution to the joint problem, SGNet [26]. In order to improve the performance of demosaicing, SGNet introduces
two self-guidance methods, the green channel guidance and
the density map guidance.
In this paper, we comprehensively study various solutions of this combined problem. First, in subsection 3.1, we
adjust the execution order, and investigate possible joint solutions under this execution order. Then, in subsection 3.2,
we propose an end-to-end learning for the combined problem by designing a very deep convolutional neural network JDN DM SR. Differently from TENet and SGNet,
our network uses the residual channel connection block
(RCAB) [47] instead of residual-in-residual dense block
(RRDB) [37] as the basic block (see subsection 6.1). We
have carried out numerous experiments and demonstrate
that the proposed method outperforms other joint solutions
both quantitatively and qualitatively (Section 4). To further
optimize the proposed network, different loss functions are
utilized, and the comparative analysis of the resulting solutions is demonstrated in subsection 5.1. A comparison
with the state-of-the-art method TENet [29] and the ablation study (see Fig. 1) are presented in subsection 5.2 and
Section 6, respectively.

3507

