Incremental Learning via Rate Reduction
Ziyang Wu∗
Cornell

Christina Baek∗
UC Berkeley

Chong You
UC Berkeley

Yi Ma
UC Berkeley

zw287@cornell.edu

ke.baek@berkeley.edu

cyou@berkeley.edu

yima@eecs.berkeley.edu

Abstract
Current deep learning architectures suffer from catastrophic forgetting, a failure to retain knowledge of
previously learned classes when incrementally trained on
new classes. The fundamental roadblock faced by deep
learning methods is that the models are optimized as “black
boxes,” making it difficult to properly adjust the model
parameters to preserve knowledge about previously seen
data. To overcome the problem of catastrophic forgetting,
we propose utilizing an alternative “white box” architecture derived from the principle of rate reduction, where
each layer of the network is explicitly computed without
back propagation. Under this paradigm, we demonstrate
that, given a pretrained network and new data classes,
our approach can provably construct a new network that
emulates joint training with all past and new classes.
Finally, our experiments show that our proposed learning
algorithm observes significantly less decay in classification
performance, outperforming state of the art methods on
MNIST and CIFAR-10 by a large margin and justifying the
use of “white box” algorithms for incremental learning
even for sufficiently complex image data.

1. Introduction
Humans are capable of acquiring new information continuously while retaining previously obtained knowledge.
This seemingly natural capability, however, is extremely
difficult for deep neural networks (DNNs) to achieve. Incremental learning (IL), also known as continual learning
or life-long learning, thus studies the design of machine
learning systems that can assimilate new information without forgetting past knowledge.
In incremental learning, models go through rounds of
training sessions to accumulate knowledge for a particular
objective (e.g. classification). Specifically, under class incremental learning (class-IL), an agent has access to training data from a subset of the classes, known as a task, at
each training session and is evaluated on all seen classes
at inference time. The overarching goal is to precisely fine∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

tune a model trained on previously seen tasks to additionally
classify new classes of data. However, due to the absence
of old data, such models often suffer from catastrophic forgetting [14], which refers to a drastic drop in performance
after training incrementally on different tasks.
In the last few years, a flurry of continual learning algorithms have been proposed for DNNs, aiming to alleviate the effect of catastrophic forgetting. These methods can be roughly partitioned into three categories: 1)
regularization-based methods that often involve knowledge
distillation [12, 6, 19, 25], 2) exemplar-based methods that
keep partial copies of data from previously learned tasks
[16, 1, 22], and 3) modified architectures that attempt to
utilize network components specialized for different tasks
[17, 19, 11]. In practice, these algorithms exhibit varying performance across different datasets and their ability
to mitigate catastrophic forgetting is inadequate. Factors
including domain shift [18] across tasks and imbalance of
new and past classes [22] are part of the reason.
The fundamental roadblock in deep continual learning
is that DNNs are trained and optimized in a “black box”
fashion. Each model contains millions of mathematical operations and its complexity prevents humans from following the mapping from data input to prediction. Given our
current limited understanding of network parameters, it is
difficult, if not impossible, to precisely control the parameters of a pre-trained model such that the decision boundary
learned fits to new data without losing its understanding of
old data.
In this work, we take a drastically different approach to
incremental learning. We avoid “black box” architectures
entirely, and instead utilize a recently proposed “white box”
DNN architecture derived from the principle of rate reduction [2]. Termed ReduNet, each layer of this DNN can be
explicitly computed in a forward-propagation fashion and
each parameter has precise statistical interpretations. The
so-constructed network is intrinsically suitable for incremental learning because the second-order statistics of any
previously-seen training data is preserved in the network
parameters to be leveraged for future tasks.
We propose a new incremental learning algorithm utiliz-

1125

