Probabilistic Model Distillation for Semantic Correspondence
Xin Li1 Deng-Ping Fan2 Fan Yang1,∗ Ao Luo3 Hong Cheng4 Zicheng Liu5
1
Group 42 (G42) 2 Inception Institute of AI 3 Megvii Technology 4 UESTC 5 Microsoft

Semantic correspondence is a fundamental problem in
computer vision, which aims at establishing dense correspondences across images depicting different instances under the same category. This task is challenging due to
large intra-class variations and a severe lack of ground
truth. A popular solution is to learn correspondences from
synthetic data. However, because of the limited intraclass appearance and background variations within synthetically generated training data, the model’s capability
for handling “real” image pairs using such strategy is intrinsically constrained. We address this problem with the
use of a novel Probabilistic Model Distillation (PMD) approach which transfers knowledge learned by a probabilistic teacher model on synthetic data to a static student model
with the use of unlabeled real image pairs. A probabilistic supervision reweighting (PSR) module together with a
confidence-aware loss (CAL) is used to mine the useful
knowledge and alleviate the impact of errors. Experimental results on a variety of benchmarks show that our PMD
achieves state-of-the-art performance. To demonstrate the
generalizability of our approach, we extend PMD to incorporate stronger supervision for better accuracy – the probabilistic teacher is trained with stronger key-point supervision. Again, we observe the superiority of our PMD.
The extensive experiments verify that PMD is able to infer more reliable supervision signals from the probabilistic
teacher for representation learning and largely alleviate the
influence of errors in pseudo labels. Code is available at
https://github.com/fanyang587/PMD.

1. Introduction
Matching all pixels between images is a classic research
problem in computer vision. Unlike stereo matching [62]
or optical flow [3] that deal with images containing different
viewpoints of one scene or object, semantic correspondence
poses additional challenges by pushing the boundaries of
dense matching to correspondence estimation between visually similar images. Matching beyond scene leads to many
∗ Corresponding author: Fan Yang (fanyang uestc@hotmail.com)

(a)

Model A

Input

Model B

Ensemble

Model C

Student model

Predict

(b)

Transform A

Model

Input

Transform B

Model

Transform C

Model

Predict

Student model

(c)
Input

Ensemble

Sample A

Probabilistic
model

Sample B

Hypotheses

𝓝 𝛍, 𝛔

𝓝_e 𝟎, 𝚺

Sample C

Student model

Predict

Supervision
reweighting

Abstract

errors

Figure 1. Idea Illustration. Instead of (a) ensembling multiple
models to generate “soft” predictions as the student’s target [22],
or (b) creating a single “hard” label from different transformations [54], (c) our idea is to distill knowledge from hypotheses
from a probabilistic teacher model in a probabilistic manner.

meaningful applications, such as attribute transfer [34, 44],
image editing [2, 17, 40], scene collaging [27], object discovery and segmentation [43, 59]. This task is extremely
challenging due to large intra-class variation and a severe
lack of groundtruth correspondence maps.
One way to overcome these challenges is to use handcrafted image descriptors (e.g., SIFT [50], HOG [9],
DAISY [67]) in combination with different regularization
methods [18,31,45–47,53,61,66] to estimate semantic correspondence. Unfortunately, hand-crafted descriptors are
intrinsically weak in capturing high-level semantics and
thus, less robust to large intra-class variation, geometric
deformation and background clutter. Inspired by the success of self-supervised deep learning models, a series of
approaches have been proposed to learn semantic descriptors [63], or directly regress parameters of a global trans-

7505

