Zhikai Chen
Xi’an Jiaotong University

Lingxi Xie
Huawei Inc.

Shanmin PangB
Xi’an Jiaotong University

zhikai chen@outlook.com

198808xc@gmail.com

pangsm@xjtu.edu.cn

Yong He
Xi’an Jiaotong University

Bo Zhang
Tencent Blade Team

hy0275@stu.xjtu.edu.cn

cradminzhang@tencent.com

Original input ⟹ Original output

Facial Reenactment

Face Editing

Face Replacement

MagDR: Mask-guided Detection and Reconstruction for Defending Deepfakes

Disrupted input ⟹ Disrupted output

Reconstructed input ⟹ Reconstructed output

Disrupting

Reconstructing

Disrupting

Reconstructing

Disrupting

Reconstructing

Figure 1: MagDR defends deepfakes from adversarial attacks in three main tasks, face replacement (top), face editing
(middle), and facial reenactment (bottom). In each group, we show the original generation effect (left), how adversarial
perturbations damage the generation (middle), and how the proposed defender recovers the desired output (right).

Abstract
1

Deepfakes raised serious concerns on the authenticity
of visual contents. Prior works revealed the possibility to
disrupt deepfakes by adding adversarial perturbations to
the source data, but we argue that the threat has not been
eliminated yet. This paper presents MagDR, a mask-guided
detection and reconstruction pipeline for defending deepfakes from adversarial attacks. MagDR starts with a detection module that defines a few criteria to judge the abnormality of the output of deepfakes, and then uses it to guide
1 This work was supported by NSFC under Grant 61972312 and by the
Key Research and Development Program of Shaanxi under Grant 2020GY002.

a learnable reconstruction procedure. Adaptive masks are
extracted to capture the change in local facial regions. In
experiments, MagDR defends three main tasks of deepfakes,
and the learned reconstruction pipeline transfers across input data, showing promising performance in defending both
black-box and white-box attacks.

1. Introduction
Deepfakes originally appeared as a neutral technology
that can synthesize images with the human face replaced
by another identity. While the technique benefits the community in the scenarios of e.g. creating new characters or
decorate them with vivid facial expressions, it gradually be-

9014

