QPP: Real-Time Quantization Parameter Prediction for Deep Neural Networks
Vladimir Kryzhanovskiy1,∗ , Gleb Balitskiy2,∗ , Nikolay Kozyrskiy2,∗ , Aleksandr Zuruev3
1
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 2 Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology,
3
Novosibirsk State University
kryzhanovskiy.vladimir@huawei.com, {gleb.balitskiy,nikolay.kozyrskiy}@skoltech.ru,
alexander.zuruev@yandex.ru

Abstract
Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) cannot be effectively used in mobile and embedded devices due to strict
requirements for computational complexity, memory, and
power consumption. The quantization of weights and feature maps (activations) is a popular approach to solve this
problem. Training-aware quantization often shows excellent results but requires a full dataset, which is not always
available. Post-training quantization methods, in turn, are
applied without fine-tuning but still work well for many
classes of tasks like classification, segmentation, and so on.
However, they either imply a big overhead for quantization
parameters (QPs) calculation at runtime (dynamic methods) or lead to an accuracy drop if pre-computed static QPs
are used (static methods). Moreover, most inference frameworks don’t support dynamic quantization. Thus we propose a novel quantization approach called QPP: quantization parameter prediction. With a small subset of a training
dataset or unlabeled data from the same domain, we find the
predictor that can accurately estimate QPs of activations
given only the NN’s input data. Such a predictor allows
us to avoid complex calculation of precise values of QPs
while maintaining the quality of the model. To illustrate
our method’s efficiency, we added QPP into two dynamic
approaches: 1) Dense+Sparse quantization, where the predetermined percentage of activations are not quantized, 2)
standard quantization with equal quantization steps. We
provide experiments on a wide set of tasks including superresolution, facial landmark, segmentation, and classification.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have been actively developing in recent years. They have already proven to be
powerful tools for solving a wide variety of complex tasks
∗ Equally-contributed first authors

such as classification, segmentation, image enhancement,
etc. But modern architectures are usually quite bulky and do
not meet the industry requirements for energy and memory
efficiency. Therefore, additional methods have to be used to
compress a neural network in order to decrease the model’s
inference time while preserving its quality. One of such approaches is the quantization of weights and feature maps
(activations). The efficiency of quantization is based on the
redundant representation of parameters in a single-precision
floating-point format. The values in low-precision (e.g., 4,
8 bit-width) format require less memory, and fixed-point
arithmetic operations take less time with hardware support
than floating-point ones.
To date, many different quantization approaches have
been proposed, so we give a classification of these methods and highlight their scope below. We also indicate the
place of our work in this classification.
The following systematization is built upon the two basic
criteria: the availability of a training dataset and the inference time.
1. Quatization-Aware Training. These methods are
characterized by the presence of the fine-tuning procedure, which requires a labeled training dataset. The
quantization parameters are fixed after the quantized
neural network converges. Usually, such methods have
better performance compared to other schemes. For
example, the method described in [25] aims to train
CNNs with low bit-width weights and activations using low bit-width parameter gradients. In [5] authors
propose to find the proper activation clipping parameter during training, which helps to find to the optimal
quantization scale. The further improved quantizationaware scheme based on the trainable quantization step
size is introduced in the paper [8]. Esser et al. describe how they adjust the task loss gradients in order
to learn the quantization step size and the weights of
NN simultaneously. In [3] authors added the offset, a
new trainable parameter, in addition to trainable quantization step size, and achieved good results compared

10684

