Disentangling Label Distribution for Long-tailed Visual Recognition
Youngkyu Hong∗ Seungju Han∗ Kwanghee Choi∗ Seokjun Seo Beomsu Kim
Hyperconnect

Buru Chang†

{youngkyu.hong,seungju.han,kwanghee.choi,seokjun.seo,beomsu.kim,buru.chang}@hpcnt.com

Abstract
The current evaluation protocol of long-tailed visual
recognition trains the classification model on the longtailed source label distribution and evaluates its performance on the uniform target label distribution. Such protocol has questionable practicality since the target may
also be long-tailed. Therefore, we formulate long-tailed
visual recognition as a label shift problem where the target and source label distributions are different. One of
the significant hurdles in dealing with the label shift problem is the entanglement between the source label distribution and the model prediction. In this paper, we focus on disentangling the source label distribution from the
model prediction. We first introduce a simple but overlooked baseline method that matches the target label distribution by post-processing the model prediction trained
by the cross-entropy loss and the Softmax function. Although this method surpasses state-of-the-art methods on
benchmark datasets, it can be further improved by directly disentangling the source label distribution from the
model prediction in the training phase. Thus, we propose
a novel method, LAbel distribution DisEntangling (LADE)
loss based on the optimal bound of Donsker-Varadhan representation. LADE achieves state-of-the-art performance
on benchmark datasets such as CIFAR-100-LT, Places-LT,
ImageNet-LT, and iNaturalist 2018. Moreover, LADE outperforms existing methods on various shifted target label
distributions, showing the general adaptability of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Based on large-scale datasets such as ImageNet [50],
COCO [34], and Places [64], deep neural networks have
achieved significant progress in various visual recognition tasks, including classification [22, 52], object detection [47, 18], and segmentation [48]. In contrast to these
relatively balanced datasets, real-world data often exhibit
∗ Equal contribution. Author ordering determined by coin flip.
† Corresponding author.

Training Phase

𝒑𝒔 (𝒚)

Entanglement
v

Training Phase

Cross-entropy

𝒑𝒔 (𝒚|𝒙)

𝒑𝒕 (𝒚)

LADE (Ours)

𝒑𝒔 (𝒚)

Injection

v

Discrepancy

𝒑𝒔 (𝒚|𝒙)

Inference Phase
Adaptation

Disentanglement
𝒑(𝒙|𝒚)
𝒑(𝒙)

Inference Phase

𝒑𝒔 (𝒚|𝒙)

𝒑𝒕 (𝒚)

𝒑(𝒙|𝒚)
𝒑(𝒙)

Injection

𝒑𝒕 (𝒚|𝒙)

Figure 1: A comparison between the cross-entropy loss and
our proposed LADE loss in long-tailed visual recognition.
After training with the cross-entropy loss, the model prediction gets entangled with the source label distribution ps (y),
which causes a discrepancy with the target label distribution pt (y) during the inference phase. Our proposed LADE
disentangles ps (y) from the model prediction so that it can
adapt to the arbitrary target probability by injecting pt (y).
long-tailed distribution where head (major) classes occupy
most of the data, while tail (minor) classes have a handful of samples [58, 38]. Unfortunately, the performance of
state-of-the-art classification models degrades on datasets
following the long-tailed distribution [7, 21, 60].
To tackle this problem, many long-tailed visual recognition methods [7, 21, 25, 8, 51, 62, 9] have been proposed.
These methods compare their effectiveness by (1) training
on the long-tailed source label distribution ps (y) and (2)
evaluating on the uniform target label distribution pt (y).
However, we argue that this evaluation protocol is often impractical as it is natural to assume that pt (y) could be the
arbitrary distribution such as uniform distribution [50] and
long-tailed distribution [17, 10].
From this perspective, we are motivated to explore a new
method that adapts the model to the arbitrary pt (y). In this
paper, we borrow the concept of the label distribution shift
problems [16, 36, 56] to the long-tailed visual recognition

6626

