Prior Based Human Completion
Zibo Zhao1 Wen Liu1 Yanyu Xu2 Xianing Chen1 Weixin Luo1 Lei Jin1
Bohui Zhu4 Tong Liu5 Binqiang Zhao4 Shenghua Gao†1,3
1

ShanghaiTech University
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR
3
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
4
Alibaba Group 5 Taobao
2

{zhaozb,liuwen,chenxn1,luowx,jinlei,gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
xu yanyu@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg

yingmu@taobao.com

{bhiui.zbh,binqiang.zhao}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
We study a very challenging task, human image completion, which tries to recover the human body part with a
reasonable human shape from the corrupted region. Since
each human body part is unique, it is infeasible to restore
the missing part by borrowing textures from other visible regions. Thus, we propose two types of learned priors to compensate for the damaged region. One is a structure prior,
it uses a human parsing map to represent the human body
structure. The other is a structure-texture correlation prior.
It learns a structure and a texture memory bank, which encodes the common body structures and texture patterns, respectively. With the aid of these memory banks, the model
could utilize the visible pattern to query and fetch a similar structure and texture pattern to introduce additional
reasonable structures and textures for the corrupted region.
Besides, since multiple potential human shapes are underlying the corrupted region, we propose multi-scale structure
discriminators to further restore a plausible topological
structure. Experiments on various large-scale benchmarks
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Human image completion aims to repair human body
parts in the corrupted human image. It has various potential
applications, including the restoration of old human photographs and films, human image re-composition, and fashion clothing re-editing.
By far, most image inpainting works [27, 45, 33, 44]
make the best use of the repeated textures in visible regions,
such as the attention mechanism [47], to restore a photo† Corresponding author

(a) Cover the repeated region
(DeepFill v2)

Structure

(b) Cover the human part
(DeepFill v2)

Texture

(c) Cover the human part (Ours)

Figure 1. Illustration of the human body completion. (a) Existing
image inpainting methods [48] usually works well to recover these
repeated regions, (b) while they might fail to recover the unique
human body region. (c) We mainly focus on how to recover the
corrupted unique human body in the image via borrowing structure
and texture information of other images from the learned memory. With the help of additional prior information, our proposed
method could generate a more realistic and plausible image.

realistic image from the damaged part. Since there are both
human body and background in corrupted regions, and they
usually have the different style of textures, it is ambiguous
to place the repeated textures into the right position. Thus,
following works [11, 54, 10, 32] take an additional human
mask as guidance to ease the texture ambiguities between
foreground and background. However, since each human
body part is unique (only one head), it is impracticable to
borrow the repeated textures from other parts. Besides, a
human body is non-rigid with diverse poses, and thereby
multiple potential human shapes exist for the damaged re-

7951

