Center-based 3D Object Detection and Tracking
Tianwei Yin
UT Austin

Xingyi Zhou
UT Austin

Philipp Krähenbühl
UT Austin

yintianwei@utexas.edu

zhouxy@cs.utexas.edu

philkr@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Three-dimensional objects are commonly represented as
3D boxes in a point-cloud. This representation mimics the
well-studied image-based 2D bounding-box detection but
comes with additional challenges. Objects in a 3D world do
not follow any particular orientation, and box-based detectors have difficulties enumerating all orientations or fitting
an axis-aligned bounding box to rotated objects. In this
paper, we instead propose to represent, detect, and track 3D
objects as points. Our framework, CenterPoint, first detects
centers of objects using a keypoint detector and regresses
to other attributes, including 3D size, 3D orientation, and
velocity. In a second stage, it refines these estimates using
additional point features on the object. In CenterPoint, 3D
object tracking simplifies to greedy closest-point matching.
The resulting detection and tracking algorithm is simple,
efficient, and effective. CenterPoint achieved state-of-theart performance on the nuScenes benchmark for both 3D
detection and tracking, with 65.5 NDS and 63.8 AMOTA
for a single model. On the Waymo Open Dataset, CenterPoint outperforms all previous single model methods by a
large margin and ranks first among all Lidar-only submissions. The code and pretrained models are available at
https://github.com/tianweiy/CenterPoint.

a) Anchor-based t=1

b) Center-based t=1

c) Anchor-based t=2

d) Center-based t=2

1. Introduction

Figure 1: We present a center-based framework to represent,
detect and track objects. Previous anchor-based methods
use axis-aligned anchors with respect to ego-vehicle coordinate. When the vehicle is driving on straight roads, both
anchor-based (red boxes) and our center-based (red points)
method can detect objects accurately (top). However, during
a safety-critical left turn (bottom), anchor-based methods
have difficulty fitting axis-aligned bounding boxes to rotated
objects. Our center-based model accurately detects objects
through rotationally invariant points. Best viewed in color.

Strong 3D perception is a core ingredient in many stateof-the-art driving systems [1, 48]. Compared to the wellstudied 2D detection problem, 3D detection on point-clouds
offers a series of interesting challenges: First, point-clouds
are sparse, and most parts of 3D objects are without measurements [22]. Second, the resulting output is a threedimensional box that is often not well aligned with any
global coordinate frame. Third, 3D objects come in a wide
range of sizes, shapes, and aspect ratios, e.g., in the traffic domain, bicycles are near planer, buses and limousines
elongated, and pedestrians tall. These marked differences between 2D and 3D detection made a transfer of ideas between

the two domains harder [43, 45, 58]. An axis-aligned 2D
box [16, 17] is a poor proxy of a free-form 3D object. One
solution might be to classify a different template (anchor)
for each object orientation [56, 57], but this unnecessarily increases the computational burden and may introduce a large
number of potential false-positive detections. We argue that
the main underlying challenge in linking up the 2D and 3D
domains lies in this representation of objects.
In this paper, we show how representing objects as
points (Figure 1) greatly simplifies 3D recognition. Our
two-stage 3D detector, CenterPoint, finds centers of ob-

11784

