Deep Active Surface Models
Udaranga Wickramasinghe, Pascal Fua
Computer Vision Laboratory
EPFL

Graham Knott
BioEM Laboratory
EPFL

{udaranga.wickramasinghe, pascal.fua}@epfl.ch

graham.knott@epfl.ch

Abstract
Active Surface Models have a long history of being
useful to model complex 3D surfaces. But only Active
Contours have been used in conjunction with deep
networks, and then only to produce the data term as well as
meta-parameter maps controlling them. In this paper, we
advocate a much tighter integration. We introduce layers
that implement them that can be integrated seamlessly into
Graph Convolutional Networks to enforce sophisticated
smoothness priors at an acceptable computational cost.
We will show that the resulting Deep Active Surface
Models outperform equivalent architectures that use
traditional regularization loss terms to impose smoothness
priors for 3D surface reconstruction from 2D images and
for 3D volume segmentation.

1. Introduction
Triangulated meshes are one of the most popular and
versatile kind of 3D surface representation. In recent
years, one of the most popular approaches to inferring
such representations from images has been to use deep
networks to produce a volumetric representation and then
running a marching-cube style algorithm to create the
mesh. However, using marching-cubes tends to introduce
artifacts and introduces additional complexities when trying
to make the process end-to-end differentiable. Hence, deeplearning methods that go directly and without resorting to
an intermediate stage from 2D images [40, 32, 41] and 3D
image stacks [42] to 3D triangulated surfaces have recently
been proposed.
Unfortunately, these direct methods are also prone to
generating unwanted artifacts such as those shown at the
top of Fig. 1. State-of-the-art methods handle them by
introducing additional regularizing loss terms such as the
edge length loss, the normal consistency loss, or the
Laplacian loss during training [14]. To be effective without
sacrificing reconstruction accuracy, these terms must be
carefully weighted, which is typically difficult to achieve.

Figure 1: Smoothness and Accuracy.
(Top) 3D surface
meshes of a couch modeled from an RGB image and of a synaptic
connection segmented from an electron microscopy stack by Mesh
R-CNN [14] and by Vox2Mesh [42], two state-of-the-art meshgenerating methods. (Bottom) Results using the same backbones
augmented by our DASM smoothing layers. The meshes have far
fewer artifacts and we will show that they are also more accurate.
In this paper, we solve this problem by introducing into
the surface generating architecture a special-purpose layer
that regularize the meshes using a semi-implicit scheme that
involves recursively solving sparse linear systems of linear
equations. It propagates smoothness constraints much faster
and more reliably than traditional gradient descent-based
energy minimization without requiring much computational
power and yields surface meshes that fit the data while
remaining smooth, such as those shown at the bottom of
Fig. 1. Furthermore, this scheme enables us to
• modulate locally the amount of regularization we
impose so that we regularize only where it is needed
and, hence, preserve accuracy;
• use meshes consisting of vertices with arbitrary

11652

