Partial Person Re-identification with Part-Part Correspondence Learning
Tianyu He1 , Xu Shen1 , Jianqiang Huang1 , Zhibo Chen2 , and Xian-Sheng Hua1
1
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
2
University of Science and Technology of China
timhe.hty@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Driven by the success of deep learning, the last decade
has seen rapid advances in person re-identification (re-ID).
Nonetheless, most of approaches assume that the input is
given with the fulfillment of expectations, while imperfect
input remains rarely explored to date, which is a non-trivial
problem since directly apply existing methods without adjustment can cause significant performance degradation. In
this paper, we focus on recognizing partial (flawed) input
with the assistance of proposed Part-Part Correspondence
Learning (PPCL), a self-supervised learning framework that
learns correspondence between image patches without any
additional part-level supervision. Accordingly, we propose
Part-Part Cycle (PP-Cycle) constraint and Part-Part Triplet
(PP-Triplet) constraint that exploit the duality and uniqueness between corresponding image patches respectively. We
verify our proposed PPCL on several partial person re-ID
benchmarks. Experimental results demonstrate that our
approach can surpass previous methods in terms of the standard evaluation metric.

1. Introduction
For most of computer vision tasks, the input data for algorithms is commonly assumed to be complete or with adequate information that can be recognized [28, 48, 38, 44, 62].
But in the real-world scenario, especially for person reidentification (re-ID) in the surveillance video, this assumption can not always be satisfied due to flawed data process
pipeline (e.g., imperfect detectors [41], communication failures, pose variances, etc.). While as shown in Figure 5,
trivially apply existing methods without adjustment causes
significant performance degradation, since Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNN) usually suffer from understanding
part-whole relationships [27]. In this paper, we focus on this
practical yet challenging problem, where the input image is
represented by only a continuous part of the original one.
To alleviate the challenge of partial person re-ID, there
are two main difficulties: 1) as shown in Figure 1a, the

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a): Partial person re-ID is required to adapt to
variances on input scales and regions. (b): The irrelevant
region needs to be eliminated when measuring similarity
between two images. (c): We employ GLRec to rectify arbitrary input and CRLoc to predict semantically corresponding
partial region.
partial input images are typically provided with unknown
size and scale; 2) as shown in Figure 1b, when computing
the similarity with the reference image, the irrelevant partial regions may bring much noise for recognition. To our
knowledge, the present studies for partial person re-ID have
been developed from two perspectives: 1) learn a multi-scale
feature to adapt to arbitrary input size [15, 16, 35]; 2) locate shared regions between partial image and the reference
one [46, 36]. However, these methods typically address one
of aforementioned difficulties and less effort has been made
to solve both of them in an unified framework. This exactly
motivates our work.
In this paper, we tackle partial person re-ID problem by
proposing Part-Part Correspondence Learning (PPCL), as
illustrated in Figure 1c, in which we propose a gated layout
rectifier (GLRec) and a corresponding region locator (CRLoc) to cope with aforementioned difficulties respectively.
Concretely, the GLRec module is a gated transformation
regression CNN module that takes an arbitrary partial image
xp in, and outputs a rectified result xr with predicted affine
transformation coefficients. Through the GLRec module, we

9105

