Learning Complete 3D Morphable Face Models from Images and Videos
Mallikarjun B R Ayush Tewari Hans-Peter Seidel Mohamed Elgharib Christian Theobalt
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

Figure 1. We present a method for learning complete 3D morphable models of faces from videos and images. We show visualizations
of the learned models on the right. Faces in each direction of indicated arrows is obtained by linearly scaling individual component of
respective models. Identity geometry captures variations in the face shape (second column), lips (top left to bottom right) and jaw (top
right to bottom left), while expressions capture variations due to mouth opening (second row), smile (second column) and eye movement
(top right to bottom left). Albedo/Reflectance spans a variety of skin color (second column), eye color (top right to bottom left) and gender
specific features such as facial hair and make-up (second row).

Abstract

Most 3D face reconstruction methods rely on 3D morphable models, which disentangle the space of facial deformations into identity and expression geometry, and skin
reflectance. These models are typically learned from a limited number of 3D scans and thus do not generalize well
across different identities and expressions. We present the
first approach to learn complete 3D models of face identity
and expression geometry, and reflectance, just from images
and videos. The virtually endless collection of such data,
in combination with our self-supervised learning-based approach allows for learning face models that generalize beyond the span of existing approaches. Our network design
and loss functions ensure a disentangled parameterization
of not only identity and albedo, but also, for the first time,
an expression basis. Our method also allows for in-the-wild
monocular reconstruction at test time. We show that our
learned models better generalize and lead to higher quality
image-based reconstructions than existing approaches. We
show that the learned model can also be personalized to a
video, for a better capture of the geometry and albedo.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D face reconstruction is defined as recovering the dense 3D facial geometry and skin reflectance of a
face from a monocular image. It has applications in several
domains such as VR/AR, entertainment, medicine, and human computer interaction [65, 16]. We are concerned with
in-the-wild images which can include faces of many different identities with varied expressions and poses, in unconstrained environments with widely different illumniation.
This problem has been well-studied, where a lot of success
can be owed to the emergence of 3D Morphable Models [5].
These models define the space of deformations for faces as
separate disentangled models such as facial identity, expression and reflectance. They are widely used in the literature
to limit the search space for reconstruction [65, 16]. However, these models are often learned from a limited number
of 3D scans, which constrains their generalizability to subjects and expressions outside the space of the scans.
Recent efforts have proposed to learn face models with
better generalizability from internet images or videos [55,
56, 58, 59, 60]. However, learning from in-the-wild data
is highly challenging, requiring solutions for handling the
strong inherent ambiguities and for ensuring disentanglement between different components of the reconstruction.

3361

