Complementary Relation Contrastive Distillation
Jinguo Zhu1†
Shixiang Tang2
Dapeng Chen3‡
Shijie Yu4
Yakun Liu3
Mingzhe Rong1
Aijun Yang1
Xiaohua Wang1‡
1
2
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University
The University of Sydney
Sensetime Group Limited
4
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS
lechatelia@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
sj.Yu@siat.ac.cn

tangshixiang@sensetime.com

liuyakun1@sensetime.com

384822707@qq.com

{mzrong, yangaijun, xhw}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Knowledge distillation aims to transfer representation
ability from a teacher model to a student model. Previous
approaches focus on either individual representation distillation or inter-sample similarity preservation. While we
argue that the inter-sample relation conveys abundant information and needs to be distilled in a more effective way.
In this paper, we propose a novel knowledge distillation
method, namely Complementary Relation Contrastive Distillation (CRCD), to transfer the structural knowledge from
the teacher to the student. Specifically, we estimate the mutual relation in an anchor-based way and distill the anchorstudent relation under the supervision of its corresponding
anchor-teacher relation. To make it more robust, mutual
relations are modeled by two complementary elements: the
feature and its gradient. Furthermore, the low bound of mutual information between the anchor-teacher relation distribution and the anchor-student relation distribution is maximized via relation contrastive loss, which can distill both
the sample representation and the inter-sample relations.
Experiments on different benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed CRCD.

1. Introduction
Knowledge distillation aims to transfer the knowledge
from one deep learning model (the teacher) to another (the
student), such as distilling a large network into a smaller
one [19, 49, 2, 48, 12] or ensembling a collection of models
into a single model [29, 37, 27, 45]. It has a wide range
of applications in the industry especially when a neural network needs to be efficiently deployed on devices with limited computational resources [9, 54, 38]. Although great
progress has been achieved in the knowledge distillation
† This work was done when Jinguo Zhu was an intern at SenseTime.
‡ Corresponding authors.

MODEL
FEATURE A

A

B

B

C

C

D

D

A

A
A

A
C

D

D

C

B

Sample contrastive distillation

B

Relation preserving distillation

Teacher model T

Teacher feature f

T

Student model S

Student feature f

S

Intra-sample force

Inter-sample force
Feature relation

Figure 1: Sample contrastive distillation vs. Relation preserving distillation. Four neighboring samples and their corresponding features are displayed, and capital letters are
used to identify them. While pulling fAS closer to fAT ,
sample contrastive distillation will simultaneously push fAS
T
away from fBT , fCT and fD
without distinction, whereas relation preserving distillation preserves the feature relations
across the feature space, thus fAS can be optimized along the
optimal direction.
regime, there is still no consensus on what kind of knowledge really needs to be preserved in the distillation [14].
As one of the most effective distillation methods, CRD
[41] holds the view that the representational knowledge is
structured. So It tries to capture the correlations and higherorder output dependencies for each sample, which is different from the original KD objective introduced in [19]
that treats all dimensions as independent information. CRD

9260

