Cross-Modal Collaborative Representation Learning and a Large-Scale
RGBT Benchmark for Crowd Counting
Lingbo Liu1 , Jiaqi Chen1 , Hefeng Wu1 , Guanbin Li1,2 , Chenglong Li3 , Liang Lin1,4 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China 3 Anhui University, China 4 DarkMatter AI Research, China

Abstract
Crowd counting is a fundamental yet challenging task,
which desires rich information to generate pixel-wise crowd
density maps. However, most previous methods only used
the limited information of RGB images and cannot well
discover potential pedestrians in unconstrained scenarios.
In this work, we find that incorporating optical and thermal information can greatly help to recognize pedestrians.
To promote future researches in this field, we introduce
a large-scale RGBT Crowd Counting (RGBT-CC) benchmark, which contains 2,030 pairs of RGB-thermal images
with 138,389 annotated people. Furthermore, to facilitate the multimodal crowd counting, we propose a crossmodal collaborative representation learning framework,
which consists of multiple modality-specific branches, a
modality-shared branch, and an Information AggregationDistribution Module (IADM) to capture the complementary
information of different modalities fully. Specifically, our
IADM incorporates two collaborative information transfers
to dynamically enhance the modality-shared and modalityspecific representations with a dual information propagation mechanism. Extensive experiments conducted on the
RGBT-CC benchmark demonstrate the effectiveness of our
framework for RGBT crowd counting. Moreover, the proposed approach is universal for multimodal crowd counting and is also capable to achieve superior performance on
the ShanghaiTechRGBD [22] dataset. Finally, our source
code and benchmark have been released at http://
lingboliu.com/RGBT_Crowd_Counting.html.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting [18, 10] is a fundamental computer vision task that aims to automatically estimate the number of
people in unconstrained scenes. Over the past decade, this
task has attracted a lot of research interests due to its huge
* The corresponding author is Liang Lin. Lingbo Liu and Jiaqi Chen
share first-authorship.

application potentials (e.g., traffic management [62, 28] and
video surveillance [52]). During the recent COVID-19 pandemic [47], crowd counting has also been employed widely
for social distancing monitoring [11].
In the literature, numerous models [64, 43, 27, 56, 1,
21, 26, 34, 30, 32] have been proposed for crowd counting.
Despite substantial progress, it remains a very challenging
problem that desires rich information to generate pixel-wise
crowd density maps. However, most previous methods only
utilized the optical information extracted from RGB images
and may fail to accurately recognize the semantic objects
in unconstraint scenarios. For instance, as shown in Fig. 1(a,b), pedestrians are almost invisible in poor illumination
conditions (such as backlight and night) and they are hard
to be directly detected from RGB images. Moreover, some
human-shaped objects (e.g., tiny pillars and blurry traffic
lights) have similar appearances to pedestrians [59] and they
are easily mistaken for people when relying solely on optical features. In general, RGB images cannot guarantee the
high-quality density maps, and more comprehensive information should be explored for crowd counting.
Fortunately, we observe that thermal images can greatly
facilitate distinguishing the potential pedestrians from cluttered backgrounds. Recently, thermal cameras have been
extensively popularized due to the COVID-19 pandemic,
which increases the feasibility of thermal-based crowd
counting. However, thermal images are not perfect. As
shown in Fig. 1-(c,d), some hard negative objects (e.g., heating walls and lamps) are also highlighted in thermal images,
but they can be eliminated effectively with the aid of optical
information. Overall, RGB images and thermal images are
highly complementary. To the best of our knowledge, no
attempts have been made to simultaneously explore RGB
and thermal images for estimating the crowd counts. In this
work, to promote further researches of this field, we propose
a large-scale benchmark “RGBT Crowd Counting (RGBTCC)”, which contains 2,030 pairs of RGB-thermal images
and 138,389 annotated pedestrians. Moreover, our benchmark makes significant advances in terms of diversity and
difficulty, as these RGBT images were captured from un-

4823

