Wide-Depth-Range 6D Object Pose Estimation in Space
Yinlin Hu 1 ,

Sébastien Speierer 2 ,
1

EPFL Computer Vision Lab,

Wenzel Jakob 2 ,
2

Pascal Fua 1 ,

EPFL Realistic Graphics Lab,

3

Mathieu Salzmann 1,3

ClearSpace SA

{firstname.lastname}@epfl.ch

Abstract
6D pose estimation in space poses unique challenges
that are not commonly encountered in the terrestrial setting. One of the most striking differences is the lack of atmospheric scattering, allowing objects to be visible from a
great distance while complicating illumination conditions.
Currently available benchmark datasets do not place a sufficient emphasis on this aspect and mostly depict the target
in close proximity.
Prior work tackling pose estimation under large scale
variations relies on a two-stage approach to first estimate
scale, followed by pose estimation on a resized image patch.
We instead propose a single-stage hierarchical end-to-end
trainable network that is more robust to scale variations.
We demonstrate that it outperforms existing approaches not
only on images synthesized to resemble images taken in
space but also on standard benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Reliable 6D pose estimation is key to automating many
spatial maneuvers, such as docking or capturing inert objects as shown in Fig. 1. An important consequence of
such maneuvers is that they dramatically change the scale
and aspect of the observed target. Although 6D pose estimation is an active area of research in computer vision
and robotics, this important aspect has not received significant attention thus far—for example, most benchmark
datasets [8, 20, 42, 9] feature objects whose depth varies
within a limited range. The lack of atmospheric scattering
enabling observation from great distances also leads to other
challenges: harsh contrast, under- and over-exposed areas,
and significant specular reflections from reflective materials used in space engineering (aluminium and carbon fiber
panels, etc.).
To address such challenges, the European Space Agency
(ESA) and Stanford University recently organized a satellite
pose estimation challenge based on the Spacecraft Pose Estimation Dataset (SPEED) [19]. The best-performing methods in this competition use a two-step approach to handle

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: Docking and space cleaning. (a, b) Two different views
of the Agena target vehicle during the first space docking. The
appearance of Agena is strongly affected by the large scale and
viewpoint changes, suggesting that different image features should
be used for 6D pose estimation. In 1966, this docking procedure
was controlled manually. (c) In 2025, the ClearSpace One chaser
satellite will be launched to retrieve and de-orbit a non-operational
satellite, so as to showcase the feasibility of removing space debris. In this case, the capture will be fully automated. The synthetic image shown here highlights the challenges the algorithm
will have to handle, such as reflections, over-exposure of some
parts of the images, and lack of details in others.

large depth variation: a detector finds an axis-aligned box
bounding the target, which is resampled to a uniform size
and finally processed by a 6D pose estimator.
This approach is suboptimal in several ways. First, detection and pose estimation are treated as separate processes, which precludes joint training. Second, it provides
supervisory signals only to the final layer of the encoderdecoder architecture being used instead of to all levels of the
decoding pyramid, which would increase robustness. Third,
many similar feature extraction computations are performed
by both processes, which results in an unnecessary duplication of effort. Finally, these methods rely on the dominant approach to deep learning based 6D object pose estimation [33, 11, 2] consisting of training a network to minimize the 2D reprojection error of predefined 3D keypoints,
which cannot cope with large depth range variations: As
shown in Fig. 2, reprojection error is strongly affected by
the distance of individual keypoints to the camera, and not
explicitly taking this into account degrades performance.
To address these shortcomings, we introduce a single hierarchical end-to-end trainable network depicted by
Fig. 3 that yields robust and scale-insensitive 6D poses.

15870

