FVC: A New Framework towards Deep Video Compression in Feature Space
Zhihao Hu
Beihang University

Guo Lu∗
Beijing Institute of Technology

Dong Xu
University of Sydney

huzhihao@buaa.edu.cn

guo.lu@bit.edu.cn

dong.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Learning based video compression attracts increasing
attention in the past few years. The previous hybrid coding
approaches rely on pixel space operations to reduce spatial
and temporal redundancy, which may suffer from inaccurate motion estimation or less effective motion compensation. In this work, we propose a feature-space video coding network (FVC) by performing all major operations (i.e.,
motion estimation, motion compression, motion compensation and residual compression) in the feature space. Specifically, in the proposed deformable compensation module,
we first apply motion estimation in the feature space to
produce motion information (i.e., the offset maps), which
will be compressed by using the auto-encoder style network. Then we perform motion compensation by using deformable convolution and generate the predicted feature.
After that, we compress the residual feature between the feature from the current frame and the predicted feature from
our deformable compensation module. For better frame
reconstruction, the reference features from multiple previous reconstructed frames are also fused by using the nonlocal attention mechanism in the multi-frame feature fusion
module. Comprehensive experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed framework achieves the state-of-the-art
performance on four benchmark datasets including HEVC,
UVG, VTL and MCL-JCV.

1. Introduction
There is an increasing research interest in developing the next generation video compression technologies.
While the traditional video compression methods [37, 27]
have achieved promising performance by using the handdesigned modules (e.g., block-based motion estimation,
Discrete Cosine Transform (DCT)) to reduce spatial and
temporal redundancy, these modules cannot be optimized
in an end-to-end fashion based on large-scale video data.
The recent deep video compression works [22, 38, 2, 10,
∗ Guo Lu is the corresponding author.

14, 21, 19] have achieved impressive results by applying
the deep neural networks within the hybrid video compression framework. Currently, most works only rely on pixellevel operations (e.g., motion estimation or motion compensation) for reducing redundancy. For example, pixellevel optical flow estimation and motion compensation are
used in [22, 21, 14, 23] to reduce temporal redundancy, and
pixel-level residual is further compressed by using the autoencoder style network. However, this pixel-level paradigm
suffers from the following three limitations. First, it is difficult to produce accurate pixel-level optical flow information, especially for videos with complex non-rigid motion
patterns. Second, even we can extract sufficiently accurate
motion information, the pixel-level motion compensation
process may introduce additional artifacts. Third, it is also
a non-trivial task to compress pixel-level residual information.
Given robust representation ability of deep features for
various applications, it is desirable to perform motion compensation or residual compression in the feature space and
more effectively reduce spatial or temporal redundancy in
videos. Furthermore, the recent progress in deformable
convolution [9, 35] has shown it is feasible to align two consecutive frames in the feature space. Based on the learned
offset maps of convolution kernels (i.e., the so-called dynamic kernels), deformable convolution can decide which
positions are sampled from the input feature. By using deformable convolution based on dynamic kernels, we can
better cope with more complex non-rigid motion patterns
between two consecutive frames, which can thus improve
the motion compensation results and also alleviate the burden for the subsequent residual compression module. Unfortunately, it is still a non-trivial task to seamlessly incorporate the feature space operations and deformable convolution into the existing hybrid deep video compression framework and train the whole network in an end-to-end fashion.
In our work, instead of following the existing works [22,
14, 3, 19] to adopt the pixel-level operations as in the
traditional video codecs, we propose a new feature-space
video coding network (referred to as FVC) by reducing the
spatial-temporal redundancy in the feature space. Specifi-

1502

