Quantifying Explainers of Graph Neural Networks in Computational Pathology
Guillaume Jaume1,2∗, Pushpak Pati1,3,∗ , Behzad Bozorgtabar2 ,
Antonio Foncubierta1 , Anna Maria Anniciello4 , Florinda Feroce4 , Tilman Rau5 ,
Jean-Philippe Thiran2 , Maria Gabrani1 , Orcun Goksel3,6
1
IBM Research Zurich, 2 EPFL Lausanne, 3 ETH Zurich,
4
Fondazione Pascale, 5 University of Bern, 6 Uppsala University
{gja,pus}@zurich.ibm.com

Abstract
Explainability of deep learning methods is imperative
to facilitate their clinical adoption in digital pathology.
However, popular deep learning methods and explainability techniques (explainers) based on pixel-wise processing disregard biological entities’ notion, thus complicating
comprehension by pathologists. In this work, we address
this by adopting biological entity-based graph processing
and graph explainers enabling explanations accessible to
pathologists. In this context, a major challenge becomes
to discern meaningful explainers, particularly in a standardized and quantifiable fashion. To this end, we propose
herein a set of novel quantitative metrics based on statistics of class separability using pathologically measurable
concepts to characterize graph explainers. We employ the
proposed metrics to evaluate three types of graph explainers, namely the layer-wise relevance propagation, gradientbased saliency, and graph pruning approaches, to explain
Cell-Graph representations for Breast Cancer Subtyping.
The proposed metrics are also applicable in other domains
by using domain-specific intuitive concepts. We validate the
qualitative and quantitative findings on the BRACS dataset,
a large cohort of breast cancer RoIs, by expert pathologists.
The code, data, and models can be accessed here1 .

1. Introduction
Histopathological image understanding has been revolutionized by recent machine learning advancements, especially deep learning (DL) [8, 53]. DL has catered to increasing diagnostic throughput as well as a need for high predictive performance, reproducibility and objectivity. However,
such advantages come at the cost of a reduced transparency
in decision-making processes [28, 61, 23]. Considering the
∗ denotes equal contribution
1 https://github.com/histocartography/
patho-quant-explainer

Figure 1. Sample explanations produced by pixel- and entity-based
explainability techniques for a ductal carcinoma in situ RoI.

need for reasoning any clinical decision, it is imperative to
enable the explainability of DL decisions to pathologists.
Inspired by the explainability techniques (explainers) for
DL model decisions on natural images [57, 68, 67, 6, 40, 52,
33, 72, 11, 32], several explainers have been implemented
in digital pathology, such as feature attribution [10, 9, 23],
concept attribution [21], and attention-based learning [38].
However, pixel-level explanations, exemplified in Figure 1,
pose several notable issues, including: (1) a pixel-wise
analysis disregards the notion of biological tissue entities,
their topological distribution, and inter-entity interactions;
(2) a typical patch-based DL processing and explainer fail
to accommodate complete tumor macro-environment information; and (3) pixel-wise visual explanations tend to be
blurry. Explainability in entity space is thus a natural choice
to address the above issues. To that end, an entity graph representation is built for a histology image, where nodes and
edges denote biological entities and inter-entity interactions
followed by a Graph Neural Network (GNN) [35, 64]. The
choice of entities, such as cells [22, 71, 44], tissues [44] or
others, can be task-dependent. Subsequently, explainers for
graph-structured data [7, 46, 65] applied to the entity graphs
highlight responsible entities for the concluded diagnosis,
thereby generating intuitive explanations for pathologists.
18106

