QPIC: Query-Based Pairwise Human-Object Interaction Detection
with Image-Wide Contextual Information
Masato Tamura1 , Hiroki Ohashi2 , and Tomoaki Yoshinaga1
1

Lumada Data Science Lab., Hitachi, Ltd.
Center for Technology Innovation - Artificial Intelligence, Hitachi, Ltd.
{masato.tamura.sf, hiroki.ohashi.uo, tomoaki.yoshinaga.xc}@hitachi.com
2

Abstract
We propose a simple, intuitive yet powerful method for
human-object interaction (HOI) detection. HOIs are so
diverse in spatial distribution in an image that existing
CNN-based methods face the following three major drawbacks; they cannot leverage image-wide features due to
CNN’s locality, they rely on a manually defined locationof-interest for the feature aggregation, which sometimes
does not cover contextually important regions, and they
cannot help but mix up the features for multiple HOI instances if they are located closely. To overcome these drawbacks, we propose a transformer-based feature extractor,
in which an attention mechanism and query-based detection play key roles. The attention mechanism is effective
in aggregating contextually important information imagewide, while the queries, which we design in such a way
that each query captures at most one human-object pair,
can avoid mixing up the features from multiple instances.
This transformer-based feature extractor produces so effective embeddings that the subsequent detection heads may
be fairly simple and intuitive. The extensive analysis reveals that the proposed method successfully extracts contextually important features, and thus outperforms existing
methods by large margins (5.37 mAP on HICO-DET, and
5.6 mAP on V-COCO). The source codes are available at
https://github.com/hitachi-rd-cv/qpic.

1. Introduction
Human-object interaction (HOI) detection has attracted
enormous interest in recent years for its potential in deeper
scene understanding [3–6,8,11–13,15–17,19–21,24,27,29–
37]. Given an image, the task of HOI detection is to localize
a human and object, and identify the interactions between
them, typically represented as hhuman bounding box, object
bounding box, object class, action classi.
Conventional HOI detection methods can be roughly di-

Frisbee
Block
Wash

Car

Catch

(a)

(b)

Fly
Kite

Board

Board
Airplane

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Observed failure cases of conventional methods. The
ground-truth human bounding boxes, object bounding boxes, object classes, and action classes are drawn with red boxes, blue
boxes, blue characters, and yellow characters, respectively.

vided into two types: two-stage methods [3–6, 8, 11, 13,
15, 16, 19–21, 24, 27, 29–31, 33–37] and single-stage methods [12, 17, 32]. In the two-stage methods, humans and objects are first individually localized by off-the-shelf object
detectors, and then the region features from the localized
area are used to predict action classes. To incorporate contextual information, auxiliary features such as the features
from the union region of a human and object bounding box,
and locations of the bounding boxes in an image are often
utilized. The single-stage methods predict interactions using the features of a heuristically-defined position such as a
midpoint between a human and object center [17].
While both two- and single-stage methods have shown
significant improvement, they often suffer from errors attributed to the nature of convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) and the heuristic way of using CNN features. Figure 1 shows observed failure cases of conventional methods.
In Fig. 1a, we can easily recognize from an entire image

10410

