Towards Efficient Tensor Decomposition-Based DNN Model Compression with
Optimization Framework

1

Miao Yin1 , Yang Sui1 , Siyu Liao2: and Bo Yuan1
Department of ECE, Rutgers University, 2 Amazon

{miao.yin, yang.sui}@rutgers.edu, liasiyu@amazon.com, bo.yuan@soe.rutgers.edu

Abstract
Advanced tensor decomposition, such as tensor train
(TT) and tensor ring (TR), has been widely studied for deep
neural network (DNN) model compression, especially for
recurrent neural networks (RNNs). However, compressing
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) using TT/TR always
suffers significant accuracy loss. In this paper, we propose
a systematic framework for tensor decomposition-based
model compression using Alternating Direction Method of
Multipliers (ADMM). By formulating TT decompositionbased model compression to an optimization problem with
constraints on tensor ranks, we leverage ADMM technique
to systemically solve this optimization problem in an iterative way. During this procedure, the entire DNN model is
trained in the original structure instead of TT format, but
gradually enjoys the desired low tensor rank characteristics. We then decompose this uncompressed model to TT
format, and fine-tune it to finally obtain a high-accuracy TTformat DNN model. Our framework is very general, and it
works for both CNNs and RNNs, and can be easily modified
to fit other tensor decomposition approaches. We evaluate
our proposed framework on different DNN models for image
classification and video recognition tasks. Experimental results show that our ADMM-based TT-format models demonstrate very high compression performance with high accuracy. Notably, on CIFAR-100, with 2.3ˆ and 2.4ˆ compression ratios, our models have 1.96% and 2.21% higher
top-1 accuracy than the original ResNet-20 and ResNet-32,
respectively. For compressing ResNet-18 on ImageNet, our
model achieves 2.47ˆ FLOPs reduction without accuracy
loss.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Network (DNNs) have already obtained
widespread applications in many computer vision tasks,
such as image classification [19, 28], video recognition
: This work was done when the author was with Rutgers University.

[10, 2], objective detection [13, 41], and image caption
[45, 9]. Despite these unprecedented success and popularity, executing DNNs on the edge devices is still very challenging. For most embedded and Internet-of-Things (IoT)
systems, the sizes of many state-of-the-art DNN models are
too large, thereby causing high storage and computational
demands and severely hindering the practical deployment
of DNNs. To mitigate this problem, to date many model
compression approaches, such as pruning [16, 17, 35, 50]
and quantization [17, 47, 40], have been proposed to reduce
the sizes of DNN models with limited impact on accuracy.
Tensor Decomposition for Model Compression. Recently, tensor decomposition, as a mathematical tool that
explores the low tensor rank characteristics of the largescale tensor data, have become a very attractive DNN model
compression technique. Different from other model compression methods, tensor decomposition, uniquely, can provide ultra-high compression ratio, especially for recurrent
neural network (RNN) models. As reported in [48, 38],
the advanced tensor decomposition approaches, such as tensor train (TT) and tensor ring (TR), can bring more than
1,000ˆ parameter reduction to the input-to-hidden layers
of RNN models, and meanwhile the corresponding classification accuracy in the video recognition task can be
even significantly improved. Motivated by such strong
compression performance, many prior research works have
been conducted on tensor decomposition-based DNN models [12, 37, 43]. In addition, to fully utilize the benefits provided by those models, several TT-format DNN hardware
accelerators have been developed and implemented in different chip formats, such as digital CMOS ASIC [7], memristor ASIC [23] and IoT board [4].
Limitations of the State of the Art. Despite its promising potentials, the performance of tensor decomposition is
not satisfied enough as a mature model compression approach. Currently all the reported success of tensor decomposition are narrowly limited to compressing RNN models in video recognition tasks. For compressing convolutional neural network (CNN) in the image classification
task, which are the most commonly used and representa-

10674

