FaceInpainter: High Fidelity Face Adaptation to Heterogeneous Domains
Jia Li, Zhaoyang Li, Jie Cao, Xingguang Song, Ran He†
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{jia.li, jie.cao}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,

Result

Target

Source

zhaoyang0427@gmail.com, Wilson.song@hotmail.com

Figure 1: Face swapping results on wild face images by means of FaceInpainter. Our identity-guided face inpainting framework can produce high fidelity results in heterogeneous domains, i.e., photograph or non-photorealistic styles, e.g., oil painting, 3D cartoons, pencil drawing and exaggerated drawing.

Abstract
In this work, we propose a novel two-stage framework
named FaceInpainter to implement controllable IdentityGuided Face Inpainting (IGFI) under heterogeneous domains. Concretely, by explicitly disentangling foreground
and background of the target face, the first stage focuses
on adaptive face fitting to the fixed background via a Styled
Face Inpainting Network (SFI-Net), with 3D priors and texture code of the target, as well as identity factor of the
source face. It is challenging to deal with the inconsistency between the new identity of the source and the original background of the target, concerning the face shape and
appearance on the fused boundary. The second stage consists of a Joint Refinement Network (JR-Net) to refine the
swapped face. It leverages AdaIN considering identity and
multi-scale texture codes, for feature transformation of the
decoded face from SFI-Net with facial occlusions. We adopt
the contextual loss to implicitly preserve the attributes, encouraging face deformation and fewer texture distortions.
Experimental results demonstrate that our approach handles high-quality identity adaptation to heterogeneous domains, exhibiting the competitive performance compared
† Corresponding author

with state-of-the-art methods concerning both attribute and
identity fidelity.

1. Introduction
Identity swapping is a technique that enables manipulating the face appearance according to the source face while
preserving the attributes of the target face. DeepFakes [1],
FaceSwap [2], FaceShifter [18], and SimSwap [5] are the
prominent methods. These methods enable the effortless
creation of fake faces, while the controllable performance
and visual realism still need to be improved. Furthermore,
face manipulation provides more challenging and diverse
samples to facilitate face forensics [31].
The face swapping task is evaluated mainly from two aspects, i.e. identity and attribute fidelity for the source and
target face, respectively. FaceShifter [18] adopts SPADE
[28] and AdaIN [14] mechanisms to integrate spatial attributes and identity styles in the decoder, while some redundant identity features of the source, e.g., hair, make it
difficult to preserve attributes in some challenging cases, as
shown in Figure 2. SimSwap [5] uses a weak feature matching loss based on the last few layers of the discriminator,
to avoid the attribute distortions during identity modifica-

5089

