Layer-wise Searching for 1-bit Detectors
Sheng Xu1 , Junhe Zhao1 , Jinhu Lü1,2 , Baochang Zhang1,3 ,* Shumin Han4 , David Doermann5
1
School of Automation Science and Electrical Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
State Key Laboratory of Software Development Environment, and Beijing Advanced
Innovation Center for Big Data and Brain Computing, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Shenzhen Academy of Aerospace Technology, Shenzhen, China
4
Department of Computer Vision Technology, Baidu Inc., Beijing, China
5
University at Buffalo, USA
{shengxu, jhzhao, lvjinhu, bczhang}@buaa.edu.cn, hanshumin@baidu.com, doermann@buffalo.edu

Abstract
1-bit detectors show great promise for resourceconstrained embedded devices but often suffer from a significant performance gap compared with their real-valued
counterparts. The primary reason lies in the error during
binarization. This paper presents a layer-wise searching
(LWS) strategy to generate 1-bit detectors that maintain a
performance very close to the original real-valued model.
The approach introduces angular and amplitude loss functions to increase detector capacity. At 1-bit layers, it exploits a differentiable binarization search (DBS) to minimize the angular error in a student-teacher framework. We
also learn the scale factor by minimizing the amplitude loss
in the same student-teacher framework. Extensive experiments show that LWS-Det outperforms state-of-the-art 1-bit
detectors by a considerable margin on the PASCAL VOC
and COCO datasets. For example, the LWS-Det achieves
1-bit Faster-RCNN with ResNet-34 backbone within 2.0%
mAP of its real-valued counterpart on the PASCAL VOC
dataset.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision [8,22], and deep convolutional neural networks (CNN)
[31–33] dominate recent performance advancements. But
CNN models typically have millions of parameters and require billions of floating-point operations (FLOPs) to compute, limiting their deployment on resource-limited platforms.
Substantial efforts have been made to compress and
accelerate CNNs for efficient online inference. Methods
* Baochang Zhang is the corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Example layer-wise feature map distribution and detection results of (a) a real-valued detector, (b) LWS-Det, and (c)
BiDet. We extract the feature maps of the first, second, and final binarized layers and illustrate their distributions based on the
frequency-value histogram in rows 1-3. The last row shows the
detection result.

include compact network design [15, 27], network pruning [14, 19, 44], low-rank decomposition [7], quantization
[30, 41], and knowledge distillation [34]. Quantization is
particularly suitable for deployment on AI chips because
it reduces the bit-width of network parameters and activations for efficient inference. Binarization, an extreme form
of quantization, compresses the weights and activations of
CNNs into a single bit, which can decrease the storage re-

5682

