Roof-GAN: Learning to Generate Roof Geometry and Relations
for Residential Houses
Yiming Qian

Hao Zhang
Yasutaka Furukawa
Simon Fraser University

{yimingq, haoz, furukawa}@sfu.ca

Figure 1. The paper proposes a novel generative model, producing realistic residential roof models. An aerial shot of the real houses are at
the left. Our generated samples are at the right. In the middle, we overlay a real house and our generation with similar structure.

Abstract
This paper presents Roof-GAN, a novel generative adversarial network that generates structured geometry of residential roof structures as a set of roof primitives and their
relationships. Given the number of primitives, the generator produces a structured roof model as a graph, which consists of 1) primitive geometry as raster images at each node,
encoding facet segmentation and angles; 2) inter-primitive
colinear/coplanar relationships at each edge; and 3) primitive geometry in a vector format at each node, generated
by a novel differentiable vectorizer while enforcing the relationships. The discriminator is trained to assess the primitive raster geometry, the primitive relationships, and the
primitive vector geometry in a fully end-to-end architecture. Qualitative and quantitative evaluations demonstrate
the effectiveness of our approach in generating diverse and
realistic roof models over the competing methods with a
novel metric proposed in this paper for the task of structured geometry generation. Code and data are available at
https://github.com/yi-ming-qian/roofgan.

1. Introduction
Residential roof structure exhibits intricate structural details and regularities. An observation reveals that a complex

polygonal surface structure emerges from a careful combination of a few primitive shapes under incident geometric
relationships such as colinearity or coplanarity. Automated
generation of high quality residential house models and any
man-made structures beyond would have tremendous impact on broader disciplines such as construction, manufacturing, urban planning, and visual effects.
With the emergence of deep learning, automated generation of CAD-style 3D models has seen a breakthrough.
Early methods focus on generating geometry without their
incident relationships as a part assembly [17, 26, 35]. Autoencoder based methods learn to generate both geometry and
relationships in a form of a binary tree [18], a hierarchical
N-ary tree [23], or deformable mesh models [10]. These
techniques use fully connected layers with 1D feature vectors to produce CAD geometries in a vector format.
The paper takes the CAD-geometry generation research
to the next level, while making the following distinctions
from the existing methods: 1) Adversarial training is the
foundation of our architecture, providing real generative
power over auto-encoder based methods; 2) Convolution
with raster-geometry representation enables effective spatial part arrangements and incident relationship generation;
and 3) A novel differentiable vectorization module generates vector-geometry in an end-to-end architecture.
Concretely, we propose a novel generative adversarial

2796

