Content-Aware GAN Compression
Yuchen Liu1 , Zhixin Shu2 , Yijun Li2 , Zhe Lin2 , Federico Perazzi2 , S.Y. Kung1
1
Princeton University 2 Adobe Research
1

{yl16, kung}@princeton.edu

2

{zshu, yijli, zlin, perazzi}@adobe.com

Abstract

quires 45.1B/74.3B FLOPs to generate a 256px/1024px image, around 150×/250× more than MobileNet [43].

Generative adversarial networks (GANs), e.g., StyleGAN2, play a vital role in various image generation and
synthesis tasks, yet their notoriously high computational
cost hinders their efficient deployment on edge devices.
Directly applying generic compression approaches yields
poor results on GANs, which motivates a number of recent GAN compression works. While prior works mainly
accelerate conditional GANs, e.g., pix2pix and CycleGAN, compressing state-of-the-art unconditional GANs has
rarely been explored and is more challenging. In this paper, we propose novel approaches for unconditional GAN
compression. We first introduce effective channel pruning
and knowledge distillation schemes specialized for unconditional GANs. We then propose a novel content-aware
method to guide the processes of both pruning and distillation. With content-awareness, we can effectively prune
channels that are unimportant to the contents of interest,
e.g., human faces, and focus our distillation on these regions, which significantly enhances the distillation quality. On StyleGAN2 and SN-GAN, we achieve a substantial
improvement over the state-of-the-art compression method.
Notably, we reduce the FLOPs of StyleGAN2 by 11× with
visually negligible image quality loss compared to the fullsize model. More interestingly, when applied to various
image manipulation tasks, our compressed model forms a
smoother and better disentangled latent manifold, making
it more effective for image editing.

A number of network compression techniques have been
developed for classification models, including weight quantization [12, 26], network pruning [17, 24, 34, 55], and
knowledge distillation [22, 41]. Nonetheless, these methods are not directly applicable for GANs. For example, although removing channels with low activations [24] is effective for classifier compression, we find it not better than
training a smaller GAN from scratch (Tab. 1).

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [16] are the
leading model for several crucial computer vision tasks like
image generation [7, 30] and image editing [3, 4, 18, 47].
Due to their growing popularity and convincing performance, there is an increasing interest in deploying them
on edge devices like mobile phones. However, state-of-theart GANs often require large storage space, high computational cost, and great memory utility, which disallows them
for efficient deployment. For example, StyleGAN2 [30] re-

As such, several specialized GAN compression mechanisms are introduced to learn efficient GAN models with
the techniques of channel pruning and knowledge distillation [45, 10, 48, 8, 35]. For example, Wang et al. [48] propose GAN-Slimming (GS), which unifies losses of channel
pruning and knowledge distillation and achieves the stateof-the-art compression results. However, these methods
mainly target on conditional GANs (pix2pix [25], CycleGAN [58], etc.) compression, and there is little study to
compress unconditional GANs (StyleGAN2, etc.). While
conditional GANs normally have paired training data and
perform translation from images to images, unconditional
GANs are trained under completely unpaired setting and
have much different source domains (white noises), which
adds extra challenges for the compression. Therefore,
a redesign of channel pruning and knowledge distillation
schemes is required for effective unconditional GAN compression. In addition, these works also miss a significant
trait of GANs that the output of GANs are images with
strong spatial correlation and meaningful semantic contents. While they prune channels by weights norm or scaling factors and distill images over all spatial locations, they
pay no attention on the generated contents and just treat output images as normal 3D tensors.
To combat these issues, we propose novel approaches to
effectively compress unconditional GANs. We first develop
an effective pruning metric to remove redundant channels
and explore several distillation losses for unconditional
GANs compression. Different from prior works [10, 8, 35,
48] where either a norm-based loss or a perceptual loss is
used for knowledge distillation, we find that a combination

12156

