Deep Stable Learning for Out-Of-Distribution Generalization
Xingxuan Zhang, Peng Cui*, Renzhe Xu, Linjun Zhou, Yue He, Zheyan Shen
Department of Computer Science, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
xingxuanzhang@hotmail.com, cuip@tsinghua.edu.cn, xrz199721@gmail.com,
{zhoulj16, heyue18, shenzy17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Many machine learning approaches tend to exploit subtle statistical correlations existing in the training distribution for predictions which have been shown to be effective under the I.I.D. hypothesis, i.e., testing and training
data is independently sampled from the identical distribution. In real cases, however, such a hypothesis can hardly
be satisfied due to the complex generation mechanism of
real data such as data selection biases, confounding factors,
or other peculiarities [5, 54, 12, 47, 21]. The testing distribution may incur uncontrolled and unknown shifts from the
*Corresponing author, also with Beijing Key Lab of Networked Multimedia

Baseline
StableNet
(ours)

Approaches based on deep neural networks have
achieved striking performance when testing data and training data share similar distribution, but can significantly
fail otherwise. Therefore, eliminating the impact of distribution shifts between training and testing data is crucial
for building performance-promising deep models. Conventional methods assume either the known heterogeneity of
training data (e.g. domain labels) or the approximately
equal capacities of different domains. In this paper, we consider a more challenging case where neither of the above
assumptions holds. We propose to address this problem by
removing the dependencies between features via learning
weights for training samples, which helps deep models get
rid of spurious correlations and, in turn, concentrate more
on the true connection between discriminative features and
labels. Extensive experiments clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on multiple distribution generalization benchmarks compared with state-of-the-art counterparts. Through extensive experiments on distribution generalization benchmarks including PACS, VLCS, MNIST-M,
and NICO, we show the effectiveness of our method compared with state-of-the-art counterparts.

Input
Image

Abstract

Figure 1: Visualization of saliency maps produced by the
vanilla ResNet-18 model and StableNet when most of the
training images containing dogs in the water. The lightness
of the saliency map indicates how much attention that the
models pay on particular area of the input image (i.e. lighter
area plays a more crucial role for the prediction than the
darker area). Due to the spurious correlation, the ResNet18 model tends to focus on both dogs and the water while
our model focuses mostly on dogs.

training distribution, which makes most machine learning
models fail to make trustworthy predictions [2, 51]. To address this issue, out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization is
proposed for improving the generalization ability of models
under distribution shifts [55, 27].
Essentially, when there incurs a distribution shift, the accuracy drop of current models is mainly caused by the spurious correlation between the irrelevant features (i.e. the features that are irrelevant to a given category, such as features
of context, figure style, etc.) and category labels, and this
kind of spurious correlations are intrinsically caused by the
subtle correlations between irrelevant features and relevant
features (i.e. the features that are relevant to a given category) [30, 38, 35, 2]. Taking the recognition task of ‘dog’
category as an example, as depicted in Figure 1, if dogs are

5372

