AttentiveNAS: Improving Neural Architecture Search via Attentive Sampling
Dilin Wang1 , Meng Li1 , Chengyue Gong2 , Vikas Chandra1
1
Facebook 2 University of Texas at Austin
{wdilin, meng.li, vchandra}@fb.com, cygong@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Top-1 validation accuracy

Neural architecture search (NAS) has shown great
promise in designing state-of-the-art (SOTA) models that
are both accurate and efficient. Recently, two-stage NAS,
e.g. BigNAS, decouples the model training and searching
process and achieves remarkable search efficiency and accuracy. Two-stage NAS requires sampling from the search
space during training, which directly impacts the accuracy
of the final searched models. While uniform sampling has
been widely used for its simplicity, it is agnostic of the model
performance Pareto front, which is the main focus in the
search process, and thus, misses opportunities to further
improve the model accuracy. In this work, we propose AttentiveNAS that focuses on improving the sampling strategy
to achieve better performance Pareto. We also propose algorithms to efficiently and effectively identify the networks
on the Pareto during training. Without extra re-training or
post-processing, we can simultaneously obtain a large number of networks across a wide range of FLOPs. Our discovered model family, AttentiveNAS models, achieves top-1
accuracy from 77.3% to 80.7% on ImageNet, and outperforms SOTA models, including BigNAS, Once-for-All networks and FBNetV3. We also achieve ImageNet accuracy
of 80.1% with only 491 MFLOPs. Our training code and
pretrained models are available at https://github.
com/facebookresearch/AttentiveNAS.

81
A5

80

A4
A3

79

A2
A1

78

(ffiFientnet
)B1etv2
)B1etv3
Big1as
2)A
Attentive1A6 (ours)

A0

77
76

200

300

400

500

600

700

800

MFLOPs
Figure 1. Comparison of AttentiveNAS with prior NAS approaches [3, 10, 35, 36, 43] on ImageNet.

search [10, 11] or reinforcement learning [34], these NAS
algorithms can be prohibitively expensive as thousands of
models are required to be trained in a single experiment.
Recent NAS advancements decouple the parameter training and architecture optimization into two separate stages
[3, 8, 15, 43]:
• The first stage optimizes the parameters of all candidate networks in the search space through weightsharing, such that all networks simultaneously reach
superior performance at the end of training.
• The second stage leverages typical search algorithms,
such as evolutionary algorithms, to find the best performing models under various resource constraints.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable empirical success. However, the rapid growth of network size and computation cost imposes a great challenge
to bring DNNs to edge devices [16, 18, 38]. Designing networks that are both accurate and efficient becomes an important but challenging problem.
Neural architecture search (NAS) [45] provides a powerful tool for automating efficient DNN design. NAS requires optimizing both model architectures and model parameters, creating a challenging nested optimization problem. Conventional NAS algorithms leverage evolutionary

Attentive1A6-A6

Such NAS paradigm has delivered state-of-the-art empirical
results with great search efficiency [3, 37, 43].
The success of the two-stage NAS heavily relies on the
candidate network training in the first stage. To achieve superior performance for all candidates, candidate networks
are sampled from the search space during training, followed
by optimizing each sample via one-step stochastic gradient
descent (SGD). The key aspect is to figure out which network to sample at each SGD step. Existing methods often use a uniform sampling strategy to sample all networks

6418

