Cross-Modal Center Loss for 3D Cross-Modal Retrieval
Longlong Jing∗ Elahe Vahdani∗ Jiaxing Tan
The City University of New York

Yingli Tian

Abstract
Cross-modal retrieval aims to learn discriminative and
modal-invariant features for data from different modalities.
Unlike the existing methods which usually learn from the
features extracted by offline networks, in this paper, we propose an approach to jointly train the components of crossmodal retrieval framework with metadata, and enable the
network to find optimal features. The proposed end-to-end
framework is updated with three loss functions: 1) a novel
cross-modal center loss to eliminate cross-modal discrepancy, 2) cross-entropy loss to maximize inter-class variations, and 3) mean-square-error loss to reduce modality
variations. In particular, our proposed cross-modal center loss minimizes the distances of features from objects
belonging to the same class across all modalities. Extensive experiments have been conducted on the retrieval tasks
across multi-modalities including 2D image, 3D point cloud
and mesh data. The proposed framework significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods for both cross-modal
and in-domain retrieval for 3D objects on the ModelNet10
and ModelNet40 datasets.

1. Introduction
With the stream of multimedia data flourishing on the Internet in the format of videos, images, text, etc, cross-modal
retrieval task has attracted more and more attention from the
multimedia communities. Cross-modal retrieval is the task
of retrieving data from one modality given a query from
a different modality. Inspired by the representation power
of deep learning, a series of deep learning-based methods
have been proposed for cross-modal retrieval [27, 52, 51].
These methods operate by learning modal-invariant representations in a common space.
The features from different modalities generally have
different distributions. Therefore, a fundamental requirement for cross-modal retrieval task is to bridge the gap
among different modalities which is commonly done by
∗ Equal contribution.

Figure 1. Traditional center loss vs. the proposed cross-modal
center loss. Our proposed cross-modal center loss (right) finds a
unique center for each class across all modalities. Traditional center loss (left) finds a center for each modality and each class and
ignores the relation among centers of different modalities. Our
proposed cross-modal center loss specifically eliminates the discrepancy across multiple modalities and thus is very effective for
learning modal-invariant features.

representation learning. The existing methods mainly extract the features of each modality by offline pre-trained
models, and apply a projection function to transfer the features into a common representation space. By this transformation, the similarity of features from different modalities
can be directly measured. Hence, the main challenge during
this process is to learn discriminative and modal-invariant
features.
By learning discriminative features, we ensure that data
from the same class are mapped closely to each other in the
feature space while different classes are separated as far as
possible. In many studies, cross entropy or mean square
error loss in the label space are used to maximize the interclass variations. In order to compare the features extracted
from different modalities, the features need to be modalinvariant. Various methods are proposed to reduce the
cross-domain discrepancy by using adversarial loss, sharing
a projection network, using triplet loss with pairs/triplets of
different modalities, maximizing cross-modal pairwise item
correlation [29, 42, 34, 20, 10].
Even though the existing methods [42, 51] achieved
promising results in the cross-modal retrieval tasks, they

3142

