Distilling Knowledge via Knowledge Review
Pengguang Chen1 Shu Liu2 Hengshuang Zhao3 Jiaya Jia1,2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong1 SmartMore2 University of Oxford3
{pgchen, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk liushuhust@gmail.com hengshuang.zhao@eng.ox.ac.uk
Abstract
Knowledge distillation transfers knowledge from the
teacher network to the student one, with the goal of greatly
improving the performance of the student network. Previous methods mostly focus on proposing feature transformation and loss functions between the same level’s features to
improve the effectiveness. We differently study the factor
of connection path cross levels between teacher and student networks, and reveal its great importance. For the first
time in knowledge distillation, cross-stage connection paths
are proposed. Our new review mechanism is effective and
structurally simple. Our finally designed nested and compact framework requires negligible computation overhead,
and outperforms other methods on a variety of tasks. We
apply our method to classification, object detection, and instance segmentation tasks. All of them witness significant
student network performance improvement.

1. Introduction
Deep convolution neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved remarkable success in a variety of computer
vision tasks. However, the success of CNN is often
accompanied with considerable computation and memory
consumption, making it a challenging topic to apply to
devices with limited resource. There have been techniques
for training fast and compact neural networks, including
designing new architectures [10, 2, 11, 26], network pruning [20, 15, 34, 4, 19], quantization [13] , and knowledge
distillation [9, 25].
We focus on knowledge distillation in this paper considering its practicality, efficiency, and most importantly the
potential to be useful. It forms a very general line, applicable to almost all network architectures and can combine
with many other strategies, such as network pruning and
quantization [32], to further improve network design.
Knowledge distillation is first proposed in [9]. The process is to train a small network (also known as the student) under the supervision of a larger network (a.k.a. the
teacher). In [9], knowledge is distilled though the teacher’s

logit, which means the student is supervised by both ground
truth labels and teacher’s logits. Recently, effort has been
made to improve distillation effectiveness. FitNet [25] distilled knowledge though intermediate features. AT [38] further optimized FitNet and used the attention map of features
to deliver knowledge. PKT [23] modeled knowledge of the
teacher as a probability distribution while CRD [28] used a
contrastive objective to transfer knowledge. All these solutions focused on transformation and loss functions.
Our New Finding We in this paper tackle this challenging problem from a new perspective regarding the connection path between the teacher and student. To briefly understand our idea, we first show how previous work deals
with these paths. As shown in Figure 1(a)-(c), all previous methods only use the-same-level information to guide
the student. For example, when supervising the student’s
fourth-stage output, always the teacher’s fourth-stage information is utilized. This procedure looks intuitive and easy
to construct. But we intriguingly reveal that it is in fact a
bottleneck in the whole knowledge distillation framework
– quick update of the structure surprisingly improves the
whole-system performance consistently for many tasks.
We investigate the previously neglected importance of
designing connection paths in knowledge distillation and
propose a new effective framework accordingly. The key
modification is to use low-level features in the teacher network to supervise deeper features for the student, which results in much improved overall performance.
We further analyze the network structure and discover
the fact that the student high-level stage has the great capacity to learn useful information from the teacher’s low-level
features. More analysis is provided in Section 4.4. This
process is analogous to human learning curve [35] where a
young kid can only comprehend a small portion of knowledge that is taught. During the course of grow-up, more and
more knowledge from past years may be gradually understood and remembered as experience.
Our Knowledge Review Framework Based on these
discoveries, we propose to use multi-level information of
the teacher to guide one-level learning of the student net-

5008

