SiamMOT: Siamese Multi-Object Tracking
Bing Shuai

Andrew Berneshawi
Xinyu Li
Davide Modolo
Amazon Web Services (AWS)

Joseph Tighe

{bshuai, bernea, xxnl, dmodolo, tighej}@amazon.com

Abstract
In this paper, we focus on improving online multi-object
tracking (MOT). In particular, we introduce a region-based
Siamese Multi-Object Tracking network, which we name
SiamMOT. SiamMOT includes a motion model that estimates the instance’s movement between two frames such
that detected instances are associated. To explore how the
motion modelling affects its tracking capability, we present
two variants of Siamese tracker, one that implicitly models motion and one that models it explicitly. We carry
out extensive quantitative experiments on three different
MOT datasets: MOT17, TAO-person and Caltech Roadside
Pedestrians, showing the importance of motion modelling
for MOT and the ability of SiamMOT to substantially outperform the state-of-the-art. Finally, SiamMOT also outperforms the winners of ACM MM’20 HiEve Grand Challenge
on HiEve dataset. Moreover, SiamMOT is efficient, and it
runs at 17 FPS for 720P videos on a single modern GPU.

1. Introduction
Multi-object tracking (MOT) is the problem of detecting object instances and then temporally associating them
to form trajectories. Early works [1, 3, 4, 17, 29, 33, 46, 49,
53, 53, 59, 64, 65, 71, 72] formulate instance association as
a graph-based optimization problem under the “trackingby-detection” paradigm, in which a node represents a detection and an edge encodes the likelihood of two nodes
being linked. In practice, they use a combination of visual and motion cues to represent each node, which often
requires expensive computation. Furthermore, they usually construct a large offline graph, which is non-trivial to
solve, making them inapplicable for real-time tracking. Recently, online trackers [5,7,60,76] started to emerge, as they
are more desirable in real-time tracking scenarios. They
focus on improving local linking over consecutive frames
rather than building an offline graph to re-identify instances
across large temporal gaps. Among these, some recent
works [5, 75] have pushed online MOT into state-of-the-art
territory, making them very competitive.

In this work, we explore the importance of modelling
motion in online MOT by building upon “Simple and Online Realtime Tracking” (SORT) [7,60] that underlies recent
state-of-the-art models [5, 76]. In SORT, a better motion
model is the key to improving its local linking accuracy.
For example, SORT [7] uses Kalman Filters [31] to model
the instance’s motion with simple geometric features, while
the more recent state-of-the-art trackers [5, 76] learn a deep
network to predict the displacement (motion) of instances
based on both visual and geometric features, significantly
outperforming the simpler SORT.
We conduct our motion modelling exploration by leveraging a region-based Siamese Multi-Object Tracking network, which we name SiamMOT. We combine a regionbased detection network (Faster-RCNN [45]) with two motion models inspired by the literature on Siamese-based
single-object tracking [6, 18, 22, 35, 36]: an implicit motion model (IMM) and an explicit motion model (EMM).
Differently from CenterTrack [76] that implicitly infers
the motion of instances with point-based features [16, 44,
56], SiamMOT uses region-based features and develops
(explicit) template matching to estimate instance motion,
which is more robust to challenging tracking scenarios, such
as fast motion.
We present extensive ablation analysis on three different multi-person tracking datasets. Our results suggest that
instance-level motion modelling is of great importance for
robust online MOT, especially in more challenging tracking
scenarios. Furthermore, we show that the motion models of
SiamMOT can improve tracking performance substantially,
especially when cameras are moving fast and when people’s
poses are deforming significantly. On the popular MOT17
Challenge [42] SiamMOT with EMM achieves 65.9 MOTA
/ 63.3 IDF1 with a DLA-34 [69] backbone by using public
detection, outperforming all previous methods. Moreover,
on the recently introduced large-scale TAO-person dataset
[14], SiamMOT substantially improves over the state-ofthe-art Tracktor++ [5] from 36.7 to 41.1 TrackAP [14, 66].
Finally, we benchmark SiamMOT on the Human In Events
(HiEve) dataset [41], where it outperforms the winner of the
ACM MM’20 grand HiEve challenge [40].

12372

