PPR10K: A Large-Scale Portrait Photo Retouching Dataset with
Human-Region Mask and Group-Level Consistency
Jie Liang1,2∗, Hui Zeng1,2∗, Miaomiao Cui2 , Xuansong Xie2 and Lei Zhang1,2†
1
The HongKong Polytechnic University, 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group

Abstract
Different from general photo retouching tasks, portrait
photo retouching (PPR), which aims to enhance the visual
quality of a collection of ﬂat-looking portrait photos, has its
special and practical requirements such as human-region
priority (HRP) and group-level consistency (GLC). HRP
requires that more attention should be paid to human regions, while GLC requires that a group of portrait photos
should be retouched to a consistent tone. Models trained
on existing general photo retouching datasets, however, can
hardly meet these requirements of PPR. To facilitate the research on this high-frequency task, we construct a largescale PPR dataset, namely PPR10K, which is the ﬁrst of
its kind to our best knowledge. PPR10K contains 1, 681
groups and 11, 161 high-quality raw portrait photos in total. High-resolution segmentation masks of human regions
are provided. Each raw photo is retouched by three experts,
while they elaborately adjust each group of photos to have
consistent tones. We deﬁne a set of objective measures to
evaluate the performance of PPR and propose strategies to
learn PPR models with good HRP and GLC performance.
The constructed PPR10K dataset provides a good benchmark for studying automatic PPR methods, and experiments
demonstrate that the proposed learning strategies are effective to improve the retouching performance. Datasets and
codes are available: https://github.com/csjliang/PPR10K.

1. Introduction
Portrait photography has a vast range of applications in
scenarios such as wedding, birthday, graduation, anniversaries, advertisements, personal recording or creations. To
ensure high quality of the ﬁnalist photos, photographers
tend to capture as many raw photos with high dynamic
ranges as possible. However, a set of raw photos might be
ﬂat-looking and present inconsistent tone due to the variations of subject view, illumination condition, background
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. This work is supported by the Hong Kong RGC
RIF grant (R5001-18).

contexts and camera settings, as shown in the top row of
Figure 1. A fast retouching on a large set of raw photos is
necessary before feeding back to customers for photo selection, followed by ﬁne-grained editing.
While a set of common standards or styles of preretouching are widely accepted and followed, most portrait
photos are retouched manually, which is very tedious and
time-consuming on the large size and highly redundant raw
photos. Automatic portrait photo retouching is thus highly
desired as it can save a huge amount of tedious human labor
and signiﬁcantly improves the efﬁciency of the entire portrait photography pipeline, bringing better experience for
both photographers and customers.
Different from general-purpose photo retouching tasks,
portrait photo retouching (PPR) has two special and practical requirements: human-region priority (HRP) and grouplevel consistency (GLC). HRP means that human-related region in a portrait photo should have higher priority and be
paid more attention. The ﬁrst row of Figure 1(a) shows a
set of typical examples, where the backgrounds are overexposed while the human regions are under-exposed. For
such cases, retouching should improve the exposure of human regions while preserving as many details as possible
in the backgrounds. GLC requires a group of portrait photos, which are usually taken on the same subject at the same
scene but have different subject views, lighting conditions
and even camera settings, to be adjusted to a consistent tone,
as shown in the bottom row of Figure 1.
To the best of our knowledge, existing general-purpose
photo retouching or enhancement datasets [1, 2, 9, 13] and
models [3, 5, 7, 10, 12, 17, 20, 26, 29, 30, 32] do not touch the
above two requirements and thus can hardly satisfy the demands of automatic PPR. To facilitate research on this important and high-frequency task, in this paper, we construct
the ﬁrst large-scale PPR dataset which contains 11, 161
(in 1, 681 groups) high-quality raw portrait photos, namely
PPR10K dataset hereafter. The raw photos are captured by
various DSLR camera devices, covering a wide range of
scenes, subjects, lighting conditions and camera settings.
Each raw photo is independently adjusted by 3 expert retouchers with rich experience in professional photography
1653

