SOE-Net: A Self-Attention and Orientation Encoding Network
for Point Cloud based Place Recognition
†

Yan Xia1

†

Yusheng Xu1 Shuang Li2 Rui Wang1 Juan Du1 Daniel Cremers1 Uwe Stilla1
1
Technical University of Munich 2 Beijing Institute of Technology
{yan.xia, yusheng.xu, stilla}@tum.de, {wangr, duj, cremers}@in.tum.de, shuangli@bit.edu.cn

Abstract

Scan sequence
Retrieval
of the best
match

We tackle the problem of place recognition from point
cloud data and introduce a self-attention and orientation
encoding network (SOE-Net) that fully explores the relationship between points and incorporates long-range context into point-wise local descriptors. Local information
of each point from eight orientations is captured in a
PointOE module, whereas long-range feature dependencies among local descriptors are captured with a selfattention unit. Moreover, we propose a novel loss function called Hard Positive Hard Negative quadruplet loss
(HPHN quadruplet), that achieves better performance than
the commonly used metric learning loss. Experiments on
various benchmark datasets demonstrate superior performance of the proposed network over the current stateof-the-art approaches. Our code is released publicly at
https://github.com/Yan-Xia/SOE-Net.

Query scan

Location 1

Location 2

Location N

1. Introduction
Place recognition and scene localization in large-scale
and complex environments is a fundamental challenge with
applications ranging from autonomous driving [13, 14, 22]
and robot navigation [11, 29] to augmented reality [19].
Given a query image or a LiDAR scan, the aim is to recover the closest match and its location by traversing a
pre-built database. In the past decade, a variety of imageretrieval based solutions have shown promising performance [18, 20, 21]. However, the performance of imagebased methods often degrades when facing drastic variations in illumination and appearance caused by weather
and seasonal changes [1]. As a possible remedy, 3D point
clouds acquired from LiDAR offer accurate and detailed
3D information that is inherently invariant to illumination
changes. As a consequence, place recognition from point
cloud data is becoming an increasingly attractive research
topic. Fig. 1 (Top) shows a typical pipeline for point cloud
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. (Top) Place recognition from 3D point clouds: the street
scene of a route map (shown in blue line) is denoted by a set of
real-scan point clouds tagged with UTM coordinates. Given a
query scan, we retrieve the closest match in this map (shown in the
green box) to get the location of the query scan. (Bottom) Comparing the average recall at top 1 retrieval, SOE-Net significantly
outperforms all published methods on various datasets.

based place recognition: One first constructs a database
with LiDAR scans tagged with UTM coordinates acquired
from GPS/INS readings. Given a query LiDAR scan, we
then retrieve the closest match and its corresponding location from the database.
The main challenge of point cloud based place recognition lies in how to find a robust and discriminative global

11348

