Restoring Extremely Dark Images in Real Time
Mohit Lamba
Indian Institute of Technology Madras

Kaushik Mitra
Indian Institute of Technology Madras

ee18d009@smail.iitm.ac.in

kmitra@ee.iitm.ac.in

Abstract
A practical low-light enhancement solution must be computationally fast, memory-efficient, and achieve a visually
appealing restoration. Most of the existing methods target restoration quality and thus compromise on speed and
memory requirements, raising concerns about their realworld deployability. We propose a new deep learning architecture for extreme low-light single image restoration,
which despite its fast & lightweight inference, produces a
restoration that is perceptually at par with state-of-the-art
computationally intense models. To achieve this, we do
most of the processing in the higher scale-spaces, skipping
the intermediate-scales wherever possible. Also unique to
our model is the potential to process all the scale-spaces
concurrently, offering an additional 30% speedup without
compromising the restoration quality. Pre-amplification of
the dark raw-image is an important step in extreme lowlight image enhancement. Most of the existing state of the
art methods need GT exposure value to estimate the preamplification factor, which is not practically feasible. Thus,
we propose an amplifier module that estimates the amplification factor using only the input raw image and can be
used “off-the-shelf” with pre-trained models without any
fine-tuning. We show that our model can restore an ultrahigh-definition 4K resolution image in just 1 sec. on a CPU
and at 32 f ps on a GPU and yet maintain a competitive
restoration quality. We also show that our proposed model,
without any fine-tuning, generalizes well to cameras not
seen during training and to subsequent tasks such as object
detection.

1. Introduction
The Computer Vision community has witnessed excellent methods in the last two decades for low-light enhancement [32, 62, 20, 42, 10, 63, 61]. Especially noteworthy is
SID’s [10] recent success in restoring extreme low-light images captured in near zero lux conditions (0.1−5 lux). Since
then several deep learning architectures have been proposed
for enhancing dark images [44, 18, 34, 65].

Dark input: 20× amplified for visualization

Restored video + Object Detection

Figure 1. (One frame of the restored video) We can restore ultrahigh-definition 4K resolution night-time images at 32 fps on a
GPU. This enables real-time visualization and subsequent inference such as object detection.

In spite of these advances, such solutions may not be
appropriate for real-world deployment due to their prohibitively high computational cost. In fact, a practical solution must have low network latency, less memory footprint,
fewer model parameters, smaller operations count and yet
maintain a pleasing restoration. Conventionally, however,
these qualities are mutually contradictory. This is especially
true for extreme low-light restoration where colors are hard
to recover and noise suppression is significantly challenging. Thus, the predominant trend is to forsake model speed
and computational efficiency for better restoration, raising
concerns for real-world deployment [9, 24, 26, 75, 60].
For example, two recent methods, SID [10] and SGN [18],
require 562 GMAC (Giga multiply-accumulate) and 2474
GMAC floating-point operations, respectively, to restore a
single 4K resolution raw image. This demands staggering
levels of computations, which is unlikely to be available
with the deployed edge devices and will cause enormous
network latency. This may be frustrating for a casual user
and impractical for critical tasks. Thus, our goal is to design a network which achieves similar restoration quality
but with drastically low operations.
We propose a deep learning architecture that extracts
most of the information required for restoration from higher
scale-spaces (which operate at lower resolution) and skip intermediate scales, as shown in Fig. 2. At the highest scale,
we use the widely used Residual Dense Block (RDB) [72],

3487

