GeoSim: Realistic Video Simulation via Geometry-Aware Composition for
Self-Driving
Yun Chen1 * Frieda Rong1,3 * Shivam Duggal1 * Shenlong Wang1,2 Xinchen Yan1
Sivabalan Manivasagam1,2 Shangjie Xue1,4 Ersin Yumer1 Raquel Urtasun1,2
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group 2 University of Toronto
3
Stanford University 4 Massachusetts Institute of Techonology
{chenyuntc, shivamduggal.9507, skywalkeryxc, meyumer}@gmail.com,
rongf@cs.stanford.edu, {slwang, manivasagam, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu, sjxue@mit.edu

Abstract
Scalable sensor simulation is an important yet challenging open problem for safety-critical domains such as selfdriving. Current works in image simulation either fail
to be photorealistic or do not model the 3D environment
and the dynamic objects within, losing high-level control
and physical realism. In this paper, we present GeoSim,
a geometry-aware image composition process which synthesizes novel urban driving scenarios by augmenting existing images with dynamic objects extracted from other
scenes and rendered at novel poses. Towards this goal, we
first build a diverse bank of 3D objects with both realistic geometry and appearance from sensor data. During
simulation, we perform a novel geometry-aware simulationby-composition procedure which 1) proposes plausible and
realistic object placements into a given scene, 2) renders
novel views of dynamic objects from the asset bank, and
3) composes and blends the rendered image segments. The
resulting synthetic images are realistic, traffic-aware, and
geometrically consistent, allowing our approach to scale
to complex use cases. We demonstrate two such important applications: long-range realistic video simulation
across multiple camera sensors, and synthetic data generation for data augmentation on downstream segmentation
tasks. Please check https://tmux.top/publication/geosim/ for
high-resolution video results.

1. Introduction
Walking along an empty pavement on a silent Sunday
morning, one can easily fantasize how busy it could look during rush hour on a weekday, or how a parked car might look
when driving on a different street. Humans are capable of
* Equal Contribution

recreating the experience of visually perceiving objects and
scenes to generate new visual data in their minds. Such an
ability allows us to formulate novel scenarios and synthesize
events in our heads without experiencing it directly.
Researchers have devoted significant effort towards enhancing computers with the capability of creating pictures by
replicating visual content [68]. This brings immense value
to many industries, such as film making, robot simulation,
augmented reality, and teleconferencing. In the literature,
two main paradigms exist: computer graphics approaches
and image editing methods. Computer graphics models the
image generation process with physics, by first creating a
virtual 3D world and then mimicking how light is transmitted
within the world to produce a realistic scene rendering.
To produce visually appealing results, physics-based
rendering requires a significant amount of computing resources, costly manual asset creation, and physical modeling
[1]. Images produced by existing real-time rendering engines [22, 53, 19], still have a significant realism gap, reducing their impact in robot simulation and data augmentation
for training. Data-driven image editing methods such as
image composition [38, 43, 16, 20, 5] and generative image
synthesis [72, 75, 71, 11, 35, 56] have received significant
attention over the past few years. They focus on pushing
realism through generative models trained from large-scale
visual data. However, most of the efforts do not correspond
to an underlying realistic 3D world, and as a consequence,
the generated 2D contents are not directly useful for applications such as 3D gaming and robot simulation.
In this paper, we propose GeoSim, a realistic image manipulation framework that inserts dynamic objects into existing
videos. GeoSim exploits a combination of both data-driven
approaches and computer graphics to generate assets inexpensively while maintaining high visual quality through
physically grounded simulation. In particular, by leveraging
low-cost bounding box annotations and sensor data captured

7230

