Open-Vocabulary Object Detection Using Captions
Alireza Zareian1,2 , Kevin Dela Rosa1 , Derek Hao Hu1 , Shih-Fu Chang2
1
2
Snap Inc., Seattle, WA
Columbia University, New York, NY
{azareian, kevin.delarosa, hao.hu}@snap.com

{az2407, sc250}@columbia.edu

github.com/alirezazareian/ovr-cnn

Abstract
Despite the remarkable accuracy of deep neural networks in object detection, they are costly to train and
scale due to supervision requirements. Particularly, learning more object categories typically requires proportionally
more bounding box annotations. Weakly supervised and
zero-shot learning techniques have been explored to scale
object detectors to more categories with less supervision,
but they have not been as successful and widely adopted
as supervised models. In this paper, we put forth a novel
formulation of the object detection problem, namely openvocabulary object detection, which is more general, more
practical, and more effective than weakly supervised and
zero-shot approaches. We propose a new method to train
object detectors using bounding box annotations for a limited set of object categories, as well as image-caption pairs
that cover a larger variety of objects at a significantly lower
cost. We show that the proposed method can detect and
localize objects for which no bounding box annotation is
provided during training, at a significantly higher accuracy
than zero-shot approaches. Meanwhile, objects with bounding box annotation can be detected almost as accurately
as supervised methods, which is significantly better than
weakly supervised baselines. Accordingly, we establish a
new state of the art for scalable object detection.

1. Introduction
Object detection is one of the most prominent applications of artificial intelligence, and one of the most successful tasks for deep neural networks. However, despite
the tremendous progress in deep object detection, such as
Faster R-CNN [32] and its impressive accuracy, training
such models requires expensive and time-consuming human
supervision. Particularly, one needs to manually annotate at
least thousands of bounding boxes for each object category
of interest. Although such efforts have been already made
and there are valuable datasets publicly available, such as
Open Images [21] and MSCOCO [25], these datasets cover

Figure 1. An overview of Open-Vocabulary Object Detection. We
propose a two-stage training framework where we first (1) construct a visual-semantic space using low-cost image-caption pairs,
and then (2) learn object detection using object annotations for a
set of base classes. During test (3), the goal is to detect object
categories beyond base classes, by exploiting the semantic space.

a limited set of object categories (e.g. 600), despite requiring extensive resources. Extending object detection from
600 to 60,000 categories requires 100 times more resources,
which makes versatile object detection out of reach.
Nevertheless, humans learn to recognize and localize objects effortlessly through natural supervision, i.e., exploring
the visual world and listening to others describing situations. Their lifelong learning of visual patterns and associating them with spoken words results in a rich visual and
semantic vocabulary that can be used not only for detecting
objects, but for other tasks too, such as describing objects
and reasoning about their attributes and affordances. Although drawing bounding boxes around objects is not a task
that humans naturally learn, they can quickly learn it using
few examples, and generalize it well to all types of objects,
without needing examples for each object class.
In this paper, we imitate this human ability, by designing a two-stage framework named Open-Vocabulary object Detection (OVD). We propose to first use a corpus of
image-caption pairs to acquire an unbounded vocabulary of

14393

