Towards Diverse Paragraph Captioning for Untrimmed Videos
Yuqing Song1∗, Shizhe Chen2∗, Qin Jin1†
1
Renmin University of China, 2 INRIA
syuqing@ruc.edu.cn, cshizhe@gmail.com, qjin@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
Video paragraph captioning aims to describe multiple
events in untrimmed videos with descriptive paragraphs.
Existing approaches mainly solve the problem in two steps:
event detection and then event captioning. Such two-step
manner makes the quality of generated paragraphs highly
dependent on the accuracy of event proposal detection
which is already a challenging task. In this paper, we
propose a paragraph captioning model which eschews the
problematic event detection stage and directly generates
paragraphs for untrimmed videos. To describe coherent
and diverse events, we propose to enhance the conventional
temporal attention with dynamic video memories, which
progressively exposes new video features and suppresses
over-accessed video contents to control visual focuses of
the model. In addition, a diversity-driven training strategy is proposed to improve diversity of paragraph on the
language perspective. Considering that untrimmed videos
generally contain massive but redundant frames, we further augment the video encoder with keyframe awareness to
improve efficiency. Experimental results on the ActivityNet
and Charades datasets show that our proposed model significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art performance on
both accuracy and diversity metrics without using any event
boundary annotations. Code will be released at https:
//github.com/syuqings/video-paragraph.

1. Introduction
Describing videos with natural language sentences,
a.k.a. video captioning, has attracted increasing research
attentions due to the rapid emergence of videos in our lives.
The dominant video captioning task [19, 46, 31, 42, 45] focuses on generating a single sentence to describe a carefully trimmed video which mainly contains one major event
within short duration such as 10-20 seconds [40, 37]. However, the videos in the wild are mostly untrimmed with
∗ Equal contribution. This work was performed when Shizhe Chen was
at Renmin University of China.
† Corresponding author.

rich temporal event structures. A single sentence is insufficient to convey fine-grained information in such untrimmed
videos. Therefore, recent works [39, 21, 13] have attempted
to generate a story-oriented paragraph with multiple sentences to comprehensively describe video contents.
Existing works [39, 21, 13] mainly adopt a two-stage
framework for video paragraph captioning: firstly detecting event segments in the video, and then generating the
event description for each segment. Despite being reasonable, the framework requires temporal segment coordinates
for descriptions in the paragraph to train the model, which
are expensive to annotate. Moreover, since event categories
are extremely diverse in open-domain untrimmed videos, it
is quite challenging to detect precise event segments compared with the action detection task [25, 47, 4], which has a
fixed category list. The poorly detected events greatly harm
the performance of paragraph captioning in existing frameworks. As a result, several works [21, 13] use ground-truth
event segments to generate video paragraphs, which cannot
generalize to videos without such event annotations.
However, is event detection really necessary for video
paragraph captioning? Let’s review a simpler task of image paragraph captioning. The state-of-the-art approaches
[16, 17] directly generate sentences from images without
predicting sequences of image coordinates. The generated
paragraphs have shown good capability to capture descriptive logic such as from foreground to background. Motivated by these works, we aim to eschew the costly event
segment detection process, and efficiently generate video
paragraph descriptions in a single stage.
Compared with the image counterpart, there are mainly
three challenges for video paragraph captioning when event
segments are unavailable. Firstly, an untrimmed video generally consists of hundreds or thousands of frames, while an
image contains much fewer region candidates to be attended
to. Therefore, it consumes more computation resources
during description generation. Secondly, the large number
of frame candidates also makes it hard for the captioning
model to learn an effective attention mechanism to form a
coherent descriptive logic and describe diverse events in the
video, especially when the training examples are limited.

11245

