Mask-Embedded Discriminator with Region-based Semantic Regularization for
Semi-Supervised Class-Conditional Image Synthesis
Yi Liu1 , Xiaoyang Huo1 , Tianyi Chen1 , Xiangping Zeng1 , Si Wu1,2,∗, Zhiwen Yu1 , and Hau-San Wong2,∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
csyiliu@gmail.com, csxyhuo@mail.scut.edu.cn, csttychen@mail.scut.edu.cn, csxpzeng@gmail.com,
cswusi@scut.edu.cn, zhwyu@scut.edu.cn, cshswong@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Semi-supervised generative learning (SSGL) makes use
of unlabeled data to achieve a trade-off between the data collection/annotation effort and generation performance,
when adequate labeled data are not available. Learning
precise class semantics is crucial for class-conditional image synthesis with limited supervision. Toward this end, we
propose a semi-supervised Generative Adversarial Network
with a Mask-Embedded Discriminator, which is referred to
as MED-GAN. By incorporating a mask embedding module, the discriminator features are associated with spatial
information, such that the focus of the discriminator can be
limited in the specified regions when distinguishing between
real and synthesized images. A generator is enforced to synthesize the instances holding more precise class semantics
in order to deceive the enhanced discriminator. Also benefiting from mask embedding, region-based semantic regularization is imposed on the discriminator feature space,
and the degree of separation between real and fake classes and among object categories can thus be increased. This
eventually improves class-conditional distribution matching
between real and synthesized data. In the experiments, the
superior performance of MED-GAN demonstrates the effectiveness of mask embedding and associated regularizers in
facilitating SSGL.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [11] have made
great progress in high-fidelity image synthesis [4] [14] [15]
[16]. To better capture class semantics, class-conditional
GANs are developed to synthesize diverse instances to
match the underlying class-conditional distribution of real
data [26] [30] [27] [10]. For many scenarios of real-world
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Visually compare the activation maps of a generic discriminator (middle row) and a mask-embedded discriminator (bottom row) used in MED-GAN on CUB-200. The top row shows
a real image and the images constructed via random regional replacement between the real image and a number of fake images.

applications, accurate and sufficient labeled data are expensive to obtain, since the collection process typically needs
expertise. The difficulty of acquiring labeled data has motivated the research on semi-supervised generative learning,
which addresses a challenging task: how to train a reliable generative model for the case where there are a limited amount of labeled data together with a large amount of
unlabeled data.
To improve class-conditional image synthesis in the
semi-supervised setting, a number of techniques have been
explored for enhancement on generators/discriminators.
Wu et al. [43] performed class-wise mean feature matching between synthesized and real data in a classifier feature
space. In [24], real and fake images of each class were randomly mixed through regional replacement. The resulting
images were used to regularize a discriminator. However,
a class-conditional discriminator always tends to learn the
most discriminative features. As shown in Figure 1, it focuses on the regions which are not necessarily important,
especially for the case of limited supervision. This may de-

5506

