IronMask: Modular Architecture for Protecting Deep Face Template
Sunpill Kim1 Yunseong Jeong2 Jinsu Kim3 Jungkon Kim3 Hyung Tae Lee2 Jae Hong Seo1 *
1

2

Department of Mathematics & Research Institute for Natural Sciences, Hanyang University
Division of Computer Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Jeonbuk National University
3
Security Team, Samsung Research, Samsung Electronics

Abstract
Convolutional neural networks have made remarkable
progress in the face recognition field. The more the technology of face recognition advances, the greater discriminative
features into a face template. However, this increases the
threat to user privacy in case the template is exposed.
In this paper, we present a modular architecture for face
template protection, called IronMask, that can be combined
with any face recognition system using angular distance
metric. We circumvent the need for binarization, which is
the main cause of performance degradation in most existing
face template protections, by proposing a new real-valued
error-correcting-code that is compatible with real-valued
templates and can therefore, minimize performance degradation. We evaluate the efficacy of IronMask by extensive
experiments on two face recognitions, ArcFace and CosFace with three datasets, CMU-Multi-PIE, FEI, and ColorFERET. According to our experimental results, IronMask
achieves a true accept rate (TAR) of 99.79% at a false accept rate (FAR) of 0.0005% when combined with ArcFace,
and 95.78% TAR at 0% FAR with CosFace, while providing
at least 115-bit security against known attacks.

1. Introduction
Biometric-based authentication has long been the subject of intensive research, and deep convolutional neural
networks (CNNs) have allowed significant recent advances
in recognition. The success of the CNN architecture comes
from its ability to extract discriminative features from user
biometric traits, such as facial images. Within face recognition systems, user face images are well-compressed into
deep face templates. Therefore, the exposure of user face
templates constitutes a severe threat to user privacy as well
as to system security. For instance, face images can be reconstructed from the corresponding templates [20] and this
* Corresponding author: J. H. Seo (e-mail: jaehongseo@hanyang.ac.kr)

is a direct threat to user privacy. In addition, the reconstructed face image can be used to gain unauthorized access
to the system. A high number of attacks have already been
reported, which shows how risky the leakage of templates
is [20, 4, 10, 9, 3].
The goal of face template protection is to satisfy irreversibility, revocability, and unlinkability properties without significant degradation in face recognition performance.
In terms of security, in the event a protected face template
is leaked to an adversary, reconstructing the original face
template from the compromised template should be computationally infeasible. Thus, the compromised template must
be revoked and generation of a new protected face template
should be feasible. In addition, two or more protected templates created from the same user biometric traits should
hide relations between them. Furthermore, the template protection scheme is expected to maintain high matching performance with high intra-user compactness and inter-user
discrepancy. Achieving both high template security and
high match performance at the same time is a fundamental
challenge in the design of face template protection schemes.
Most of recent research on CNN-based face template
protection can be categorized into two groups, training-inenrollment and training-before-enrollment. The former approach [23, 12, 13] requires face images of the target user
to train the CNN, which maps from face images into binary
code during enrollment; at this stage, the resulting binary
codes are randomly generated and so have no correlation
with the original face images. The hashed value of the resulting binary code is stored as a protected template of the
target user. This approach is incompatible with dynamic enrollment systems because, once the initial enrollment has
been completed, the CNN would need to be retrained from
scratch whenever a new user is added to the system. The
latter approach [31, 21] was proposed to mitigate the effect
of the above problem. In this case, the CNN can be pretrained before enrollment, and performance degradation is
minimized using additional methods, e.g., neural network

16125

