Mesoscopic photogrammetry with an unstabilized phone camera
Kevin C. Zhou,* Colin Cooke, Jaehee Park, Ruobing Qian,
Roarke Horstmeyer, Joseph A. Izatt, Sina Farsiu
Duke University, Durham, NC
kevin.zhou@duke.edu

Abstract
We present a feature-free photogrammetric technique
that enables quantitative 3D mesoscopic (mm-scale height
variation) imaging with tens-of-micron accuracy from sequences of images acquired by a smartphone at close
range (several cm) under freehand motion without additional hardware. Our end-to-end, pixel-intensity-based approach jointly registers and stitches all the images by estimating a coaligned height map, which acts as a pixelwise radial deformation field that orthorectifies each camera image to allow plane-plus-parallax registration. The
height maps themselves are reparameterized as the output of an untrained encoder-decoder convolutional neural network (CNN) with the raw camera images as the input, which effectively removes many reconstruction artifacts. Our method also jointly estimates both the camera’s
dynamic 6D pose and its distortion using a nonparametric
model, the latter of which is especially important in mesoscopic applications when using cameras not designed for
imaging at short working distances, such as smartphone
cameras. We also propose strategies for reducing computation time and memory, applicable to other multi-frame registration problems. Finally, we demonstrate our method using sequences of multi-megapixel images captured by an unstabilized smartphone on a variety of samples (e.g., painting
brushstrokes, circuit board, seeds).

1. Introduction
The photogrammetric problem of reconstructing 3D representations of an object or scene from 2D images taken
from multiple viewpoints is common and well studied, featuring prominently in techniques such as multi-view stereo
(MVS) [15], structure from motion (SfM) [51, 57, 46], and
simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) [13]. Implicit in these 3D reconstructions is knowledge of the camera parameters, such as camera position, orientation, and
distortions, which are jointly estimated in SfM and SLAM.
Photogrammetry tools have been developed and applied

Figure 1. Our method jointly stitches multi-megapixel images acquired under freehand motion at close range and reconstructs highaccuracy height maps without precalibration of camera distortion.

to both long-range, macro-scale applications [41], such as
building-scale reconstructions or aerial topographical mapping, and close-range, meter-scale applications [33], such
as industrial metrology. However, comparatively less work
has been done to push photogrammetry to mesoscopic (mm
variation) and microscopic scales, where additional issues
arise, such as more limited depths of field and increased
impact of camera distortion. Existing approaches at smaller
scales typically require very careful camera distortion precalibration, expensive cameras, dedicated setups that allow
well-controlled camera or sample motion (e.g., with a dedicated rig), or attachment of control points to the object [33].
Here, we show that a smartphone is capable of obtaining quantitative 3D mesoscopic images of objects with 100
µm- to mm-scale height variations at tens-of-micron accuracies with unstabilized, freehand motion and without precalibration of camera distortion (Fig. 1). To achieve this, we
present a new photogrammetric reconstruction algorithm
that simultaneously stitches the multi-perspective images
after warping to a common reference frame, reconstructs

7535

