SMD-Nets: Stereo Mixture Density Networks
Fabio Tosi1∗
Yiyi Liao2
Carolin Schmitt2
Andreas Geiger2
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI), University of Bologna
2
Autonomous Vision Group, MPI-IS / University of Tübingen
1

{fabio.tosi5}@unibo.it 2 {firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Despite stereo matching accuracy has greatly improved
by deep learning in the last few years, recovering sharp
boundaries and high-resolution outputs efficiently remains
challenging. In this paper, we propose Stereo Mixture Density Networks (SMD-Nets), a simple yet effective learning
framework compatible with a wide class of 2D and 3D
architectures which ameliorates both issues. Specifically,
we exploit bimodal mixture densities as output representation and show that this allows for sharp and precise disparity estimates near discontinuities while explicitly modeling the aleatoric uncertainty inherent in the observations.
Moreover, we formulate disparity estimation as a continuous problem in the image domain, allowing our model to
query disparities at arbitrary spatial precision. We carry
out comprehensive experiments on a new high-resolution
and highly realistic synthetic stereo dataset, consisting of
stereo pairs at 8Mpx resolution, as well as on real-world
stereo datasets. Our experiments demonstrate increased
depth accuracy near object boundaries and prediction of ultra high-resolution disparity maps on standard GPUs. We
demonstrate the flexibility of our technique by improving the
performance of a variety of stereo backbones.

(a) PSM [4]

(b) PSM [4] + Ours

Figure 1: Point Cloud Comparison between the stereo network PSM [4] and our Stereo Mixture Density Network
(SMD-Net) on the UnrealStereo4K dataset. Notice how
SMD-Net notably alleviates bleeding artifacts near object
boundaries, resulting in more accurate 3D reconstructions.

1. Introduction
Stereo matching is a long standing and active research
topic in computer vision. It aims at recovering dense correspondences between image pairs by estimating the disparity between matching pixels, required to infer depth through
triangulation. It also plays a crucial role in many areas like
3D mapping, scene understanding and robotics.
Traditional stereo matching algorithms apply handcrafted matching costs and engineered regularization strategies. More recently, learning methods based on Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have proven to be superior, given the increasing availability of large stereo datasets
∗ Work done as intern at MPI-IS.

[11, 10, 52]. Although such methods produce compelling
results, two major issues remain unsolved: predicting accurate depth boundaries and generating high-resolution outputs with limited memory and computation.
The first issue is shown in Fig. 1a: As neural networks
are smooth function approximators, they often poorly reconstruct object boundaries, causing “bleeding” artifacts
(i.e., flying pixels) when converted to point clouds. These
artifacts can be detrimental to subsequent applications such
as 3D reconstruction or 3D object detection. Thus, while
being ignored by most commonly employed disparity metrics, accurate 3D reconstruction of contours is a desirable
property for any stereo matching algorithm.

8942

