UnsupervisedR&R:
Unsupervised Point Cloud Registration via Differentiable Rendering
Mohamed El Banani
Luya Gao
Justin Johnson
University of Michigan
{mbanani, mlgao, justincj}@umich.edu

Abstract
Aligning partial views of a scene into a single whole is
essential to understanding one’s environment and is a key
component of numerous robotics tasks such as SLAM and
SfM. Recent approaches have proposed end-to-end systems
that can outperform traditional methods by leveraging pose
supervision. However, with the rising prevalence of cameras with depth sensors, we can expect a new stream of
raw RGB-D data without the annotations needed for supervision. We propose UnsupervisedR&R: an end-to-end
unsupervised approach to learning point cloud registration
from raw RGB-D video. The key idea is to leverage differentiable alignment and rendering to enforce photometric and geometric consistency between frames. We evaluate
our approach on indoor scene datasets and find that we outperform existing traditional approaches with classical and
learned descriptors while being competitive with supervised
geometric point cloud registration approaches.

1. Introduction
Consider the two scenes depicted in Fig 1. How are they
related? What is the layout of the room they depict? Aligning partial views of a scene into a single whole is essential
to understanding one’s environment and is a key component
of numerous robotics tasks such as SLAM and SfM. Recent
approaches have leveraged supervised learning to develop
end-to-end systems that outperform traditional methods in
both accuracy and speed [9, 22]. However, with the rising
prevalence of cameras with depth sensors, we can expect
a new stream of raw RGB-D data without the annotations
needed for supervision. How can we leverage this data for
unsupervised learning of point cloud registration?
The common approach to point cloud registration relies
on correspondence extraction and geometric model fitting.
Traditional approaches rely on hand-crafted features [30,
38] and robust estimators such as RANSAC [20]. While
those approaches work well, their performance is limited

Figure 1. What 3D scene do the two views on the left portray?
Given 2 RGB-D images, we train a model to estimate the camera
motion between them through enforcing photometric and geometric consistency losses on point cloud renderings of the scene.

by their inability to flexibly adapt to different data distributions. Recent work leverages supervised learning to address
those limitations by learning to extract feature descriptors [10, 16, 71], finding better correspondences [9, 22, 52],
and training more efficient robust estimators [6, 7, 48].
However, accurate pose annotation can be challenging to
attain automatically, due to sensor error or reliance on traditional SfM pipelines with no convergence guarantees [53].
Meanwhile, self-supervised visual learning has made remarkable progress in learning semantic [15, 17, 21, 25, 60]
and 3D [29, 35, 62, 64, 81] features. The key idea is to use
natural transformations in the data as indirect supervision.
RGB-D video provides us with this supervision since successive frames capture different views of the same scene. In
this case, aligning two point clouds from nearby frames is
not only about achieving good geometric consistency, but
also showing good photometric consistency between the
two views. By achieving both photometric and geometric
consistency, we can train our model using RGB-D image
pairs without relying on additional supervision.
We propose using view synthesis between RGB-D im-

7129

