Multispectral Photometric Stereo for Spatially-Varying Spectral Reflectances:
A well posed problem?
Heng Guo1 Fumio Okura1 Boxin Shi2,3 Takuya Funatomi4
Yasuhiro Mukaigawa4 Yasuyuki Matsushita1
1

Osaka University
Peng Cheng Laboratory

2

4

Peking University
Nara Institute of Science and Technology

Multispectral photometric stereo setup
LED 1

Input

Output

425nm

450nm

485nm

505nm

520nm

550nm

590nm

635nm

LED 3
LED 4

LED 2

White
LED array

Shape estimation

3

Light direction distribution

Surface normal

Camera
LED 8

LED 7

LED 9

LED 10

650nm

LED 11

LED 12

Hardware setup

675nm

705nm

730nm

Wavelength [nm]

Light spectrum distribution

Spectral image observations

Reflectance estimation

LED 6

LED 5

Recovered shape

Wavelength [nm]

SV-albedo

Chromaticity

Figure 1: Our multispectral photometric stereo setup with 12 narrow-band spectral LEDs under varying spectrum and lighting
directions. Taking the spectral image observations as input, our method outputs a closed-form unique solution of both surface
normal and spectral reflectance for monochromatic surfaces with spatially-varying (SV) albedos.

Abstract
Multispectral photometric stereo (MPS) aims at recovering the surface normal of a scene from a single-shot multispectral image, which is known as an ill-posed problem. To
make the problem well-posed, existing MPS methods rely
on restrictive assumptions, such as shape prior, surfaces
having a monochromatic with uniform albedo. This paper alleviates the restrictive assumptions in existing methods. We show that the problem becomes well-posed for a
surface with a uniform chromaticity but spatially-varying
albedos based on our new formulation. Specifically, if at
least three (or two) scene points share the same chromaticity, the proposed method uniquely recovers their surface
normals and spectral reflectance with the illumination of
more than or equal to four (or five) spectral lights. Besides, our method can be made robust by having many
(i.e., 4 or more) spectral bands using robust estimation
techniques for conventional photometric stereo. Experiments on both synthetic and real-world scenes demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. Our data and result
can be found at https://github.com/GH-HOME/
MultispectralPS.git.

1. Introduction
Photometric stereo is effective for the detailed recovery
of three-dimensional (3D) surfaces. Classical photometric
stereo methods, originally proposed by Woodham [24] and
Silver [22], use images captured from a fixed camera under varying lighting directions, which are commonly obtained at different timestamps. Since conventional photometric stereo methods stack images with time-multiplexing,
the target surface has to be static during the multiple shots.
With spectral-multiplexing, multispectral photometric
stereo (MPS) [13] recovers surface normals from a oneshot multispectral image. An input image for MPS encodes
observations under different lighting directions in different spectral bands, conveying the information about surface
normals and spectral reflectances. Figure 1 shows our MPS
setup, which contains a fixed camera and 12 narrow-band
spectral light sources located at different positions.
Unlike time-multiplexing photometric stereo, shape recovery in MPS with Lambertian surfaces is an ill-posed
problem. Under the illumination of f spectral lights, there
are f + 2 unknowns (f for the reflectance for each spec-

963

