Self-supervised Geometric Perception
Heng Yang*
MIT LIDS

Wei Dong⇤
CMU RI

Abstract
We present self-supervised geometric perception (SGP),
the first general framework to learn a feature descriptor
for correspondence matching without any ground-truth geometric model labels (e.g., camera poses, rigid transformations). Our first contribution is to formulate geometric perception as an optimization problem that jointly optimizes
the feature descriptor and the geometric models given a
large corpus of visual measurements (e.g., images, point
clouds). Under this optimization formulation, we show that
two important streams of research in vision, namely robust
model fitting and deep feature learning, correspond to optimizing one block of the unknown variables while fixing the
other block. This analysis naturally leads to our second
contribution – the SGP algorithm that performs alternating
minimization to solve the joint optimization. SGP iteratively
executes two meta-algorithms: a teacher that performs robust model fitting given learned features to generate geometric pseudo-labels, and a student that performs deep feature learning under noisy supervision of the pseudo-labels.
As a third contribution, we apply SGP to two perception
problems on large-scale real datasets, namely relative camera pose estimation on MegaDepth and point cloud registration on 3DMatch. We demonstrate that SGP achieves stateof-the-art performance that is on-par or superior to the supervised oracles trained using ground-truth labels.1

1. Introduction
Geometric perception is the task of estimating geometric
models (e.g., camera poses, rigid transformations, and 3D
structures) from visual measurements (e.g., images or point
clouds). It is a fundamental class of problems in computer
vision that has extensive applications in object detection and
pose estimation [77, 86], motion estimation and 3D reconstruction [18, 25], simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) [13], structure from motion (SfM) [62], and virtual
and augmented reality [44], to name a few.
Modern geometric perception typically consists of a
front-end that detects, represents, and associates (sparse
or dense) keypoints to establish putative correspondences,
and a back-end that performs estimation of the geometric
models while being robust to outliers (i.e., incorrect corre* Equal contribution. Work performed during internship at Intel Labs.
1 Code available at https://github.com/theNded/SGP.

Luca Carlone
MIT LIDS

Vladlen Koltun
Intel Labs

spondences). Traditionally, hand-crafted keypoint detectors
and feature descriptors, such as SIFT [52] and FPFH [60],
have been used for feature matching in 2D images and 3D
point clouds. Despite being general and efficient to compute, hand-crafted features typically lead to an overwhelming number of outliers so that robust estimation algorithms
struggle to return accurate estimates of the geometric models. For example, it is not uncommon to have over 95%
of the correspondences estimated from FPFH be outliers in
point cloud registration [57, 80]. As a result, learning feature descriptors from data, particularly using deep neural
networks, has become increasingly popular. Learned feature descriptors have been shown to consistently and significantly outperform their hand-crafted counterparts across applications such as relative camera pose estimation [69, 61],
3D point cloud registration [21, 32], and object detection
and pose estimation [58, 86, 64, 72].
However, existing feature learning approaches have several major shortcomings. First, a large number of groundtruth geometric model labels are required for training. For
example, ground-truth relative camera poses are needed for
training image keypoint descriptors [69, 54, 27], pairwise
rigid transformations are required for training point cloud
descriptors [21, 32, 74, 85, 70], and object poses are used
to train image keypoint predictors [58, 86]. Second, although obtaining ground-truth geometric labels is trivial in
some controlled settings such as robotic manipulation [30],
in general the labels come from full 3D reconstruction
pipelines (e.g., COLMAP [62], Open3D [91]) that require delicate parameter tuning, partial human supervision, and extra
sensory information such as IMU and GPS. As a result, the
success of feature learning is limited to a handful of datasets
with ground-truth annotations [87, 23, 50, 72, 11].
In this paper, we ask the key question: Can we design
a general framework for feature learning that requires no
ground-truth geometric labels or sophisticated reconstruction pipelines? Our answer is affirmative.
Contributions. We formulate geometric perception
as an optimization problem that jointly searches for the
best feature descriptor (for correspondence matching) and
the best geometric models given a large corpus of visual measurements. This formulation incorporates robust
model fitting and deep feature learning as two subproblems: (i) robust estimation only searches for the geometric
models, while consuming putative correspondences established from a given feature descriptor; (ii) feature learning
searches purely for the feature descriptor, while relying on
114350

