Spatial Feature Calibration and Temporal Fusion for Effective
One-stage Video Instance Segmentation
Minghan Li1,2 , Shuai Li1,2 , Lida Li1 and Lei Zhang1,2∗
The HongKong Polytechnic University, 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
liminghan0330@gmail.com, { csshuaili, cslli, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
1

Abstract
Modern one-stage video instance segmentation networks
suffer from two limitations. First, convolutional features
are neither aligned with anchor boxes nor with groundtruth bounding boxes, reducing the mask sensitivity to spatial location. Second, a video is directly divided into individual frames for frame-level instance segmentation, ignoring the temporal correlation between adjacent frames.
To address these issues, we propose a simple yet effective
one-stage video instance segmentation framework by spatial calibration and temporal fusion, namely STMask. To
ensure spatial feature calibration with ground-truth bounding boxes, we first predict regressed bounding boxes around
ground-truth bounding boxes, and extract features from
them for frame-level instance segmentation. To further explore temporal correlation among video frames, we aggregate a temporal fusion module to infer instance masks from
each frame to its adjacent frames, which helps our framework to handle challenging videos such as motion blur,
partial occlusion and unusual object-to-camera poses. Experiments on the YouTube-VIS valid set show that the proposed STMask with ResNet-50/-101 backbone obtains 33.5
% / 36.8 % mask AP, while achieving 28.6 / 23.4 FPS on
video instance segmentation. The code is released online
https://github.com/MinghanLi/STMask.

1. Introduction
Video instance segmentation aims to obtain the pixellevel segmentation mask for individual instances of all
classes over the entire frames of a video, which heavily
depends on spatial position-sensitive features to localize
frame-level objects and redundant temporal information to
track instances across frames. Following object detection
and image instance segmentation works, modern video instance segmentation approaches usually adopt the top-down
∗ Corresponding author.This work is supported by the Hong Kong RGC
RIF grant (R5001-18).

(a) Original anchors and features (b) Calibrated anchors and features

(c) Adaptive features
(d) Aligned features
Figure 1. Spatial calibration for anchor boxes and bounding
boxes. (a) and (b) display anchors and features in original and calibrated one-stage networks respectively. (c) and (d) demonstrate
adaptive and aligned features extracted from predicted bounding
boxes. Purple, blue and green rectangles denote anchors, predicted
and ground-truth bounding boxes respectively, where coloured areas indicate the receptive filed of their convolutional features.

framework of first detecting and segmenting objects frame
by frame and then linking instance masks across frames.
Top-down video instance segmentation approaches can
be divided into two-stage and one-stage methods. By
adding a tracking branch to Mask R-CNN [18], two-stage
video instance segmentation methods [43, 2, 16] first predict region-of-interests (RoIs) around ground-truth bounding boxes, and then feed aligned features via RoIPooling [32] or RoIAlign [18] to segment frame-level object
masks and to track cross-frame instances. To obtain better
location-sensitive features for mask predictor, many spatial
feature calibration strategies for RoIs have been continuously proposed in recent years like Deformable RoI [12]
and Hybrid Task Cascade [8]. For temporal information
exploration, recently proposed MaskProp [2] utilizes temporal features propagated from all frames of a video clip
for clip-level instance tracking. Obviously, two-stage methods have recognized the importance of spatial feature localisation and temporal feature tracking for video instance

11215

