CDFI: Compression-Driven Network Design for Frame Interpolation
Tianyu Ding1∗

Luming Liang2∗†

Zhihui Zhu3

Ilya Zharkov2

1

2
3
Johns Hopkins University
Microsoft
University of Denver
tding1@jhu.edu, {lulian,zharkov}@microsoft.com, zhihui.zhu@du.edu

Abstract
DNN-based frame interpolation—that generates the intermediate frames given two consecutive frames—typically
relies on heavy model architectures with a huge number of
features, preventing them from being deployed on systems
with limited resources, e.g., mobile devices. We propose
a compression-driven network design for frame interpolation (CDFI), that leverages model pruning through sparsityinducing optimization to significantly reduce the model size
while achieving superior performance. Concretely, we first
compress the recently proposed AdaCoF model and show
that a 10× compressed AdaCoF performs similarly as its
original counterpart; then we further improve this compressed model by introducing a multi-resolution warping
module, which boosts visual consistencies with multi-level
details. As a consequence, we achieve a significant performance gain with only a quarter in size compared with
the original AdaCoF. Moreover, our model performs favorably against other state-of-the-arts in a broad range of
datasets. Finally, the proposed compression-driven framework is generic and can be easily transferred to other DNNbased frame interpolation algorithm. Our source code is
available at https://github.com/tding1/CDFI.

1. Introduction
Video frame interpolation is a lower level computer vision task referring to the generation of intermediate (nonexistent) frames between actual frames in a sequence, which
is able to largely increase the temporal resolution. It plays
an important role in many applications, including frame rate
up-conversion [4], slow-motion generation [27], and novel
view synthesis [20, 66]. Though fundamental, the problem
is challenging in that the complex motion, occlusion and
feature variation in real world videos are difficult to estimate and predict in a transparent way.
∗ Equal contribution. This work was done when Tianyu Ding was an
intern at Applied Sciences Group, Microsoft.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. A challenging example consists of large motion, severe occlusion and non-stationary finer details. From top to bottom: the overlaid two inputs, the ground-truth middle frame, the
frame generated by AdaCoF [32], the frame generated by the 10×
compressed AdaCoF, and the frame generated by our method. The
compressed AdaCoF even outperforms the full one in this case.

Recently, a large number of researches have been conducted in this area, especially those based on deep neural
networks (DNN) for their promising results in motion estimation [18, 26, 55, 58], occlusion reasoning [2, 27, 46] and
image synthesis [19, 20, 28, 30, 66]. In particular, due to the

8001

