Unsupervised Degradation Representation Learning for Blind Super-Resolution
Longguang Wang1 , Yingqian Wang1 , Xiaoyu Dong2,3 , Qingyu Xu1 , Jungang Yang1 , Wei An1 , Yulan Guo1∗
1
3
National University of Defense Technology 2 The University of Tokyo
RIKEN AIP
{wanglongguang15,yulan.guo}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract
Most existing CNN-based super-resolution (SR) methods
are developed based on an assumption that the degradation
is fixed and known (e.g., bicubic downsampling). However,
these methods suffer a severe performance drop when the
real degradation is different from their assumption. To handle various unknown degradations in real-world applications, previous methods rely on degradation estimation to
reconstruct the SR image. Nevertheless, degradation estimation methods are usually time-consuming and may lead
to SR failure due to large estimation errors. In this paper, we propose an unsupervised degradation representation learning scheme for blind SR without explicit degradation estimation. Specifically, we learn abstract representations to distinguish various degradations in the representation space rather than explicit estimation in the pixel space.
Moreover, we introduce a Degradation-Aware SR (DASR)
network with flexible adaption to various degradations
based on the learned representations. It is demonstrated
that our degradation representation learning scheme can
extract discriminative representations to obtain accurate
degradation information. Experiments on both synthetic
and real images show that our network achieves state-ofthe-art performance for the blind SR task. Code is available at: https://github.com/LongguangWang/
DASR.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SR) aims at recovering
a high-resolution (HR) image from a low-resolution (LR)
observation. Recently, CNN-based methods [9, 22, 24, 2,
32] have dominated the research of SR due to the powerful
feature representation capability of deep neural networks.
As a typical inverse problem, SR is highly coupled with the
degradation model [3]. Most existing CNN-based methods
are developed based on an assumption that the degradation
is known and fixed (e.g., bicubic downsampling). However,
these methods suffer a severe performance drop when the
real degradation differs from their assumption [12].

encoder

two-layer
MLP

LR patches

degradation
representations

𝑥+

𝑥

𝑥−

contrastive learning

Figure 1. An illustration of our unsupervised degradation representation learning scheme.

To handle various degradations in real-world applications, several methods [42, 33, 40, 34] have been proposed
to investigate the non-blind SR problem. Specifically, these
methods use a set of degradations (e.g., different combinations of Gaussian blurs, motion blurs and noises) for
training and assume the degradation of the test LR image
is known at the inference time. These non-blind methods
produce promising SR results when the true degradation is
known in priori.
To super-resolve real images with unknown degradations, degradation estimation [28, 3] needs to be performed
to provide degradation information for non-blind SR networks [42, 33, 40, 34]. However, these non-blind methods
are sensitive to degradation estimation. Consequently, the
estimation error can further be magnified by the SR network, resulting in obvious artifacts [12]. To address this
problem, Gu et al. [12] proposed an iterative kernel correction (IKC) method to correct the estimated degradation
by observing previous SR results. By iteratively correcting
the degradation, artifact-free results can be gradually produced. Since numerous iterations are required at test time
by degradation estimation methods [28, 3] and IKC [12],
these methods are time-consuming.
Unlike the above methods that explicitly estimate the
degradation from an LR image, we investigate a different
approach by learning a degradation representation to distinguish the latent degradation from other ones. Motivated by
recent advances of contrastive learning [13, 10, 35, 17, 5],
a contrastive loss is used to conduct unsupervised degradation representation learning by contrasting positive pairs
against negative pairs in the latent space (Fig. 1). The

10581

