MetricOpt: Learning to Optimize Black-Box Evaluation Metrics
Chen Huang

Shuangfei Zhai
Pengsheng Guo
Apple Inc.

Josh Susskind

{chen-huang,szhai,pengsheng guo,jsusskind}@apple.com

Abstract
We study the problem of directly optimizing arbitrary
non-differentiable task evaluation metrics such as misclassification rate and recall. Our method, named MetricOpt,
operates in a black-box setting where the computational details of the target metric are unknown. We achieve this by
learning a differentiable value function, which maps compact task-specific model parameters to metric observations.
The learned value function is easily pluggable into existing
optimizers like SGD and Adam, and is effective for rapidly
finetuning a pre-trained model. This leads to consistent improvements since the value function provides effective metric supervision during finetuning, and helps to correct the
potential bias of loss-only supervision. MetricOpt achieves
state-of-the-art performance on a variety of metrics for (image) classification, image retrieval and object detection.
Solid benefits are found over competing methods, which often involve complex loss design or adaptation. MetricOpt
also generalizes well to new tasks and model architectures.

1. Introduction
In real-world vision applications, machine learning models are usually evaluated on a variety of complex evaluation metrics. For example, one may evaluate a classification
model using Mis-Classification Rate (MCR), and evaluate
a ranking model using recall. Many of these metrics are
non-continuous, non-differentiable, or non-decomposable,
which poses challenges for direct metric optimization due
to the difficulty of obtaining an informative gradient (e.g., it
is zero almost everywhere for MCR). In other scenarios, the
computational details may be unknown for a black box metric function. Hence its true gradient is simply inaccessible,
which further increases the challenge of metric optimization.
As a common practice, people usually rely on a surrogate differentiable loss, which can be easily optimized
with Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD). One example is
the widely used cross-entropy loss [15] for classification
problems. While cross-entropy loss can be regarded as a

(a)

Loss-based trajectory

Metric space

(b) Loss & metric-based trajectory

Metric space

High
Low
error
metric

error
metric
time (iteration)

Metric observation

time (iteration)

Interpolated metric contour

Figure 1. Motivation (a) Optimization with loss-only supervision
may travel through several “bumps” in the metric space, and tends
to converge to a suboptimal solution in terms of evaluation metric.
We propose to collect a sparse set of (black-box) metrics along
the optimization trajectory. Then we use the temporally interpolated metrics to meta-learn a differentiable value function, which
can provide effective metric supervision to augment and improve
any loss optimization process. (b) This way, we find continuous
decrease in the error metric while keeping the loss from growing.

smooth relaxation of MCR, this loss is not a good proxy
for other metrics like recall. When the loss does not match
the target metric, inferior performance can be obtained [23].
State-of-the-art approaches follow two main paradigms to
address this loss-metric mismatch issue. One is to introduce better metric-aligned surrogate losses, e.g., AUCPR
loss [9]. These hand-designed losses not only require tedious manual effort and white-box metric formulation, but
also tend to be specific to a given metric. Another paradigm
is to learn adaptive losses in a relaxed or interpolated surrogate space [16, 23, 24, 28], which is inherently sub-optimal
when compared to optimization in the original space.
In this paper, we propose to directly adapt the gradientbased optimization process to optimize black-box metrics,
without knowing any details about the metric function. To
do so, we first meta-learn a differentiable value function to
model the metric observations along optimization trajectories. We focus on the model finetuning setup which can provide meaningful metrics to learn our value function. Once
learned, the value function can provide useful metric super-

174

