Monte Carlo Scene Search for 3D Scene Understanding
∗

Shreyas Hampali(1) , ∗ Sinisa Stekovic(1) , Sayan Deb Sarkar(1) , Chetan S. Kumar(1) ,
Friedrich Fraundorfer(1) , Vincent Lepetit(2,1)
(1)

Institute for Computer Graphics and Vision, Graz University of Technology, Graz, Austria
(2)
Université Paris-Est, École des Ponts ParisTech, Paris, France

{<firstname>.<lastname>}@icg.tugraz.at, fraundorfer@icg.tugraz.at, vincent.lepetit@enpc.fr
Project page: https://www.tugraz.at/index.php?id=50484

Noisy RGB-D Scan

Layout and Object Proposals

Our Retrieved CAD-like Representation

Figure 1: In this paper, we advocate for the use of Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) for 3D scene understanding problems.
Given a noisy 3D point cloud recovered from an RGB-D sequence, our approach recovers accurate 3D models and poses
for the objects, walls, and floor with minimal training data, even in challenging conditions. We first generate proposals for
the layout components and the objects, and rely on Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) adapted to the problem to identify
the proposals that best explain the RGB-D sequence. We retrieve correctly the arrangement of chairs on the left-hand side
of the scene despite them being close to each other and the thin wall on the top. Our adapted MCTS algorithm has few
hyperparameters and can be applied to wide variety of scenes with minimal tuning effort. For visualization purposes only,
we texture the objects and the layout using the colors of the 3D points close-by.
Abstract

ability of objects and room layout hypotheses given the
RGB-D data. This results in an analysis-by-synthesis
approach that explores the solution space by rendering
the current solution and comparing it to the RGB-D
observations. To perform this exploration even more
efficiently, we propose simple changes to the standard
MCTS’ tree construction and exploration policy. We
demonstrate our approach on the ScanNet dataset. Our
method often retrieves configurations that are better
than some manual annotations, especially on layouts.

We explore how a general AI algorithm can be used
for 3D scene understanding to reduce the need for training data. More exactly, we propose a modification
of the Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithm to
retrieve objects and room layouts from noisy RGB-D
scans. While MCTS was developed as a game-playing
algorithm, we show it can also be used for complex
perception problems. Our adapted MCTS algorithm
has few easy-to-tune hyperparameters and can optimise
general losses. We use it to optimise the posterior prob-

∗ The first two authors contributed equally.

13804

