Domain-Specific Suppression for Adaptive Object Detection
Yu Wang1,2,3

Rui Zhang1,2
Shuo Zhang2
Miao Li1,2,3
YangYang Xia2
XiShan Zhang1,2
ShaoLi Liu2
1
SKL of Computer Architecture, Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, China
2
3
Cambricon Technologies, China
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, China
{wangyu19g,zhangrui,limiao18g,zhangxishan}@ict.ac.cn
{zhangshuo,xiayangyang,liushaoli}@cambricon.com

Abstract
Domain adaptation methods face performance degradation in object detection, as the complexity of tasks require
more about the transferability of the model. We propose
a new perspective on how CNN models gain the transferability, viewing the weights of a model as a series of motion patterns. The directions of weights, and the gradients,
can be divided into domain-specific and domain-invariant
parts, and the goal of domain adaptation is to concentrate
on the domain-invariant direction while eliminating the disturbance from domain-specific one. Current UDA object detection methods view the two directions as a whole while optimizing, which will cause domain-invariant direction mismatch even if the output features are perfectly aligned. In
this paper, we propose the domain-specific suppression, an
exemplary and generalizable constraint to the original convolution gradients in backpropagation to detach the two
parts of directions and suppress the domain-specific one.
We further validate our theoretical analysis and methods
on several domain adaptive object detection tasks, including weather, camera configuration, and synthetic to realworld adaptation. Our experiment results show significant
advance over the state-of-the-art methods in the UDA object
detection field, performing a promotion of 10.2 ∼ 12.2%
mAP on all these domain adaptation scenarios.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks(DNN) has achieved a tremendous
breakthrough at various computer vision tasks on public
dataset, including classification[21], object detection[12]
and segmentation[7]. Nevertheless, most of these researches are based on the hypothesis that the training dataset
and application scenarios have identical distribution, which
is apparently impossible to satisfy in practice. Unsupervised domain adaptation(UDA) provides an alternative to

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Feature Distribution Sketches. (a) represents the original feature distributions of two different domains. Features inside each domain’s inner circle represent those extracted by the
domain-invariant part of the model; others are from the domainspecific part of the model. (b) shows an extreme common feature
alignment method, with the overall distribution aligned while the
domain-invariant part mismatched. (c) represents an ideal adapted
distribution, with the domain-invariant part well-aligned without
the intervention of domain-specific part

solve the performance degradation caused by domain distribution mismatch problem[10] without the need for annotations on the target domain. We delved into the transferability of the model from the perspective on model-level explanation in the training process. We divided the weights and
gradients of a model into two separate directions: domaininvariant and domain-specific. The former emphasizes the
consistency between different domains for high-level tasks,
and plays a crucial role in the transferability of a model. In
contrast, the latter is the main obstacle to the transferability of a model, as it represents the unique features within
a certain domain which have no concern with the tasks. In
this way, an ideal domain adaptation method is expected
to promote transferability by learning the domain-invariant
weights while eliminating the domain-specific one.
Current research in UDA strives to align the distribution of features extracted by the model with auxiliary objective function measuring the discrepancy between them.
With the common goal, early research tries to measure
and minimize the distance of features from different domains in a well-designed feature space, such as maxi19603

