FAIEr: Fidelity and Adequacy Ensured Image Caption Evaluation
Sijin Wang1,2 , Ziwei Yao1,2 , Ruiping Wang1,2 , Zhongqin Wu3 , Xilin Chen1,2
1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Tomorrow Advancing Life Education Group, Beijing, 100080, China
{sijin.wang, ziwei.yao}@vipl.ict.ac.cn, {wangruiping, xlchen}@ict.ac.cn, wuzhongqin@tal.com

Abstract
Image caption evaluation is a crucial task, which involves the semantic perception and matching of image and
text. Good evaluation metrics aim to be fair, comprehensive, and consistent with human judge intentions. When humans evaluate a caption, they usually consider multiple aspects, such as whether it is related to the target image without distortion, how much image gist it conveys, as well as
how fluent and beautiful the language and wording is. The
above three different evaluation orientations can be summarized as fidelity, adequacy, and fluency. The former two
rely on the image content, while fluency is purely related to
linguistics and more subjective. Inspired by human judges,
we propose a learning-based metric named FAIEr to ensure
evaluating the fidelity and adequacy of the captions. Since
image captioning involves two different modalities, we employ the scene graph as a bridge between them to represent
both images and captions. FAIEr mainly regards the visual
scene graph as the criterion to measure the fidelity. Then for
evaluating the adequacy of the candidate caption, it highlights the image gist on the visual scene graph under the
guidance of the reference captions. Comprehensive experimental results show that FAIEr has high consistency with
human judgment as well as high stability, low reference dependency, and the capability of reference-free evaluation.

1. Introduction
Good evaluations lead to continuous progress in many
computer vision tasks. Different from other visual tasks,
the evaluation of the image captioning [25, 39, 4, 40, 33,
38, 8, 7] is very difficult because the outputs of the image
captioning are in the form of natural language and need to
mirror the content of the given image, which involves multimodals. Since image captioning can be regarded as translating the visual information into natural language, early
image captioning methods follow the evaluation mode of

the machine translation [30, 31, 12], which ignore the visual modal information. That is, the candidate caption is
scored only based on the similarity with the human-labeled
reference captions of the target image. In this formulation,
early popular metrics [26, 9, 22, 32] measure the similarity of two sentences by the n-gram overlap, which results
in low robustness to text ambiguity. To address this deficiency, SPICE [3] breaks the shackles of sentence structure by using the scene graph representations, which can
measure the semantic similarity of sentences. However, “A
picture paints a thousand words.” Limited numbers of reference captions are hard to cover all contents in an image.
Therefore, the reference-based metrics usually lead to biased evaluations. With recent breakthroughs, some studies
[15, 6, 14] introduce the image information into the caption evaluation, which measures the similarity between the
candidate caption and both the target image and reference
captions simultaneously.
Developing automatic metrics aims to replace human
judges, so the goal of a good metric is to reveal the human’s evaluation intentions. From the human perspective,
as shown in Fig.1(a), it is fundamental that the messages
conveyed by a caption are related to the given image with
no extra or distortion. Then, an adequate caption should
describe the gist of the image concerned by humans [35].
Moreover, idiomatic wording and beautiful sentences will
further get a higher score. We summarize them as three
evaluating orientations: fidelity, adequacy, and fluency,
which we think roughly form a multi-aspect criteria for image caption evaluation, to some extent similar to the machine translation evaluation systems [37, 27, 36]. With
no consideration of image information, previous referencebased metrics cannot assess fidelity adequately, leading to
biased evaluations. For example, if the candidate caption
contains information not included in references but in the
image, the reference-based metrics will fail to give a correct evaluation. It is also hard for those metrics based on ngram overlap to ensure the evaluation of adequacy. Recent

14050

