SPSG: Self-Supervised Photometric Scene Generation from RGB-D Scans
Angela Dai1

Yawar Siddiqui1
1

Justus Thies1

Julien Valentin2

Technical University of Munich

2

Matthias Nießner1

Google

Figure 1: Our SPSG approach formulates the problem of generating a complete, colored 3D model from an incomplete scan
observation to be self-supervised, enabling training on incomplete real-world scan data. Our key idea is to leverage a 2D
view-guided synthesis for self-supervision, comparing rendered views of our predicted model to the original RGB-D frames
of the scan. Our 2D view-guided synthesis enables outperforming methods relying fully on 3D-based (self-)supervision.

Abstract
We present SPSG, a novel approach to generate highquality, colored 3D models of scenes from RGB-D scan
observations by learning to infer unobserved scene geometry and color in a self-supervised fashion. Our selfsupervised approach learns to jointly inpaint geometry and
color by correlating an incomplete RGB-D scan with a
more complete version of that scan. Notably, rather than
relying on 3D reconstruction losses to inform our 3D geometry and color reconstruction, we propose adversarial
and perceptual losses operating on 2D renderings in order to achieve high-resolution, high-quality colored reconstructions of scenes. This exploits the high-resolution, selfconsistent signal from individual raw RGB-D frames, in
contrast to fused 3D reconstructions of the frames which
exhibit inconsistencies from view-dependent effects, such as
color balancing or pose inconsistencies. Thus, by informing our 3D scene generation directly through 2D signal, we
produce high-quality colored reconstructions of 3D scenes,
outperforming state of the art on both synthetic and real
data.

1. Introduction
The wide availability of consumer range cameras has
propelled research in 3D reconstruction of real-world environments, with applications ranging from content creation to indoor robotic navigation and autonomous driving.
While state-of-the-art 3D reconstruction approaches have
now demonstrated robust camera tracking and large-scale
reconstruction [21, 15, 31, 6], occlusions and sensor limitation lead these approaches to yield reconstructions that
are incomplete both in geometry and in color, making them
ill-suited for use in the aforementioned applications.
In recent years, geometric deep learning has made significant progress in learning to reconstruct complete, highfidelity 3D models of shapes from RGB or RGB-D observations [19, 7, 25, 20, 23], leveraging synthetic 3D shape
data to provide supervision for the geometric completion
task. Recent work has also advanced generative 3D approaches towards operating on larger-scale scenes [28, 8, 5].
However, producing complete, colored 3D reconstructions
of real-world environments remains challenging – in particular, for real-world observations, we do not have complete
ground truth data available.
We introduce SPSG, a generative 3D approach to cre-

1747

