DeRF: Decomposed Radiance Fields
Daniel Rebain1 , Wei Jiang1 , Soroosh Yazdani4 , Ke Li2,4 , Kwang Moo Yi1 , Andrea Tagliasacchi3,4
1

University of British Columbia
3
University of Toronto

2
4

Simon Fraser University
Google Research

Abstract
With the advent of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF), neural networks can now render novel views of a 3D scene
with quality that fools the human eye. Yet, generating these
images is very computationally intensive, limiting their applicability in practical scenarios. In this paper, we propose a technique based on spatial decomposition capable
of mitigating this issue. Our key observation is that there
are diminishing returns in employing larger (deeper and/or
wider) networks. Hence, we propose to spatially decompose
a scene and dedicate smaller networks for each decomposed
part. When working together, these networks can render the
whole scene. This allows us near-constant inference time
regardless of the number of decomposed parts. Moreover, we
show that a Voronoi spatial decomposition is preferable for
this purpose, as it is provably compatible with the Painter’s
Algorithm for efficient and GPU-friendly rendering. Our
experiments show that for real-world scenes, our method
provides up to 3× more efficient inference than NeRF (with
the same rendering quality), or an improvement of up to
1.0 dB in PSNR (for the same inference cost).

1. Introduction
While high-quality rendering of virtual scenes has long
been associated with traditional computer graphics [16, 14],
there have been promising developments in using neural networks for photo-realistic rendering [21, 9, 11, 13]. These
neural rendering methods have the potential to reduce the
amount of human interaction that is needed to digitize the
real world. We believe the further development of neural
scene representations will increase the viability of 3D content creation in-the-wild and continue pushing neural rendering to higher levels of life-like detail.
Among existing neural rendering methods, those that
operate in 3D have lately drawn much interest [19, 9, 13].
Unlike those based on convolutional neural networks [6],
these methods do not operate in image-space, and rather
train volumetric representations of various types: they de-

Figure 1. We render a scene (a) from a decomposed neural representation (b), consisting of a collection of spatially localized neural
networks. Each of these networks render a convex portion of the image, and these are then composited into the output via the Painter’s
Algorithm. Depending on the level of decomposition, this can lead
to faster rendering, or to renderings that have the same runtime, but
contain sharper details. In (c), we decompose the scene into 16
parts, which leads to sharper details than (d), with similar runtime.

fine functions that can be queried in space during a volume
rendering operation. This is essential, as volume rendering
introduces an inductive bias towards rendering phenomena,
so that effects like occlusion and parallax are modeled by
construction, rather than being emulated by image-space
operations.
However, neural volume rendering is far from being a
fully developed technology. The two development axes are

14153

