The Spatially-Correlative Loss for Various Image Translation Tasks
Chuanxia Zheng
Tat-Jen Cham
School of Computer Science and Engineering
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

Jianfei Cai
Department of Data Science & AI
Monash University, Australia

{chuanxia001,astjcham}@ntu.edu.sg

Jianfei.Cai@monash.edu

Abstract
We propose a novel spatially-correlative loss that is simple, efficient and yet effective for preserving scene structure
consistency while supporting large appearance changes
during unpaired image-to-image (I2I) translation. Previous
methods attempt this by using pixel-level cycle-consistency
or feature-level matching losses, but the domain-specific
nature of these losses hinder translation across large domain gaps. To address this, we exploit the spatial patterns of
self-similarity as a means of defining scene structure. Our
spatially-correlative loss is geared towards only capturing
spatial relationships within an image rather than domain
appearance. We also introduce a new self-supervised learning method to explicitly learn spatially-correlative maps
for each specific translation task. We show distinct improvement over baseline models in all three modes of unpaired I2I translation: single-modal, multi-modal, and
even single-image translation. This new loss can easily be integrated into existing network architectures and
thus allows wide applicability. The code is available at
https://github.com/lyndonzheng/F-LSeSim.

1. Introduction
I2I translation refers to the task of modifying an input
image to fit the style / appearance of the target domain,
while preserving the original content / structure (as shown
in Fig. 1: horse → zebra); learning to assess the content
and style correctly is thus of central importance. While
GANs [15] have the ability to generate images that adhere to
the overall dataset distribution, it is still difficult to preserve
scene structure during translation when image-conditional
GANs are optimized with purely adversarial loss.
To mitigate the issue of scene structure discrepancies,
a few loss functions for comparing the content between
input and output images have been proposed, including
(a) pixel-level image reconstruction loss [23, 46, 6] and
cycle-consistency loss [29, 56, 52]; (b) feature-level perceptual loss [12, 25] and PatchNCE loss [39]. However,

(a) Input

(b) Output

(c) Structure map

(d) Structure map

Figure 1. Our learned spatially-correlative representation encodes local scene structure based on self-similarities. Despite vast
appearance differences between the horse and zebra, when the
scene structures are identical (i.e. same poses), the spatial patterns
of self-similarities are as well.

these losses still have several limitations. First, pixel-level
losses do not explicitly decouple structure and appearance.
Second, feature-level losses help but continue to conflate
domain-specific structure and appearance attributes. Finally, most feature-level losses are calculated using a fixed
ImageNet [11] pre-trained network (e.g. VGG16 [47]),
which will not correctly adapt to arbitrary domains.
In this work, we aim to design a domain-invariant representation to precisely express scene structure, rather than
using original pixels or features that couple both appearance
and structure. To achieve this, we propose to revisit the idea
of self-similarity. Classically, low-level self-similarity has
been used for matching [43] and image segmentation [44],
while feature-level self-similarity in deep learning manifests as self-attention maps [51]. We propose to go further,
to advance an assumption that all regions within same categories exhibit some form of self-similarity. For instance,
while the horse and zebra in Fig. 1 appear very different, there is obvious visual self-similarity in their own re-

16407

