LPSNet: A lightweight solution for fast panoptic segmentation
Weixiang Hong, Qingpei Guo, Wei Zhang, Jingdong Chen, Wei Chu
Ant Financial Services Group
{hwx229374, qingpei.gqp, ivy.zw, jingdongchen.cjd, weichu.cw}@antgroup.com

Abstract
Panoptic segmentation is a challenging task aiming to
simultaneously segment objects (things) at instance level
and background contents (stuff) at semantic level. Existing methods mostly utilize a two-stage detection network to
attain instance segmentation results, and a fully convolutional network to produce a semantic segmentation prediction. Post-processing or additional modules are required to
handle the conflicts between the outputs from these two nets,
which makes such methods suffer from low efficiency, heavy
memory consumption and complicated implementation. To
simplify the pipeline and decrease computation/memory
cost, we propose an one-stage approach called Lightweight
Panoptic Segmentation Network (LPSNet), which does not
involve a proposal, anchor or mask head. Instead, we predict a bounding box and semantic category at each pixel
upon the feature map produced by an augmented feature
pyramid, and design a parameter-free head to merge the
per-pixel bounding box and semantic prediction into panoptic segmentation output. Our LPSNet is not only efficient
in computation and memory, but also accurate in panoptic segmentation. Comprehensive experiments on COCO,
Cityscapes and Mapillary Vistas datasets demonstrate the
promising effectiveness and efficiency of the proposed LPSNet.

1. Introduction
Panoptic Segmentation (PS) is a challenging task aiming to assign each pixel a semantic category and segment
each object in the input image [11]. Specifically, the goal
of PS is to segment countable objects (things) at instance
level and parse amorphous image regions (stuff) at semantic level. Therefore, compared with semantic segmentation
or instance segmentation, PS provides more comprehensive
scene information and can be broadly used in autonomous
driving and scene parsing.
A straightforward solution to tackle PS is to merge the
instance segmentation and semantic segmentation predictions, as is done by most existing methods [11, 3, 10, 35,

(a) Input image.

(b) Object detection.

(c) Semantic segmentation.

(d) Panoptic segmentation.

Figure 1. (Better viewed in color). Lightweight Panoptic Segmentation Network (LPSNet) predicts bounding boxes and semantic
segmentation, and merge them into panoptic segmentation output
with a parameter-free panoptic head.

34]. To achieve good panoptic quality, these methods are often built upon large networks and complex pipelines, without concerning efficiency and computational resources. For
example, Mask RCNN [7] has been widely used or integrated to attain promising accuracy, despite that Mask
RCNN is heavy in resources consumption and slow in inference. Moreover, the utilization of Mask RCNN naturally
introduces conflicts with the output from semantic segmentation branch, hence heuristic or complex post-processing
like the pixel rank module [20] are required to deal with the
outputs of both branches and obtain unified panoptic segmentation results. Nevertheless, we argue that an efficient
solution for PS is not only desired for practical usage like
autonomous driving, but also of great importance for potential performance gain by saving memory for larger image
and batch size.
In this paper, we propose Lightweight Panoptic Segmentation Network (LPSNet) to tackle the drawback mentioned
above. By introducing a parameter-free panoptic head, our
LPSNet decomposes panoptic segmentation into two inde116746

