Semantic-Aware Video Text Detection
Wei Feng1,2 Fei Yin1,2 Xu-Yao Zhang1,2 Cheng-Lin Liu1,2,3
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR),
Institute of Automation of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
CAS Center for Excellence of Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Beijing 100190, China
Email: {wei.feng, fyin, xyz, liucl}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Most existing video text detection methods track texts
with appearance features, which are easily influenced by the
change of perspective and illumination. Compared with appearance features, semantic features are more robust cues
for matching text instances. In this paper, we propose an
end-to-end trainable video text detector that tracks texts
based on semantic features. First, we introduce a new
character center segmentation branch to extract semantic
features, which encode the category and position of characters. Then we propose a novel appearance-semanticgeometry descriptor to track text instances, in which semantic features can improve the robustness against appearance changes. To overcome the lack of character-level annotations, we propose a novel weakly-supervised character
center detection module, which only uses word-level annotated real images to generate character-level labels. The
proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance on
three video text benchmarks ICDAR 2013 Video, Minetto
and RT-1K, and two Chinese scene text benchmarks CASIA10K and MSRA-TD500.

1. Introduction
Video text detection aims to localize and track text instances in videos. It has attracted much attention in recent years, due to its wide application in video analysis and
multimedia information retrieval. Although previous methods [34, 41, 52] have made significant efforts in both text
detection and tracking, it is still a challenging task because
of motion blur and illumination changes.
Most existing methods [56, 46, 34] treat text detection
and tracking separately, where a single frame is detected
first, then text tracking methods are applied based on detection results. However, these methods ignore the temporal
contexts and the information interaction between detection

(a)
A U L A D LN F OR MATI C A

A U LE S 1 0

A U LA

A 1 5

A U LES

D LN FOR M A TI C
1 0

A

A

1 5

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The text appearance changes dramatically from different perspectives, which makes the tracking branch failed to
match text instances. (b) The category and position of characters
can help the tracking branch to match text instances more accurately. Boxes with the same color belong to the same trajectory,
and dots represent the character centers.

and tracking. Recently, Yu et al. [52] proposed an endto-end trainable framework to integrate text detection and
tracking, in which the appearance-geometry descriptor is
used to track text instances. However, the proposed descriptor is mainly based on the text appearance, which is easily
influenced by the change of perspective and illumination.
In contrast to appearance features, semantic features are robust cues for matching text instances. For example, most
text instances fail to match due to large perspective changes
as shown in Fig 1 (a). However, the character position and
category of the same text instance from different perspectives are similar. When there are priori semantic features,
wrong matching results could be corrected as shown in Fig 1
(b). Although both word-level and character-level annotations provide semantic information, character-level annotations contain more detailed structure information, which are

1695

