Sparse Auxiliary Networks for Unified
Monocular Depth Prediction and Completion
Vitor Guizilini Rares, Ambrus, Wolfram Burgard Adrien Gaidon
Toyota Research Institute (TRI), Los Altos, CA
{first.lastname}@tri.global

Abstract
Estimating scene geometry from data obtained with costeffective sensors is key for robots and self-driving cars. In
this paper, we study the problem of predicting dense depth
from a single RGB image (monodepth) with optional sparse
measurements from low-cost active depth sensors. We introduce Sparse Auxiliary Networks (SANs), a new module
enabling monodepth networks to perform both the tasks
of depth prediction and completion, depending on whether
only RGB images or also sparse point clouds are available
at inference time. First, we decouple the image and depth
map encoding stages using sparse convolutions to process
only the valid depth map pixels. Second, we inject this information, when available, into the skip connections of the
depth prediction network, augmenting its features. Through
extensive experimental analysis on one indoor (NYUv2) and
two outdoor (KITTI and DDAD) benchmarks, we demonstrate that our proposed SAN architecture is able to simultaneously learn both tasks, while achieving a new state of
the art in depth prediction by a significant margin.

1. Introduction
Dense scene geometry can be directly measured using
active sensors (e.g., LiDAR, structured light) or estimated
from RGB cameras (e.g., via stereo matching, structure
from motion, monocular depth networks). Both approaches
have complementary strengths and failure modes (e.g., rain
or low light). Consequently, a robust perception system
must leverage both modalities while still retaining functionality when only one is available. In this paper, we propose a
learning algorithm and model that can satisfy these desiderata with a simple sensor suite: a single monocular RGB
camera combined with any low-cost active depth sensor returning only a few 3D points per scene.
Monocular depth prediction is becoming a cornerstone
capability for a wide range of robotic applications where
RGB cameras are ubiquitous [23, 49, 51]. Recently, self-

Figure 1: Our proposed joint task learning SAN architecture produces state of the art monocular depth estimates
from a single image (prediction), which can be further improved by also providing a sparse depth map (completion)
without changing the model.
supervised methods trained only on raw videos demonstrated that robots with a single camera can learn and predict
dense depth information [2, 14, 15, 17, 58, 60], especially
as the quantity of data increases [18]. However, in practice an active range sensor is often available, and can be
used to either provide further supervision at training time
[7, 9, 10, 30, 53] or also during inference [24, 33, 39], in a
task known as depth completion. Even though sparse, recent works [20] have shown that even a few pixels containing valid depth information is enough to boost performance,
and therefore should not be discarded. Importantly, these
two tasks, depth prediction and completion, are treated as
separate problems with different architectures. No method
to date tackles the issue of using all the information available from both modalities at both training and inference
time, including if only partially available (e.g., due to sensor
blackout, occlusion, or environmental conditions).
Our main contribution is a novel architecture, Sparse
Auxiliary Networks (SANs, cf. Fig. 2), that enables a
monocular depth prediction network to also perform depth
completion in the presence of optional sparse 3D measurements at inference time. Note that the same architecture
111078

