Relevance-CAM: Your Model Already Knows Where to Look
Jeong Ryong Lee
Sewon Kim
Inyong Park
Taejoon Eo
Dosik Hwang*
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University

Abstract
With increasing fields of application for neural networks
and the development of neural networks, the ability to explain deep learning models is also becoming increasingly
important. Especially, prior to practical applications, it
is crucial to analyze a model’s inference and the process
of generating the results. A common explanation method
is Class Activation Mapping(CAM) based method where it
is often used to understand the last layer of the convolutional neural networks popular in the field of Computer Vision. In this paper, we propose a novel CAM method named
Relevance-weighted Class Activation Mapping(RelevanceCAM) that utilizes Layer-wise Relevance Propagation to
obtain the weighting components. This allows the explanation map to be faithful and robust to the shattered gradient problem, a shared problem of the gradient based CAM
methods that causes noisy saliency maps for intermediate
layers. Therefore, our proposed method can better explain
a model by correctly analyzing the intermediate layers as
well as the last convolutional layer. In this paper, we visualize how each layer of the popular image processing models extracts class specific features using Relevance-CAM,
evaluate the localization ability, and show why the gradient based CAM cannot be used to explain the intermediate layers, proven by experimenting the weighting component. Relevance-CAM outperforms other CAM-based methods in recognition and localization evaluation in layers of
any depth. The source code is available at: https:
//github.com/mongeoroo/Relevance-CAM

1. Introduction
Recently, deep learning is producing remarkable results
with the development in GPUs and the advancements of
new neural net architectures[10, 12, 13]. In this context,
the field of interpretable deep learning is also being ardently studied[1, 24, 36, 4], especially in medical image
processing [15, 7]. There are many methods for analyzing
models in Computer Vision, and such as Class Activation
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Visualization results of Grad-CAM[25], GradCAM++[6], Score-CAM[30] and proposed Relevance-CAM. The
label of the input is a admiral butterfly. Relevance-CAM makes
the high resolution heatmaps even in the shallow layer.

Map(CAM) based methods [36, 25, 6, 30] and the decomposition based methods [27, 33, 9, 14, 19, 34, 4, 21, 3, 26].
CAM-based method calculates the weighted linear summation of the last convolutional feature map to visualize a
model decision. The weights of fully connected layer between global average pooling output and target class output nodes are multiplied to the activation maps of the corresponding channels, and the sum of the weighted activation maps along the channel axis is the Class Activation
Map. It can be understood as generating heatmaps describing the model decision by localizing where the model looks
at. However, although CAM[36] can localize a target class,
it is heavily constrained to the model architecture where the
model must consist of Global Average Pooling(GAP) and
one fully connected layer as its classifier. Grad-CAM[25]
and Grad-CAM++[6] explain a model without the constraint to the model architecture. These gradient based
CAMs use gradients of the target class output scores with
respect to the last convolutional layer as the weighting components of activation maps. These methods are based on the

14944

