Embracing Uncertainty: Decoupling and De-bias for Robust Temporal
Grounding
Hao Zhou1 , Chongyang Zhang1,2 *, Yan Luo1 , Yanjun Chen1 , Chuanping Hu1,3
School of Electronic Information and Electrical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
3
Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou, China
1

{zhouhao 0039,sunny zhang,luoyan bb,erinchen}@sjtu.edu.cn, cphu@vip.sina.com

Abstract
Temporal grounding aims to localize temporal boundaries within untrimmed videos by language queries, but it
faces the challenge of two types of inevitable human uncertainties: query uncertainty and label uncertainty. The
two uncertainties stem from human subjectivity, leading to
limited generalization ability of temporal grounding. In
this work, we propose a novel DeNet (Decoupling and Debias) to embrace human uncertainty: Decoupling — We explicitly disentangle each query into a relation feature and
a modified feature. The relation feature, which is mainly
based on skeleton-like words (including nouns and verbs),
aims to extract basic and consistent information in the presence of query uncertainty. Meanwhile, modified feature assigned with style-like words (including adjectives, adverbs,
etc) represents the subjective information, and thus brings
personalized predictions; De-bias — We propose a de-bias
mechanism to generate diverse predictions, aim to alleviate the bias caused by single-style annotations in the presence of label uncertainty. Moreover, we put forward new
multi-label metrics to diversify the performance evaluation.
Extensive experiments show that our approach is more effective and robust than state-of-the-arts on Charades-STA
and ActivityNet Captions datasets.

1. Introduction
As the increasing demand for video understanding, many
related works have drawn increasing attention, e.g. action recognition [31, 37, 23] and temporal action detection [50, 20]. These tasks rely on trimmed videos or predefined action categories, yet most videos are untrimmed
and associated with open-world language descriptions in
real scenarios. Temporal grounding task aims to localize
corresponding temporal boundaries in an untrimmed video
* This is the corresponding author.

Query A: the person
washes their hands
at the kitchen sink.

Query B: a person
is washing their
hands in the sink.

Query C: a person
washes hands in the
kitchen sink.

Time
1

2
3
4

5

temporal annotations

Figure 1. Example of temporal grounding task with two types
of uncertainties. Query uncertainty: For one same event, there
are different language expressions. Label uncertainty: Given one
same query and video, different annotators may provide a variety
of temporal boundaries.

by a language query. Thus, models need to understand both
fine-grained video content and complex language queries.
Recently, this task has also shown its potential in a wide
range of applications, e.g. video captioning [26, 41, 5],
video object segmentation [7, 13] and video question answering [19, 14, 35].
We observe there lies inherent uncertainty in temporal
grounding task and classify it into two types: 1) One is
query uncertainty stemming from different expressions for
one same event. As shown in Figure 1, three queries are
attached to the same moment. Previous approaches usually
leverage LSTM-based [45, 47] networks to encode entire
language as a deterministic vector. However, the variety of
expressions makes it challenging to extract discriminative
semantic features, sometimes leading to quite different predictions for the same event. 2) The other is label uncertainty
representing subjective boundaries for one same event. As
shown in Figure 1, for the same query A and video, temporal boundaries annotated by different people exist disagree-

8445

