Fast Sinkhorn Filters: Using Matrix Scaling for Non-Rigid Shape
Correspondence with Functional Maps
Gautam Pai1
Jing Ren2
Simone Melzi3
Peter Wonka2
Maks Ovsjanikov1
1
2
3
ĹIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris
KAUST
Sapienza University of Rome
Source

Abstract
In this paper, we provide a theoretical foundation for
pointwise map recovery from functional maps and highlight
its relation to a range of shape correspondence methods
based on spectral alignment. With this analysis in hand,
we develop a novel spectral registration technique: Fast
Sinkhorn Filters, which allows for the recovery of accurate and bijective pointwise correspondences with a superior time and memory complexity in comparison to existing approaches. Our method combines the simple and
concise representation of correspondence using functional
maps with the matrix scaling schemes from computational
optimal transport. By exploiting the sparse structure of the
kernel matrices involved in the transport map computation,
we provide an efficient trade-off between acceptable accuracy and complexity for the problem of dense shape correspondence, while promoting bijectivity.1

1. Introduction
Non-rigid shape matching remains at the core of many
computer vision tasks including statistical shape analysis
[4], texture mapping [10], and deformation transfer, [41],
among others.
Among many existing approaches for this problem [43,
38], a prominent overall strategy is to exploit spectral quantities, such as the eigenfunctions of the Laplace-Beltrami
operator, which are naturally invariant to isometric shape
deformations. Within this category, the functional map
framework, introduced in [28] proposes an efficient way to
represent and compute mappings and achieves the state-ofthe-art accuracy in difficult shape matching problems [23].
One of the advantages of this framework is that it allows to formulate shape correspondence as a simple optimization problem relating the basis functions on the two
shapes, from which a dense point-to-point correspondence
can be extracted. This framework has been successfully ap1 Demo code: https://github.com/paigautam/CVPR21_
FastSinkhornFilters

Functional Map

Adjoint +
Fast Sinkhorn Filter

Figure 1: We formally justify pointwise map recovery
from functional maps using the adjoint, and introduce Fast
Sinkhorn Filters: an efficient method promoting bijectivity
in this process. This yields better pointwise maps (color
transfer) with improvement in bijectivity (errors in red).
plied in both axiomatic [28, 16, 14, 32] and learning-based
[18, 35, 13, 8] settings. However, one of the recurring issues
of virtually all works in this domain, is defining and using
the exact relation between functional and pointwise maps.
This problem is especially relevant in the conversion step
from functional to point-to-point correspondences. This
conversion has been specifically treated in several works,
including [28, 33, 11, 34, 15, 45, 23] among others. Despite this significant effort, the precise rigorous relation between the two representations still remains ill-defined. In
this paper, we provide a rigorous theoretical justification
for pointwise conversion from a functional map, and discuss how it is related to the problem of aligning the spectral
embeddings of non-rigid shapes. We highlight that unlike a
functional map, which is not well-suited for pointwise conversion, the adjoint operator can naturally be used for pointto-point map extraction both theoretically in the smooth setting, and in practice on discrete shapes.
With this foundation in hand, we propose a general
framework for iterative spectral alignment, and illustrate
that many previous shape matching methods are regularized variants of our meta algorithm. Finally, we introduce
an effective regularized procedure using Sinkhorn’s algorithm to compute accurate near-bijective pointwise correspondences that can scale to densely-sampled shapes. We
find that existing approaches do not allow the recovery of
an accurate, smooth and bijective point-to-point correspondence with acceptable time and memory complexity. Such
methods are either too inaccurate (e.g., nearest-neighbor),

384

