Time Adaptive Recurrent Neural Network
Anil Kag, Venkatesh Saligrama
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Boston University
{anilkag, srv}@bu.edu

Abstract
We propose a learning method that, dynamically modifies the time-constants of the continuous-time counterpart
of a vanilla RNN. The time-constants are modified based
on the current observation and hidden state. Our proposal
overcomes the issues of RNN trainability, by mitigating exploding and vanishing gradient phenomena based on placing
novel constraints on the parameter space, and by suppressing noise in inputs based on pondering over informative
inputs to strengthen their contribution in the hidden state. As
a result, our method is computationally efficient overcoming
overheads of many existing methods that also attempt to
improve RNN training. Our RNNs, despite being simpler
and having light memory footprint, shows competitive performance against standard LSTMs and baseline RNN models
on many benchmark datasets including those that require
long-term memory.

1. Introduction
We focus on trainability of vanilla Recurrent Neural Networks1 (RNN). Improving vanilla RNN performance is important since they are deployed in a number of IoT applications [15] due to their light memory footprint. A fundamental challenge is that, during training, the gradient of loss
back-propagated in time could suffer from exponential decay/explosion resulting in poor generalization for processes
exhibiting long-term dependencies (LTD).
There has been a long-line of work such as [12, 21, 2,
31, 10] that propose matrix designs, gating and novel architectures, to mitigate gradient explosion/decay, and improve
handling of state-transition. Different from these are works,
which go back to [45, 18] that draw inspiration from ordinary differential equations (ODEs). [10] leverages stability
theory of ODEs, to identify new transition matrices, and
proposes discretization of ODEs, to improve trainability.
While we also draw upon ODEs to propose solutions to
1 By vanilla RNNs we refer to networks that sequentially update their
hidden state by means of a simple linear transformation of the previous
state and current input, followed by non-linear activation.

improve vanilla RNN trainability, our proposal differs from
existing works in fundamental ways. To build intuition, first
consider the ODE, with λ ∈ R+ , U ∈ RD×D , W ∈ RD×d ,
and A ∈ RD×D Hurwitz stable [28]:
λż(t) = Az(t) + φ(Uz(t) + Wxm )

(1)

where, φ(·) is the conventional non-linear RNN activation
function such as a ReLU; This particular form, serving as an
analogue2 of vanilla RNNs, is quite old [45]. In each round,
m, we start from an initial state, z(t0 ) = sm−1 , which
corresponds to the current hidden state, and input, xm , and
evolve the ODE for a unit period of time. Subsequently, the
hidden state is updated by setting sm = z(t0 + 1), and in
this way, mapping inputs to the hidden state sequence.
What is new? We introduce two novel aspects within
this context. First, we allow for λ to be time-varying, and in
particular, a function of previous hidden state and input. Our
reasoning is that λ serves as a time-constant, and inherently
accounts for how long we evolve the ODE in response to the
current input. To see this, let us write the ODE in integral
form for a fixed λ:


1
sm , z(t0 + 1) = exp A
sm−1 +
λ


Z
1 1
1−t
φ(Uz(t) + Wxm )dt (2)
exp A
λ 0
λ
Then, with λ → ∞, we deduce that, z(t0 + 1) → sm−1 .
Namely, when time constant is large relative to integration
time, we barely process the new input, remaining essentially at our previous solution. Alternatively, if λ → 0,
namely, when the integration time is large relative to the
time-constant, we reach equilibrium, and in this process
strengthen influence of the current input. Moreover, by
letting the time-constant be a function, of sm−1 , xm , we
selectively adapt the amount of “pondering” that we need
on each new input. Finally, we let λ(·) take values in RD ,
and thus allow for element-wise dependence for each hidden
state, leading to selective updates of hidden state components. These ideas result in a time-adaptive RNN (TARNN).
2 Vanilla RNNs and residual variants amount to a suitable Euler discretization (see Appendix).

115149

