Reconsidering Representation Alignment for Multi-view Clustering
Daniel J. Trosten
Sigurd Løkse
Robert Jenssen
Michael Kampffmeyer
Department of Physics and Technology, UiT The Arctic University of Norway*

Abstract
Aligning distributions of view representations is a core
component of today’s state of the art models for deep
multi-view clustering. However, we identify several drawbacks with naı̈vely aligning representation distributions. We
demonstrate that these drawbacks both lead to less separable
clusters in the representation space, and inhibit the model’s
ability to prioritize views. Based on these observations, we
develop a simple baseline model for deep multi-view clustering. Our baseline model avoids representation alignment
altogether, while performing similar to, or better than, the
current state of the art. We also expand our baseline model
by adding a contrastive learning component. This introduces
a selective alignment procedure that preserves the model’s
ability to prioritize views. Our experiments show that the
contrastive learning component enhances the baseline model,
improving on the current state of the art by a large margin
on several datasets1 .

1. Introduction
Several kinds of real world data are gathered from different points of view, or by using a collection of different
sensors. Videos, for instance, contain both visual and audible components, while captioned images include both the
raw image data and a descriptive text. In both of these examples, the low-level content of the views are vastly different,
but they can still carry the same high-level cluster structure.
The objective of multi-view clustering is to discover this
common clustering structure, by learning from all available
views simultaneously.
Learning from multiple sources at once is not a trivial
task [6]. However, the introduction of deep learning [33],
has led to the development of several promising deep multiview clustering models [1, 36, 48, 61, 64]. These models
efficiently learn from multiple views by transforming each
view with a view-specific encoder network. The resulting
representations are fused to obtain a common representation
* UiT Machine Learning Group, machine-learning.uit.no
1 The source code for the experiments performed in this paper is available

at https://github.com/DanielTrosten/mvc

for all views, which can then be clustered by a subsequent
clustering module.
The current state of the art methods for deep multi-view
clustering use adversarial training to align the representation
distributions from different views [36, 64].
Aligning distributions leads to view invariant representations, which can be beneficial for the subsequent fusion
of views, and the clustering module [64]. View invariant
representations preserve the information present in all views,
while discarding information that only exists in a subset of
views. If the view-specific information is irrelevant to the
clustering objective, it will be advantageous for the clustering module that the encoders learn to remove it. Moreover,
aligning representation distributions introduces an auxiliary
task, which regularizes the encoders, and helps preserve the
local geometric structure of the input space. This has been
shown to improve single-view deep clustering models [21].
Despite these advantages however, we identify three important drawbacks of distribution alignment for multi-view
clustering:
Aligning representations prevents view-prioritization in
the representation space. Views are not necessarily equally
important to the clustering objective. The model should
therefore be able to adaptively prioritize views, based on the
information contained in the view representations. However,
aligning representation distributions makes it harder for the
model to prioritize views in the representation space, by
making these distributions as similar as possible.
One-to-one alignment of clusters is only attainable when
encoders can separate all clusters in all views. When the
clustering structure is only partially present in the individual
views, alignment causes clusters to merge together in the
representation space. This makes the clustering task more
difficult for the subsequent clustering module.
Aligning representation distributions can make it harder
to discriminate between clusters. Since adversarial alignment only considers the representation distributions, a given
cluster from one view might be aligned with a different
cluster from another view. This misalignment of label distributions has been shown to have a negative impact on
discriminative models in the representation space [62].
The End-to-end Adversarial-attention network for Multi-

1255

