Unsupervised Discovery of the Long-Tail in Instance Segmentation Using
Hierarchical Self-Supervision
Zhenzhen Weng, Mehmet Giray Ogut, Shai Limonchik, Serena Yeung
Stanford University
{zzweng, giray98, shailk, syyeung}@stanford.edu

Abstract
Instance segmentation is an active topic in computer vision that is usually solved by using supervised learning approaches over very large datasets composed of object level
masks. Obtaining such a dataset for any new domain can
be very expensive and time-consuming. In addition, models
trained on certain annotated categories do not generalize
well to unseen objects. The goal of this paper is to propose
a method that can perform unsupervised discovery of longtail categories in instance segmentation, through learning
instance embeddings of masked regions. Leveraging rich
relationship and hierarchical structure between objects in
the images, we propose self-supervised losses for learning
mask embeddings. Trained on COCO [34] dataset without
additional annotations of the long-tail objects, our model is
able to discover novel and more fine-grained objects than
the common categories in COCO. We show that the model
achieves competitive quantitative results on LVIS [17] as
compared to the supervised and partially supervised methods.

CLOCK

VAS
E

BUCKET

1. Introduction

Figure 1. We propose an instance segmentation method that is able
to discover the long-tail objects through self-supervised representation learning. Without having access to ground truth annotations
of long-tail objects during training, our method is able to produce
fine-grained segmentation result of novel objects.

Instance segmentation is a crucial problem that has a
wide range of applications in various real-world applications such as autonomous driving and medical imaging. Recent approaches [18, 19, 4, 35] have shown impressive results on large-scale datasets in parsing diverse real-world
scenes into informative semantics or instance maps. Most
of the existing works so far assume a fully supervised setting, where the instance level segmentation masks are available during training. However, relying on human annotated
segmentation labels has a few obvious drawbacks. Since
most of the existing segmentation datasets contain a small
set of annotated categories (e.g. 20 in PASCAL VOC [10]
and 80 in COCO [34]), models trained on these categories
are not able to generalize well to novel and long-tail objects present in the real world. Despite the ease of cap-

turing a large number of images nowadays, extending the
set of annotated categories is still very expensive and timeconsuming. Recently, a dataset for Large Vocabulary Instance Segmentation (LVIS) [17] was released as an attempt to increase the coverage of the annotated categories in
COCO from 80 to over 1200 categories including the longtail categories that appear rarely in the dataset.
To overcome the bottleneck in obtaining large annotated
datasets, previous works have attempted instance segmentation with weaker forms of supervision such as the object
bounding boxes [7, 39], points on instances [2] or imagelevel labels [49]. Recent works [31, 25, 12, 48] aim to
improve the generalization capability of instance segmentation models by employing a partially supervised setting
12603

