Nearest Neighbor Matching for Deep Clustering
Zhiyuan Dang1,2 , Cheng Deng1∗, Xu Yang1 , Kun Wei1 , Heng Huang3,4
1
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China; 2 JD Tech, Beijing 100176, China
3
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
4
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
{zhiyuandang, chdeng.xd, xuyang.xd, weikunsk}@gmail.com, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
Deep clustering gradually becomes an important branch
in unsupervised learning methods. However, current approaches hardly take into consideration the semantic sample relationships that existed in both local and global features. In addition, since the deep features are updated onthe-fly, relying on these sample relationships may construct
more semantically confident sample pairs, leading to inferior performance. To tackle this issue, we propose a method
called Nearest Neighbor Matching (NNM) to match samples
with their nearest neighbors from both local (batch) and
global (overall) levels. Specifically, for the local level, we
match the nearest neighbors based on batch embedded features, as for the global one, we match neighbors from overall embedded features. To keep the clustering assignment
consistent in both neighbors and classes, we frame consistent loss and class contrastive loss for both local and global
levels. Experimental results on three benchmark datasets
demonstrate the superiority of our new model against stateof-the-art methods. Particularly on the STL-10 dataset,
our method can achieve supervised performance. As for
the CIFAR-100 dataset, our NNM leads 3.7% against the
latest comparison method. Our code will be available at
https://github.com/ZhiyuanDang/NNM .

1. Introduction
Unsupervised learning approach becomes emerging recently since the expensive label acquisition. As an important branch of unsupervised learning, clustering methods
have attracted more attention, which goal is that grouping
the samples into clusters, such that similar samples into the
same cluster while dissimilar ones into different clusters.
Traditional clustering methods, such as K-Means [28],
Spectral Clustering [43], Nonnegative Matrix Factorization
[2], have been widely applied in various tasks. However,
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. The illustration of our idea. We propose to match more
semantically nearest neighbors from between local (batch) and
global (overall) level. Benefit from the dynamic updated deep features with iteration and epoch increases, we can construct more
and more semantically confident sample pairs from samples and
its neighbors.

these methods only focus on low-level information, leading
to their suboptimal performance. With the aid of the impressive deep learning methods [26], deep clustering methods are proposed to non-linearly transform the original samples into a latent embedded space for successfully providing more effective features and promising performance.
Although conducting cluster analysis with learnable deep
learning representations shows the potential to benefit clustering on such unlabelled data, how to improve the semantic
confidence of these clusters remains an open question.
There are some methods proposed to solve it. According to the data training strategy, current deep clustering approaches could be roughly divided into two categories: The
first one (such as DEC [38], JULE [39], DAC [5], DeepCluster [3], DDC [4], DCCM [36]) usually iteratively evaluate the clustering assignment from the up-to-date model
and supervise the network training processes by the estimated information; The second one (such as ADC [14], IIC
[21], PICA [20], DCDC[10]) simultaneously learn both the

13693

