3D Human Action Representation Learning via Cross-View Consistency Pursuit
Linguo Li1,2∗ Minsi Wang1,2∗ Bingbing Ni1,2∗∗ Hang Wang1,2 Jiancheng Yang1,2 Wenjun Zhang1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
mswang1994@gmail.com, {LLG440982, nibingbing, zhangwenjun}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

Sample 1

Positive

Negative

Sample 2

In this work, we propose a Cross-view Contrastive
Learning framework for unsupervised 3D skeleton-based
action Representation (CrosSCLR), by leveraging multiview complementary supervision signal. CrosSCLR consists of both single-view contrastive learning (SkeletonCLR) and cross-view consistent knowledge mining (CVCKM) modules, integrated in a collaborative learning manner. It is noted that CVC-KM works in such a way that
high-confidence positive/negative samples and their distributions are exchanged among views according to their
embedding similarity, ensuring cross-view consistency in
terms of contrastive context, i.e., similar distributions. Extensive experiments show that CrosSCLR achieves remarkable action recognition results on NTU-60 and NTU-120
datasets under unsupervised settings, with observed higherquality action representations. Our code is available at
https://github.com/LinguoLi/CrosSCLR.

Figure 1. Hand waving in joint and motion form. Two samples are
from the same action class. (a) usual contrastive learning methods
regard them as negative pairs. (b) in a multi-view situation, considering their similar motion patterns, they can be positive pairs.
This motivates us to introduce cross-view contrastive learning for
skeleton representation.

1. Introduction

on contrastive learning [55, 4, 11, 18], aiming to leverage
the instance discrimination of samples in latent space.

Human action recognition is an important but challenging task in computer vision research. Due to the lightweight and robust estimation algorithms [3, 56], 3D skeleton has become a popular feature representation to study human action dynamics. Many 3D action recognition works
[6, 60, 17, 25, 44, 28, 16] use a fully-supervised manner
and require massive labeled 3D skeleton data. However,
annotating data is expensive and time-consuming, which
prompts people to explore unsupervised methods [65, 26,
39, 47] on skeleton data. Some unsupervised methods
exploit structure completeness within each sample based
on pretext tasks, including reconstruction [9, 65], autoregression [20, 47] and jigsaw puzzles [35, 54], but it is
unsure that the designed pretext tasks generalize well for
downstream tasks. Other unsupervised methods are based
∗ Equal Contribution
∗∗ Corresponding Author: Bingbing Ni

Joint
(a) General
(b) Ours
Joint
Different in Pose

Motion
Similar in Motion

Although the above approaches improve the skeleton
representation capability to some extent, it is believed that
the power of unsupervised methods is by far from fully
explored. On the one hand, traditional contrastive learning uses only one positive pair generated by data augmentation and even similar samples are regarded as negative
samples. Despite the high similarity, the negative samples
are forced away in embedding space, which is unreasonable for clustering. On the other hand, current unsupervised
methods [1, 65, 20, 26, 47] have not yet explored the rich
intra-supervision information provided by different skeleton modalities. Considering that it is easy to obtain skeleton
data in multiple “views”, e.g., joint, motion and bone, complementary information preserved in different views can assist the operation to mine positive pairs from similar negative samples. As shown in Figure 1, the same hand waving
actions are different in pose (joint), but similar in motion.
Usual contrastive learning methods regard them as nega-

4741

