Person30K: A Dual-Meta Generalization Network for Person Re-Identification
Yan Bai1,4 , Jile Jiao2 , Wang Ce1 , Jun Liu3 , Yihang Lou1 , Xuetao Feng2 , and Ling-Yu Duan1,4,∗
1
2
Peking University, Beijing, China
Alibaba Group, Beijing, China
3
4
Singapore University of Technology and Design Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{yanbai, wce, yihanglou, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn,
{jile.jjl, xuetao.fxt}@alibaba-inc.com, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Recently, person re-identification (ReID) has vastly benefited from the surging waves of data-driven methods. However, these methods are still not reliable enough for realworld deployments, due to the insufficient generalization
capability of the models learned on existing benchmarks
that have limitations in multiple aspects, including limited
data scale, capture condition variations, and appearance
diversities. To this end, we collect a new dataset named
Person30K with the following distinct features: 1) a very
large scale containing 1.38 million images of 30K identities, 2) a large capture system containing 6,497 cameras deployed at 89 different sites, 3) abundant sample diversities
including varied backgrounds and diverse person poses.
Furthermore, we propose a domain generalization ReID
method, dual-meta generalization network (DMG-Net), to
exploit the merits of meta-learning in both the training
procedure and the metric space learning. Concretely, we
design a “learning then generalization evaluation” metatraining procedure and a meta-discrimination loss to enhance model generalization and discrimination capabilities. Comprehensive experiments validate the effectiveness
of our DMG-Net.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) targets at matching people across different cameras. Recent years have witnessed
remarkable progress of learning-based person ReID methods [5, 14, 20, 24, 34, 37], which have achieved promising
performances when the training and testing sets are collected from the same scenarios or camera sets. However,
they are often confronted with an inevitable accuracy drop
when handling unseen cameras [3, 38]. This performance
disparity reveals the problem of their limited generalization capability against data domain gaps, which are usually
∗ Ling-Yu Duan is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Comparison among samples from our Person30K,
Matket1501 [47], Dukemtmc [28], and MSMT17 [38] datasets.
Our Person30K covers more varied backgrounds, illumination
conditions, person poses, and capture viewpoints.

caused by different capture viewpoints, camera types, backgrounds and illumination conditions. Therefore, the study
on enhancing ReID model’s generalization ability is of great
potential to explore for better practical deployment.
Particularly, the benchmark dataset plays a crucial role
in model training and comprehensive evaluation. However, the existing person ReID datasets still have many
limitations, such as: (1) limited image samples and annotated identities (∼4K only); (2) very few capturing cameras (2∼15 only) involved in data collection; (3) less varied
scenes and environmental conditions, such as backgrounds
and illumination; (4) monotonous pedestrian poses, usually covering walking poses only. These limitations oversimplify the challenges of real-world person ReID, and restrict the representation and generalization capability of the
models developed on these datasets.
To facilitate person ReID, we create a new dataset,
named Person30K, with a very large scale and high data
diversity. Our dataset has the following major advantages
over existing benchmarks: (1) It contains 1.38 million images of 30K identities, 11 times the scale of the existing
largest benchmark MSMT17 [38]. (2) The images in our
Person30K are collected from 6,497 cameras deployed at 89

2123

