The Temporal Opportunist: Self-Supervised Multi-Frame Monocular Depth
Jamie Watson1 Oisin Mac Aodha2 Victor Prisacariu1,3 Gabriel Brostow1,4
1 Niantic
2 University of Edinburgh
3 University of Oxford
www.github.com/nianticlabs/manydepth

Abstract
Self-supervised monocular depth estimation networks
are trained to predict scene depth using nearby frames as a
supervision signal during training. However, for many applications, sequence information in the form of video frames
is also available at test time. The vast majority of monocular networks do not make use of this extra signal, thus ignoring valuable information that could be used to improve
the predicted depth. Those that do, either use computationally expensive test-time refinement techniques or off-theshelf recurrent networks, which only indirectly make use of
the geometric information that is inherently available.
We propose ManyDepth, an adaptive approach to dense
depth estimation that can make use of sequence information
at test time, when it is available. Taking inspiration from
multi-view stereo, we propose a deep end-to-end cost volume based approach that is trained using self-supervision
only. We present a novel consistency loss that encourages
the network to ignore the cost volume when it is deemed
unreliable, e.g. in the case of moving objects, and an augmentation scheme to cope with static cameras. Our detailed
experiments on both KITTI and Cityscapes show that we
outperform all published self-supervised baselines, including those that use single or multiple frames at test time.

1. Introduction
Knowing the depth to each pixel in an image has proved
to be a useful and versatile tool, with applications ranging from augmented reality [59], autonomous driving [22],
through to 3D reconstruction [64]. While specialist hardware can give per-pixel depth, e.g. from structured light
or Lidar sensors, a more attractive approach is to only require a single RGB camera. Many recent monocular depth
from RGB methods are trained using only self-supervision,
which removes the need for expensive hardware to capture
training depth data [21, 99, 23, 26]. While these approaches
appear to be very promising, their test-time depth estimation performance is not yet on a par with specialist depth
hardware or deep multi-view methods [73].

Michael Firman1
4 UCL

,W
D 6LQJOHIUDPHLQSXW

E 0XOWLIUDPHLQSXW
6DPHPRGHO

Figure 1. Trained using only self-supervision, our model not only
predicts depth from single frames (a) but can also utilize multiple
frames, when they are available, using the same model (b). This
results in superior>)URP0RQRUHF@
depth predictions at test time. Error
maps on the
>)URP0RQRUHF@
bottom row show large depth errors as red, small as blue.

E 6LQJOHIUDPHGHSWKHUURU
PDSDQGSRLQWFORXG

G ,PSURYHGPXOWLIUDPH
GHSWKHUURUVDQGSRLQWFORXG

In an attempt to close this performance gap, we observe
that in most practical scenarios more than one frame is
available at test time e.g. from a camera on a moving vehicle or micro-baseline frames from a phone camera [32, 41].
Yet these additional frames are typically not exploited by
current monocular methods. In this work, we use these additional frames at both training and test time, when they
are available, to self-supervise a multi-frame depth estimation system. We show that a straightforward application of
self-supervised training to a multi-view plane-sweep stereo
architecture produces poor results, significantly worse than
self-supervised single frame networks. To overcome this,
we introduce several innovations to address issues caused
by moving objects, scale ambiguity, and static cameras. We
call our resultant multi-frame system ManyDepth.
We make the following three contributions:
1. A novel self-supervised multi-frame depth estimation
model that combines the strengths of monocular and
multi-view depth estimation by making use of multiple
frames at test time, when they are available.
2. We show that moving objects and static scenes significantly impact self-supervised multi-view matching approaches, and we introduce efficient losses and train-

1164

