Bilinear Parameterization for Non-Separable Singular Value Penalties
Marcus Valtonen Örnhag1
1

José Pedro Iglesias2

Centre for Mathematical Sciences
Lund University

2

Carl Olsson1,2

Department of Electrical Engineering
Chalmers University of Technology

Abstract
Low rank inducing penalties have been proven to successfully uncover fundamental structures considered in
computer vision and machine learning; however, such
methods generally lead to non-convex optimization problems. Since the resulting objective is non-convex one often resorts to using standard splitting schemes such as Alternating Direction Methods of Multipliers (ADMM), or
other subgradient methods, which exhibit slow convergence
in the neighbourhood of a local minimum. We propose
a method using second order methods, in particular the
variable projection method (VarPro), by replacing the nonconvex penalties with a surrogate capable of converting the
original objectives to differentiable equivalents. In this way
we benefit from faster convergence.
The bilinear framework is compatible with a large family of regularizers, and we demonstrate the benefits of our
approach on real datasets for rigid and non-rigid structure
from motion. The qualitative difference in reconstructions
show that many popular non-convex objectives enjoy an advantage in transitioning to the proposed framework.1

Figure 1: Top row: Weighted nuclear norm penalty (left)
and the corresponding relaxation rh , for a1 = 0 and a2 = 1,
considered in this paper. Bottom row: Level sets, corresponding to the red lines in the top images.
classical problem of low rank recovery with missing data

1. Introduction
Low rank approximation and factorization methods are
classical approaches for solving various computer vision
problems, such as structure from motion [38, 5, 21, 11,
24, 25], photometric stereo [2, 7, 29] image segmentation [15], image restoration [9, 29, 20, 27, 45], background/foreground segmentation [43, 7], etc.
There are two main approaches when it comes to solving
these problems, and which one is used largely depends on
properties of the particular problem being addressed. The
1 This work was supported by the Swedish Research Council (grants no.
2015-05639, 2016-04445 and 2018-05375), the strategic research project
ELLIIT, the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research (Semantic Mapping and Visual Navigation for Smart Robots) and the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP) funded by the Knut and
Alice Wallenberg Foundation.

min

rank(X)≤k

kW ⊙ (X − M )k2F ,

(1)

is a core step in many structure from motion formulations [6]. Here M is a measurement matrix which is only
partially known and W is a binary matrix removing residuals corresponding to unknown elements. The traditional approach, which is typically used when the rank of the sought
matrix is known, enforces a particular rank by restricting
the number of columns of the factors B and C and searches
over the bilinear parameterization of the unknown matrix
X = BC T . Since the resulting objective is a least squares
problem in both B and C, alternating updates of B and C
can be used. While being extremely simple, this approach
has been shown to be prone to “flatlining: requiring excessive numbers of iterations before convergence” [6]. Instead
[6] proposed a damped newton approach and empirically

3897

