AdCo: Adversarial Contrast for Efficient Learning of Unsupervised
Representations from Self-Trained Negative Adversaries
Qianjiang Hu1∗, Xiao Wang2∗ , Wei Hu1† , Guo-Jun Qi3†
1

Peking University, 2 Purdue University
3
Laboratory for MAchine Perception and LEarning (MAPLE)
http://maple-lab.net/

Abstract
Contrastive learning relies on constructing a collection
of negative examples that are sufficiently hard to discriminate against positive queries when their representations
are self-trained. Existing contrastive learning methods either maintain a queue of negative samples over minibatches while only a small portion of them are updated in an
iteration, or only use the other examples from the current minibatch as negatives. They could not closely track the
change of the learned representation over iterations by updating the entire queue as a whole, or discard the useful
information from the past minibatches. Alternatively, we
present to directly learn a set of negative adversaries playing against the self-trained representation. Two players, the
representation network and negative adversaries, are alternately updated to obtain the most challenging negative examples against which the representation of positive queries
will be trained to discriminate. We further show that the
negative adversaries are updated towards a weighted combination of positive queries by maximizing the adversarial contrastive loss, thereby allowing them to closely track
the change of representations over time. Experiment results
demonstrate the proposed Adversarial Contrastive (AdCo)
model not only achieves superior performances (a top-1 accuracy of 73.2% over 200 epochs and 75.7% over 800 epochs with linear evaluation on ImageNet), but also can be
pre-trained more efficiently with much shorter GPU time
and fewer epochs. The source code is available at https:
//github.com/maple-research-lab/AdCo.

1. Introduction
Learning visual representations in an unsupervised fashion [1, 31, 10, 23, 24, 39] has attracted many attentions as
it greatly reduces the cost of collecting a large volume of
∗ Q. Hu and X. Wang made an equal contribution to performing experiments while being mentored by G.-J. Qi.
† Corresponding author: W. Hu and G.-J. Qi (guojunq@gmail.com).
G.-J. Qi conceived the idea, formulated the method, and wrote the paper.

labeled data to train deep networks. Significant progresses
have also been made to reduce the performance gap with the
fully supervised models. Among them are a family of contrastive learning methods [19, 7, 38, 21, 29, 3, 41, 36, 20]
that self-train deep networks by distinguishing the representation of positive queries from their negative counterparts.
Depending on how the negative samples are constructed, two large types of contrastive learning approaches have been
proposed in literature [19, 7]. These negative samples play
a critical role in contrastive learning since the success in
self-training deep networks relies on how positive queries
can be effectively distinguished from negative examples.
Specifically, one type of contrastive learning methods
explicitly maintains a queue of negative examples from the
past minibatches. For example, the Momentum Contrast
(MoCo) [19] iteratively updates an underlying queue with
the representations from the current minibatch in a First-InFirst-Out (FIFO) fashion. However, only a small portion
of oldest negative samples in the queue would be updated,
which could not continuously track the rapid change of the
feature representations over iterations. Even worse, the momentum update of key encoders, which is necessary to stabilize the negative queue in MoCo, could further slow down
the track of the representations. Consequently, this would
inefficiently train the representation network, since partially updated negatives may not cover all critically challenging
samples thus far that ought to be distinguished from positive
queries to train the network.
Alternatively, another type of contrastive learning methods [7] abandons the use of such a separate queue of negative examples. Instead, all negative examples come from the
current minibatch, and a positive query would be retrieved
by distinguishing it from the other examples in the minibatch. However, it discards the negative examples from the
past minibatches, and often requires a much larger size of
minibatch so that a sufficient number of negative samples
are available to train the representation network by discriminating against positive queries. This incurs heavy memory
11074

