Few-Shot Incremental Learning with Continually Evolved Classifiers
Chi Zhang1 ,* Nan Song1∗ , Guosheng Lin1†, Yun Zheng2 , Pan Pan2 , Yinghui Xu2
1
2
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Alibaba DAMO Academy
{chi007,nan001}@e.ntu.edu.sg, gslin@ntu.edu.sg
{zhengyun.zy,panpan.pp}@alibaba-inc.com, renji.xyh@taobao.com
Abstract
Few-shot class-incremental learning (FSCIL) aims to design machine learning algorithms that can continually learn
new concepts from a few data points, without forgetting
knowledge of old classes. The difficulty lies in that limited
data from new classes not only lead to significant overfitting
issues but also exacerbate the notorious catastrophic forgetting problems. Moreover, as training data come in sequence
in FSCIL, the learned classifier can only provide discriminative information in individual sessions, while FSCIL requires all classes to be involved for evaluation. In this paper, we address the FSCIL problem from two aspects. First,
we adopt a simple but effective decoupled learning strategy of representations and classifiers that only the classifiers are updated in each incremental session, which avoids
knowledge forgetting in the representations. By doing so,
we demonstrate that a pre-trained backbone plus a nonparametric class mean classifier can beat state-of-the-art
methods. Second, to make the classifiers learned on individual sessions applicable to all classes, we propose a
Continually Evolved Classifier (CEC) that employs a graph
model to propagate context information between classifiers
for adaptation. To enable the learning of CEC, we design a pseudo incremental learning paradigm that episodically constructs a pseudo incremental learning task to optimize the graph parameters by sampling data from the base
dataset. Experiments on three popular benchmark datasets,
including CIFAR100, miniImageNet, and Caltech-USCD
Birds-200-2011 (CUB200), show that our method significantly outperforms the baselines and sets new state-of-theart results with remarkable advantages.

1. Introduction
Deep Convolutional Neural Networks have gained remarkable success in many computer vision tasks [10, 19,
* indicates equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: G. Lin (e-mail: gslin@ntu.edu.sg)

…
FC 0

…

…

…

CEC

…
FC 1

FC 2

…
FC i

Figure 1: Illustration of our proposed continually evolved classifiers for
FSCIL. We employ a graph model to adapt the classifier weights learned
on individual sessions for the prediction over all classes.

22, 38, 55], stemming from the availability of big curated
datasets, along with unprecedented computing power. However, a classification model that is trained by supervised
learning can only make predictions on a set of pre-defined
image categories. If we want to extend a trained model
on new classes, a large amount of labeled data for new
classes as well as data from old classes are both necessary for network finetuning, which inevitably hinders its
real-world applications. If the dataset of old classes is no
longer available, directly finetuning a deployed model with
new classes can lead to the notorious catastrophic forgetting
problem that knowledge about old classes is quickly forgotten [11, 17, 34]. In contrast to machine learning systems,
humans are readily able to learn a new concept with few
examples without forgetting old knowledge. The gap between humans and the machine learning algorithms fuels interest in few-shot class-incremental learning (FSCIL) [39],
which aims to design machine learning algorithms that can
be continually extended to new classes with only a few data
points. The challenge of FSCIL lies in that the scarcity in
the data of new classes will not only cause severe overfitting
but also exacerbates the catastrophic forgetting problem of
old classes. In this paper, we undertake the task of few shot
incremental learning and consider to solve the aforementioned problems from two aspects.

12455

