AdvSim: Generating Safety-Critical Scenarios for Self-Driving Vehicles
Jingkang Wang1,2

Ava Pun3 James Tu1,2 Sivabalan Manivasagam1,2 Abbas Sadat2
Sergio Casas1,2 Mengye Ren1,2 Raquel Urtasun1,2
University of Toronto1 , Uber ATG2 , University of Waterloo3

{wangjk, manivasagam, sergio, mren, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu
a5pun@uwaterloo.ca

james.tu@mail.utoronto.ca

Abstract
As self-driving systems become better, simulating scenarios where the autonomy stack may fail becomes more
important. Traditionally, those scenarios are generated for
a few scenes with respect to the planning module that takes
ground-truth actor states as input. This does not scale and
cannot identify all possible autonomy failures, such as perception failures due to occlusion. In this paper, we propose AdvSim, an adversarial framework to generate safetycritical scenarios for any LiDAR-based autonomy system.
Given an initial traffic scenario, AdvSim modifies the actors’ trajectories in a physically plausible manner and updates the LiDAR sensor data to match the perturbed world.
Importantly, by simulating directly from sensor data, we obtain adversarial scenarios that are safety-critical for the full
autonomy stack. Our experiments show that our approach
is general and can identify thousands of semantically meaningful safety-critical scenarios for a wide range of modern
self-driving systems. Furthermore, we show that the robustness and safety of these systems can be further improved by
training them with scenarios generated by AdvSim.

1. Introduction
Self-driving vehicles (SDV) are safety critical applications in which the comprehensive testing is necessary before
real-world deployment. As the performance of self-driving
systems becomes better on natural and well-behaved scenarios, it becomes of key importance to find scenarios where
the system is likely to fail. However, exhaustively searching
over all possible scenarios to identify safety critical ones is
computationally unfeasible, as there are exponentially many
scenario variations due to the combinatorial number of possible lane topologies, actor configurations, trajectories, velocity profiles, appearance of actors and background, etc.
Conventional practice in industry for comprehensive
testing is a semi-autonomic process that relies on human
expertise to create an initial scenario set, where each sce-

abbas.sadat@gmail.com

Original Scenario

Perturbed Trajectory Ego-vehicle

AdvSim Scenario

Perturbed vehicle

Collided actor

Figure 1: AdvSim modifies traffic scenarios in a physically
plausible manner to produce autonomy system failure. Here
the SDV collides with a crossing pedestrian after the behavior of a nearby bus is modified by AdvSim. The collision is
indicated by the red arrow.
nario contains at most 1 or 2 “actors of interest” (e.g., vehicles that interact with the SDV’s planned path) with specified initial locations and trajectories [34, 26]. Scenario
variations are then programmatically created by varying the
actors’ locations and velocity profiles. While such scenarios are valuable, they only evaluate simple interactions
with the SDV and do not test complex multi-actor interactions, such as lane-merging and unprotected left-turns in
dense traffic scenes. They do not test the autonomy system on the wide variety of scenarios that the SDV may encounter. Moreover, human involvement makes this process
time-consuming and difficult to scale. Manual design may
also result in missing testing configurations that identify unexpected failure modes, as it is difficult to assess coverage.
To address this problem, recent works aim to automate
the scenario generation procedure by searching over the
set of possible scenarios and identifying high-risk ones according to a specified cost function. Most previous works
[14, 43, 23, 11, 13] only consider a motion planning module
that has access to the ground-truth state of the actors in the
scene. This overlooks the fact that many adversarial scenarios often involve actors that are hard to identify due to
occlusion, or that have trajectory plans that can be difficult
to localize and forecast. Such issues in the perception and
motion forecasting modules of the autonomy system can

9909

