GMOT-40: A Benchmark for Generic Multiple Object Tracking
Hexin Bai1
Temple University
Philadelphia, USA

Wensheng Cheng1
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, USA

Peng Chu1
Microsoft
Redmond, USA

hexin.bai@temple.edu

wenscheng@cs.stonybrook.edu

pengchu@microsoft.com

Juehuan Liu
Temple University
Philadelphia, USA

Kai Zhang
Temple University
Philadelphia, USA

Haibin Ling2
Stony Brook University
Stony Brook, USA

juehuan.liu@temple.edu

zhang.kai@temple.edu

hling@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) has witnessed remarkable advances in recent years. However, existing studies
dominantly request prior knowledge of the tracking target (eg, pedestrians), and hence may not generalize well
to unseen categories. In contrast, Generic Multiple Object Tracking (GMOT), which requires little prior information about the target, is largely under-explored. In this paper, we make contributions to boost the study of GMOT in
three aspects. First, we construct the first publicly available dense GMOT dataset, dubbed GMOT-40, which contains 40 carefully annotated sequences evenly distributed
among 10 object categories. In addition, two tracking protocols are adopted to evaluate different characteristics of
tracking algorithms. Second, by noting the lack of devoted tracking algorithms, we have designed a series of
baseline GMOT algorithms. Third, we perform a thorough evaluations on GMOT-40, involving popular MOT algorithms (with necessary modifications) and the proposed
baselines. The GMOT-40 benchmark is publicly available
at https://github.com/Spritea/GMOT40.

1. Introduction
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) has long been studied in the computer vision community [13, 39], due to
its wide range of applications such as in robotics, surveillance, autonomous driving, cell tracking, etc. Remarkable
advances have been made recently in MOT, partly due to
the progress of major components such as detection, single object tracking, association, etc. Another driving force
1 Equal contribution
2 Corresponding author

comes from the popularization of MOT benchmarks (e.g.,
[22, 33, 41, 52, 62]). Despite the achievement, previous
studies in MOT mostly focus on a speciﬁc object category
of interest (pedestrian, car, cell, etc.) and rely on models of
such objects. For example, detectors of such objects are often pre-trained ofﬂine, and motion patterns for speciﬁc objects are sometimes utilized as well. It remains unclear how
well existing MOT algorithms generalize to unseen objects
and hence constrains the expansion of MOT to new applications, especially those with limited data for training object
detectors.
By contrast, Generic Multiple Object Tracking (GMOT),
which requests no prior knowledge of the objects to be
tracked, aims to deal with these issues. Hence GMOT could
be applied in video editing, animal behaviour analysis, and
vision based object counting. Despite its wide applications,
it is however seriously under-explored, except for some
early investigations [37, 38]. Comparing the progress in
GMOT with that in MOT, we see a clear lack of GMOT
benchmark, and the absence of GMOT baselines with effective deep learning ingredients. Note that we follow the
deﬁnition of GMOT in [38], i.e., tracking multiple objects
of a generic object class.
Addressing the above issues, in this paper, we contribute
to the study of GMOT in three aspects: dataset, baseline,
and evaluation. First, we construct the ﬁrst publicly available dense GMOT dataset, dubbed GMOT-40, for systematical study of GMOT. GMOT-40 contains 40 carefully selected sequences, which cover ten categories (e.g., insect
and balloon) with four sequences per category. Each sequence contains multiple objects of same category, and
the average number of objects per frame is around 22.
All sequences are manually annotated with careful validation/correction. The sequences involve many challenging
factors such as heavy blur, occlusion, etc. A tracking Proto-

6719

