Camera Pose Matters: Improving Depth Prediction
by Mitigating Pose Distribution Bias
Yunhan Zhao1
1
UC Irvine

Shu Kong2 Charless Fowlkes1
2
Carnegie Mellon University

{yunhaz5, fowlkes}@ics.uci.edu

shuk@andrew.cmu.edu

Abstract
Monocular depth predictors are typically trained on
large-scale training sets which are naturally biased w.r.t the
distribution of camera poses. As a result, trained predictors fail to make reliable depth predictions for testing examples captured under uncommon camera poses. To address
this issue, we propose two novel techniques that exploit the
camera pose during training and prediction. First, we introduce a simple perspective-aware data augmentation that
synthesizes new training examples with more diverse views
by perturbing the existing ones in a geometrically consistent manner. Second, we propose a conditional model that
exploits the per-image camera pose as prior knowledge by
encoding it as a part of the input. We show that jointly applying the two methods improves depth prediction on images captured under uncommon and even never-before-seen
camera poses. We show that our methods improve performance when applied to a range of different predictor architectures. Lastly, we show that explicitly encoding the
camera pose distribution improves the generalization performance of a synthetically trained depth predictor when
evaluated on real images.

1. Introduction
Monocular depth prediction aims to estimate 3D scene
geometry from a 2D image. Despite being a largely underdetermined problem, convolutional neural network (CNN)
based depth predictors trained on a sufficiently large-scale
dataset are able to learn the joint statistics of scene geometry and appearance, and achieve impressive performance [10, 9, 12, 15, 26, 48].
However, an important overlooked fact is that the distribution of camera poses in training sets are naturally biased.
As a result, a learned depth predictor is unable to make reliable predictions on images captured from uncommon camera poses, as shown in Fig. 1. Importantly, camera poses of

Figure 1:

Contemporary monocular depth predictors, e.g.,
DORN [12], rely on large-scale training data which is naturally
biased w.r.t the distribution of camera poses (e.g., pitch angle distribution shown in gray). As a result, DORN makes unreliable
predictions on test images captured with uncommon poses (red
bars), e.g., pitch angles >120◦ . To address this issue, we propose two novel techniques that drastically reduce prediction errors
(cf. black bars) by leveraging perspective-aware data augmentation during training and known camera pose at test time. Qualitative examples with more extreme camera pitch angles (top) show
that incorporating our techniques leads to notable improvements.

testing examples may follow a different distribution from
that in the training set. This will exacerbate prediction errors on images that are captured by cameras with uncommon poses relative to the training set.
Contributions. To this end, we propose two novel approaches that significantly improve depth prediction under
diverse test-time camera poses. First, we introduce a simple
perspective-aware data augmentation (PDA) that synthesizes new geometrically consistent training examples with
more diverse viewpoints by perturbing the camera pose
of existing samples. In contrast, common data augmentation (CDA) methods such as random-crop, though widely
adopted in prior work [12, 24, 51, 21, 48, 5], produce training examples where the resulting image and target depth are
115759

