Few-Shot Segmentation Without Meta-Learning:
A Good Transductive Inference Is All You Need?
Malik Boudiaf ∗
ÉTS Montreal

Hoel Kervadec
ÉTS Montreal

Ziko Imtiaz Masud
ÉTS Montreal

Ismail Ben Ayed
ÉTS Montreal

Abstract
We show that the way inference is performed in
few-shot segmentation tasks has a substantial effect on
performances—an aspect often overlooked in the literature
in favor of the meta-learning paradigm. We introduce a
transductive inference for a given query image, leveraging
the statistics of its unlabeled pixels, by optimizing a new
loss containing three complementary terms: i) the crossentropy on the labeled support pixels; ii) the Shannon entropy of the posteriors on the unlabeled query-image pixels; and iii) a global KL-divergence regularizer based on
the proportion of the predicted foreground. As our inference uses a simple linear classifier of the extracted features, its computational load is comparable to inductive inference and can be used on top of any base training. Foregoing episodic training and using only standard cross-entropy
training on the base classes, our inference yields competitive performances on standard benchmarks in the 1-shot
scenarios. As the number of available shots increases, the
gap in performances widens: on PASCAL-5i , our method
brings about 5% and 6% improvements over the state-ofthe-art, in the 5- and 10-shot scenarios, respectively. Furthermore, we introduce a new setting that includes domain
shifts, where the base and novel classes are drawn from different datasets. Our method achieves the best performances
in this more realistic setting. Our code is freely availhttps://github.com/mboudiaf/
able online:
RePRI-for-Few-Shot-Segmentation.

1. Introduction
Few-shot learning, which aims at classifying instances
from unseen classes given only a handful of training ex∗ Corresponding author: malik.boudiaf.1@etsmtl.net

Pablo Piantanida
CentraleSupélec-CNRS
Université Paris-Saclay

Jose Dolz
ÉTS Montreal

amples, has witnessed a rapid progress in the recent years.
To quickly adapt to novel classes, there has been a substantial focus on the meta-learning (or learning-to-learn)
paradigm [27, 31, 35]. Meta-learning approaches popularized the need of structuring the training data into episodes,
thereby simulating the tasks that will be presented at inference. Nevertheless, despite the achieved improvements,
several recent image classification works [2, 4, 6, 12, 32, 44]
observed that meta-learning might have limited generalization capacity beyond the standard 1- or 5-shot classification
benchmarks. For instance, in more realistic settings with
domain shifts, simple classification baselines may outperform much more complex meta-learning methods [4, 12].
Deep-learning based semantic segmentation has been
generally nurtured from the methodological advances in
image classification. Few-shot segmentation, which has
gained popularity recently [10, 17, 19, 23, 25, 33, 36, 37, 38,
39, 41, 42], is no exception. In this setting, a deep segmentation model is first pre-trained on base classes. Then, model
generalization is assessed over few-shot tasks and novel
classes unseen during base training. Each task includes
an unlabeled test image, referred to as the query, along
with a few labeled images (the support set). The recent
literature in few-shot segmentation follows the learning-tolearn paradigm, and substantial research efforts focused on
the design of specialized architectures and episodic-training
schemes for base training. However, i) episodic training itself implicitly assumes that testing tasks have a structure
(e.g., the number of support shots) similar to the tasks used
at the meta-training stage; and ii) base and novel classes are
often assumed to be sampled from the same dataset.
In practice, those assumptions may limit the applicability
of the existing few-shot segmentation methods in realistic
scenarios [3, 4]. In fact, our experiments proved consistent
with findings in few-shot classification when going beyond
the standard settings and benchmarks. Particularly, we ob113979

