In the light of feature distributions: moment matching for Neural Style Transfer
Nikolai Kalischek
Jan D. Wegner
Konrad Schindler
EcoVision Lab, Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing, ETH Zürich
{nikolai.kalischek,jan.wegner}@geod.baug.ethz.ch, schindler@ethz.ch

P. Picasso

W. Kandinsky

V. Van Gogh

G. Richter

C. Monet

Figure 1: Style transfer results: artists’ portraits rendered in their own painting style by our method.

Abstract
Style transfer aims to render the content of a given image
in the graphical/artistic style of another image. The fundamental concept underlying Neural Style Transfer (NST) is
to interpret style as a distribution in the feature space of a
Convolutional Neural Network, such that a desired style can
be achieved by matching its feature distribution. We show
that most current implementations of that concept have important theoretical and practical limitations, as they only
partially align the feature distributions. We propose a novel
approach that matches the distributions more precisely, thus
reproducing the desired style more faithfully, while still being computationally efficient. Specifically, we adapt the
dual form of Central Moment Discrepancy (CMD), as recently proposed for domain adaptation, to minimize the difference between the target style and the feature distribution
of the output image. The dual interpretation of this metric explicitly matches all higher-order centralized moments
and is therefore a natural extension of existing NST methods
that only take into account the first and second moments.
Our experiments confirm that the strong theoretical properties also translate to visually better style transfer, and better
disentangle style from semantic image content.

1. Introduction
In 2017 Loving Vincent was released, the first fully
painted feature film with >65,000 frames. Indeed, every

single frame is an oil painting drawn by one of over 100
artists. The creation of the movie was split into two steps.
First, the entire movie was produced with real actors in front
of a green screen, which was then replaced by Van Gogh
paintings. In a second step, each frame was painted over by
an artist with the techniques and style of Van Gogh, which
took over six years to complete.
Attempts to automate this form of texture synthesis,
termed style transfer, date back to at least the mid-90s [12].
More recently, Gatys et al. [9] pioneered the idea of Neural Style Transfer (NST). It is based on the idea that the
deep layers of a pre-trained Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) encode high-level semantic information and are insensitive to the actual appearance, whereas shallow layers
learn low-level features such as color, texture and brush patterns. A fundamental question that arises in this context is
how to define style. Li et al. [25] proved that the loss introduced in [9] can be rewritten as a Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD), offering an interpretation of style transfer as
aligning feature distributions. In fact, most existing methods can be interpreted in this way. This has led to a series of
works all centered around aligning feature distributions of
CNNs, linking style transfer to Domain Adaptation (DA).
Here we look deeper into that interpretation. By translating NST to distribution matching, it becomes amenable to a
suite of tools developed to measure the divergence between
probability distributions, such as integral probability metrics, f -divergences and Optimal Transport (OT).

9382

