ACRE: Abstract Causal REasoning Beyond Covariation
Chi Zhang

Baoxiong Jia
Mark Edmonds
Song-Chun Zhu
UCLA Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning, and Autonomy

Yixin Zhu

{chi.zhang,baoxiongjia,markedmonds}@ucla.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu, yixin.zhu@ucla.edu

Abstract
Causal induction, i.e., identifying unobservable mechanisms that lead to the observable relations among variables,
has played a pivotal role in modern scientific discovery, especially in scenarios with only sparse and limited data. Humans, even young toddlers, can induce causal relationships
surprisingly well in various settings despite its notorious
difficulty. However, in contrast to the commonplace trait
of human cognition is the lack of a diagnostic benchmark
to measure causal induction for modern Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems. Therefore, in this work, we introduce
the Abstract Causal REasoning (ACRE) dataset for systematic evaluation of current vision systems in causal induction. Motivated by the stream of research on causal discovery in Blicket experiments, we query a visual reasoning system with the following four types of questions in either an
independent scenario or an interventional scenario: direct,
indirect, screening-off, and backward-blocking, intentionally going beyond the simple strategy of inducing causal
relationships by covariation. By analyzing visual reasoning architectures on this testbed, we notice that pure neural models tend towards an associative strategy under their
chance-level performance, whereas neuro-symbolic combinations struggle in backward-blocking reasoning. These deficiencies call for future research in models with a more
comprehensive capability of causal induction.

direct

screening-off

indirect

backward-blocking

A

rays, Joseph Thomson proved and derived the existence of
electrons. From merely crossbreeding of pea plants, Gregor
Mendel established the laws of Mendelian inheritance much
beyond pea plants. Out of many other possible conjectures,
pioneering scientists picked the most plausible ones.
The above examples of causal induction are only a few
acclaimed cases of omnipresent causal reasoning scenarios
in science history and our daily life. In fact, despite the notorious complexity in causal discovery, humans, even young
toddlers, can felicitously identify and, sometimes, intervene
in the unobservable mechanisms from only a trifling number of samples of observable events [19, 58].
This captivating commonplace trait of human cognition
and its paramount connection to human learning mechanism motivate us to ask a counterpart question for modern
Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems:

1. Introduction
“There is something fascinating about science.
One gets such wholesale returns of conjecture out
of such a trifling investment of fact.”
— Mark Twain [64]
The history of scientific discovery is full of intriguing
anecdotes. Mr. Twain is accurate in summarizing how influential science theories are distilled from sparse and limited
investments. From only three observations, Edmond Halley precisely predicted the orbit of the Halley comet and its
next visit, which he did not live to see. From a few cathode

B

Figure 1. Abstract causal reasoning tasks administered to human
participants [22, 61]. The Blicket machine possesses various activation patterns in these four cases. One needs to discover the
hidden causal relations to answer two types of questions: whether
object A / B is a Blicket, and how to make the machine stop / go.

At what level do current visual reasoning systems
induce causal relationships?
To answer this question, we propose the Abstract Causal
REasoning (ACRE) dataset. ACRE is inspired by the established stream of research on Blicket detection originally
administered to young toddlers [7, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 35,
42, 44, 58, 60, 61, 66, 67]. The original experiments designed by Gopnik and Sobel [21] introduced a novel setup
for investigating children’s ability of causal induction, in
which children were given a special machine referred to
as “Blicket detector.” Its underlying mechanism is intuitive:
A Blicket detector would activate, lighting up and making

10643

