Mixed-Privacy Forgetting in Deep Networks
Aditya Golatkar2,1 Alessandro Achille1 Avinash Ravichandran1 Marzia Polito1 Stefano Soatto1
1
Amazon Web Services 2 UCLA
{aachille,ravinash,mpolito,soattos}@amazon.com aditya29@cs.ucla.edu
Abstract
We show that the influence of a subset of the training samples can be removed – or “forgotten” – from the
weights of a network trained on large-scale image classification tasks, and we provide strong computable bounds on
the amount of remaining information after forgetting. Inspired by real-world applications of forgetting techniques,
we introduce a novel notion of forgetting in mixed-privacy
setting, where we know that a “core” subset of the training
samples does not need to be forgotten. While this variation of the problem is conceptually simple, we show that
working in this setting significantly improves the accuracy
and guarantees of forgetting methods applied to vision classification tasks. Moreover, our method allows efficient removal of all information contained in non-core data by simply setting to zero a subset of the weights with minimal loss
in performance. We achieve these results by replacing a
standard deep network with a suitable linear approximation. With opportune changes to the network architecture
and training procedure, we show that such linear approximation achieves comparable performance to the original
network and that the forgetting problem becomes quadratic
and can be solved efficiently even for large models. Unlike previous forgetting methods on deep networks, ours can
achieve close to the state-of-the-art accuracy on large scale
vision tasks. In particular, we show that our method allows
forgetting without having to trade off the model accuracy.

1. Introduction
When building a classification system, one rarely has all
the data to be used for training available at the outset. More
often, one starts by pre-training a model with some “core”
dataset (e.g. ImageNet, or datasets close to the target task)
and then incorporates various cohorts of task-specific data
as they become available from diverse sources. In some
cases, the wrong data may be incorporated inadvertently, or
the owners may change their mind and demand that their
data be removed. One can, of course, restart the training
from scratch every time such a demand is made, but at a

significant cost of time and disruption. What if one could
remove the effect of cohort(s) of data a-la-carte, without
re-training, in a way that the resulting model is functionally indistinguishable from one that has never seen the cohort(s) in question, and in addition has no residual information about it buried in the weights of the model? Of
course, forgetting can always be trivially achieved by zeroing the weights or replacing them with random noise, but
this comes at the expense of the accuracy of the model. Can
we forget the cohort of interest without interfering with information about the other data and preserving, to the extent
possible, the accuracy of the trained model? Recently, the
problem of forgetting has received considerable attention
[15, 16, 13, 19, 5, 24, 35, 41, 6, 39, 12, 7, 36], but solutions
have focused on simpler machine learning problems such as
linear logistic regression. Removing information from the
weights of a standard convolutional network still remains
an open problem, with some initial results working only on
small scale problems [15, 16]. This is mainly due to the
highly non-convex loss-landscape of CNNs, which makes
the influence of a particular sample on the optimization trajectory and the final weights highly non-trivial to model.
In this paper we introduce Mixed-Linear Forgetting
(ML-Forgetting), a method to train large scale computer vision models in such a way that information about a subset of
the data can be removed on request – with strong bounds on
the amount of remaining information – while at the same
time retaining close to the state of the art accuracy on the
tasks. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first algorithm to achieve forgetting for deep networks trained on
large-scale computer vision problems without compromising the accuracy. To further improve the performance in
realistic use-cases, we introduce the notion of forgetting in
a mixed-privacy setting, that is, when we know that a subset
Dc ⇢ D of the training dataset, which we call core data,
will not need to be forgotten. For example, the core data
may be a large dataset of generic data used for pre-training
(e.g., ImageNet) or a large freely available collection of
task-specific data (e.g., a self-driving dataset) which is not
likely subject to changes. We show that ML-Forgetting can
naturally take advantage of this setting, to improve both ac-

792

