Neural Architecture Search with Random Labels
Xuanyang Zhang

Pengfei Hou
Xiangyu Zhang*
MEGVII Technology

Jian Sun

{zhangxuanyang,houpengfei,zhangxiangyu,sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract
In this paper, we investigate a new variant of neural
architecture search (NAS) paradigm – searching with random labels (RLNAS). The task sounds counter-intuitive for
most existing NAS algorithms since random label provides
few information on the performance of each candidate architecture. Instead, we propose a novel NAS framework
based on ease-of-convergence hypothesis, which requires
only random labels during searching. The algorithm involves two steps: first, we train a SuperNet using random labels; second, from the SuperNet we extract the subnetwork whose weights change most significantly during the
training. Extensive experiments are evaluated on multiple
datasets (e.g. NAS-Bench-201 and ImageNet) and multiple
search spaces (e.g. DARTS-like and MobileNet-like). Very
surprisingly, RLNAS achieves comparable or even better results compared with state-of-the-art NAS methods such as
PC-DARTS, Single Path One-Shot, even though the counterparts utilize full ground truth labels for searching. We
hope our finding could inspire new understandings on the
essential of NAS.

1. Introduction
Recent years Neural Architecture Search [49, 2, 50, 47,
48, 29, 35, 38, 10] (NAS) has received much attention in
the community as its superior performances over humandesigned architectures on a variety of tasks such as image
classification [38, 39, 19], object detection [10, 16] and semantic segmentation [27]. In general, most existing NAS
frameworks can be summarized as a nested bilevel optimization, formulated as follows:
a⋆ = argmax Score (a, Wa⋆ )

(1)

a∈A

s.t. Wa⋆ = argmin L (a, W) ,

(2)

W
* Corresponding author. This work is supported by The National Key
Research and Development Program of China (No.2017YFA0700800) and
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI).

where a is a candidate architecture with weights Wa sampled from the search space A; L(·) represents the training
loss; Score(·) means the performance indicator (e.g. accuracy in supervised NAS algorithms or pretext task scores in
unsupervised NAS frameworks [28]) evaluated on the validation set. Briefly speaking, the NAS paradigm aims to
search for the architecture which obtains the best validation
performance, thus we name it performance-based NAS in
the remaining text.
Despite the great success, to understand why and how
performance-based NAS works is still an open question.
Especially, the mechanism how NAS algorithms discover
good architectures from the huge search space is well worth
study. A recent literature [37] analyzes the searching results under cell-based search spaces and reveals that existing performance-based methods tend to favor architectures with fast convergence. Although Shu et al. [37] further empirically find that architectures with fast convergence can not achieve the highest generalization performance, the fast convergence connection pattern still implies
that there may exist high correlations between architectures with fast convergence and the ones with high performance (named ease-of-convergence hypothesis for short).
Inspired by the hypothesis, we propose an alternative NAS
paradigm, convergence-based NAS, as follows:
a⋆ = argmax Convergence (a, Wa⋆ )

(3)

a∈A

s.t. Wa⋆ = argmin L (a, W) ,

(4)

W

where Convergence(·) is a certain indicator to measure the
speed of convergence; other notations follow the same definitions as in Eq. 1, 2.
In this paper we mainly investigate convergence-based
NAS frameworks, which is rarely explicitly explored in previous works to our knowledge. First of all, we study the
role of labels in both frameworks. In performance-based
NAS, we notice that feasible labels are critical in both search
steps: for Eq. 1 step, since we need to select the architecture
with the highest validation performance, reasonable labels
such as ground truths or at least carefully-designed pretext
task (e.g. rotation prediction [17]) labels in unsupervised

10907

