Wasserstein Contrastive Representation Distillation
Liqun Chen1 ,* Dong Wang1∗ , Zhe Gan2 , Jingjing Liu2 , Ricardo Henao1 , Lawrence Carin1
1
Duke University, 2 Microsoft Corporation
{liqun.chen, dong.wang, ricardo.henao, lcarin}@duke.edu, {zhe.gan, jingjl}@microsoft.com

Abstract
The primary goal of knowledge distillation (KD) is to encapsulate the information of a model learned from a teacher
network into a student network, with the latter being more
compact than the former. Existing work, e.g., using KullbackLeibler divergence for distillation, may fail to capture important structural knowledge in the teacher network and often
lacks the ability for feature generalization, particularly in situations when teacher and student are built to address different classification tasks. We propose Wasserstein Contrastive
Representation Distillation (WCoRD), which leverages both
primal and dual forms of Wasserstein distance for KD. The
dual form is used for global knowledge transfer, yielding
a contrastive learning objective that maximizes the lower
bound of mutual information between the teacher and the student networks. The primal form is used for local contrastive
knowledge transfer within a mini-batch, effectively matching
the distributions of features between the teacher and the student networks. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed
WCoRD method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches on
privileged information distillation, model compression and
cross-modal transfer.

1. Introduction
The recent success of deep learning methods has brought
about myriad efforts to apply them beyond benchmark
datasets, but a number of challenges can emerge in realworld scenarios. For one, as the scale of deep learning
models continues to grow (e.g., [21, 15]), it has become increasingly difficult to deploy such trained networks on more
computationally-restrictive platforms, such as smart phones,
remote sensors, and edge devices. Additionally, deep networks require abundant data for training, but large datasets
are often private [36], classified [29], or institutional [39],
which the custodians may be hesitant to release publicly.
Labeled datasets in specialized domains may also be rare or
expensive to produce. Finally, despite ample datasets from
neighboring modalities, conventional frameworks lack clear
ways to leverage cross-modal data.
* Equal contribution

Knowledge distillation (KD), which has become an increasingly important topic in the deep learning community,
offers a potential solution to these challenges. In KD, the
goal is to improve a student model’s performance by supplementing it with additional feedback from a teacher model.
Often the teacher has larger capacity than the student, or
has access to additional data that the student does not. As
such, KD can transfer this additional and valuable knowledge
from the teacher to the student. In early KD methods [23],
this supplemental supervision was imposed by asking the
student to minimize the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence
between its output prediction distribution and the teacher’s.
Given that the prediction probability distribution contains
richer and more informative signals than the one-hot labels,
student models have been shown to benefit from this extra
supervision. However, the low dimensionality of prediction
distribution means that the amount of information encoded
(therefore transferred) can be limited. For cross-modal transfer, these predictions may even be irrelevant, making KL
divergence unable to transfer meaningful information.
In contrast, intermediate representations present an opportunity for more informative learning signals, as a number of
recent works have explored [37, 50, 40, 42, 41]. However, as
observed by [42], these methods often compare poorly with
the basic KD, potentially due to the challenge of defining a
proper distance metric between features of the teacher and
student networks. Furthermore, they heavily rely on strategies to copy teacher’s behavior, i.e., aligning the student’s
outputs to those from the teacher. We argue that such practice overlooks a key factor: the teacher’s experience may not
necessarily generalize well to the student.
Motivated by this, we present Wasserstein Constrastive
Representation Distillation (WCoRD), a new KD framework that reduces the generalization gap between teacher
and student to approach better knowledge transfer. Specifically, our approach constitutes distillation and generalization
blocks, realized by solving the dual and primal form of the
Wasserstein distance (WD), respectively. For better distillation, we leverage the dual form of WD to maximize the
mutual information (MI) between student and teacher representation distributions, using an objective inspired by Noise

16296

