CompositeTasking: Understanding Images by Spatial Composition of Tasks
Nikola Popovic1 , Danda Pani Paudel1 , Thomas Probst1 , Guolei Sun1 , Luc Van Gool1,2
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2
VISICS, ESAT/PSI, KU Leuven, Belgium
{nipopovic, paudel, probstt, guolei.sun, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
We define the concept of CompositeTasking as the fusion
of multiple, spatially distributed tasks, for various aspects
of image understanding. Learning to perform spatially distributed tasks is motivated by the frequent availability of
only sparse labels across tasks, and the desire for a compact multi-tasking network. To facilitate CompositeTasking, we introduce a novel task conditioning model – a single encoder-decoder network that performs multiple, spatially varying tasks at once. The proposed network takes
an image and a set of pixel-wise dense task requests as inputs, and performs the requested prediction task for each
pixel. Moreover, we also learn the composition of tasks that
needs to be performed according to some CompositeTasking
rules, which includes the decision of where to apply which
task. It not only offers us a compact network for multitasking, but also allows for task-editing. Another strength
of the proposed method is demonstrated by only having to
supply sparse supervision per task. The obtained results
are on par with our baselines that use dense supervision
and a multi-headed multi-tasking design. The source code
will be made publicly available at www.github.com/
nikola3794/composite-tasking.

1. Introduction
Intuitively, different image understanding tasks offer
complementary information for scene understanding and
reasoning [24, 53, 2, 62, 57, 61, 11, 50]. Therefore, networks that can perform multiple visual tasks on the same
image are of very high interest [10, 34, 22, 51, 55]. A key
aspect – effectively serving the ultimate goal of scene understanding and reasoning – is often not part of their design.
This paper is about this utility question: can we determine
where in the image it is necessary (or even meaningful) to
perform a task? For example, the task of recognizing human body parts is meaningful only in the presence of humans. Similarly, any attempt to estimate the normals of the
sky is absurd.

One may argue that we cannot know beforehand whether
some task is necessary to be performed, without recognizing the image content. The content of the image may then
reveal the task necessity. This begs the question whether
we can know what task needs to be performed where, while
bypassing the content-task pairing altogether? When the answer to where is known – either by learning or not – we aim
to design an algorithm that executes the given multi-task
instructions in an efficient manner. For example, some applications of Augmented Reality may require human poses
and the normals of the interacting surfaces. We show that
such flexibility to locally activate some tasks allows us to
design more compact multi-tasking networks.
The task specific annotations of images are often sparse,
either by definition or due to missing annotations. Take, for
example, facial landmarks or image salience. Sometimes,
the annotations may be missing simply because of being futile. Even the well-curated PASCAL-MT [38, 34] dataset
has the sparsity of 30.4%, 7.5%, 41.9%, 60.0%, for semantic segmentation, human body parts, surface normals,
and salience, respectively. Such label sparsity only tends
to get worse, if the image annotations are crowd-sourced.
In fact, it is simply impractical to expect pixel-wise dense
annotations for large datasets, even at locations where the
annotations are well defined. The case of merging datasets,
by cross-label intersection, follows the same behaviour of
sparsity. Under such circumstances, it may be unnecessary
to waste computational resources during learning, for image pixels without labels. This calls for an efficient learning
paradigm for multi-tasking from sparse labels. In this work,
we show that efficient learning from sparse multi-task labels and executing spatially chosen multi-task instructions
go hand-in-hand.
The key idea of this paper is rather simple. We design a
convolutional neural network that performs multiple, pixelwise tasks. We feed every image along with a composition of spatially distributed multiple task requests – which
we call Task Palette – to execute pixel-specific tasks. This
process we call CompositeTasking. The proposed network
uses a single encoder-decoder architecture to perform all

6870

