Human-like Controllable Image Captioning with Verb-specific Semantic Roles
Long Chen2,3∗
Zhihong Jiang1∗
Jun Xiao1†
1
Zhejiang University 2 Tencent AI Lab 3 Columbia University

Wei Liu4
4
Tencent Data Platform

zjuchenlong@gmail.com, {zju jiangzhihong, junx}@zju.edu.cn, wl2223@columbia.edu

CS: level 3 (15-19)
Cap: a group of people sitting next
to each other in front of a tree.

CS:
Cap: a man riding a wave on a
surfboard.
CS:
Cap: a man riding a wave on a
surfboard in his hand in the sky.

(a) Content-controlled Signal

✓
✗

(b) Structure-controlled Signal
CS: read; <Arg0, 2>, Arg1
Cap: a man on a playground
reading a book.

CS: sit; Arg1, Arg2
Cap: a man sitting on a bench.

✓
CS: sit; Arg1, Arg2, LOC
Cap: a man sitting on a bench next
to a playground.

✓

CS: level 4 (20-25)
Cap: a group of men and two boys
are standing in front of a refrigerator
in front of a house.

CS: read; Arg0, Arg1, <LOC, 2>
Cap: a man reading a book on a
bench in a park.

✓

✗

✓
✓

(c) Verb-specific Semantic Roles

Figure 1: The CS and Cap in each sample denote the control signal and generated caption, respectively. (a): The captions are generated by
model SCT [16], which uses a set of visual regions as control signals. When control signals don’t meet the event-compatible requirement
(e.g., objects hand and sky), SCT generates lower quality captions (red cross). (b): The captions are generated by model LaBERT [19],
which uses different length-levels as control signals. When control signals don’t meet the sample-suitable requirement (e.g., level 4), the
LaBERT generates lower quality captions. (c): The captions are generated by our framework with VSR as control signals. For brevity, we
abbreviate < role, 1 > to role in all samples. Arg and LOC denote “argument” and “location”, respectively. For verb sit, Arg1 and
Arg2 are “thing sitting” and “sitting position”, respectively. For verb read, Arg0 and Arg1 are “reader” and “thing read”, respectively.

Abstract
Controllable Image Captioning (CIC) — generating image descriptions following designated control signals — has
received unprecedented attention over the last few years.
To emulate the human ability in controlling caption generation, current CIC studies focus exclusively on control signals concerning objective properties, such as contents of
interest or descriptive patterns. However, we argue that almost all existing objective control signals have overlooked
two indispensable characteristics of an ideal control signal: 1) Event-compatible: all visual contents referred to in
a single sentence should be compatible with the described
activity. 2) Sample-suitable: the control signals should be
suitable for a specific image sample. To this end, we propose a new control signal for CIC: Verb-specific Semantic Roles (VSR). VSR consists of a verb and some semantic
∗ denotes equal contributions, † denotes the corresponding author.

roles, which represents a targeted activity and the roles of
entities involved in this activity. Given a designated VSR, we
first train a grounded semantic role labeling (GSRL) model
to identify and ground all entities for each role. Then, we
propose a semantic structure planner (SSP) to learn humanlike descriptive semantic structures. Lastly, we use a roleshift captioning model to generate the captions. Extensive
experiments and ablations demonstrate that our framework
can achieve better controllability than several strong baselines on two challenging CIC benchmarks. Besides, we can
generate multi-level diverse captions easily. The code is
available at: https://github.com/mad-red/VSR-guided-CIC.

1. Introduction
Image captioning, i.e., generating fluent and meaningful
descriptions to summarize the salient contents of an image,
is a classic proxy task for comprehensive scene understand-

16846

