Deep Video Matting via Spatio-Temporal Alignment and Aggregation
Yanan Sun
HKUST

Guanzhi Wang∗
Stanford University

Qiao Gu∗
Carnegie Mellon University

now.syn@gmail.com

guanzhi@cs.stanford.edu

qiaog@andrew.cmu.edu

Chi-Keung Tang
HKUST

Yu-Wing Tai
Kuaishou Technology

cktang@cs.ust.hk

yuwing@gmail.com

Abstract
Despite the significant progress made by deep learning
in natural image matting, there has been so far no representative work on deep learning for video matting due to the
inherent technical challenges in reasoning temporal domain
and lack of large-scale video matting datasets. In this paper,
we propose a deep learning-based video matting framework
which employs a novel and effective spatio-temporal feature aggregation module (ST-FAM). As optical flow estimation can be very unreliable within matting regions, ST-FAM
is designed to effectively align and aggregate information
across different spatial scales and temporal frames within
the network decoder. To eliminate frame-by-frame trimap
annotations, a lightweight interactive trimap propagation
network is also introduced. The other contribution consists
of a large-scale video matting dataset with groundtruth alpha mattes for quantitative evaluation and real-world highresolution videos with trimaps for qualitative evaluation.
Quantitative and qualitative experimental results show that
our framework significantly outperforms conventional video
matting and deep image matting methods applied to video in
presence of multi-frame temporal information. Our dataset
is available at https://github.com/nowsyn/DVM .

1. Introduction
Video matting, or extracting from a given video highquality alpha matte of a moving foreground object, has a
wide range of applications in special effect and TV/movie
production. Formally, given the color of a video frame I,
foreground color F , background color B and alpha matte
α ∈ [0, 1], the video compositing equation Eq. 1 is
I = αF + (1 − α)B.

(1)

∗ The second and third authors contribute equally to this work.

This work was done when Yanan Sun was a student intern at Kuaishou
Technology. This work was supported by Kuaishou Technology and the
Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong SAR under grant no. 16201420.

Figure 1. A challenging video matting example where top and bottom are consecutive frames. Left: input frames with insets zooming in complex hairs and showing the estimated optical flow from
PWC-Net [38]. Note that the estimated optical flow is unreliable
within the hair regions. Middle: deep image matting [44] results.
Right: our results.

Compared to image matting, video matting poses two further challenges. First, video matting needs to preserve spatial and temporal coherence in the predicted alpha matte.
A straightforward solution applying image matting on individual frames may inevitably cause severe flickering artifacts for moving fine details. Using optical flow to regularize output may help to alleviate these artifacts, but even
with the most state-of-the-art optical flow estimation methods [20, 38, 46], optical flow estimation within complex
matting regions is still very unreliable. This is because matting regions simultaneously contain both the foreground and
background and there is so far no good optical flow estimation that can handle large area of semi-transparency.
Traditional methods tackled the video matting problem
by finding local or non-local affinity among pixel colors
and computing the motion of the foreground [9, 48] but
their results are still far from satisfactory especially when
dealing with complex cases, such as rapidly moving objects
or complex backgrounds. Figure 1 shows an example with
challenging motions. The other challenge for video matting is the necessary input of a dense trimap for each frame,
making it difficult to generate high quality large-scale video
16975

