Riggable 3D Face Reconstruction via In-Network Optimization
Ziqian Bai1 Zhaopeng Cui2∗ Xiaoming Liu3 Ping Tan1∗
1
Simon Fraser University 2 State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University
3
Michigan State University
{ziqianb, pingtan}@sfu.ca, zhpcui@zju.edu.cn, liuxm@cse.msu.edu
Source

Reconstruction

Target A

Rig

Retargeting

Target B

Rig

Drive

Retargeting

Drive

Figure 1. Our method estimates personalized face rigs and per-image reconstructions from monocular images with good reconstruction
quality and supports video retargeting to different actors. The code is available at https://github.com/zqbai-jeremy/INORig.

Abstract
This paper presents a method for riggable 3D face reconstruction from monocular images, which jointly estimates
a personalized face rig and per-image parameters including expressions, poses, and illuminations. To achieve this
goal, we design an end-to-end trainable network embedded
with a differentiable in-network optimization. The network
first parameterizes the face rig as a compact latent code
with a neural decoder, and then estimates the latent code as
well as per-image parameters via a learnable optimization.
By estimating a personalized face rig, our method goes beyond static reconstructions and enables downstream applications such as video retargeting. In-network optimization
explicitly enforces constraints derived from the first principles, thus introduces additional priors than regressionbased methods. Finally, data-driven priors from deep learning are utilized to constrain the ill-posed monocular setting
and ease the optimization difficulty. Experiments demonstrate that our method achieves SOTA reconstruction accuracy, reasonable robustness and generalization ability, and
supports standard face rig applications.

1. Introduction
3D face reconstruction has been an important research
topic due to the increasing demands on 3D face understanding in fields like AR/VR, communication, games, and secu∗ Corresponding authors

rity. Some approaches go beyond merely estimating static
reconstructions and aim to reconstruct face rigs, which are
personalized parametric models that can produce 3D faces
under different expressions of a specific person. The rig can
either be used on character animations such as face retargeting and voice puppetry, or on 3D face tracking serving as a
personalized prior to ease the tracking difficulty.
When 3D data is available, various approaches [7,23,24]
have been proposed to automatically reconstruct face rigs in
the forms of blendshapes. Progress has also been made to
develop more sophisticated rigs based on anatomical constraints [44] and deep neural networks [27, 45] to faithfully capture facial details. However, these methods heavily depend on the 3D data provided by specialized equipment such as dense camera/lighting arrays and depth sensors, which limits the application realms.
To release the restricted hardware requirements, methods were enhanced to work on monocular imagery. Given
the ill-posedness of monocular reconstruction, algorithms
usually use a low dimensional parametric face model as
priors, e.g., 3D morphable model (3DMM) [5] and multilinear model [9, 43], whose parameters are estimated via
the analysis-by-synthesis optimization [14, 16, 19, 49]. Additional components such as corrective basis [16], shadingbased dynamic details [16, 21], image-based representation [10], as well as hair [10, 19] and other secondary components [21] are adopted to further personalize the estimated rig. However, these approaches may assume specific properties of the input, e.g., requiring the subject to
be static and in the neutral pose for a portion of the in-

6216

