Group Whitening: Balancing Learning Efficiency and Representational Capacity
Lei Huang1,3 Yi Zhou2 Li Liu3 Fan Zhu3 Ling Shao3
SKLSDE, Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
MOE Key Laboratory of Computer Network and Information Integration, Southeast University, China
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), Abu Dhabi, UAE
1

Abstract
Batch normalization (BN) is an important technique commonly incorporated into deep learning models to perform
standardization within mini-batches. The merits of BN in
improving a model’s learning efficiency can be further amplified by applying whitening, while its drawbacks in estimating population statistics for inference can be avoided
through group normalization (GN). This paper proposes
group whitening (GW), which exploits the advantages of the
whitening operation and avoids the disadvantages of normalization within mini-batches. In addition, we analyze the
constraints imposed on features by normalization, and show
how the batch size (group number) affects the performance
of batch (group) normalized networks, from the perspective
of model’s representational capacity. This analysis provides
theoretical guidance for applying GW in practice. Finally,
we apply the proposed GW to ResNet and ResNeXt architectures and conduct experiments on the ImageNet and COCO
benchmarks. Results show that GW consistently improves
the performance of different architectures, with absolute
gains of 1.02% ⇠ 1.49% in top-1 accuracy on ImageNet
and 1.82% ⇠ 3.21% in bounding box AP on COCO.

1. Introduction
Batch normalization (BN) [24] represents a milestone
technique in deep learning [15, 52, 59], and has been extensively used in various network architectures [15, 52, 66, 51,
18]. BN standardizes the activations within a mini-batch of
data, which improves the conditioning of optimization and
accelerates training [24, 4, 46]. Further, the stochasticity
of normalization introduced along the batch dimension is
believed to benefit generalization [59, 48, 22]. However, this
stochasticity also results in differences between the training
distribution (using mini-batch statistics) and the test distribution (using estimated population statistics) [23], which
is believed to be the main cause of BN’s small-batch-size
problem — BN’s error increases rapidly as the batch size
becomes smaller [59]. To address this issue, a number of approaches have been proposed [59, 43, 37, 23, 56, 50, 7]. One

representative method is group normalization (GN), which
divides the neurons into groups and then applies the standardization operation over the neurons of each group, for each
sample, independently. GN provides a flexible solution to
avoid normalization along the batch dimension, and benefits
visual tasks limited to small-batch-size training [59, 29].
As a widely used operation in data pre-processing, whitening not only standardizes but also decorrelates the data [31],
which further improves the conditioning of the optimization
problem [31, 58, 12, 20]. A whitened input has also been
shown to make the gradient descent updates similar to the
Newton updates for linear models [31, 58, 20]. Motivated
by this, Huang et al. [20] proposed batch whitening (BW)
for deep models, which performs whitening on the activations of each layer within a mini-batch. BW has been shown
to achieve better optimization efficiency and generalization
than BN [20, 22, 41]. However, BW further amplifies the
disadvantage of BN in estimating the population statistics,
where the number of parameters to be estimated with BW
is quadratic to the number of neurons/channels. Thus, BW
requires a sufficiently large batch size to work well.
To exploit whitening’s advantage in optimization, while
avoiding its disadvantage in normalization along the batch
dimension, this paper proposes group whitening (GW). GW
divides the neurons of a sample into groups for standardization over the neurons in each group, and then decorrelates
the groups. Unlike BW, GW has stable performance for a
wide range of batch sizes, like GN, and thus can be applied
to a variety of tasks. GW further improves the conditioning
of optimization of GN with its whitening operation.
One important hyperparameter of GW is the group number. We observe that GW/GN has a significantly degenerated training performance when the group number is large,
which is similar to the small-batch-size problem of BW/BN.
We attribute this to the constraints on the output imposed
by the normalization operation, which affect the model’s
representational capacity. As such, this paper defines the
constraint number of normalization (as will be discussed
in Section 4) to quantitatively measure the magnitude of
the constraints provided by normalization methods. With
the support of the constraint number, we analyze how the

9512

