Neural Feature Search for RGB-Infrared Person Re-Identification
Yehansen Chen1∗, Lin Wan1∗, Zhihang Li2†, Qianyan Jing1 , Zongyuan Sun1
1
School of Geography and Information Engineering, China University of Geosciences, Wuhan, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{chenyehansen, wanlin, jingqianyan, sunzongyuan}@cug.edu.cn; zhihang.li@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to match the
person-of-interest over non-overlapping camera views [54,
67, 44, 73, 60], serving as a central part of intelligent video
surveillance systems. Currently, most conventional ReID
methods concentrate efforts on visible images-based crossview matching tasks [29, 18, 46, 43, 36], which cannot
adapt well to illumination variations in real-world scenarios
(e.g., low lighting environments at nighttime). Motivated
by this challenge, associating RGB and infrared (IR) pedestrian images captured by dual-mode cameras for cross∗ Equally-contributed first authors
† Corresponding author

Feature Space

Selected Features

Manually Design

Stripes? Landmarks? Parsing Maps? …

Training

Evaluating

Manually Selection Module

ReID
Dataset

Hyperparameters
Numbers of stripes?
Numbers of Landmarks?
Numbers of parts?
…

Feature Maps

(b)

Feature
Search Space

Neural Feature Search

Selected Features
+

Spatial Channel

Feature Map
=

RGB-Infrared person re-identification (RGB-IR ReID) is
a challenging cross-modality retrieval problem, which aims
at matching the person-of-interest over visible and infrared
camera views. Most existing works achieve performance
gains through manually-designed feature selection modules, which often require significant domain knowledge and
rich experience. In this paper, we study a general paradigm,
termed Neural Feature Search (NFS), to automate the process of feature selection. Specifically, NFS combines a duallevel feature search space and a differentiable search strategy to jointly select identity-related cues in coarse-grained
channels and fine-grained spatial pixels. This combination
allows NFS to adaptively filter background noises and concentrate on informative parts of human bodies in a datadriven manner. Moreover, a cross-modality contrastive optimization scheme further guides NFS to search features
that can minimize modality discrepancy whilst maximizing inter-class distance. Extensive experiments on mainstream benchmarks demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-arts, especially achieving better performance on the RegDB dataset with significant improvement
of 11.20% and 8.64% in Rank-1 and mAP, respectively.

(a)

AutoML

Spatial-level

Dual-level Feature Search

+

Cells

Channel

Cells

Cells

Channel-level

Cells

Spatial

Training
RGB
IR

Proxy
Dataset

Sampling
Probability

Features

Figure 1. Comparison of hand-crafted and automated feature selection strategies. (a) Manually designing task-specific modules
to select identity-related features. (b) NFS automatically derives
the optimal feature subset from a dual-level feature search space.

modality image retrieval, a.k.a. RGB-IR ReID, has drawn
much attention in vision community [58, 64, 51, 52, 66].
Due to intrinsically different imaging mechanisms,
RGB-IR ReID suffers from undesired visual discrepancy
between visible and infrared images, which makes appearance cues such as colors and textures unreliable or even
misleading for the matching task [32, 52, 58]. Moreover, such modality divergence also exacerbates the already large intra-class variations caused by diverse camera viewpoints, person poses, partial occlusions, and background clutter [57, 14, 22], making it even harder to align
images of the same identity. In an effort to minimize
the modality gap, cross-modality image synthesis methods [51, 52, 22] typically leverage generative adversarial
networks (GANs) to transfer stylistic properties between
modalities to synthesize fake RGB/IR images. But it is
non-trivial to preserve identity information for generated
RGB images due to lack of color information in their IR
counterparts [11]. Another line of shared feature learning
approaches [64, 69, 66, 63] utilize convolutional neural net-

587

