Towards Part-Based Understanding of RGB-D Scans
Alexey Bokhovkin1,2
Vladislav Ishimtsev2
Emil Bogomolov2
Alexey Artemov2
Evgeny Burnaev2
Angela Dai1

Denis Zorin3,2

1

2

Technical University of Munich
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
3
New York University

Figure 1: From an input RGB-D scan (left), we propose to detect objects in the scan and predict their complete part
decompositions as semantic part completion; that is, we predict the part masks for the complete object, inferring the part
geometry of any missing or unobserved regions in the scan. To achieve this, we predict the part structure of each detected
object to drive a geometric prior-driven prediction of the complete part masks.

Abstract

Recent advances in 3D semantic scene understanding
have shown impressive progress in 3D instance segmentation, enabling object-level reasoning about 3D scenes; however, a finer-grained understanding is required to enable
interactions with objects and their functional understanding.
Thus, we propose the task of part-based scene understanding of real-world 3D environments: from an RGB-D scan
of a scene, we detect objects, and for each object predict
its decomposition into geometric part masks, which composed together form the complete geometry of the observed
object. We leverage an intermediary part graph representation to enable robust completion as well as building of
part priors, which we use to construct the final part mask
predictions. Our experiments demonstrate that guiding part
understanding through part graph to part prior-based predictions significantly outperforms alternative approaches to
the task of semantic part completion.

1. Introduction
Recently, we have seen remarkable advances in 3D semantic scene understanding, driven by efforts in large-scale
data collection and annotation of 3D reconstructions of RGBD scanned environments [5, 2], coupled with exploration of
3D deep learning approaches across 3D representations such
as sparse or dense volumetric grids [55, 39, 5, 15, 4], point
clouds [38, 40], meshes [13, 23], and multi-view [7, 50].
This has led to significant progress in both 3D semantic
segmentation as well as 3D semantic instance segmentation
[16, 15, 4, 25]. These have enabled a basis for 3D perception at the level of objects, which is essential for semantic
understanding, but lacks finer-grained understanding often
critical for enabling interactions with objects and reasoning
about functionality (e.g., the seat part of a chair is for sitting
on, a knob or handle enables opening doors or drawers).
At the same time, notable progress has been made in
part segmentation for shapes [33, 32, 18]. However, these
methods have been developed on synthetic datasets such
as ShapeNet [3], of objects in isolation; this scenario is

7484

