QAIR: Practical Query-efficient Black-Box Attacks for Image Retrieval
Xiaodan Li1 *, Jinfeng Li1 , Yuefeng Chen1 , Shaokai Ye2 , Yuan He1 , Shuhui Wang3 , Hang Su4 , Hui Xue1
1
2
3
Alibaba Group
EPFL
Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, China
4
Institute for AI, THBI Lab, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China
{fiona.lxd, jinfengli.ljf, yuefeng.chenyf, heyuan.hy, hui.xueh}@alibaba-inc.com
shaokaiyeah@gmail.com, wangshuhui@ict.ac.cn, suhangss@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

White-box
Target model

Transfer-based
Training data

Query-based
Query access

Cls

FGSM, MIM

FGSM transfer

BA, HSJA, RGF

IR

UAP, ODFA

DeepMisR

less information

"

+

2

+

N

+

Initialize a perturbation

Update according to the last state

…

1

Target IR system

* Corresponding author.

Queries

…

Despite of its impressive performance in many tasks
such as image classification [17], object detection [7] and
image retrieval (IR) [37], deep neural network (DNN) has
been shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples that
can trigger the misbehavior with human-imperceptible perturbations [14, 10, 13]. Such vulnerability has raised great
concerns about the robustness and real-world deployment of
DNNs for image retrieval [24, 39] and object detection [7],

Ours

Original

…

1. Introduction

Cat, 0.9999

!

Attack with Query

We study the query-based attack against image retrieval
to evaluate its robustness against adversarial examples under the black-box setting, where the adversary only has
query access to the top-k ranked unlabeled images from
the database. Compared with query attacks in image classification, which produce adversaries according to the returned labels or confidence score, the challenge becomes
even more prominent due to the difficulty in quantifying the
attack effectiveness on the partial retrieved list. In this paper, we make the first attempt in Query-based Attack against
Image Retrieval (QAIR), to completely subvert the top-k retrieval results. Specifically, a new relevance-based loss is
designed to quantify the attack effects by measuring the set
similarity on the top-k retrieval results before and after attacks and guide the gradient optimization. To further boost
the attack efficiency, a recursive model stealing method is
proposed to acquire transferable priors on the target model
and generate the prior-guided gradients. Comprehensive
experiments show that the proposed attack achieves a high
attack success rate with few queries against the image retrieval systems under the black-box setting. The attack evaluations on the real-world visual search engine show that it
successfully deceives a commercial system such as Bing Visual Search with 98% attack success rate by only 33 queries
on average.

Update according to the last state

Figure 1. (a) (Left)Taxonomy of adversarial attacks. Different
from existing attacks for IR, our attack is applicable to real-world
scenarios since it only needs query access to the target model.
(Right) The output of image classification(Cls) is a label or confidence score while it is a list of unlabeled images in IR.
(b) Demonstration of the query-based black-box attack on IR.
Given a target model, the attackers use queries to update and generate adversarial perturbations.

et al.. For example, in digital right management, the original graphic designs are protected by checking if there exists
a same design in the top-k similar ones retrieved from the
whole graphic design database. By adding adversarial perturbations on protected designs, attackers can deceive the
target IR system into retrieving some irrelevant images for
evading the censorship of professional monitors. Therefore, it is crucial to develop a practical robustness evaluation technology to explore the vulnerability of IR systems
against adversarial attacks, and then facilitate the development of the corresponding countermeasures.
A general idea of adversarial attack is to generate adversarial examples with human-imperceptible perturbations
along the gradient direction by maximizing a certain loss
function, e.g., a classification loss [14, 11]. However, as
shown in Fig. 1, the IR system produces a list of images
for a query input. This makes it hard to define the objective

3330

