Stylized Neural Painting
Zhengxia Zou1 , Tianyang Shi2 , Shuang Qiu1 , Yi Yuan2 , Zhenwei Shi3
1
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 2 NetEase Fuxi AI Lab, 3 Beihang University

Figure 1: We propose a stroke-rendering based method that generates realistic painting artworks. The paintings are generated with a vector
format, which can be further optimized and rendered with different visual styles. We recommend zooming in to see the stroke textures.

Abstract
This paper proposes an image-to-painting translation
method that generates vivid and realistic painting artworks
with controllable styles. Different from previous image-toimage translation methods that formulate the translation
as pixel-wise prediction, we deal with such an artistic creation process in a vectorized environment and produce a sequence of physically meaningful stroke parameters that can
be further used for rendering. Since a typical vector render is not differentiable, we design a novel neural renderer
which imitates the behavior of the vector renderer and then
frame the stroke prediction as a parameter searching process that maximizes the similarity between the input and the
rendering output. We explored the zero-gradient problem
on parameter searching and propose to solve this problem
from an optimal transportation perspective. We also show
that previous neural renderers have a parameter coupling

problem and we re-design the rendering network with a rasterization network and a shading network that better handles the disentanglement of shape and color. Experiments
show that the paintings generated by our method have a
high degree of fidelity in both global appearance and local textures. Our method can be also jointly optimized with
neural style transfer that further transfers visual style from
other images. Our code and animated results are available
at https:// jiupinjia.github.io/ neuralpainter/ .

1. Introduction
Creating artistic paintings is one of the defining characteristics of humans and other intelligent species. In recent
years, we saw great advancements in generative modeling
of image translation or style transfer which utilizes neural network as a generative tool [6, 13, 23, 38]. Previous
image-to-image translation and style transfer methods typ-

15689

