Training Networks in Null Space of Feature Covariance for Continual Learning
Shipeng Wang1 , Xiaorong Li1 , Jian Sun( )1,2,3 , Zongben Xu1,2,3
1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, 710049, China
2
National Engineering Laboratory of Big Data Algorithm and Analysis Technology, Xi’an, 710049, China
3
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, Guangdong, 510335, China
{wangshipeng8128, lixiaorong}@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, {jiansun, zbxu}@xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In the setting of continual learning, a network is trained
on a sequence of tasks, and suffers from catastrophic forgetting. To balance plasticity and stability of network in
continual learning, in this paper, we propose a novel network training algorithm Adam-NSCL which sequentially
optimizes network parameters in the null space of all previous tasks. We first propose two mathematical conditions
respectively for achieving network stability and plasticity in
continual learning. Based on them, the network training for
sequential tasks without forgetting can be simply achieved
by projecting the candidate parameter update into the approximate null space of all previous tasks in the network
training process, where the candidate parameter update can
be generated by Adam. The approximate null space can be
derived by applying singular value decomposition to the uncentered covariance matrix of all input features of previous
tasks for each linear layer. For efficiency, the uncentered covariance matrix can be incrementally computed after learning each task. We also empirically verify the rationality of
the approximate null space at each linear layer. We apply
our approach to training networks for continual learning
on benchmark datasets of CIFAR-100 and TinyImageNet,
and the results suggest that the proposed approach outperforms or matches the state-ot-the-art continual learning approaches.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved promising performance on various tasks in natural language processing, machine intelligence, etc., [5, 9, 47, 48, 51]. However, the ability of deep neural networks for continual learning is limited,
where the network is expected to continually learn knowledge from sequential tasks [15]. The main challenge for
continual learning is how to overcome catastrophic forgetting [11, 32, 42], which has drawn much attention recently.
In the context of continual learning, a network is trained

on a stream of tasks sequentially. The network is required
to have plasticity to learn new knowledge from current
task, and also stability to retain its performance on previous
tasks. However, it is challenging to simultaneously achieve
plasticity and stability in continual learning for neural networks, and catastrophic forgetting always occurs. This phenomenon is called plasticity-stability dilemma [33].
Recently, various strategies for continual learning have
been explored, including regularization-based, distillationbased, architecture-based, replay-based and algorithmbased strategies. The regularization-based strategy focuses
on penalizing the variations of parameters across tasks, such
as EWC [21]. The distillation-based strategy is inspired
by knowledge distillation [14], such as LwF [26]. The
architecture-based strategy modifies the architecture of network on different tasks, such as [1, 25]. The replay-based
strategy utilizes data from previous tasks or pseudo-data to
maintain the network performance on previous tasks, such
as [4, 36]. The algorithm-based strategy designs network
parameter updating rule to alleviate performance degradation on previous tasks, such as GEM [30], A-GEM [7] and
OWM [53].
In this paper, we focus on the setting of continual learning where the datasets from previous tasks are inaccessible.
We first propose two theoretical conditions respectively for
stability and plasticity of neural networks in continual learning. Based on them, we design a novel network training algorithm called Adam-NSCL for continual learning, which
forces the network parameter update to lie in the null space
of the input features of previous tasks at each network layer,
as shown in Fig. 1. The layer-wise null space of input features can be modeled as the null space of the uncentered
covariance of these features, which can be incrementally
computed after learning each task. Since it is too strict to
guarantee the existence of null space, we approximate the
null space of each layer by the subspace spanned by singular vectors corresponding to the smallest singular values
of the uncentered covariance of input features. We embed
this strategy into the Adam optimization algorithm by pro-

184

