DECOR-GAN: 3D Shape Detailization by Conditional Refinement
Zhiqin Chen 1

Vladimir G. Kim 2
Matthew Fisher 2
Noam Aigerman 2
Hao Zhang 1
Siddhartha Chaudhuri 2,3
2
3
1
Simon Fraser University
Adobe Research
IIT Bombay

Abstract
We introduce a deep generative network for 3D shape detailization, akin to stylization with the style being geometric
details. We address the challenge of creating large varieties
of high-resolution and detailed 3D geometry from a small
set of exemplars by treating the problem as that of geometric
detail transfer. Given a low-resolution coarse voxel shape,
our network refines it, via voxel upsampling, into a higherresolution shape enriched with geometric details. The output shape preserves the overall structure (or content) of the
input, while its detail generation is conditioned on an input “style code” corresponding to a detailed exemplar. Our
3D detailization via conditional refinement is realized by a
generative adversarial network, coined DECOR-GAN. The
network utilizes a 3D CNN generator for upsampling coarse
voxels and a 3D PatchGAN discriminator to enforce local
patches of the generated model to be similar to those in the
training detailed shapes. During testing, a style code is fed
into the generator to condition the refinement. We demonstrate that our method can refine a coarse shape into a variety of detailed shapes with different styles. The generated
results are evaluated in terms of content preservation, plausibility, and diversity. Comprehensive ablation studies are
conducted to validate our network designs. Code is available at https://github.com/czq142857/DECOR-GAN.

1. Introduction
Creating high-quality detailed 3D shapes for visual design, AR/VR, gaming, and simulation is a laborious process
that requires significant expertise. Recent advances in deep
generative neural networks have mainly focused on learning
low-dimensional [1, 8, 18, 46, 47] or structural representations [6, 26, 34, 43, 48] of 3D shapes from large collections
of stock models, striving for plausibility and diversity of
the generated shapes. While these techniques are effective
at creating coarse geometry and enable the user to model
rough objects, they lack the ability to represent, synthesize,
and provide control over the finer geometric details.
In this work, we pose the novel problem of 3D shape detailization, akin to stylization with the style defined by geo-

Figure 1: Our 3D detailization network, DECOR-GAN, refines a coarse shape (red, leftmost) into a variety of detailed
shapes, each conditioned on a style code characterizing an
exemplar detailed 3D shape (green, topmost).
metric details. We wish to address the challenge of creating
large varieties of high-resolution and detailed 3D geometries from only a small set of detailed 3D exemplars by treating the problem as that of geometric detail transfer. Specifically, given a low-resolution coarse content shape and a detailed style shape, we would like to synthesize a novel shape
that preserves the coarse structure of the content, while refining its geometric details to be similar to that of the style
shape; see Figure 1. Importantly, the detail transfer should
not rely on any annotations regarding shape details.
Our conditional detailization task cannot be accomplished by simply copying local patches from the style
shape onto the content shape, since (a) it is unknown which
patches represent details; (b) it may be difficult to integrate
copied patches into the content shape to ensure consistency.
To this end, we train a generative neural network that learns
detailization priors over a collection of high-resolution detailed exemplar shapes, enabling it to refine a coarse instance using a detail style code; see top of Figure 1.
To date, there has been little work on generating highresolution detailed 3D shapes. For example, surface-based
representations that synthesize details on meshes [21, 28]

15740

