DAP: Detection-Aware Pre-training with Weak Supervision
Yuanyi Zhong1 , Jianfeng Wang2 , Lijuan Wang2 , Jian Peng1 , Yu-Xiong Wang1 , Lei Zhang2
1

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign {yuanyiz2, jianpeng, yxw}@illinois.edu
2
Microsoft {jianfw, lijuanw, leizhang}@microsoft.com

Abstract

Step 2: Pseudo Box Generation

Step 3: Detector Pre-training
Backbone

This paper presents a detection-aware pre-training
(DAP) approach, which leverages only weakly-labeled
classification-style datasets (e.g., ImageNet) for pretraining, but is specifically tailored to benefit object detection tasks. In contrast to the widely used image
classification-based pre-training (e.g., on ImageNet), which
does not include any location-related training tasks, we
transform a classification dataset into a detection dataset
through a weakly supervised object localization method
based on Class Activation Maps to directly pre-train a detector, making the pre-trained model location-aware and
capable of predicting bounding boxes. We show that DAP
can outperform the traditional classification pre-training in
terms of both sample efficiency and convergence speed in
downstream detection tasks including VOC and COCO. In
particular, DAP boosts the detection accuracy by a large
margin when the number of examples in the downstream
task is small.

1. Introduction
Pre-training and fine-tuning have been a dominant
paradigm for deep learning-based object recognition in
computer vision [14, 10, 29, 17]. In such a paradigm, neural
network weights are typically pre-trained on a large dataset
(e.g., through ImageNet [8] classification training), and then
transferred to initialize models in downstream tasks. Pretraining can presumably help improve downstream tasks in
multiple ways. The low-level convolutional filters, such as
edge, shape, and texture filters, are already well-learned in
pre-training [42]. The pre-trained network is also capable
of providing meaningful semantic representations. For example, in the case of ImageNet classification pre-training,
since the number of categories is large (1000 classes), the
downstream object categories might be related to a subset
of the pre-training categories and can reuse the pre-trained
feature representations. Pre-training may also help the optimizer avoid bad local minima by providing a better initial-

Cat
Classification

Piano

FPN
Box regression

Clock
RPN losses

Weight init.
Step 1: Classifier Pre-training

Step 4: Downstream Detection Tasks
Backbone

Cat

Backbone

Classification

Piano

Clock

FPN
Box regression

Classification
RPN losses

Figure 1. The DAP workflow. It consists of 4 steps: (1) Classifier
pre-training on a weak supervision dataset, (2) Pseudo box generation by WSOL (e.g., through CAM as illustrated), (3) Detector
pre-training with the generated pseudo boxes, (4) Downstream detection tasks. The traditional classification pre-training and finetuning directly go from Step (1) to (4) at the bottom, while DAP
inserts the additional Steps (2) and (3) at the top. In both cases, the
pre-trained weights are used to initialize the downstream models.
DAP gives the model a chance to learn how to perform explicit
localization, and is able to pre-train detection-related components
while classification pre-training cannot, such as the FPN, RPN,
and box regressor in a Faster RCNN detector.

ization point than a completely random initialization [12].
Therefore, fine-tuning would only require a relatively small
number of gradient steps to achieve competitive accuracy.
However, the empirical gain for object detection brought
by classification pre-training is diminishing with successively larger pre-training datasets, ranging from ImageNet1M, ImageNet-5k [17], to ImageNet-21k (14M), JFT-300M
[36], and billion-scale Instagram images [25]. Meanwhile,
[16] shows that training from random initialization (i.e.,
from scratch) can work equally well with sufficiently large
data (COCO [24]) and a sufficiently long training time,
making the effect of classification pre-training questionable.
We conjecture that the diminishing gain of classifica-

4537

