PAUL: Procrustean Autoencoder for Unsupervised Lifting
Chaoyang Wang1
Simon Lucey1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Adelaide
{chaoyanw, slucey}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Recent success in casting Non-rigid Structure from Motion (NRSfM) as an unsupervised deep learning problem
has raised fundamental questions about what novelty in
NRSfM prior could the deep learning offer. In this paper we advocate for a 3D deep auto-encoder framework to
be used explicitly as the NRSfM prior. The framework is
unique as: (i) it learns the 3D auto-encoder weights solely
from 2D projected measurements, and (ii) it is Procrustean
in that it jointly resolves the unknown rigid pose for each
shape instance. We refer to this architecture as a Procustean Autoencoder for Unsupervised Lifting (PAUL), and
demonstrate state-of-the-art performance across a number
of benchmarks in comparison to recent innovations such as
Deep NRSfM [21] and C3PDO [32].

1. Introduction
Inferring non-rigid 3D structure from multiple unsynchronized 2D imaged observations is an ill-posed problem.
Non-Rigid Structure from Motion (NRSf M) methods approach the problem by introducing additional priors – of
particular note in this regards are low rank [10, 6, 3] and
union of subspaces [25, 44] methods.
Recently, NRSfM has seen improvement in performance
by recasting the problem as an unsupervised deep learning
problem [32, 8, 33]. These 2D-3D lifting networks have
inherent advantages over classical NRSf M as: (i) they are
more easily scalable to larger datasets, and (ii) they allow fast feed-forward prediction once trained. These improvement, however, can largely be attributed to the endto-end reframing of the learning problem rather than any
fundamental shift in the prior/constraints being enforced
within the NRSfM solution. For example, both Cha et
al. [8] and Park et al. [33] impose a classical low rank constraint on the recovered 3D shape. It is also well understood [10, 21, 44, 25] that such low rank priors have poor
performance when applied to more complex 3D shape variations.
The NRSfM field has started to explore new non-rigid

shape priors inspired by recent advances in deep learning.
Kong & Lucey [21] proposed the use of hierarchical sparsity to have a more expressive shape model while ensuring
the inversion problem remains well conditioned. Although
achieving significant progress in several benchmarks, the
approach is limited by the somewhat adhoc approximations
it employs so as to make the entire NRSfM solution realizable as a feed-forward lifting network. Such approximations hamper the interpretability of the method as the final
network is a substantial departure from the actually proposed objective. We further argue that this departure from
the true objective also comes at the cost of the overall effectiveness of the 2D-3D lifting solution.
In this paper we propose a prior that 3D shapes aligned
to a common reference frame are compressible with an undercomplete auto-encoder. This is advantageous over previous linear methods, because the deeper auto-encoder is
naturally capable of compressing more complicated nonrigid 3D shapes. What makes learning such an auto-encoder
challenging is: (i) it observes only 2D projected measurements of the non-rigid shape; (ii) it must automatically
resolve the unknown rigid transformation to align each
projected shape instance. We refer to our solution as a
Procustean Autoencoder for Unsupervised Lifting (PAUL).
PAUL is considered unsupervised as it has to handle unknown depth, shape pose, and occlusions. Unlike Deep
NRSfM [21], the optimization process of PAUL does not
have to be realizable as a feed-forward network – allowing for a solution that stays tightly coupled to the proposed
mathematical objective.
We also explore other alternative deep shape priors such
as: decoder only and decoder + low-rank. A somewhat similar approach is recently explored by Sidhu et al. [34] for
dense NRSf M. Our empirical results demonstrate the fundamental importance of the auto-encoder architecture for
2D-3D lifting.
Contributions: We make the following contributions:
• We present an optimization objective for joint learning
the 2D-3D lifting network and the Procrustean autoencoder solely from 2D projected measurements.
1434

