MOS: Towards Scaling Out-of-distribution Detection for Large Semantic Space
Rui Huang
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Yixuan Li
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison

huangrui@cs.wisc.edu

sharonli@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Detecting out-of-distribution (OOD) inputs is a central
challenge for safely deploying machine learning models in
the real world. Existing solutions are mainly driven by
small datasets, with low resolution and very few class labels (e.g., CIFAR). As a result, OOD detection for largescale image classification tasks remains largely unexplored.
In this paper, we bridge this critical gap by proposing a
group-based OOD detection framework, along with a novel
OOD scoring function termed MOS. Our key idea is to
decompose the large semantic space into smaller groups
with similar concepts, which allows simplifying the decision boundaries between in- vs. out-of-distribution data for
effective OOD detection. Our method scales substantially
better for high-dimensional class space than previous approaches. We evaluate models trained on ImageNet against
four carefully curated OOD datasets, spanning diverse semantics. MOS establishes state-of-the-art performance, reducing the average FPR95 by 14.33% while achieving 6x
speedup in inference compared to the previous best method.

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection has become a central challenge in safely deploying machine learning models in the open world, where the test data may be distributionally different from the training data. A plethora of
literature has emerged in addressing the problem of OOD
detection [3, 14, 16, 24, 27, 29, 35, 4, 20, 31]. However, existing solutions are mainly driven by small, low-resolution
datasets such as CIFAR [23] and MNIST [25]. Deployed
systems like autonomous vehicles often operate on images
that have far greater resolution and perceive environments
with far more categories. As a result, a critical research
gap exists in developing and evaluating OOD detection algorithms for large-scale image classification tasks.
While one may be eager to conclude that solutions for
small datasets should transfer to a large-scale setting, we
argue that this is far from the truth. The main challenges
posed in OOD detection stem from the fact that it is impos-

sible to comprehensively define and anticipate anomalous
data in advance, resulting in a large space of uncertainty.
As the number of semantic classes increases, the plethora of
ways that OOD data may occur increases exponentially. For
example, our analysis reveals that the average false positive
rate (at 95% true positive rate) of a common baseline [16]
would rise from 17.34% to 76.94% as the number of classes
increases from 50 to 1,000 on ImageNet-1k [8]. Very few
works have studied OOD detection in the large-scale setting, with limited evaluations and effectiveness [41, 15].
This begs the following question: how can we design an
OOD detection algorithm that scales effectively for classification with large semantic space?
Motivated by this, we take an important step to bridge
this gap and propose a group-based OOD detection framework that is effective for large-scale image classification.
Our key idea is to decompose the large semantic space into
smaller groups with similar concepts, which allows simplifying the decision boundary and reducing the uncertainty
space between in- vs. out-of-distribution data. Intuitively,
for OOD detection, it is simpler to estimate whether an image belongs to one of the coarser-level semantic groups than
to estimate whether an image belongs to one of the finergrained classes. For example, consider a model tasked with
classifying 200 categories of plantations and another 200
categories of marine animals. A truck image can be easily classified as OOD data since it does not resemble either
the plantation group or the marine animal group.
Formally, our proposed method leverages group softmax and derives a novel OOD scoring function. Specifically, the group softmax computes probability distributions
within each semantic group. A key component is to utilize a category others in each group, which measures the
probabilistic score for an image to be OOD with respect
to the group. Our proposed OOD scoring function, Minimum Others Score (MOS), exploits the information carried by the others category. As illustrated in Figure 1,
MOS is higher for OOD inputs as they will be mapped to
others with high confidence in all groups, and is lower
for in-distribution inputs.

8710

