Transferable Semantic Augmentation for Domain Adaptation
∗

Shuang Li1 Mixue Xie1 Kaixiong Gong1 Chi Harold Liu1 Yulin Wang2 Wei Li3
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Tsinghua University 3 Inceptio Tech.
shuangli@bit.edu.cn

michellexie102@gmail.com

kxgong@bit.edu.cn

wang-yl19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Domain adaptation has been widely explored by transferring the knowledge from a label-rich source domain to a
related but unlabeled target domain. Most existing domain
adaptation algorithms attend to adapting feature representations across two domains with the guidance of a shared
source-supervised classifier. However, such classifier limits
the generalization ability towards unlabeled target recognition. To remedy this, we propose a Transferable Semantic Augmentation (TSA) approach to enhance the classifier
adaptation ability through implicitly generating source features towards target semantics. Specifically, TSA is inspired
by the fact that deep feature transformation towards a certain direction can be represented as meaningful semantic
altering in the original input space. Thus, source features
can be augmented to effectively equip with target semantics
to train a more transferable classifier. To achieve this, for
each class, we first use the inter-domain feature mean difference and target intra-class feature covariance to construct a
multivariate normal distribution. Then we augment source
features with random directions sampled from the distribution class-wisely. Interestingly, such source augmentation
is implicitly implemented through an expected transferable
cross-entropy loss over the augmented source distribution,
where an upper bound of the expected loss is derived and
minimized, introducing negligible computational overhead.
As a light-weight and general technique, TSA can be easily
plugged into various domain adaptation methods, bringing
remarkable improvements. Comprehensive experiments on
cross-domain benchmarks validate the efficacy of TSA.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success on various vision tasks, including image recognition [16, 12, 14]
and semantic segmentation [55, 49]. However, the recent
success of deep learning methods heavily relies on massive
∗ Corresponding author.

liweimcc@gmail.com

Source-only

Abstract

liuchi02@gmail.com

Source-only+TSA

Source

Target

DA

DA+TSA

Augmented Source

Figure 1. Overview of TSA, which relaxes the assumption that
source and target domains share the same classifier. For both traditional deep learning and DA methods, TSA could augment source
features towards target semantics to successfully adapt the final
classifier from source domain to target domain.

labeled data. In practice, collecting abundant annotated data
is expensive [30, 6, 54, 33]. Meanwhile, each domain has
its own specific exploratory factors, namely semantics, e.g.,
the illuminations, colors, visual angles or backgrounds, resulting in the domain shift [28]. Hence, traditional deep
models trained on a large dataset usually show poor generalizations on a new domain due to the domain shift issues
[24, 10]. To remedy this, one appealing alternative is domain adaptation (DA), which strives to leverage the knowledge of a label-rich source domain to assist the learning in
a related but unlabeled target domain [24, 10].
Prior deep DA methods can be roughly categorized as
1) statistical discrepancy minimization based methods [27,
20, 51], which leverage statistical regularizations to explicitly mitigate the cross-domain distribution discrepancy; and
2) adversarial learning based methods [21, 25, 10], which
strive to learn domain-invariant representations across two
domains via adversarial manners.
Indeed, these DA methods have admittedly yielded
promising results, but most of them assume a shared classifier with domain-invariant representations derived. Rare attention has been paid to explicitly enhancing the adaptation
ability of the source-supervised classifier, which is also fundamental to DA problems as shown in Fig. 1. To achieve
classifier adaptation, Long et al. [26] introduce classifier
residual learning to explicitly model the classifier difference across domains. SymNets [52] constructs three classifiers to facilitate joint distribution alignment. However, they

11516

