Jo-SRC: A Contrastive Approach for Combating Noisy Labels
Yazhou Yao1∗, Zeren Sun1,∗†, Chuanyi Zhang1 , Fumin Shen2 , Qi Wu3 , Jian Zhang4 , Zhenmin Tang1
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China
3
The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, Australia
4
University of Technology Sydney, Sydney, Australia

Abstract

1. Introduction
DNNs have recently lead to tremendous progress in various computer vision tasks [14, 28, 25, 40, 21]. These successes largely attribute to large-scale datasets with reliable
annotations (e.g., ImageNet [4]). However, collecting wellannotated datasets is extremely labor-intensive and timeconsuming, especially in domains where expert knowledge
is required (e.g., fine-grained categorization [37, 36]). The
high cost of acquiring large-scale well-labeled data poses a
bottleneck in employing DNNs in real-world scenarios.
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

mini-batch j … mini-batch i
mini-batch j … mini-batch i

Due to the memorization effect in Deep Neural Networks
(DNNs), training with noisy labels usually results in inferior model performance. Existing state-of-the-art methods primarily adopt a sample selection strategy, which selects small-loss samples for subsequent training. However,
prior literature tends to perform sample selection within
each mini-batch, neglecting the imbalance of noise ratios
in different mini-batches. Moreover, valuable knowledge
within high-loss samples is wasted. To this end, we propose a noise-robust approach named Jo-SRC (Joint Sample
Selection and Model Regularization based on Consistency).
Specifically, we train the network in a contrastive learning
manner. Predictions from two different views of each sample
are used to estimate its “likelihood” of being clean or outof-distribution. Furthermore, we propose a joint loss to advance the model generalization performance by introducing
consistency regularization. Extensive experiments have validated the superiority of our approach over existing stateof-the-art methods. The source code and models have been
made available at https : / / github . com / NUST Machine- Intelligence- Laboratory/Jo- SRC.

fixed rate r
Clean samples

Unclean samples

……

……

Clean samples

Unclean samples

Clean samples

ID samples

……
Clean samples

OOD samples

……
ID samples

OOD samples

Figure 1. Existing small-loss based sample selection methods
(upper) tend to regard a human-defined proportion of samples
within each mini-batch as clean ones. They ignore the fluctuation of noise ratios in different mini-batches. On the contrary,
our proposed method (bottom) selects clean samples in a global
manner. Moreover, in-distribution (ID) noisy samples and out-ofdistribution (OOD) ones are also selected and leveraged for enhancing the model generalization performance.

As an alternative, employing web images to train DNNs
has received increasing attention recently [20, 41, 42, 34,
45, 44, 51, 52, 32]. Unfortunately, whereas web images
are cheaper and easier to obtain via image search engines
[5, 29, 46, 43], they usually yield inevitable noisy labels due
to the error-prone automatic tagging system or non-expert
annotations [23, 32, 45, 47]. A recent study has suggested
that samples with noisy labels would be unavoidably overfitted by DNNs and consequently cause performance degradation [15, 50].
To alleviate this issue, many methods have been proposed for learning with noisy labels. Early approaches
primarily attempt to correct losses during training. Some
methods correct losses by introducing a noise transition matrix [31, 24, 6, 11]. However, estimating the noise transition

5192

