Posterior Promoted GAN with Distribution Discriminator for Unsupervised
Image Synthesis
Xianchao Zhang, Ziyang Cheng, Xiaotong Zhang∗ , Han Liu
School of Software, Dalian University of Technology
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province
xczhang@dlut.edu.cn, chengziyang2@mail.dlut.edu.cn
zxt.dut@hotmail.com, liu.han.dut@gmail.com

Abstract
Sufficient real information in generator is a critical point
for the generation ability of GAN. However, GAN and its
variants suffer from lack of this point, resulting in brittle training processes. In this paper, we propose a novel
variant of GAN, Posterior Promoted GAN (P2 GAN), which
promotes generator with the real information in the posterior distribution produced by discriminator. In our framework, different from other variants of GAN, the discriminator maps images to a multivariate Gaussian distribution
and extracts real information. The generator employs the
real information by AdaIN and a latent code regularizer.
Besides, reparameterization trick and pretraining is applied
to guarantee a stable training process in practice. The convergence of P2 GAN is theoretically proved. Experimental
results on typical high-dimensional multi-modal datasets
demonstrate that P2 GAN has achieved comparable results
with the state-of-the-art variants of GAN on unsupervised
image synthesis.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [13] has been
widely developed since it was proposed, and its variants
have made remarkable progresses in the field of image
synthesis. Sufficient real information in generator is the
key point for such models. The only real information
contributing to generator in original GAN is the gradient
transferred from discriminator, which is indirect and jejune for generator, leading to brittle training. Some supervised variants of GAN [32, 34, 8, 26, 12] use the attributes like labels in a direct and strong way with some constraints on the attributes, which supplies sufficient real information to generator. For unsupervised variants of GAN,
there are two major ways to improve the real information
∗ Corresponding author.

in generator. One approach is to provide more refined
gradient from discriminator by introducing new loss functions [15, 3, 31, 11, 46, 41]. But the information from gradient is still indirect and frangible, which cannot supply a
continuous support for generator. The other approach is
to enrich the real information by adding priors into input
noise [4, 6, 10, 40, 47, 25, 44, 9, 28]. Nevertheless, the real
information in prior is only added into input noise, which
may be decayed by stacking convolutional layers gradually.
To tackle the above lack of real information issue, in
this paper, we propose a novel framework of GAN called
Posterior Promoted GAN (P2 GAN). Firstly, unlike traditional discriminator that cannot provide sufficient real information, P2 GAN learns abundant real information in the
posterior distribution by discriminator, and applies the information to generator in a more straight and robust way.
In specific, our discriminator maps images to a multivariate Gaussian distribution, and matches this distribution with
two different given prior distributions for distinguishing.
The discriminator structure is inspired by the encoder of
Variational Autoencoder (VAE) [23]. Secondly, unlike previous works [4, 6, 10, 40, 47, 25, 44, 9, 28] which apply
a prior distribution to the input noise, our generator is promoted by introducing the external real information into each
convolutional layer via Adaptive Instance Normalization
(AdaIN) [18] and a latent code regularizer. Directly affecting the features in convolutional layers by AdaIN is more
powerful than only changing the prior of the input noise.
Thirdly, we change the losses of Least Squares Generative
Adversarial Network (LSGAN) [31] to a distribution version, and provide theoretical guarantees for its convergence.
Besides, we employ reparameterization trick for reasonably
calculating the losses at the implementation level and a pretraining step for initialization.
Our contributions are summarized as follows. First, we
propose a novel GAN framework called P2 GAN. The discriminator outputs a posterior distribution for distinguish-

6519

