Dynamic Transfer for Multi-Source Domain Adaptation
Yunsheng Li1 , Lu Yuan2 , Yinpeng Chen2 , Pei Wang1 , Nuno Vasconcelos1
1
UC San Diego, 2 Microsoft
{yul554,pew062,nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu, {luyuan,yiche}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Recent works of multi-source domain adaptation focus
on learning a domain-agnostic model, of which the parameters are static. However, such a static model is difficult to
handle conflicts across multiple domains, and suffers from
a performance degradation in both source domains and target domain. In this paper, we present dynamic transfer to
address domain conflicts, where the model parameters are
adapted to samples. The key insight is that adapting model
across domains is achieved via adapting model across samples. Thus, it breaks down source domain barriers and turns
multi-source domains into a single-source domain. This
also simplifies the alignment between source and target domains, as it only requires the target domain to be aligned
with any part of the union of source domains. Furthermore, we find dynamic transfer can be simply modeled by
aggregating residual matrices and a static convolution matrix. Experimental results show that, without using domain
labels, our dynamic transfer outperforms the state-of-theart method by more than 3% on the large multi-source domain adaptation datasets – DomainNet. Source code is at
https://github.com/liyunsheng13/DRT.

1. Introduction
Multi-source domain adaptation addresses the adaptation
from multiple source domains to a target domain. It is challenging because a clear domain discrepancy exists not only
between source and target domains, but also among multiple source domains (see exemplar images in Figure 2). This
suggests that successful adaptation requires significant elasticity of the model to adapt. A nature way to achieve this
elasticity is to make model dynamic i.e. the mapping implemented by the model should vary with the input sample.
This hypothesis has not been explored by existing work,
e.g. [22, 28], which instead aims to learn a domain agnostic
model fθc , of static parameters θc , that works well for all
source {S1 , S2 , ..., SN } and target T domains. We refer to
this approach as static transfer. As illustrated in Figure 1
(a), the model implements a fixed mapping across all do-

Model

Samples from different domains

𝒮#

𝒮"

𝒮#

𝒮"
𝑓𝜽(&)
𝑓𝜽(&)

𝑓𝜽!

𝒮$

𝒯

𝒮$

𝒯
𝑓𝜽(&)

𝑓𝜽(&)

𝒆𝜃
𝒟

𝒙

𝑓(!

𝑦 = 𝑓(! (𝒙)

Model parameter flow
(a) Static Transfer

𝒙

𝑓 𝒆𝒟
((𝒙)

𝑦 = 𝑓((𝒙)(𝒙)

Data flow
(b) Dynamic Transfer

Figure 1: Static Transfer vs. Dynamic Transfer. (a)
‘Static Transfer’ implements domain adaptation with a
static model fθc , which has fixed parameters θc to average
domain conflict. (b) ‘Dynamic Transfer’ (fθ(x) ) adapts the
model parameters θ(x) according to samples, which generates a different model per sample and turns multi-source
domain adaptation into single-source domain adaptation.
mains. However, learning a domain agnostic model is difficult, since different domains can give rise to very different
image distributions. When forcing a model to be domain
agnostic, it essentially averages the domain conflict. Thus
the performance drops on each source domain. This is validated by our preliminary study. As shown in Figure 2, compared to the optimal model per domain, the static transfer
model consistently degrades in each source domain.
In this paper, we propose dynamic transfer to address
this issue. As shown in Figure 1(b), it contains a parameter predictor that changes the model parameters on a persample basis, i.e. implements mapping fθ(x) . It has the
advantage of not requiring the definition of domains or the
collection of domain labels. In fact, it unifies the problems of single-source and multi-source domain adaptation.
By breaking down source domain barriers, it turns multiple

10998

