Robust and Accurate Object Detection via Adversarial Learning
Xiangning Chen1,2 * Cihang Xie3 Mingxing Tan1 Li Zhang1 Cho-Jui Hsieh2 Boqing Gong1
1

Google

2

UCLA

3

UCSC

Abstract
Data augmentation has become a de facto component
for training high-performance deep image classifiers, but
its potential is under-explored for object detection. Noting that most state-of-the-art object detectors benefit from
fine-tuning a pre-trained classifier, we first study how the
classifiers’ gains from various data augmentations transfer to object detection. The results are discouraging; the
gains diminish after fine-tuning in terms of either accuracy
or robustness. This work instead augments the fine-tuning
stage for object detectors by exploring adversarial examples, which can be viewed as a model-dependent data augmentation. Our method dynamically selects the stronger
adversarial images sourced from a detector’s classification
and localization branches and evolves with the detector to
ensure the augmentation policy stays current and relevant.
This model-dependent augmentation generalizes to different
object detectors better than AutoAugment, a model-agnostic
augmentation policy searched based on one particular detector. Our approach boosts the performance of state-ofthe-art EfficientDets by +1.1 mAP on the COCO object detection benchmark. It also improves the detectors’ robustness against natural distortions by +3.8 mAP and against
domain shift by +1.3 mAP.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are powerful tools for visual representation learning. As the training data grows in
size and diversity, DNNs keep up the pace and achieve unprecedented performance on a wide range of benchmarked
tasks [13, 31, 30, 24, 12, 29]. The learned representations also demonstrate good transferability to downstream
tasks for which there is often a small amount of curated
data. This pre-training and then fine-tuning paradigm is
one of the crucial enablers for state-of-the-art object detectors [32, 11, 30, 20, 22]. In this paper, we aim to enhance this learning paradigm for training not only accurate
but also robust object detectors.
* Work done during an internship at Google.

Figure 1. Top: Det-AdvProp improves object detectors’ accuracy
on clean images. Our model correctly detects some objects (e.g.,
“spoon” and “knife”) missed by the vanilla detector trained without Det-AdvProp. Middle: Det-AdvProp improves the detectors’
robustness against natural corruption. The vanilla detector misses
“bowl” and “oven” and produces a false positive for “person” after the image is corrupted by motion blur. Bottom: Det-AdvProp
improves robustness against cross-dataset domain shift. We can
successfully detect the “potted plants” behind the “cat” from an
image out of the dataset for training. (best viewed in color).

We first revisit the role of pre-training in object detection, given He et al.’s study [11] about vanilla ImageNet [5]
pre-training and yet the new advances in data-augmented
ImageNet pre-training [36, 34]. We examine both the accuracy and robustness of the detectors. In the study with
the top-performing EfficientDet detectors [33], we find that
the performance gains for ImageNet classification, brought

16622

