Bottom-Up Shift and Reasoning for Referring Image Segmentation
Sibei Yang1∗†

Meng Xia2∗
Guanbin Li2
Hong-Yu Zhou3
1
2
ShanghaiTech University
Sun Yat-sen University
3
4
The University of Hong Kong
Deepwise AI Lab

Yizhou Yu3,4†

Abstract
Referring image segmentation aims to segment the referent that is the corresponding object or stuff referred by
a natural language expression in an image. Its main challenge lies in how to effectively and efficiently differentiate
between the referent and other objects of the same category
as the referent. In this paper, we tackle the challenge by
jointly performing compositional visual reasoning and accurate segmentation in a single stage via the proposed novel
Bottom-Up Shift (BUS) and Bidirectional Attentive Refinement (BIAR) modules. Specifically, BUS progressively locates the referent along hierarchical reasoning steps implied by the expression. At each step, it locates the corresponding visual region by disambiguating between similar
regions, where the disambiguation bases on the relationships between regions. By the explainable visual reasoning,
BUS explicitly aligns linguistic components with visual regions so that it can identify all the mentioned entities in
the expression. BIAR fuses multi-level features via a twoway attentive message passing, which captures the visual
details relevant to the referent to refine segmentation results. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed
method consisting of BUS and BIAR modules, can not only
consistently surpass all existing state-of-the-art algorithms
across common benchmark datasets but also visualize interpretable reasoning steps for stepwise segmentation. Code is
available at https://github.com/incredibleXM/BUSNet.

1. Introduction
The intersection of vision and language has attracted
growing interests in academia, where many methods [1, 3,
25] have been proposed to promote a better understanding
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding authors.
This work was partially supported
by National Key Research and Development Program of China
(No.2020YFC2003902), National Natural Science Foundation of China
(No.61976250 and No.U1811463), and the Guangdong Basic and Applied
Basic Research Foundation (No.2020B1515020048).

Figure 1. The Bottom-Up Shift (BUS) for referring image segmentation. BUS performs stepwise visual reasoning from the entity
“broccolis” to “female” to “person”. At each step, it first identifies the objects corresponding to the entity and then differentiates
between the identified objects by the relational reasoning.

of these two modalities. Existing vision-and-language approaches can be roughly divided into two types based on
their designing principles, i.e., multimodal fusion and representation learning, and language-conditioned visual reasoning. In contrast to the former which focuses more on
how to learn joint representations from multiple modalities,
the latter reasoning based approaches usually are not only
more effective in complex scenes but also can provide an
explainable decision-making process.
However, as one of the most fundamental vision-andlanguage tasks, Referring Image Segmentation (RIS) [8]
has not been well addressed in previous research works
from the second perspective (i.e., reasoning). Existing visual reasoning based methods [19, 46] for RIS mainly resort to a two-stage pipeline, where they first detect and
segment the object instances and then perform reasoning
over feature vectors of both object instances and their relationships. However, the two-stage solution inevitably faces
the problems of slow inference speed and has poor generalization [23]. What is worse, the relational and spatial priors in images that are essential for visual reasoning
are lost when conducting reasoning over feature vectors of
those object instances. On the other hand, most existing
works [9, 10, 15] on RIS mainly focus on learning multimodal contextual representations in a single stage. Generally, one-stage RIS methods have fast inference speed but
are inferior in handling complex visual scenes and expres-

11266

