Multiresolution Knowledge Distillation for Anomaly Detection
Mohammadreza Salehi, Niousha Sadjadi∗ , Soroosh Baselizadeh∗ , Mohammad H. Rohban, Hamid R. Rabiee
Department of Computer Engineering, Sharif University of Technology
(smrsalehi, nsadjadi, baselizadeh)@ce.sharif.edu, (rohban, rabiee)@sharif.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised representation learning has proved to be
a critical component of anomaly detection/localization in
images. The challenges to learn such a representation are
two-fold. Firstly, the sample size is not often large enough
to learn a rich generalizable representation through conventional techniques. Secondly, while only normal samples
are available at training, the learned features should be discriminative of normal and anomalous samples. Here, we
propose to use the “distillation” of features at various layers of an expert network, which is pre-trained on ImageNet,
into a simpler cloner network to tackle both issues. We detect and localize anomalies using the discrepancy between
the expert and cloner networks’ intermediate activation values given an input sample. We show that considering multiple intermediate hints in distillation leads to better exploitation of the expert’s knowledge and a more distinctive
discrepancy between the two networks, compared to utilizing only the last layer activation values. Notably, previous
methods either fail in precise anomaly localization or need
expensive region-based training. In contrast, with no need
for any special or intensive training procedure, we incorporate interpretability algorithms in our novel framework to
localize anomalous regions. Despite the striking difference
between some test datasets and ImageNet, we achieve competitive or significantly superior results compared to SOTA
on MNIST, F-MNIST, CIFAR-10, MVTecAD, Retinal-OCT,
and two other medical datasets on both anomaly detection
and localization.

1. Introduction
Anomaly detection (AD) aims for recognizing test-time
inputs that look abnormal or novel to the model according
to previously seen normal samples during training. AD has
been a vital demanding task in computer vision with various
applications, like in industrial image-based product quality
control [27, 7], or health monitoring processes [26]. These
∗ Denotes equal contribution.

Figure 1: Our precise heatmaps are localizing anomalous
features in MVTecAD (top two rows) and normal features
in MNIST and CIFAR-10 (two bottom rows).
tasks also require pixel-precise localization of anomalous
regions, called defects. This is pivotal for comprehending the dynamics of monitored procedures, triggering the
apt antidotes, and providing pertinent data for downstream
models in industrial settings.
Traditionally, the AD problem has been approached in a
one-class setting, where anomalies represent a broadly different class from normal samples. Recently, considering
subtle anomalies has attracted attention. This new setting
further necessitates precise anomaly localization. However,
performing excellently in both settings on various datasets
is highly appreciated but is not fully achieved.
Due to the unsupervised nature of the AD problem and
the restricted data access, only having anomaly-free data in
training, the majority of AD methods [36, 31, 40, 18, 34]
model the normal data abstraction by extracting semantically meaningful latent features. These methods perform

14902

