3D Video Stabilization with Depth Estimation by CNN-based Optimization
Yao-Chih Lee1

Kuan-Wei Tseng2
Chu-Song Chen2
1
Academia Sinica, Taiwan

1

Yu-Ta Chen2
Chien-Cheng Chen2
Yi-Ping Hung2
2
National Taiwan University

yclee1231@iis.sinica.edu.tw, 2 {kwtseng,r07922120,r09944015,chusong,hung}@csie.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Video stabilization is an essential component of visual
quality enhancement. Early methods rely on feature tracking to recover either 2D or 3D frame motion, which suffer
from the robustness of local feature extraction and tracking in shaky videos. Recently, learning-based methods seek
to find frame transformations with high-level information
via deep neural networks to overcome the robustness issue
of feature tracking. Nevertheless, to our best knowledge,
no learning-based methods leverage 3D cues for the transformation inference yet; hence they would lead to artifacts
on complex scene-depth scenarios. In this paper, we propose Deep3D Stabilizer, a novel 3D depth-based learning
method for video stabilization. We take advantage of the
recent self-supervised framework on jointly learning depth
and camera ego-motion estimation on raw videos. Our approach requires no data for pre-training but stabilizes the
input video via 3D reconstruction directly. The rectification stage incorporates the 3D scene depth and camera motion to smooth the camera trajectory and synthesize the stabilized video. Unlike most one-size-fits-all learning-based
methods, our smoothing algorithm allows users to manipulate the stability of a video efficiently. Experimental results
on challenging benchmarks show that the proposed solution
consistently outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on almost all motion categories.

1. Introduction
Video stabilization removes the undesired shaky motion
and preserves the primary motion from a video, which is
a critical module to video acquisition and pre-processing.
Video stabilization methods often estimate the motion between frames at first, and then the inter-frame motion estimated can be used in a smoothing algorithm for stabilizing
the input video. Traditional video stabilization methods can
be categorized into two types according to the dimensionality of the motion model. The 2D-motion methods model the
tracked features with 2D transformations (e.g. affinity, ho-

mography). Earlier 2D-based approaches (such as [15, 10])
adopt full-frame 2D transformations and show promising
stabilization qualities. Nonetheless, the full-frame 2D motion would suffer from spatially variant motion (e.g. parallax effect) caused by complex 3D scene structures. Some
2D-based methods [21, 19] divide the frame into grids and
extract the 2D local motion of each grid to handle parallax effect. Despite the local motion models show better results than full-frame models, the local motion methods are
still challenging since it is difficult to coordinate the gridwise transformations to avoid the local distortions thus introduced. The 3D approaches [16, 14, 8, 20] acquire 3D information to model the frame motion in 3D space by using
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) or additional sensors such as
inertial measurement unit (IMU) and depth sensors. Hence,
the 3D approach often requires expensive costs but shows
superior results in contrast to the 2D approach.
The performance of earlier 2D and 3D approaches often
rely on successful feature tracking for motion estimation.
Yet it is challenging to obtain robust and long feature tracks,
particularly from shaky videos. This restricts the performance of early approaches. The convolution neural network (CNN)-based video stabilization methods [29, 31, 35]
learn to extract the frame motion in CNN parameter space
and infer the stabilization transformation directly. Some
learning-based methods train the networks on synchronized
stable/unstable video pairs [29] to find frame transformations from ground-truth stable video directly. However, the
application would be limited by the generalization capability as it is demanding to collect all types of unsteady videos
for training in advance. On the other hand, these prior studies are based on 2D transformation and thus they still suffer
from parallax effect and introduce distortions.
We introduce a novel 3D-based learning method for
video stabilization. To the best of our knowledge, our proposed Deep3D Stabilizer is the first learning method that
handles the stabilization process with learned 3D information. The pipeline of our method is provided in Figure 1.
The CNNs jointly learn the scene depth and 3D camera motion for the input video during test time in an optimization

10621

