Adaptive Consistency Regularization for Semi-Supervised Transfer Learning
Abulikemu Abuduweili1,2 ,* Xingjian Li1,3∗ , Humphrey Shi2† , Cheng-Zhong Xu3 , Dejing Dou1†
1
3

Big Data Lab, Baidu Research, 2 SHI Lab, University of Oregon,

State Key Lab of IOTSC, Department of Computer Science, University of Macau

{v abuduweili,lixingjian,doudejing}@baidu.com, hshi3@uoregon.edu, czxu@um.edu.mo

Abstract
While recent studies on semi-supervised learning have
shown remarkable progress in leveraging both labeled and
unlabeled data, most of them presume a basic setting of the
model is randomly initialized. In this work, we consider
semi-supervised learning and transfer learning jointly,
leading to a more practical and competitive paradigm that
can utilize both powerful pre-trained models from source
domain as well as labeled/unlabeled data in the target domain. To better exploit the value of both pre-trained weights
and unlabeled target examples, we introduce adaptive consistency regularization that consists of two complementary
components: Adaptive Knowledge Consistency (AKC) on
the examples between the source and target model, and
Adaptive Representation Consistency (ARC) on the target
model between labeled and unlabeled examples. Examples
involved in the consistency regularization are adaptively
selected according to their potential contributions to the
target task. We conduct extensive experiments on popular
benchmarks including CIFAR-10, CUB-200, and MURA, by
fine-tuning the ImageNet pre-trained ResNet-50 model. Results show that our proposed adaptive consistency regularization outperforms state-of-the-art semi-supervised learning techniques such as Pseudo Label, Mean Teacher, and
FixMatch. Moreover, our algorithm is orthogonal to
existing methods and thus able to gain additional improvements on top of MixMatch and FixMatch. Our
code is available at https://github.com/Walleclipse/SemiSupervised-Transfer-Learning-Paddle.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved great success in supervised learning tasks especially in computer vision [21,
15]. Yet, this heavily relies on a large amount of labeled
data. As data annotation is usually expensive and time* Equal contributions and by alphabetical order. † Correspondence.

consuming, Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL), which pursues the goal of effectively leveraging both labeled and
unlabeled data, is widely studied. Recent state-of-the-art
methods can be roughly summarized in three categories,
which are consistency based regularization [22, 42], entropy
minimization [12] and pseudo label [23].
While most works focus on the general setting that training a randomly initialized model from scratch, we consider
a more realistic setting utilizing the powerful pre-trained
model which is adequately fit on large-scale datasets for
general purposes such as ImageNet [6] and Places365 [54].
These pre-trained models are empirically proven to have excellent transferability on various down-streaming tasks [49]
and can significantly improve the generalization capacity
of target tasks especially when the sample size is relatively
small. Moreover, they are free to fetch and can be efficiently
fine-tuned to adapt to new tasks. A recent study [55] points
out that the benefit of semi-supervised learning sometimes
may be marginal when fine-tuning a pre-trained model on
the target dataset. However, the investigation of a systematic solution on DNN-based semi-supervised transfer learning has rarely been delved into.
In this work, we propose a semi-supervised transfer
learning framework beyond a simple combination of these
two kinds of algorithms. We extend the effective idea of
consistency regularization in semi-supervised learning to
adapt to inductive transfer learning, where the pre-trained
weight learned by the source task is available. Specifically, our method is composed of two essential components:
(1) Adaptive Knowledge Consistency (AKC) on the examples between the source and target model. We utilize target examples to transfer knowledge from the pre-trained
model and help generalize the target model inspired by recent studies about knowledge distillation [51] and transfer
learning [24]. To cope with the risk of negative transfer [43]
caused by the discrepancy between the source and target
task, we use the knowledge adaptive sample importance for
proper cross-task knowledge consistency regularization. Intuitively, we are inclined to select examples lying in the

6923

