Lesion-Aware Transformers for Diabetic Retinopathy Grading
Rui Sun1∗, Yihao Li1∗ , Tianzhu Zhang1†, Zhendong Mao1 , Feng Wu1 , Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
{issunrui, luoheliyihao}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {tzzhang, zdmao, fengwu, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Haemorrhage

Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is the leading cause of permanent blindness in the working-age population. And automatic DR diagnosis can assist ophthalmologists to design
tailored treatments for patients, including DR grading and
lesion discovery. However, most of existing methods treat
DR grading and lesion discovery as two independent tasks,
which require lesion annotations as a learning guidance
and limits the actual deployment. To alleviate this problem,
we propose a novel lesion-aware transformer (LAT) for DR
grading and lesion discovery jointly in a unified deep model
via an encoder-decoder structure including a pixel relation
based encoder and a lesion filter based decoder. The proposed LAT enjoys several merits. First, to the best of our
knowledge, this is the first work to formulate lesion discovery as a weakly supervised lesion localization problem via
a transformer decoder. Second, to learn lesion filters well
with only image-level labels, we design two effective mechanisms including lesion region importance and lesion region
diversity for identifying diverse lesion regions. Extensive
experimental results on three challenging benchmarks including Messidor-1, Messidor-2 and EyePACS demonstrate
that the proposed LAT performs favorably against state-ofthe-art DR grading and lesion discovery methods.

1. Introduction
Diabetic retinopathy (DR) is one of the most severe complications of blood vessel damage triggered by diabetes,
which can lead to vision impairment and even irreversible
blindness [13, 6, 25]. Usually, as shown in Figure 1 (a),
ophthalmologists identify DR severity based on the type
and number of associated lesion symptoms, such as microaneurysms, haemorrhages, soft exudates and hard exudates
[46, 22]. According to the international protocol [17, 35],
the severity of DR can be divided into five grades, including
normal, mild, moderate, severe non-proliferative, and proliferative. These five grades can also be fused into binary
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Exudate

Referable DR

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: (a) A sample fundus image with different lesions
is annotated. The arrows indicate the main DR-related lesions, among which the yellow, red and blue arrows represent haemorrhages, microaneurysms and exudates, respectively. (b) The lesion regions marked by the green bounding
box in (a) are zoomed in, and we can observe that pixel appearances of the same lesion region tend to be similar. (c)
Our model can achieve DR grading and lesion discovery
jointly by using only the severity level labels.
classification, i.e. no DR (normal) versus DR (abnormal), or
non-referable (normal and mild DR) versus referable (moderate and worse DR) [17, 34, 41].
Recently, with the development of deep learning, rapid
and automatic DR diagnostic models have been proposed
based on pixel-level supervision [46], or patch-level supervision [41, 23, 40]. However, their flexibility and scalability
are limited in the actual deployment because the annotation
of fundus images requires manual labeling by experienced
domain experts [22, 27, 32]. In addition, the identification
of lesion regions in fundus images is also very important,
since it provides visual instructions for ophthalmologists to
assist their diagnosis [12, 26, 30]. However, most existing
methods treat DR grading and lesion discovery as two independent tasks, and they both require lesion annotations
as a guide for learning. To overcome these issues, in [34],
a weakly supervised learning model based on DR severity
grades has been proposed for simultaneously grading DR
and highlighting lesion regions. Unfortunately, it tends to
be biased on the most important lesion regions while ignoring trivial lesion information contained in the fundus
images, which may impair the performance of lesion location. Furthermore, the less discriminating regions found at
a certain severity level may be important for other severi-

10938

