PWCLO-Net: Deep LiDAR Odometry in 3D Point Clouds Using Hierarchical
Embedding Mask Optimization

1

Guangming Wang1
Xinrui Wu1
Zhe Liu2
Hesheng Wang1 *
Department of Automation, Insititue of Medical Robotics, Key Laboratory of System Control
and Information Processing of Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cambridge
{wangguangming,916806487,wanghesheng}@sjtu.edu.cn

Input Point Cloud PC1 Input Point Cloud PC2

Abstract

1. Introduction
The visual/LiDAR odometry is one of the key technologies in autonomous driving. This task uses two consecutive images or point clouds to obtain the relative pose
transformation between two frames, and acts as the base
of the subsequential planning and decision making of mobile
robots [13]. Recently, learning-based odometry methods
have shown impressive accuracy on datasets compared with
conventional methods based on hand-crafted features. It
* Corresponding Author. The ﬁrst three authors contributed equally.

Feature
Pyramid

PWCLO-Net

A novel 3D point cloud learning model for deep LiDAR
odometry, named PWCLO-Net, using hierarchical embedding mask optimization is proposed in this paper. In this
model, the Pyramid, Warping, and Cost volume (PWC) structure for the LiDAR odometry task is built to refine the estimated pose in a coarse-to-fine approach hierarchically. An
attentive cost volume is built to associate two point clouds
and obtain embedding motion patterns. Then, a novel trainable embedding mask is proposed to weigh the local motion patterns of all points to regress the overall pose and
filter outlier points. The estimated current pose is used
to warp the first point cloud to bridge the distance to the
second point cloud, and then the cost volume of the residual motion is built. At the same time, the embedding mask
is optimized hierarchically from coarse to fine to obtain
more accurate filtering information for pose refinement. The
trainable pose warp-refinement process is iteratively used
to make the pose estimation more robust for outliers. The
superior performance and effectiveness of our LiDAR odometry model are demonstrated on KITTI odometry dataset.
Our method outperforms all recent learning-based methods and outperforms the geometry-based approach, LOAM
with mapping optimization, on most sequences of KITTI
odometry dataset. Our source codes will be released on
https://github.com/IRMVLab/PWCLONet.

zl457@cam.ac.uk

Feature
Pyramid

Attentive costvolume

Sampled points in PC1

Initial Embedding Mask

Initial Pose

Pose

Iterative Pose WarpRefinement

Sampled points in PC1

Final Embedding Mask

Final Pose

Pose

Output Pose

Weight
Low

High

Figure 1. The Point Feature Pyramid, Pose Warping, and Attentive
Cost Volume (PWC) structure in our proposed PWCLO-Net. The
pose is reﬁned layer by layer through iterative pose warp-reﬁnement.
The whole process is realized end-to-end by making all modules
differentiable. In the LiDAR point clouds, the small red points
are the whole point cloud. The big black points are the sampled
points in P C1 . Distinctive colors of big points in embedding mask
measure the contribution of sampled points to the pose estimation.

is found that learning-based methods can deal with sparse
features and dynamic environments [9, 14], which are usually difﬁcult for conventional methods. To our knowledge,
most learning-based methods are on the 2D visual odometry
[26, 33, 15, 29, 23, 25] or utilize 2D projection of LiDAR
[16, 22, 27, 10, 11] and the LiDAR odometry in 3D point
clouds is underexplored. This paper aims to estimate the
LiDAR odometry directly through raw 3D point clouds.
For the LiDAR odometry in 3D point clouds, there are
three challenges: 1) As the discrete LiDAR point data are obtained in two consecutive frames separately, it is hard to ﬁnd

15910

