Patch-NetVLAD: Multi-Scale Fusion of Locally-Global Descriptors
for Place Recognition
Stephen Hausler
Sourav Garg
Ming Xu
Michael Milford
Tobias Fischer
QUT Centre for Robotics, Queensland University of Technology
{s.hausler, s.garg, m22.xu, michael.milford, tobias.fischer}@qut.edu.au

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual Place Recognition (VPR) is a key prerequisite for
many robotics and autonomous system applications, both as
a stand-alone positioning capability when using a prior map
and as a key component of full Simultaneous Localization
And Mapping (SLAM) systems. The task can prove challenging because of major changes in appearance, illumination
and even viewpoint, and is therefore an area of active research in both the computer vision [3, 19, 35, 43, 79, 81, 82]

Input
Image

VLAD
Residuals

CNN

∑

W

∑
∑

∑

∑
∑

∑

∑

Multi-Scale Fusion

NetVLAD

H

Visual Place Recognition is a challenging task for
robotics and autonomous systems, which must deal with
the twin problems of appearance and viewpoint change in
an always changing world. This paper introduces PatchNetVLAD, which provides a novel formulation for combining
the advantages of both local and global descriptor methods
by deriving patch-level features from NetVLAD residuals.
Unlike the fixed spatial neighborhood regime of existing
local keypoint features, our method enables aggregation
and matching of deep-learned local features defined over
the feature-space grid. We further introduce a multi-scale
fusion of patch features that have complementary scales
(i.e. patch sizes) via an integral feature space and show that
the fused features are highly invariant to both condition (season, structure, and illumination) and viewpoint (translation
and rotation) changes. Patch-NetVLAD achieves state-ofthe-art visual place recognition results in computationally
limited scenarios, validated on a range of challenging realworld datasets, including winning the Facebook Mapillary
Visual Place Recognition Challenge at ECCV2020. It is
also adaptable to user requirements, with a speed-optimised
version operating over an order of magnitude faster than
the state-of-the-art. By combining superior performance
with improved computational efficiency in a configurable
framework, Patch-NetVLAD is well suited to enhance both
stand-alone place recognition capabilities and the overall
performance of SLAM systems.

Patch-NetVLAD

Figure 1. Patch-NetVLAD is a novel condition and viewpoint
invariant visual place recognition system that produces a similarity
score between two images through local matching of locally-global
descriptors extracted from a set of patches in the feature space
of each image. Furthermore, by introducing an integral feature
space, we are able to derive a multi-scale approach that fuses
multiple patch sizes. This is in contrast with the original NetVLAD
paper, which performs an appearance only aggregation of the whole
feature space into a single global descriptor.

and robotics [10, 11, 12, 27, 39, 45] communities.
VPR is typically framed as an image retrieval task [45,
59, 76, 24], where, given a query image, the most similar database image (alongside associated metadata such
as the camera pose) is retrieved. There are two common ways to represent the query and reference images:
using global descriptors which describe the whole image [3, 79, 27, 59, 10, 58, 82], or using local descriptors
that describe areas of interest [20, 52, 18, 23, 14]. Global
descriptor matching is typically performed using nearest
neighbor search between query and reference images. These
global descriptors typically excel in terms of their robustness to appearance and illumination changes, as they are
directly optimized for place recognition [3, 59]. Conversely,
local descriptors are usually cross-matched, followed by
geometric verification. Local descriptor techniques priori114141

