Frequency-aware Discriminative Feature Learning Supervised by Single-Center
Loss for Face Forgery Detection
Jiaming Li1
Hongtao Xie1∗
Jiahong Li2
Zhongyuan Wang2
Yongdong Zhang1
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Kuaishou Technology
ljmd@mail.ustc.edu.cn

{htxie,zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Face forgery detection is raising ever-increasing interest
in computer vision since facial manipulation technologies
cause serious worries. Though recent works have reached
sound achievements, there are still unignorable problems:
a) learned features supervised by softmax loss are separable but not discriminative enough, since softmax loss does
not explicitly encourage intra-class compactness and interclass separability; and b) fixed filter banks and hand-crafted
features are insufficient to capture forgery patterns of frequency from diverse inputs. To compensate for such limitations, a novel frequency-aware discriminative feature learning framework is proposed in this paper. Specifically, we design a novel single-center loss (SCL) that only compresses
intra-class variations of natural faces while boosting interclass differences in the embedding space. In such a case,
the network can learn more discriminative features with
less optimization difficulty. Besides, an adaptive frequency
feature generation module is developed to mine frequency
clues in a completely data-driven fashion. With the above
two modules, the whole framework can learn more discriminative features in an end-to-end manner. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness and superiority of our
framework on three versions of the FF++ dataset.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the great progress made in deep learning, the Variational AutoEncoders [21, 35] and Generative
Adversarial Networks based [15] face manipulation technology [38, 23, 44] enables ordinary people without professional skills and equipment to generate high-quality forged
faces. Derived from that, certain free apps [2] and opensource projects [1, 3] quickly arise and gain popularity explosively. Unluckily, the technology may be abused for malicious purposes, causing severe trust issues in our society. Although digital forensics experts can analyze some in∗ Corresponding author

{lijiahong,wangzhongyuan}@kuaishou.com

Softmax loss

SCL

Manipulated face

Natural face

Center point

Decision boundary

Figure 1. The feature distribution of samples in the embedding space. Left: learned features supervised by softmax loss are
broadly separable but not discriminative enough, since the intraclass compactness and inter-class separability are not explicitly
constrained. Right: our SCL only encourages the intra-class compactness of natural faces when constraining inter-class separability.

fluential videos for evidence of manipulation, they will be
helpless in reviewing countless videos uploaded to the Internet every day. Thus, it is of high significance to develop
efficient automatic detection algorithms.
Towards such a concern, many methods have been proposed successively. Early research is keen on utilizing handcrafted features or modifying the structure of existing neural
networks[47, 5, 4, 34]. However, with remarkable progress
made in facial synthesis technology [20, 46, 12], such methods have been unable to reliably detect face forgery. After
that, the research mainstream is gradually turning to methods that introduce different information and prior knowledge into backbone networks [10, 33, 29]. For example,
DeepRhythm [33] utilizes the minuscule periodic changes
of skin color due to blood pumping through the face.
In essence, all current popular detection methods are using the powerful data fitting capability of neural networks
to extract discriminative features for face forgery detection. And detection methods based on deep learning usually pose face forgery detection as a binary classification

6458

