A Deep Emulator for Secondary Motion of 3D Characters
Mianlun Zheng1 , Yi Zhou2 , Duygu Ceylan2 , Jernej Barbič1
1
University of Southern California, 2 Adobe Research

Size: 2.3×3.8×2.4

0

Dynamic:

0.22

{mianlunz, jnb}@usc.edu, {yizho, ceylan}@adobe.com

a) Training Data

b) Skinned mesh

c) Predicted Mesh

d) Rendered Mesh

Figure 1: a) Our method is trained on a primitive (sphere) dataset with deformation dynamics but generalizes across topology
varying 3D characters. The uniform volumetric mesh surrounding the surface mesh is used for prediction, where the red
vertices are set to be constraints. b) At inference time, the input is an artist-specified skinned mesh without dynamics. c) Our
neural network predicts the dynamic mesh with secondary motion. d) The surface mesh is rendered with textures.

Abstract
Fast and light-weight methods for animating 3D characters are desirable in various applications such as computer
games. We present a learning-based approach to enhance
skinning-based animations of 3D characters with vivid secondary motion effects. We design a neural network that
encodes each local patch of a character simulation mesh
where the edges implicitly encode the internal forces between the neighboring vertices. The network emulates the
ordinary differential equations of the character dynamics,
predicting new vertex positions from the current accelerations, velocities and positions. Being a local method, our
network is independent of the mesh topology and generalizes to arbitrarily shaped 3D character meshes at test time.
We further represent per-vertex constraints and material
properties such as stiffness, enabling us to easily adjust the
dynamics in different parts of the mesh. We evaluate our
method on various character meshes and complex motion
sequences. Our method can be over 30 times more efficient
than ground-truth physically based simulation, and outperforms alternative solutions that provide fast approximations.

1. Introduction
Fast and light-weight methods for animating 3D characters are desirable in various applications including computer
games and film visual effects. Traditional skinning-based
mesh deformation provides a fast geometric approach but
often lacks realistic dynamics. On the other hand, physicallybased simulation can add plausible secondary motion to
skinned animations, augmenting them with visually realistic
and vivid effects, but at the cost of heavy computation.
Recent research has explored deep learning methods to
approximate physically-based simulation in a much more
time-efficient manner. While some approaches have focused
on accelerating specific parts of the simulation [18, 7, 20],
others have proposed end-to-end solutions that predict dynamics directly from mesh based features [1, 11, 11, 25].
While demonstrating impressive results, these methods still
have some limitations. Most of them assume a fixed mesh
topology and thus need to train different networks for different character meshes. Moreover, in order to avoid the

5932

