Adversarial Generation of Continuous Images
Ivan Skorokhodov1 , Savva Ignatyev2 , Mohamed Elhoseiny1
1
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)
2
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology
iskorokhodov@gmail.com

savvaignatiev@gmail.com

Abstract
In most existing learning systems, images are typically
viewed as 2D pixel arrays. However, in another paradigm
gaining popularity, a 2D image is represented as an implicit neural representation (INR) — an MLP that predicts an RGB pixel value given its (x, y) coordinate. In
this paper, we propose two novel architectural techniques
for building INR-based image decoders: factorized multiplicative modulation and multi-scale INRs, and use them
to build a state-of-the-art continuous image GAN. Previous
attempts to adapt INRs for image generation were limited
to MNIST-like datasets and do not scale to complex realworld data. Our proposed INR-GAN architecture improves
the performance of continuous image generators by several
times, greatly reducing the gap between continuous image
GANs and pixel-based ones. Apart from that, we explore
several exciting properties of the INR-based decoders, like
out-of-the-box superresolution, meaningful image-space interpolation, accelerated inference of low-resolution images,
an ability to extrapolate outside of image boundaries, and
strong geometric prior. The project page is located at
https://universome.github.io/inr-gan.

mohamed.elhoseiny@kaust.edu.sa

z ∼ N (0, I)
Conv 3x3

𝑦

z ∼ N (0, I)

𝑥

Upsample
Activation
Conv 3x3
Upsample
Activation

Linear

Linear

Activation

Activation

Linear

Linear

Activation

Activation

θ
Figure 1: Comparison between a traditional convolutional
generator (left) and an INR-based one (right). A traditional
generator directly generates a pixel-based image representation given its latent code z. The INR-based one produces
parameters of an MLP. The corresponding pixel-based representation is obtained by evaluating the INR at each coordinate location (x, y) of a specified grid.

on a 3D grid) is too expensive [51, 11, 67, 55].

1. Introduction
In deep learning, images are typically represented as 2D
arrays of pixels. However, there is another paradigm which
views an image as a continuous function F (p) = v that
maps a pixel’s 2D coordinate p = (x, y) 2 R2 to its RGB
value v = (r, g, b) 2 R3 . The advantage of such a representation is that it gives a true continuous version of the
underlying 2D signal instead of its cropped quantized counterpart like pixel-based representations do. In practice, we
almost never know the underlying function F (p) and thus
have to work with its approximations. The most popular
and expressive way to approximate F (p) is through a neural
network Fθ [81, 74]. It is called an implicit neural representation (INR) and is especially popular in 3D deep learning where working with voxels directly (i.e. pixels defined

Building such a decoder has two severe difficulties: 1)
since it is a hypernetwork, i.e. a network that produces parameters for another network [26], it is unstable to train and
requires too many parameters in general [9]; and 2) it is
too costly to evaluate INRs for a dense high-resolution coordinates grid limiting their application to low-resolution
images only. To alleviate these issues, we design two
principled architectural techniques: factorized multiplicative modulation (FMM) layer for hypernetworks and multiscale INRs. We use these techniques to build INR-GAN:
a state-of-the-art continuous image generator that generates pictures in their INR representations. Previous attempts to build such a model were only conducted on small
MNIST-like datasets [11, 3, 51] and do not scale to complex real-world data. In our case, we managed to achieve
FID [28] scores of 5.09, 4.96 and 16.32 on LSUN Churches
110753

