Quantum Permutation Synchronization
Tolga Birdal1,⋆
1

Vladislav Golyanik2,⋆

Stanford University

2

Christian Theobalt2

Leonidas Guibas1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, SIC

We present QuantumSync, the first quantum algorithm
for solving a synchronization problem in the context of computer vision. In particular, we focus on permutation synchronization which involves solving a non-convex optimization problem in discrete variables. We start by formulating
synchronization into a quadratic unconstrained binary optimization problem (QUBO). While such formulation respects
the binary nature of the problem, ensuring that the result is
a set of permutations requires extra care. Hence, we: (i)
show how to insert permutation constraints into a QUBO
problem and (ii) solve the constrained QUBO problem on
the current generation of the adiabatic quantum computers
D-Wave. Thanks to the quantum annealing, we guarantee
global optimality with high probability while sampling the
energy landscape to yield confidence estimates. Our proofof-concepts realization on the adiabatic D-Wave computer
demonstrates that quantum machines offer a promising way
to solve the prevalent yet difficult synchronization problems.

1. Introduction
Computer vision literature accommodates a myriad of
efficient and effective methods for processing rich information from widely available 2D and 3D cameras. Many algorithms at our disposal excel at processing single frames or
sequence of images such as videos [82, 34, 13]. Oftentimes,
a scene can be observed by multiple cameras, from different, usually unknown viewpoints. To this date it remains an
open question how to consistently combine the multi-view
cues acquired without respecting any particular order [44].
Synchronization [91, 42, 92] is one of the proposed solutions to the aforementioned problem. On an abstract note, it
involves distributing the discrepancies over the graph connecting multiple viewpoints such that the estimates are consistent across all considered nodes. To this end, synchronization simultaneously averages the pairwise local information into a global one [48, 54, 4, 12]. This procedure
is a fundamental piece of most state-of-the-art multi-view
⋆ both authors contributed equally to this work

Logical Problem

QUBO

Abstract

Formulation

Minor
Solution

Embedding

Quantum Annealing

Unembedding

Figure 1. Overview of QuantumSync. QuantumSync formulates
permutation synchronization as a QUBO and embeds its logical
instance on a quantum computer. After running multiple anneals,
it selects the lowest energy solution as the global optimum.

reconstruction and multi-shape analysis pipelines [85, 23,
25] because it heavy-lifts the global constraint satisfaction
while respecting the geometry of the parameters. In fact,
most of the multiview-consistent inference problems can be
expressed as some form of a synchronization [107, 15].
In this paper, our focus is permutation synchronization,
where the edges of the graph are labeled by permutation
matrices denoting the correspondences either between two
2D images or two 3D shapes. Specifically, we seek to find
an absolute ordering for each point of each frame which
sorts all the corresponding points into the same bin. Unfortunately, this problem by definition involves a combinatorial non-convex optimization, for which attaining the
global minimum is intractable under standard formulations
targeting classical von Neumann computers. This difficulty
have encouraged scholars to seek continuous relaxations for
which either a good local optimum [14, 16] or a closed form
solution [6, 57, 5] could be found. The solution to this
approximately equivalent relaxed problem should then be
rounded back to the permutation matrices to report a valid
result. Ideally, we would like to avoid such approximations
and work with the original set of constraints at hand. This
is exactly what we propose to do in this work. Because on
a classical computer we cannot speak of a global optimality
guarantee of our discrete problem, we turn our attention to
a new family of processors, i.e., quantum computers.

13122

