CoCoNets: Continuous Contrastive 3D Scene Representations
Shamit Lal*, Mihir Prabhudesai* , Ishita Mediratta, Adam W. Harley, Katerina Fragkiadaki
Carnegie Mellon University
{shamitl, mprabhud, imedirat, aharley, katef} @cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
This paper explores self-supervised learning of amodal
3D feature representations from RGB and RGB-D posed
images and videos, agnostic to object and scene semantic
content, and evaluates the resulting scene representations
in the downstream tasks of visual correspondence, object
tracking, and object detection. The model infers a latent
3D representation of the scene in the form of 3D feature
points, where each continuous world 3D point is mapped to
its corresponding feature vector. The model is trained for
contrastive view prediction by rendering 3D feature clouds
in queried viewpoints and matching against the 3D feature
point cloud predicted from the query view. Notably, the representation can be queried for any 3D location, even if it is
not visible from the input view. Our model brings together
three powerful ideas of recent exciting research work: 3D
feature grids as a neural bottleneck for view prediction, implicit functions for handling resolution limitations of 3D
grids, and contrastive learning for unsupervised training
of feature representations. We show the resulting 3D visual feature representations effectively scale across objects
and scenes, imagine information occluded or missing from
the input viewpoints, track objects over time, align semantically related objects in 3D, and improve 3D object detection. We outperform many existing state-of-the-art methods
for 3D feature learning and view prediction, which are either limited by 3D grid spatial resolution, do not attempt
to build amodal 3D representations, or do not handle combinatorial scene variability due to their non-convolutional
bottlenecks.

1. Introduction
Understanding the three-dimensional structure of objects
and scenes may be a key for success of machine perception and control in object detection, tracking, manipulation
and navigation. Exciting recent works have explored learn* Equal contribution

Project page: https://mihirp1998.github.io/project pages/coconets/

ing representations of objects and scenes from multiview
imagery and capture the three-dimensional scene structure
implicitly or explicitly with 3D binary or feature grids
[46, 45, 40], 3D point feature clouds [50], implicit functions that map continuous world coordinates to 3D point
occupancy [4, 9, 41, 25, 31, 3], as well as 1D or 2D feature
maps [6]. These methods typically evaluate the accuracy
of the inferred 3D scene occupancy [4, 30, 46, 25, 31, 3]
and the fidelity of image views rendered from the 3D representation [22, 26, 6, 50, 41], as opposed to the suitability
of representations for downstream semantic tasks. Methods
that indeed focus on rendering photo-realistic images often
give up on cross-scene generalization [26, 36], or focus on
single-object scenes [41]. Methods that instead focus on
learning semantically relevant scene representations are expected to generalize across scenes, and handle multi-object
scenes. In the 2D image space, contrastive predictive coding has shown to generate state-of-the-art visual features for
correspondence and recognition [49, 12], but does not encode 3D scene structure. In 3D voxel feature learning methods [14, 13], convolutional latent 3D feature grids encode
the 3D structure and a view contrastive objective learns semantically useful 3D representations, but the grid resolution
limits the discriminability of the features learnt. Recent exciting works combine 3D voxel grids and implicit functions
and learn to predict 3D scene and object 3D occupancy from
a single view with unlimited spatial resolution [32, 33]. The
model proposed in this work brings together these two powerful ideas: 3D feature grids as a 3D-informed neural bottleneck for contrastive view prediction [14], and implicit
functions for handling the resolution limitations of 3D grids
[32].
We propose Continuous Contrastive 3D Networks (CoCoNets), a model that learns to map RGB-D images to
infinite-resolution 3D scene feature representations by contrastively predicting views, in an object and scene agnostic
way. Our model is trained to predict views of static scenes
given 2.5D (color and depth; RGB-D) video streams as input, and is evaluated on its ability to detect and recognize
objects in 3D. CoCoNets map the 2.5D input streams into
3D feature grids of the depicted scene. Given a target view

12487

