Compatibility-aware Heterogeneous Visual Search
Rahul Duggal∗ Hao Zhou
Shuo Yang Yuanjun Xiong
†
Wei Xia Zhuowen Tu
Stefano Soatto
AWS/Amazon AI
rduggal7@gatech.edu

{zhouho, shuoy, yuanjx, wxia, ztu, soattos}@amazon.com

Abstract
We tackle the problem of visual search under resource
constraints. Existing systems use the same embedding
model to compute representations (embeddings) for the
query and gallery images. Such systems inherently face a
hard accuracy-efficiency trade-off: the embedding model
needs to be large enough to ensure high accuracy, yet
small enough to enable query-embedding computation on
resource-constrained platforms. This trade-off could be
mitigated if gallery embeddings are generated from a large
model and query embeddings are extracted using a compact model. The key to building such a system is to ensure
representation compatibility between the query and gallery
models. In this paper, we address two forms of compatibility: One enforced by modifying the parameters of each
model that computes the embeddings. The other by modifying the architectures that compute the embeddings, leading
to compatibility-aware neural architecture search (C MP NAS). We test C MP -NAS on challenging retrieval tasks
for fashion images (DeepFashion2), and face images (IJBC). Compared to ordinary (homogeneous) visual search using the largest embedding model (paragon), C MP -NAS
achieves 80-fold and 23-fold cost reduction while maintaining accuracy within 0.3% and 1.6% of the paragon on
DeepFashion2 and IJB-C respectively.

1. Introduction
A visual search system in an “open universe” setting is
often composed of a gallery model φg and a query model
φq , both mapping an input image to a vector representation known as embedding. The gallery model φg is typically used to map a set of gallery images onto their embedding vectors, a process known as indexing, while the query
∗ Currently at the Georgia Institute of Technology. Work conducted
during an internship with Amazon AI.
† Corresponding author

Accuracy Efficiency
Compatible √

Gallery Set

Model 𝜙!

Homogeneous
(𝜙! , 𝜙! )

Embedding
space of 𝜙!
Compatible ?

Heterogeneous
(𝜙" , 𝜙! )

Embedding
space of 𝜙"

Compatible √

Query Image

Model 𝜙"

Homogeneous
(𝜙" , 𝜙" )

Figure 1: Homogeneous visual search uses the same embedding
model, either large (orange) to meet performance specifications, or
small (green) to meet cost constraints, forcing a dichotomy. Heterogeneous Visual Search (blue) uses a large model to compute
embeddings for the gallery, and a small model for the query images. This allows high efficiency without sacrificing accuracy, provided that the green and orange embedding models are designed
and trained to be compatible.

model extracts embeddings from query images to perform
search against the indexed gallery. Most existing visual
search approaches [24, 26, 38, 2, 31] use the same model
architecture for both φq and φg . We refer to this setup as
homogeneous visual search. An approach that uses different model architectures for φq and φg is referred to as heterogeneous visual search (HVS).
The use of the same φg = φq trivially ensures that
gallery and query images are mapped to the same vector space where the search is conducted. However, this
engenders a hard accuracy-efficiency trade-off (Fig. 1)—
choosing a large architecture φg for both query and gallery
achieves high-accuracy at a loss of efficiency; choosing a
small architecture φq improves efficiency to the detriment
of accuracy, which is compounded since in practice, indexing only happens sporadically while querying is performed
continuously. This leads to efficiency being driven mainly
by the query model. HVS allows the use of a small model
φq for querying, and a large model φg for indexing, partly

10723

