Pseudo 3D Auto-Correlation Network for Real Image Denoising
Xiaowan Hu1,2 , Ruijun Ma3 , Zhihong Liu1 , Yuanhao Cai1 , Xiaole Zhao4 , Yulun Zhang5 , Haoqian Wang1,2, *
1 The Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
2 The Shenzhen Institute of Future Media Technology, Shenzhen 518071, China
3 University of Macau, China 4 Southwest Jiaotong University, China 5 Northeastern University, US

Abstract
The extraction of auto-correlation in images has shown
great potential in deep learning networks, such as the selfattention mechanism in the channel domain and the selfsimilarity mechanism in the spatial domain. However, the
realization of the above mechanisms mostly requires complicated module stacking and a large number of convolution calculations, which inevitably increases model complexity and memory cost. Therefore, we propose a pseudo
3D auto-correlation network (P3AN) to explore a more efficient way of capturing contextual information in image denoising. On the one hand, P3AN uses fast 1D convolution
instead of dense connections to realize criss-cross interaction, which requires less computational resources. On the
other hand, the operation does not change the feature size
and makes it easy to expand. It means that only a simple
adaptive fusion is needed to obtain contextual information
that includes both the channel domain and the spatial domain. Our method built a pseudo 3D auto-correlation attention block through 1D convolutions and a lightweight 2D
structure for more discriminative features. Extensive experiments have been conducted on three synthetic and four real
noisy datasets. According to quantitative metrics and visual
quality evaluation, the P3AN shows great superiority and
surpasses state-of-the-art image denoising methods.

1. Introduction
As a low-level vision task, image denoising aims to recover the underlying clean image from an observed noisy
one, which is a fundamental step for various high-level
vision and image analysis applications [42]. In recent
years, many advanced methods have achieved remarkable
progress in removing synthesized additive white Gaussian
noise. However, the noise in real images often has a complicated generation process in CCD or CMOS camera systems.
Affected by different devices and image signal processing
(ISP) pipelines within the camera, the denoising algorithms
based on synthetic data are inherently difficult to simu* Haoqian Wang is the corresponding author.

late and remove irregular real noise accurately [1, 36]. For
blind image denoising, the low-quality noise images without specific noise statistical priors become the only source
of guidance. So it is particularly important to capture autocorrelation prior information from the input.
The image auto-correlation prior has been widely explored and played an essential role in many traditional noise
reduction algorithms. In order to obtain more robust learning and presentation abilities, recent methods try to use deep
learning methods to accumulate more useful and comprehensive prior knowledge. In recent years, auto-correlation
features extracted by convolutional neural networks (CNN)
can be divided into channel-wise and spatial-wise features,
which are calculated by the channel-based model and spacebased model, respectively. Similar to other high-level vision
tasks, channel-based model can capture non-linear crosschannel information about channels of interest, which is defined as a self-attention mechanism [3, 12, 22, 29, 34, 55].
Through features are aggregated and recalibrated in different ways, self-attention can capture cross-channel interaction. Lightweight attention aggregation is conducive to assign sophisticated channel-wise dependencies efficiently.
The space-based model revolves around the spatial selfsimilarity that has been proven as a powerful feature of
natural images [30, 35, 44]. A common way to obtain the
global auto-correlation in the spatial domain is using a nonlocal block [56]. As shown in Fig. 1(a), it calculates the
response as the weighted sum of all pixels. The spatial autocorrelation is hidden in the pixel-wise long-range contextual
information. The dense connection generates huge attention
maps with high complexity. Huang et al. proposed crisscross attention with sparsely-connected graphs, as shown
in Fig. 1(b) [24]. They only extract contextual information
in its horizontal and vertical direction to narrow the search.
But they still need to traverse each pixel to obtain full-image
auto-correlation for each position, which does not fully play
the role of sparse connections. Although the idea of utilizing auto-correlation prior of images has achieved great successes in various restoration tasks, most CNNs built with
this still suffer from a heavier computational burden.

16175

