CFNet: Cascade and Fused Cost Volume for Robust Stereo Matching
Zhelun Shen1,2 , Yuchao Dai1 ,* Zhibo Rao1
1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China 2 Peking University, Beijing, China
shenzhelun@pku.edu.cn, daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn, raoxi36@foxmail.com

Abstract
Recently, the ever-increasing capacity of large-scale annotated datasets has led to profound progress in stereo
matching. However, most of these successes are limited
to a specific dataset and cannot generalize well to other
datasets. The main difficulties lie in the large domain differences and unbalanced disparity distribution across a variety of datasets, which greatly limit the real-world applicability of current deep stereo matching models. In this paper,
we propose CFNet, a Cascade and Fused cost volume based
network to improve the robustness of the stereo matching
network. First, we propose a fused cost volume representation to deal with the large domain difference. By fusing
multiple low-resolution dense cost volumes to enlarge the
receptive field, we can extract robust structural representations for initial disparity estimation. Second, we propose
a cascade cost volume representation to alleviate the unbalanced disparity distribution. Specifically, we employ a
variance-based uncertainty estimation to adaptively adjust
the next stage disparity search space, in this way driving the
network progressively prune out the space of unlikely correspondences. By iteratively narrowing down the disparity search space and improving the cost volume resolution,
the disparity estimation is gradually refined in a coarse-tofine manner. When trained on the same training images and
evaluated on KITTI, ETH3D, and Middlebury datasets with
the fixed model parameters and hyperparameters, our proposed method achieves the state-of-the-art overall performance and obtains the 1st place on the stereo task of Robust Vision Challenge 2020. The code will be available at
https://github.com/gallenszl/CFNet.

1. Introduction
Stereo matching, i.e. estimating a disparity/depth map
from a pair of stereo images, is fundamental to various applications such as autonomous driving [3], robot navigation
[1], SLAM [8, 10], etc. Recently, many deep learning-based
* Yuchao Dai is the corresponding author.

Figure 1. Performance comparison in terms of generalization ability on the Middlebury, ETH3D, and KITTI 2015 datasets. Bad 2.0,
bad1.0, and D1 all (the lower the better) are used for evaluation.
All methods are trained on the same training images and tested on
three datasets with single model parameters and hyper-parameters.
Our CFNet achieves state-of-the-art generalization and performs
well on all three real-world datasets.

stereo methods have been developed and achieved impressive performance on most of the standard benchmarks.
However, current state-of-the-art methods are generally
limited to a specific dataset due to the significant domain
shifts across different datasets. For example, the KITTI
dataset [9, 19] focuses on real-world urban driving scenarios while Middlebury [22] concentrates on indoor highresolution scenes. Consequently, methods that are state-ofthe-art on one dataset often cannot achieve comparable performance on a different one without substantial adaptation
(visualization comparison can be seen in Fig. 2). However,
real-world applications require the approaches to generalize well to different scenarios without adaptation. Thus, we
need to push methods to be robust and perform well across
different datasets with the fixed model parameters and hyperparameters.
The difficulties in designing a robust stereo matching
system come from the large domain differences and unbalanced disparity distribution between a variety of datasets.
As illustrated in Fig. 2 (a), there are significant domain differences across various datasets, e.g., indoors vs outdoors,
color vs gray, and real vs synthetic, which leads to the
learned features distorted and noisy [37]. In addition, as
illustrated in Fig. 3, the disparity range of half-resolution
images in Middlebury [22] is even more than 6 times larger
than full-resolution images in ETH3D [24] (400 vs 64).

13906

