Spk2ImgNet: Learning to Reconstruct Dynamic Scene from Continuous
Spike Stream
Jing Zhao1 , Ruiqin Xiong1 , Hangfan Liu2 , Jian Zhang3 , Tiejun Huang1
School of Electronic Engineering and Computer Science, Peking University, China
2
Center for Biomedical Image Computing and Analytics, University of Pennsylvania, US
3
Shenzhen Graduate School, Peking University, China
1

𝑡
{jzhaopku, rqxiong, zhangjian.sz, tjhuang}@pku.edu.cn,
hfliu@upenn.edu

𝑦

Abstract
The recently invented retina-inspired spike camera has
shown great potential for capturing dynamic scenes. Different from the conventional digital cameras that compact the
photoelectric information within the exposure interval into
a single snapshot, the spike camera produces a continuous
spike stream to record the dynamic light intensity variation
process. For spike cameras, image reconstruction remains
an important and challenging issue. To this end, this paper
develops a spike-to-image neural network (Spk2ImgNet) to
reconstruct the dynamic scene from the continuous spike
stream. In particular, to handle the challenges brought
by both noise and high-speed motion, we propose a hierarchical architecture to exploit the temporal correlation of
the spike stream progressively. Firstly, a spatially adaptive
light inference subnet is proposed to exploit the local temporal correlation, producing basic light intensity estimates
of different moments. Then, a pyramid deformable alignment is utilized to align the intermediate features such that
the feature fusion module can exploit the long-term temporal correlation, while avoiding undesired motion blur.
In addition, to train the network, we simulate the working mechanism of spike camera to generate a large-scale
spike dataset composed of spike streams and corresponding ground truth images. Experimental results demonstrate
that the proposed network evidently outperforms the stateof-the-art spike camera reconstruction methods.

𝑡
𝑥

(a) Image captured by iPhone11

𝑦

𝑥

(b) Spike stream

(c) TFP [36] (ICME’ 19)

(d) TFI [36] (ICME’ 19)

(e) TVS [37] (CVPR’ 20)

(f) Proposed

Figure 1. The image for a high-speed rotation disk. For better
comparison, we stuck a paper with characters ”CVPR” to the disk.
(a) The image captured by the camera of iPhone11, which suffers
from severe blur. (b) Spike stream captured by the spike camera [6]. (c)-(f) Spike camera reconstruction results with different
methods. Our proposed method evidently outperforms the competing methods, producing clear image for the high-speed object.

1. Introduction
With the prevalence of emerging computer vision applications, such as autonomous driving, robotics and unmanned aerial vehicle, there has been an increasing demand
for capturing high-speed motion scenes, which makes the
inherent limitations of conventional cameras become evident [17, 15]. Most conventional cameras use a certain ex-

posure time window to accumulate the photoelectric information to form a snapshot image. Such an imaging mechanism requires the scene to be still during the exposure interval. Otherwise, a single point on a moving object may be
projected onto different pixels on the image sensor, resulting in blurry artifacts for the moving objects.

11996

