Online Multiple Object Tracking with Cross-Task Synergy
Song Guo*1
Jingya Wang*1,2
Xinchao Wang3,4
Dacheng Tao1
1
The University of Sydney, 2 ShanghaiTech University,
3
National University of Singapore, 4 Stevens Institute of Technology
sguo2908@uni.sydney.edu.au
xinchao@nus.edu.sg

wangjingya@shanghaitech.edu.cn
dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Modern online multiple object tracking (MOT) methods
usually focus on two directions to improve tracking performance. One is to predict new positions in an incoming
frame based on tracking information from previous frames,
and the other is to enhance data association by generating more discriminative identity embeddings. Some works
combined both directions within one framework but handled them as two individual tasks, thus gaining little mutual
benefits. In this paper, we propose a novel unified model
with synergy between position prediction and embedding
association. The two tasks are linked by temporal-aware
target attention and distractor attention, as well as identityaware memory aggregation model. Specifically, the attention modules can make the prediction focus more on targets and less on distractors, therefore more reliable embeddings can be extracted accordingly for association. On the
other hand, such reliable embeddings can boost identityawareness through memory aggregation, hence strengthen
attention modules and suppress drifts. In this way, the synergy between position prediction and embedding association is achieved, which leads to strong robustness to occlusions. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority
of our proposed model over a wide range of existing methods on MOTChallenge benchmarks. Our code and models are publicly available at https://github.com/
songguocode/TADAM .

1. Introduction
The problem of multiple object tracking (MOT) has been
studied for decades because of its broad applications such
as robotics, surveillance, and autonomous driving. It aims
to locate targets while maintain their identities to form trajectories across video frames. Recent research in the area of
MOT mostly follows the paradigm of tracking-by-detection,
* Equal contributions

Figure 1. (a) Position prediction and embedding association in existing methods do not benefit each other during occlusion. The
prediction of target position drifts and the extracted embeddings
become noisy. (b) Our method brings synergy between the two
tasks via proposed model to deal with occlusion.

which divides the MOT problem into two separate steps.
Object detections are obtained independently in each frame
first, then linked across frames through data association
to form trajectories, where identity embeddings are usually adopted to distinguish objects during association. Such
two-step procedure intuitively reveals two ways to improve
the tracking performance. One is to augment detections,
and the other is to enhance data association via embeddings.
Most existing online methods usually address only one
of these two aspects for better tracking results, despite the
fact that a common source of error, occlusions, affects both
aspects. Unexpected occlusions often lead to miss detections due to overlapped objects, as well as increased difficulty for data association. Many online tracking approaches
fill the gaps in detections during occlusions by predicting
new positions of tracked targets, while a number of studies focus on generating more distinguishable embeddings

8136

