Robust Neural Routing Through Space Partitions for Camera Relocalization
in Dynamic Indoor Environments
Siyan Dong1,2 * Qingnan Fan3 * He Wang3 Ji Shi4 Li Yi5
Thomas Funkhouser5 Baoquan Chen4 Leonidas Guibas3
1
Shandong University 2 AICFVE, Beijing Film Academy 3 Stanford University
4
Peking University 5 Google Research
{siyandong.3,fqnchina,baoquan.chen}@gmail.com, hewang@stanford.edu, i@sjj118.com,
{ericyi,tfunkhouser}@google.com, guibas@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Localizing the camera in a known indoor environment is
a key building block for scene mapping, robot navigation,
AR, etc. Recent advances estimate the camera pose via optimization over the 2D/3D-3D correspondences established
between the coordinates in 2D/3D camera space and 3D
world space. Such a mapping is estimated with either a
convolution neural network or a decision tree using only the
static input image sequence, which makes these approaches
vulnerable to dynamic indoor environments that are quite
common yet challenging in the real world. To address the
aforementioned issues, in this paper, we propose a novel
outlier-aware neural tree which bridges the two worlds, deep
learning and decision tree approaches. It builds on three
important blocks: (a) a hierarchical space partition over
the indoor scene to construct the decision tree; (b) a neural
routing function, implemented as a deep classification network, employed for better 3D scene understanding; and (c)
an outlier rejection module used to filter out dynamic points
during the hierarchical routing process. Our proposed algorithm is evaluated on the RIO-10 benchmark developed
for camera relocalization in dynamic indoor environments.
It achieves robust neural routing through space partitions
and outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches by around
30% on camera pose accuracy, while running comparably
fast for evaluation.

1. Introduction
The task of camera relocalization is to estimate the 6DoF (Degree of Freedom) camera pose from a test frame
with respect to a known environment. It is of great importance for many computer vision and robotics applications,
* Equal Contribution

inlier outlier

Figure 1. Demonstration of our algorithm. We build a hierarchical
space partition over the entire scene environment to construct a
3-level 4-way neural tree. For the input static (green) or dynamic
(red) points from a visual observation, our neural tree will route
them into either inlier (solid line) or outlier (dashed line) categories.
Only the points falling into the inlier category will be considered
for camera pose estimation.

such as Simultaneously Localization and Mapping (SLAM),
Augmented Reality (AR), and navigation, etc. One popular
solution to camera relocalization is to make use of advanced
hardware, e.g., LIDAR sensors, WIFI, Bluetooth or GPS.
However, these approaches may suffer from bad weather for
outdoor environments, and instability or blocked signal for
indoor environments. Another popular solution replaces the
above hardware with a RGB/RGB-D sensor that feeds only
visual observation for camera relocalization, also known as
visual relocalization, which is the focus of this paper.
The problem of visual relocalization has been studied for
decades, and recent advances [11, 32] have reached around
100% camera pose accuracy (5cm / 5◦ ) on the popular in-

8544

