Monocular Depth Estimation via Listwise Ranking
using the Plackett-Luce Model
Julian Lienen1, * Eyke Hüllermeier2 Ralph Ewerth3,4 Nils Nommensen3,4
1
Paderborn University 2 University of Munich (LMU)
3
L3S Research Center, Leibniz University Hannover 4 TIB Hannover

Abstract
In many real-world applications, the relative depth of objects in an image is crucial for scene understanding. Recent
approaches mainly tackle the problem of depth prediction
in monocular images by treating the problem as a regression task. Yet, being interested in an order relation in the
first place, ranking methods suggest themselves as a natural
alternative to regression, and indeed, ranking approaches
leveraging pairwise comparisons as training information
(“object A is closer to the camera than B”) have shown
promising performance on this problem. In this paper, we
elaborate on the use of so-called listwise ranking as a generalization of the pairwise approach. Our method is based on
the Plackett-Luce (PL) model, a probability distribution on
rankings, which we combine with a state-of-the-art neural
network architecture and a simple sampling strategy to reduce training complexity. Moreover, taking advantage of the
representation of PL as a random utility model, the proposed
predictor offers a natural way to recover (shift-invariant)
metric depth information from ranking-only data provided
at training time. An empirical evaluation on several benchmark datasets in a “zero-shot” setting demonstrates the
effectiveness of our approach compared to existing ranking
and regression methods.

1. Introduction
Estimating depth in monocular images constitutes a problem of practical importance when aiming to understand the
geometry of a scene, e.g., in autonomous driving systems
or for augmented reality applications. Due to its ill-posed
nature, methods approaching this problem nowadays typically incorporate complex models, trained on large amounts
* Corresponding author: julian.lienen@upb.de.

of data using machine learning methods.
The majority of existing approaches tackles depth estimation (whether per-pixel or per-object) as a regression
problem, i.e., as the problem of learning a model to predict
a (pseudo-)metric map (e.g., [1, 9, 17, 18]). However, on
the one hand, accurate prediction of metric depth actually
depends on the intrinsic camera parameters, which are often
not available. On the other hand, instead of predicting absolute depth, it is often enough to predict the relative depth of
pixels or higher level concepts (such as objects), that is, to
sort them from closest to farthest away from the camera.
One may then argue that regression is solving an unnecessarily difficult task, and rather advocate a formalization of depth estimation as a ranking task [12]. So-called
“learning-to-rank” methods can be used to minimize suitable
performance metrics based on relative errors. As absolute
depth measurements are not necessarily needed, ranking
has the additional advantage that it potentially allows for
learning from weaker training information. This includes
depth annotations that are not metric but can be regarded as
pseudo-metric data, e.g., disparity maps constructed from
stereo images or videos [6, 14, 20], or human-annotated data
[5, 7]. Without the need for metric RGB-D data produced
by depth sensors, the diversity of training datasets can be
drastically increased due to cheaper data acquisition [33].
Existing ranking methods are essentially based on pairwise comparisons of the form “object A is closer to the camera than B” [5, 33, 34, 35]. Pairwise relations of that kind are
sampled from a depth map as training information, and predictive models are induced by minimizing pairwise ranking
losses. While these approaches have proven effective, the
quadratic number of possible pairs that can be constructed
renders them rather inefficient and necessitates sophisticated
sampling strategies to eliminate less informative pairs [34].
Besides, breaking a linear order into pairwise comparisons
necessarily comes with a certain loss of information. In par-

14595

