Domain-robust VQA with diverse datasets and methods but no target labels
Mingda Zhang

Tristan Maidment
Ahmad Diab
Adriana Kovashka
Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh

{mzhang, kovashka, hwa}@cs.pitt.edu

Rebecca Hwa

{tdm51, ahd23}@pitt.edu

https://people.cs.pitt.edu/~mzhang/domain-robust-vqa/

Abstract
The observation that computer vision methods overfit to
dataset specifics has inspired diverse attempts to make object recognition models robust to domain shifts. However,
similar work on domain-robust visual question answering
methods is very limited. Domain adaptation for VQA differs from adaptation for object recognition due to additional complexity: VQA models handle multimodal inputs,
methods contain multiple steps with diverse modules resulting in complex optimization, and answer spaces in different
datasets are vastly different. To tackle these challenges, we
first quantify domain shifts between popular VQA datasets,
in both visual and textual space. To disentangle shifts between datasets arising from different modalities, we also
construct synthetic shifts in the image and question domains
separately. Second, we test the robustness of different families of VQA methods (classic two-stream, transformer, and
neuro-symbolic methods) to these shifts. Third, we test the
applicability of existing domain adaptation methods and devise a new one to bridge VQA domain gaps, adjusted to
specific VQA models. To emulate the setting of real-world
generalization, we focus on unsupervised domain adaptation and the open-ended classification task formulation.

1. Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) borders on AIcompleteness: it requires perception (visual and linguistic)
and cognition. Despite the strong performance of recent
VQA methods, they fall short of generalization and true
reasoning: they are known to suffer from dataset bias [22],
require domain-specific languages or domain-specific executable program annotations [34, 41], or must be trained
separately for each new dataset.
Prior work in domain adaptation for object recognition
examines how robust methods are when trained and tested
on different datasets (domains), and further proposes techniques to bridge domain gaps. In contrast, there is a shortage of analyses of how domain-robust visual question answering methods are. Importantly, domain adaptation tech-

What foods are placed on the table?
How many people will be having wine?

What time is it?

Does the curtain to the left of the side
table have small size and white color?

Figure 1. The same visual setting can be captured in different
ways in VQA datasets, and paired with different information needs
(questions). They may require deduction using visual contents,
reading from a specific region of the image, or reasoning about
complex spatial relationships. All examples are selected from real
VQA datasets, i.e. VQA v2, VQA Abstract, VizWiz and GQA.

niques cannot successfully be applied in the VQA setting in
a straight-forward manner. First, VQA models take inputs
across multiple modalities, each of which could contribute
to the domain specificity of the trained models. Second, different VQA methods have multiple intermediate stages and
processing steps over the inputs, which makes optimization
challenging. Domain adaptation techniques could be applied at multiple of these stages, and domain adaptation can
be performed jointly or separately from VQA training, with
varying success. Third, answer spaces in different datasets
are vastly different. While domain adaptation methods exist
to tackle non-identical answer spaces in object recognition,
this setting is not very common. Conversely, in VQA, it is
the norm, since many datasets are highly specialized (for
example, VizWiz [23] contains special answers “unanswerable” or “unsuitable image” because image-question pairs

7046

