You See What I Want You to See: Exploring Targeted Black-Box Transferability
Attack for Hash-based Image Retrieval Systems
Yanru Xiao and Cong Wang
Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA
{yxiao002,c1wang}@odu.edu

Abstract
With the large multimedia content online, deep hashing
has become a popular method for efficient image retrieval
and storage. However, by inheriting the algorithmic backend from softmax classification, these techniques are vulnerable to the well-known adversarial examples as well.
The massive collection of online images into the database
also opens up new attack vectors. Attackers can embed adversarial images into the database and target specific categories to be retrieved by user queries. In this paper, we
start from an adversarial standpoint to explore and enhance
the capacity of targeted black-box transferability attack for
deep hashing. We motivate this work by a series of empirical studies to see the unique challenges in image retrieval.
We study the relations between adversarial subspace and
black-box transferability via utilizing random noise as a
proxy. Then we develop a new attack that is simultaneously adversarial and robust to noise to enhance transferability. Our experimental results demonstrate about 1.2-3×
improvements of black-box transferability compared with
the state-of-the-art mechanisms. The code is available at:
https://github.com/SugarRuy/CVPR21 Transferred Hash.

1. Introduction
With the exponential growth of visual content on the Internet, deep learning to hash (deep hashing) [46, 9, 25] has
emerged as a leading technique in content-based image retrieval. By mapping semantically similar images into close
proximity in the Hamming space, it enables efficient nearest
neighbor search and storage of large-scale multimedia data.
Powered by deep hashing, from a photo of a product taken
in the real world, without knowing its name, customers
could extract similar products online. Service providers,
such as search engines (Google [2], Bing [1]), social networks (Pinterest [6], e-commerce (Taobao [5]) and fashion
designers([16]), are investing largely into this technology to
complement the traditional text query.
Unfortunately, by inheriting the backend from classification networks, deep hashing is also vulnerable to the wellknown adversarial examples [27, 44, 38, 42], that purposely

crafted perturbations with minimal perceptual difference
can cause misclassification into any other label (untargeted
attack) or a specific label (targeted attack). Targeted attacks
are strictly more difficult given the complex inter-class semantics [8, 26]. While white-box attacks almost guarantee
success, service providers do not reveal their models publicly, which remain a black box to the attacker. Because of
the resemblance of decision boundaries, adversarial examples can still transfer to the black-box models, but at a much
less chance to accomplish targeted attacks [26].
Rather than causing a wrong decision, system designers face a slightly different attack surface in image retrieval systems, in which images from the database are
returned to match user’s query. For better results, a
growing database is typically maintained via automated
crawling, indexing of online images [4] and caching user
queries [3]. However, this may also inadvertently include private/inappropriate/upsetting content such as protected copyright, violence, pornography, racism or advertising spam into the database. By designing adversarial perturbations into the inappropriate images, attackers can launch
targeted attacks against benign search queries, and visually
display those images to the victims. To exploit this vulnerability, competitors can override the product search results in
online shopping; advertisers can make customers view their
advertisements for free; conspirators can divert images of
political banners into racism or violence. Attackers can further target the content in the top searching list to reap high
visibility.
The previous works have shown high success rate of untargeted white-box attacks for image retrieval [27, 44, 38].
E.g., [44] shows that by maximizing the hamming distance
of a perturbed image to its original category in the hash
space, the network retrieves an irrelevant image. Nevertheless, the most challenging targeted attacks are yet to
be fully explored in the black-box setting and they also
carry higher practical value as attackers can mislead the results into specific categories. A trivial way to accomplish
black-box transferability is to increase the level of perturbation [26], at the cost of degrading visual quality and being
detected. In fact, our preliminary experiment indicates drastically small transferability under 1%, even the state-of-the-

1934

