Effective Snapshot Compressive-spectral Imaging via
Deep Denoising and Total Variation Priors
Haiquan Qiu1 , Yao Wang1,2 *, Deyu Meng1,3
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
Shanghai Em-Data Technology Co., Ltd., China
3
The Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau, China
qiuhaiquan@stu.xjtu.edu.cn, yao.s.wang@gmail.com, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) is a new type
of compressive imaging system that compresses multiple
frames of images into a single snapshot measurement,
which enjoys low cost, low bandwidth, and high-speed sensing rate. By applying the existing SCI methods to deal with
hyperspectral images, however, could not fully exploit the
underlying structures, and thereby demonstrate unsatisfactory reconstruction performance. To remedy such issue, this
paper aims to propose a new effective method by taking advantage of two intrinsic priors of the hyperspectral images,
namely deep image denoising and total variation (TV) priors. Specifically, we propose an optimization objective to
utilize these two priors. By solving this optimization objective, our method is equivalent to incorporate a weighted
FFDNet and a 2DTV or 3DTV denoiser into the plug-andplay framework. Extensive numerical experiments demonstrate the outperformance of the proposed method over several state-of-the-art alternatives. Additionally, we provide
a detailed convergence analysis of the resulting plug-andplay algorithm under relatively weak conditions such as
without using diminishing step sizes. The code is available at https://github.com/ucker/SCI- TVFFDNet.

pressive sensing technology, SCI possesses of low memory,
low power consumption, low bandwidth and low cost, and
as such, can be used to efficient capture the hyperspectral
images. Among the existing SCI systems, coded aperture
snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) [25] is a representative
hyperspectral SCI system, which combines hyperspectral
images of different wavelengths into a single 2D one.

1. Introduction

Along with the development of hardware, various reconstruction algorithms have been proposed for SCI. GAPTV [28] applied total variation minimization under the generalized alternating projection (GAP) [13] framework. Recently, DeSCI [14] demonstrates the-state-of-art results in
reconstructing both video and hyperspectral image data. As
further shown in [31], DeSCI can be regarded as a plug-andplay (PnP) algorithm that employs rank minimization as an
intermediate step during reconstruction. However, the low
computational speed of DeSCI precludes its applications.
For example, DeSCI costs more than six hours to reconstruct a hyperspectral image of size 1021 × 703 × 24 from
its snapshot measurement. While GAP-TV is a faster algorithm, it cannot reconstruct high-quality images that can be
fitted for real applications. Therefore, [31] incorporated a
deep denoiser network such as FFDNet [34] into PnP algorithm [3]. Because FFDNet can be performed on GPU, it
runs very fast compared with DeSCI. However, [31] mainly
focused on video SCI reconstruction, and as we shall show
later, its reconstruction performance on hyperspectral images are not satisfactory.

Compressive sensing [5, 1] is a popular imaging technology that can be employed to capture video [8, 19, 15, 32,
22, 23] and hyperspectral images [6, 24, 25, 30, 2]. One of
the most important compressive sensing systems is the socalled snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) [15, 24]. Precisely, SCI uses 2D sensors to obtain higher dimensional
image data and exploit corresponding algorithms to reconstruct the desired data. As compared with traditional com-

Basically, applying DeSCI for hyperspectral image reconstruction requires to perform GAP-TV to get its initial
value. Numerical experiments revealed that this initial value
is crucial for the performance of DeSCI. If the initialization is slightly worse, the performance of DeSCI could be
largely poor. As such, it is highly demanding to develop
newly effective method to address the aforementioned issues.
DeSCI which uses GAP-TV reconstruction results as its

* Corresponding author.

9127

