Blind Deblurring for Saturated Images
Liang Chen ∗1 , Jiawei Zhang †2 , Songnan Lin2 , Faming Fang1 , Jimmy S. Ren2,3
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing,
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
2
SenseTime Research
3
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China

Abstract
Blind deblurring has received considerable attention in
recent years. However, state-of-the-art methods often fail
to process saturated blurry images. The main reason is
that pixels around saturated regions are not conforming to
the commonly used linear blur model. Pioneer arts suggest excluding these pixels during the deblurring process,
which sometimes simultaneously removes the informative
edges around saturated regions and results in insufficient
information for kernel estimation when large saturated regions exist. To address this problem, we introduce a new
blur model to fit both saturated and unsaturated pixels, and
all informative pixels can be considered during the deblurring process. Based on our model, we develop an effective maximum a posterior (MAP)-based optimization framework. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations on benchmark datasets and challenging real-world examples show
that the proposed method performs favorably against existing methods.

1. Introduction
At night, a long exposure is often required to capture
the dark regions and it often results in heavy blur in the
captured image due to the inevitable camera shake. Meanwhile, because of the existence of lights at night, the images also commonly contain saturated regions. As a result,
the images captured at night are usually blurry and partially
saturated at the same time.
Mathematically, the widely adopted linear blurring process can be modeled by convolving a sharp image I with a
blur kernel K:
B = I ⊗ K,
(1)
where B is the blurry image and ⊗ denotes the convolution
operation. Recovering the latent sharp image given only a

single blurry image, which is referred to as blind deblurring,
has long been a fundamental research problem in the image
processing community.
Based on the degrading model in Eq. (1), significant efforts [9, 29, 14, 34, 25, 10, 35, 23, 18, 3, 2] have been proposed in recent years. Despite their effectiveness in most
occasions, these methods often have difficulties recovering
a blurry image with saturated regions as shown in Figure 1
(b) and (c). The major reason lies in that the saturated pixels tend to violate the linear blur model in Eq. (1), and it
will mislead the kernel estimation process during deblurring [6, 7, 4].
Considering this, existing algorithms [24, 7, 4] suggest
implicitly or explicitly excluding the saturated pixels during
the deblurring process. Specifically, Pan et al. [24] select
salient edges from unsaturated areas and use them to improve the kernel estimation, while Dong et al. [7] and Chen
et al. [4] both suggest using sophisticated fidelity term so
that only unsaturated pixels can contribute during deblurring. However, these methods are only effective in blurry
images with small saturated regions. When the saturated
regions are large (Figure 1 (a)), all of them will encounter
setbacks as shown in Figure 1 (d), (e) and (f). As there
are not enough informative pixels left to estimate the kernel
when the sharp, strong edges of the light streaks are discarded in their methods.
To acquire enough information to estimate the blur kernel while avoiding the side-effects brought by the saturated
pixels, we propose a simple yet effective blur model that
considers both saturated and unsaturated pixels. Specifically, we introduce a latent map M into the blur model in
Eq. (1). For a pixel i, the latent map assures that the degrading process (i.e. Mi (I ⊗ K)i ) can output values within the
sensor range1 . Our proposed latent map serves similarly as
an ideal clipping function in [6, 32] (i.e. min((I ⊗ K)i , 1)).
Different from the clipping function, our latent map-based
model is differentiable, which enables the further optimization process. Based on the proposed blur model, we develop

∗ This work was done when Liang Chen was an intern at SenseTime.
† Corresponding author

1 The maximum value of the sensor range is 1 in our setting.

6308

