LAFEAT: Piercing Through Adversarial Defenses with Latent Features
Yunrui Yu∗
University of Macau,
Macau SAR, China.
yb97445@um.edu.mo

Xitong Gao∗
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shenzhen, China.

Cheng-Zhong Xu†
University of Macau,
Macau SAR, China.
czxu@um.edu.mo

xt.gao@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Deep convolutional neural networks are susceptible to
adversarial attacks. They can be easily deceived to give
an incorrect output by adding a tiny perturbation to the input. This presents a great challenge in making CNNs robust against such attacks. An influx of new defense techniques have been proposed to this end. In this paper, we
show that latent features in certain “robust” models are
surprisingly susceptible to adversarial attacks. On top of
this, we introduce a unified ℓ∞ -norm white-box attack algorithm which harnesses latent features in its gradient descent
steps, namely LAFEAT. We show that not only is it computationally much more efficient for successful attacks, but it is
also a stronger adversary than the current state-of-the-art
across a wide range of defense mechanisms. This suggests
that model robustness could be contingent on the effective
use of the defender’s hidden components, and it should no
longer be viewed from a holistic perspective.

1. Introduction
Many safety-critical systems, such as aviation [12, 1, 45]
medical diagnosis [54, 34], self-driving [6, 33, 52] have
seen a large-scale deployment of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Yet CNNs are prone to adversarial
attacks: a small specially-crafted perturbation imperceptible to human, when added to an input image, could result
in a drastic change of the output of a CNN [51, 19, 7]. As
a rapidly increasing number of safety-critical systems are
automated by CNNs, it is now incumbent upon us to make
them robust against adversarial attacks.
The strongest assumption commonly used for generating adversarial inputs is known as white-box attacks, where
the adversary have full knowledge of the model [8]. For instance, the model architecture, parameters, and training al∗ These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

gorithm and dataset are completely exposed to the attacker.
By leveraging the gradient of the output loss with respect to
(w.r.t.) the input, gradient-based methods [37, 8, 35] have
been shown to decimate the accuracy of CNNs when evaluated on adversarial examples. Many new techniques to
improve the robustness of CNNs have since been proposed
to defend against such attacks. Recent years have therefore
seen a tug of war between adversarial attack [19, 37, 8, 35,
16, 59, 14] and defense [35, 48, 9, 2, 64, 43, 55, 58, 57, 20]
strategies. Attackers search for a perturbation that maximizes the loss of the model output, typically through gradient ascent methods, e.g. one popular method is projected
gradient descent (PGD) [35]; whereas defenders attempts to
make the loss landscape smoother w.r.t. the perturbation via
adversarial training, i.e. training with adversarial examples.
From a human perception perspective, as feature extractors, shallow layers of CNNs extract simple local textures
while neurons in deep layers specialize to differentiate complex objects [40, 10]. Intuitively, we expect incorrectly extracted shallow features often cannot be pieced together to
form correct high-level features. Moreover, this could have
a cascading effect in subsequent layers. To illustrate, we
equipped PGD with the ability to attack one of the intermediate layers by maximizing only the loss of an attackertrained classifier, which we call LPGD for now. In Figure 1,
we scrambled the feature extracted by attacking an intermediate layer with LPGD, and observed increasing discrepancies between the pairs of features extracted from the natural
images and their associated adversary in deeper layers.
Nevertheless, existing attack and defense strategies approach the challenge of evaluating or promoting the whitebox model robustness in a model-holistic manner. Namely,
for classifiers, they regard the model as a single non-linear
differentiable function f that maps the input image to output logits. While these approaches generalize well across
models, they tend to ignore the latent features extracted by
the intermediate layers within the model.
Some recent defense strategies [4, 62, 63, 28, 27, 38, 39]
reported that their models can achieve high robustness

5735

