Deep Graph Matching under Quadratic Constraint
Quankai Gao1 , Fudong Wang1 , Nan Xue1 , Jin-Gang Yu2 , Gui-Song Xia1
1
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
2
South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China.
{quankaigao, fudong-wang, xuenan, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn, jingangyu@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, deep learning based methods have demonstrated promising results on the graph matching problem,
by relying on the descriptive capability of deep features
extracted on graph nodes. However, one main limitation
with existing deep graph matching (DGM) methods lies in
their ignorance of explicit constraint of graph structures,
which may lead the model to be trapped into local minimum in training. In this paper, we propose to explicitly formulate pairwise graph structures as a quadratic constraint
incorporated into the DGM framework. The quadratic constraint minimizes the pairwise structural discrepancy between graphs, which can reduce the ambiguities brought
by only using the extracted CNN features. Moreover, we
present a differentiable implementation to the quadratic
constrained-optimization such that it is compatible with the
unconstrained deep learning optimizer. To give more precise and proper supervision, a well-designed false matching
loss against class imbalance is proposed, which can better penalize the false negatives and false positives with less
overfitting. Exhaustive experiments demonstrate that our
method achieves competitive performance on real-world
datasets. The code is available at: https://github.
com/Zerg-Overmind/QC-DGM .

1. Introduction
Graph matching aims to find an optimal one-to-one node
correspondence between graph-structured data, which has
been widely used in many tasks [3, 6, 9, 14, 20, 37]. By integrating the similarity between nodes and edges in a combinatorial fashion, graph matching is often mathematically
formulated as a quadratic assignment problem (QAP) [29].
The study of this paper is funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under grant contracts No.61922065,
No.61771350 and No.41820104006 and 61871299. It is also supported
by Supercomputing Center of Wuhan University.
Corresponding author: Gui-Song Xia (guisong.xia@whu.edu.cn).

(a) DGM without quadratic constraint

(b) DGM with quadratic constraint (our method)

Figure 1. Deep graph matching with/without quadratic constraint.
Matching results are in left and the predicted (black) v.s. the
ground truth (red) correspondence matrices are in right.

QAP is known to be NP-hard [16], and various approximation techniques [25, 26, 28, 34] have been proposed to make
it computationally tractable.
Until recently, deep graph matching (DGM) methods
give birth to many more flexible formulations [13, 32, 39,
45] besides traditional QAP. DGM aims to learn the meaningful node affinity by using deep features extracted from
convolutional neural network. To this end, many existing
DGM methods [32, 39, 45] primarily focus on the feature
modeling and refinement for more accurate affinity construction. The feature refinement step is expected to capture
the implicit structure information [39] encoded in learnable
parameters. However, nodes with similar deep features are
hard to distinguish from each other in deep graph matching, while their structure contexts may be very different.
Moreover, the implicit structure information is not specific
enough, which is insufficient to clearly represent the structural discrepancy over graphs (e.g., Fig. 1(a)).
In traditional graph matching, it is common to incorporate pairwise structures into the formulation to enhance
matching accuracy [25], which inspired us to consider
quadratic structural constraint in deep graph matching to
maximize the adjacency consensus and achieve global consistency. More precisely, we use the pairwise term of

5069

