How to Exploit the Transferability of
Learned Image Compression to Conventional Codecs
Jan P. Klopp
National Taiwan University

Keng-Chi Liu
Taiwan AI Labs

kloppjp@gmail.com

calvin89029@gmail.com

Liang-Gee Chen Shao-Yi Chien
National Taiwan University
lgchen@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
Lossy image compression is often limited by the simplicity of the chosen loss measure. Recent research suggests that generative adversarial networks have the ability
to overcome this limitation and serve as a multi-modal loss,
especially for textures. Together with learned image compression, these two techniques can be used to great effect
when relaxing the commonly employed tight measures of
distortion. However, convolutional neural network-based
algorithms have a large computational footprint. Ideally,
an existing conventional codec should stay in place, ensuring faster adoption and adherence to a balanced computational envelope.
As a possible avenue to this goal, we propose and investigate how learned image coding can be used as a surrogate
to optimise an image for encoding. A learned filter alters
the image to optimise a different performance measure or
a particular task. Extending this idea with a generative adversarial network, we show how entire textures are replaced
by ones that are less costly to encode but preserve a sense
of detail.
Our approach can remodel a conventional codec to adjust for the MS-SSIM distortion with over 20% rate improvement without any decoding overhead. On task-aware
image compression, we perform favourably against a similar but codec-specific approach.

1. Introduction
Forming the basis for video compression, image compression’s efficiency is vital to many data transmission and
storage applications. Most compression algorithms are
lossy, i.e. they do not reproduce the original content exactly but allow for deviations that reduce the coding rate.

sychien@ntu.edu.tw

Lossy compression optimises the objective
L = R + λD

(1)

where R and D stand for rate and distortion, respectively,
and λ controls their weight relative to each other. In practice, computational efficiency is another constraint as at
least the decoder needs to process high resolutions in realtime under a limited power envelope, typically necessitating
dedicated hardware implementations. Requirements for the
encoder are more relaxed, often allowing even offline encoding without demanding real-time capability.
Recent research has developed along two lines: evolution of exiting coding technologies, such as H264 [41] or
H265 [35], culminating in the most recent AV1 codec, on
the one hand. On the other hand, inspired by the success
of deep learning in computer vision, based on the variational autoencoder [20], several learned image compression approaches have been developed. Through careful
modelling of the latent code’s symbol probabilities, those
learned codecs have recently shown to outperform the x265
codec on various performance measures [30]. This trades
engineering effort for complexity: training a neural network
image codec is simple compared to designing a conventional codec with all its bells and whistles. However, the
resulting neural decoder requires on the order of 105 operations per pixel, where a conventional codec has at most a
few hundred operations, being several orders of magnitude
more efficient. This is an important factor, given how much
video and imagery is consumed on mobile devices.
Another advantage of learned compression is the ability
to be easily adapted to different distributions or distortion
measures. By merely collecting data and choosing an appropriate distortion loss, a new codec can quickly be trained
without having to manually re-engineer coding tools or internal parameters.

16165

