A Dual Iterative Refinement Method for Non-rigid Shape Matching
Rui Xiang
Department of Mathematics,
UC, Irvine

Rongjie Lai
Department of Mathematics
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute

Hongkai Zhao
Department of Mathematics
Duke University

xiangr1@uci.edu

lair@rpi.edu

zhao@math.duke.edu

Abstract
In this work, a robust and efficient dual iterative refinement (DIR) method is proposed for dense correspondence
between two nearly isometric shapes. The key idea is to use
dual information, such as spatial and spectral, or local and
global features, in a complementary and effective way, and
extract more accurate information from current iteration to
use for the next iteration. In each DIR iteration, starting
from current correspondence, a zoom-in process at each
point is used to select well matched anchor pairs by a local
mapping distortion criterion. These selected anchor pairs
are then used to align spectral features (or other appropriate global features) whose dimension adaptively matches
the capacity of the selected anchor pairs. Thanks to the
effective combination of complementary information in a
data-adaptive way, DIR is not only efficient but also robust
to render accurate results within a few iterations. By choosing appropriate dual features, DIR has the flexibility to handle patch and partial matching as well. Our comprehensive
experiments on various data sets demonstrate the superiority of DIR over other state-of-the-art methods in terms of
both accuracy and efficiency.

1. Introduction
Nonrigid shape matching is one of the most basic and
important tasks in computer vision and shape analysis, e.g.,
shape registration, comparison, recognition, and retrieval.
Different from 2D images, shapes are usually represented
as 2-dimensional manifolds embedded in R3 . Many challenges for nonrigid shape matching come from embedding
ambiguities, i.e. shapes sharing the same metric (isometry)
or very similar metrics (nearly isometry) can have drastically different xyz-coordinates representations in R3 .
To overcome these representation ambiguities, one of
the commonly used strategies is to extract features which
are isometrically invariant and robust to small perturbations. Along with the idea, many successful and popular approaches are based on spectral geometry [40, 31,

52, 11, 28, 44]. Theoretically, the Laplace-Beltrami (LB)
operator is isometrically invariant. As a generalization of
Fourier basis functions from Euclidean domains to manifolds, the eigensystem of LB operator provides complete
intrinsic spectral information of the underlying manifold.
Moreover, from lower eigen-modes to higher eigen-modes,
LB eigenfunctions also provide a multi-scale characterization of the underlying manifold from coarse to fine resolution. Although using spectral geometry removed possible
non-rigid embedding ambiguities, new ambiguities emerge
in the spectral domain due to non-uniqueness of the LB
eigen-system, e.g., sign ambiguity for eigenfunctions, the
ambiguity of choosing a basis for the LB eigen-space corresponding to a non-simple LB eigenvalue (due to symmetry), the ambiguity of ordering for close eigenvalues (due
to small perturbations). To handle these ambiguities and
use spectral features accurately and robustly, a proper linear
transformation (a rigid transformation for exact isometry)
needs to be found to align the spectral modes between two
shapes first. This linear transformation is typically computed through some matching/correlation based on given
(prior) correspondence, e.g., landmarks [35, 2, 29]. Moreover, to resolve fine details and acquire accurate correspondence between two shapes, high eigen-modes need to be
used. However, the use of higher eign-modes will not only
require more computation costs but, more importantly, can
also cause instability with respect to small perturbations.
To tackle the instability issue of using high eigen-modes
directly, one natural multi-scale approach is to start from a
correspondence at a coarse scale using a few low modes
and iteratively refine the correspondence at a finer scale
by adding more higher modes gradually. The main motivation is that the linear transformation (a small matrix)
on a coarse scale between two truncated spectral functional spaces spanned by a few low eigen-modes can be
determined efficiently and stably from an initial approximate or limited correspondence. Once low eigen-modes are
aligned well, an improved correspondence, especially between smooth parts of the two shapes, is likely obtained.
The improved correspondence is then used to determine the

15930

