Image Inpainting with External-internal Learning and Monochromic Bottleneck
Tengfei Wang∗
Hao Ouyang∗
Qifeng Chen
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Although recent inpainting approaches have demonstrated significant improvement with deep neural networks,
they still suffer from artifacts such as blunt structures and
abrupt colors when filling in the missing regions. To address these issues, we propose an external-internal inpainting scheme with a monochromic bottleneck that helps image inpainting models remove these artifacts. In the external learning stage, we reconstruct missing structures and
details in the monochromic space to reduce the learning dimension. In the internal learning stage, we propose a novel
internal color propagation method with progressive learning strategies for consistent color restoration. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our proposed scheme helps
image inpainting models produce more structure-preserved
and visually compelling results.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting is a task that aims to complete the missing regions of an image with visually realistic and semantically consistent content. Image inpainting can benefit general users in various practical applications, including unwanted object removal from an image, face defect removal,
and image editing. While we have witnessed significant
progress in image inpainting, inpainting models still suffer from abrupt color artifacts, especially when the missing
regions are large. This work will analyze the weaknesses of
state-of-the-art inpainting approaches and present a novel
framework to improve existing inpainting methods.
State-of-the-art inpainting methods roughly fall into two
categories of patch matching by iteratively nearest-neighbor
search and deep learning models, with different pros and
cons. PatchMatch [3] is a learning-free method that only
utilizes internal statistics of a single image. As shown in
Fig. 1, it generates smooth patterns and colors that are consistent with the non-missing region, but it fails to fill in
semantic-aware content. The deep learning based inpainting approaches can learn semantic-aware models by training on large-scale datasets. These approaches have ex-

plored coarse-to-fine inpainting models in different fashions. They may first generate edges [20, 17], structural
information [24], segmentation maps [29] or blurry images [37, 38, 36], and then use these intermediate outputs
as guidance for filling in details. However, their results still
suffer from color and texture artifacts. One of the most
common artifacts observed is color bleeding, as shown in
Fig. 1. These methods trained on a large-scale dataset tend
to introduce inconsistent colors that do not conform to the
color distribution of the test image. On the other hand, we
observe that color bleeding artifacts seldom appear in the
internal methods.
Based on the observations above, we propose a robust inpainting method by combining the best of both
worlds. We adopt a novel external-internal inpainting
scheme with a monochromic bottleneck: first completing the monochromic image via learning externally from
large-scale datasets and then colorizing the completed
monochrome by learning internally on the single test image. Our proposed method is orthogonal to early inpainting
approaches and thus can be easily applied to improve previous learning-based inpainting models for a higher-quality
generation. In the external learning stage, by changing the
output of the reconstruction network from polychromatic
images to monochromic images, we reduce the dimension
of the optimization space from R3 to R, leading to more
structure-preserving reconstruction (Section 4.3). Models
trained in this way also show stronger generalization ability on cross-dataset evaluation. In the colorization stage,
motivated by the recent advancement in deep internal learning, we propose a novel internal color propagation approach
guided by the completed monochromic bottleneck. However, similar monochromic values can map to different polychromic outputs even in a single image. We, therefore,
adopt a progressive restoration strategy for combining both
local and global color statistics. Our external-internal learning scheme not only facilitates structure reconstruction but
also ensures color consistency. By focusing on the internal color distribution of a single image, we can eliminate
abrupt colors and produce a visually pleasing image (Section 3.1.1).
We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the perfor-

∗ Equal contribution

5120

