Learning 3D Shape Feature for Texture-insensitive Person Re-identification
Jiaxing Chen1,5# , Xinyang Jiang3# , Fudong Wang3 , Jun Zhang3 , Feng Zheng4 , Xing Sun3 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2∗
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Youtu Lab, Tencent
4
CSE, Southern University of Science and Technology
5
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
chenjx228@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,xinyangj9024@gmail.com,{fudongwang,bobbyjzhang}@tecent.com
zhengf@sustech.edu.cn,winfredsun@tencent.com,wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
It is well acknowledged that person re-identification
(person ReID) highly relies on visual texture information
like clothing. Despite significant progress has been made
in recent years, texture-confusing situations like clothing
changing and persons wearing the same clothes receive little attention from most existing ReID methods. In this paper, rather than relying on texture based information, we
propose to improve the robustness of person ReID against
clothing texture by exploiting the information of a person’s
3D shape. Existing shape learning schemas for person
ReID either ignore the 3D information of a person, or require extra physical devices to collect 3D source data. Differently, we propose a novel ReID learning framework that
directly extracts a texture-insensitive 3D shape embedding
from a 2D image by adding 3D body reconstruction as an
auxiliary task and regularization, called 3D Shape Learning (3DSL). The 3D reconstruction based regularization
forces the ReID model to decouple the 3D shape information from the visual texture, and acquire discriminative 3D
shape ReID features. To solve the problem of lacking 3D
ground truth, we design an adversarial self-supervised projection (ASSP) model, performing 3D reconstruction without ground truth. Extensive experiments on common ReID
datasets and texture-confusing datasets validate the effectiveness of our model.

1. Introduction
The aim of person ReID is to find the target person
among an existing set of persons captured by a distributed
camera system. Some works [7, 34, 44, 46] have demonstrated that person ReID largely depends on clothing ap# Equal Contribution.
* Corresponding Author.

2D Image Space

Texture-confusing Person
ReID

yellow
T-shirt

plaid
shirt

Large intra-class
distance

Viewpoint
Limitation

Contour

Keypoint

Monocular 3D Reconstruction
ID 1

ID 1

Human
Shape
Learning

Clothing-change

ID 1
white
T-shirt

white
T-shirt

Small inter-class
distance

black
pants

black
pants

ID 1

ID 2

ID 3

3D Source Data
Extra Device
Dependency

ID 3

ID 2

Similar Clothing
Point Cloud

Depth Map

Ratio
Frequency

Figure 1. Illustration of texture-confusing person ReID. Human
shape information is crucial when clothing texture is misleading.
However, modeling shape upon 2D measurement could not capture the intact shape perception and collection of 3D source data
relies on auxiliary devices. Single-view 3D human reconstruction
could help to learn 3D shape feature in surveillance environments.

pearance textures, and most of existing methods decline a
lot when clothing texture is confusing. Considering clothing texture-confusing situations (see Figure 1) that people
might change their clothing [44] or different people wear
very similar clothing [46], clothing texture would become
unreliable for ReID. Situations like suspects wearing different clothes, or different people wearing similar uniforms in
hospitals or schools are ubiquitous.
To extend the scalability of real-world person ReID, in
this paper, we explicitly model discriminative clues beyond
human clothing textures, i.e., human shape representations.
Existing works try to learn shape-related features in two
ways: 2D image space [7, 34, 44] and 3D source data
[21, 31, 41]. 2D-based methods mainly make attempt to extract shape feature based on visual statistics, such as contour
[44] and keypoint [34], or via adversarial feature disentanglement [21]. These methods only utilize the structure and
shape information in 2D space while 3D information like
18146

