Anchor-Free Person Search
Yichao Yan1 * † , Jinpeng Li1 *, Jie Qin1† , Song Bai2 , Shengcai Liao1 , Li Liu1 , Fan Zhu1 , and Ling Shao1
1
2
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI), UAE
University of Oxford, UK
{yanyichao91, ljpadam, qinjiebuaa, songbai.site}@gmail.com, {scliao, ling.shao}@ieee.org

Abstract
Detection
CNN

Person search aims to simultaneously localize and identify a query person from realistic, uncropped images, which
can be regarded as the unified task of pedestrian detection
and person re-identification (re-id). Most existing works
employ two-stage detectors like Faster-RCNN, yielding encouraging accuracy but with high computational overhead.
In this work, we present the Feature-Aligned Person Search
Network (AlignPS), the first anchor-free framework to efficiently tackle this challenging task. AlignPS explicitly addresses the major challenges, which we summarize as the
misalignment issues in different levels (i.e., scale, region,
and task), when accommodating an anchor-free detector for
this task. More specifically, we propose an aligned feature
aggregation module to generate more discriminative and
robust feature embeddings by following a “re-id first” principle. Such a simple design directly improves the baseline
anchor-free model on CUHK-SYSU by more than 20% in
mAP. Moreover, AlignPS outperforms state-of-the-art twostage methods, with a higher speed. The code is available
at https://github.com/daodaofr/AlignPS .

1. Introduction
Person search [55, 48], which aims to localize and identify a target person from a gallery of realistic, uncropped
scene images, has recently emerged as a practical task with
real-world applications. To tackle this task, we need to address two fundamental tasks in computer vision, i.e., pedestrian detection [34, 52] and person re-identification (reid) [15, 1]. Both detection and re-id are very challenging
tasks and have received tremendous attention in the past
decade. In person search, we need to not only address the
challenges (e.g., occlusions, pose/viewpoint variations, and
background clutter) of the two individual tasks, but also pursue a unified and optimized framework to simultaneously
perform detection and re-id.
Previous efforts devoted to this research topic can be
* indicates equal contributions; † indicates corresponding authors.

crop

Re-id
CNN
re-id features

(a) Two-step person search framework
regression
loss
fg/bg
cls loss

RPN

re-id loss

conv

ROI
Align

conv
&
GAP

re-id feature

FC

(b) One-step two-stage person search framework

regression
loss

conv

AFA

fg/bg
cls loss
re-id loss

re-id features
(c) The proposed one-step one-stage anchor-free framework

Figure 1: Comparison of three person search frameworks.
(a) The two-step framework addresses detection and re-id as
two separate tasks. (b) The one-step model enables end-toend training of detection and re-id with an ROI-Align operation based on a two-stage detector; however, re-id is considered as a secondary task after detection. (c) The proposed
framework enables single-stage inference for both detection
and re-id, while making re-id the primary task.
generally divided into two categories. The first line of
works [55, 5, 22], which we refer to as two-step approaches,
attempt to deal with detection and re-id separately. As
shown in Fig. 1a, multiple persons are first localized with
off-the-shelf detection models, and then cropped out and
fed to re-id networks to extract discriminative embeddings.
Although two-step models can obtain satisfactory results,
the disentangled treatment of the two tasks is time- and
resource-consuming. In contrast, the second line of approaches [48, 27, 3, 33, 6] provide a one-step solution that

7690

