Boosting Video Representation Learning with Multi-Faceted Integration
Zhaofan Qiu† , Ting Yao† , Chong-Wah Ngo‡ , Xiao-Ping Zhang§ , Dong Wu† and Tao Mei‡
†
‡

JD AI Research, Beijing, China
§

Singapore Management University, Singapore

Ryerson University, Toronto, Canada

{zhaofanqiu, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com, cwngo@smu.edu.sg
xzhang@ee.ryerson.ca, wudong99@gmail.com, tmei@jd.com

Abstract

holding something

kitchen

t-shirt

Video content is multifaceted, consisting of objects,
scenes, interactions or actions. The existing datasets mostly
label only one of the facets for model training, resulting
in the video representation that biases to only one facet
depending on the training dataset. There is no study yet
on how to learn a video representation from multifaceted
labels, and whether multifaceted information is helpful
for video representation learning. In this paper, we propose a new learning framework, MUlti-Faceted Integration (MUFI), to aggregate facets from different datasets for
learning a representation that could reflect the full spectrum
of video content. Technically, MUFI formulates the problem
as visual-semantic embedding learning, which explicitly
maps video representation into a rich semantic embedding
space, and jointly optimizes video representation from two
perspectives. One is to capitalize on the intra-facet supervision between each video and its own label descriptions, and
the second predicts the “semantic representation” of each
video from the facets of other datasets as the inter-facet supervision. Extensive experiments demonstrate that learning 3D CNN via our MUFI framework on a union of four
large-scale video datasets plus two image datasets leads
to superior capability of video representation. The prelearnt 3D CNN with MUFI also shows clear improvements
over other approaches on several downstream video applications. More remarkably, MUFI achieves 98.1%/80.9%
on UCF101/HMDB51 for action recognition and 101.5%
in terms of CIDEr-D score on MSVD for video captioning.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks have been proven to be highly
effective for learning vision models on large-scale datasets.
To date in the literature, there are various image datasets
(e.g., ImageNet [47], COCO [31], Visual Genome [25]) that
include large amounts of expert labeled images for train-

scoop

bowl

making a cake

cake pouring something table
onto something

cup

Figure 1. Example illustrating the four facets of video content: object (blue), scene (green), interaction (magenta), and action (red).

ing deep models. The well-trained models, on one hand,
manifest impressive classification performances, and on the
other, produce discriminative and generic representation for
image understanding tasks. Compared to static 2D images,
video has one more dimension (time) and is an informationintensive media with large variations and complexities. As
a result, learning a powerful spatio-temporal video representation is yet a challenging problem.
Capitalizing on the high capability of deep models, one
natural way to improve video representation is to acquire
more video data. For example, Tran et al. [50] devised
a widely-adopted 3D CNN, namely C3D, optimized on
a large-scale Sports1M dataset and a constructed I380K
dataset. Carreira et al. [2] built a popular pre-training
dataset, i.e., Kinetics, consisting of around 300K wellannotated trimmed video clips. To expand the study in the
regime of web videos which is multiple orders of magnitude
larger, Ghadiyaram et al. [14] collected 65M web videos
for pre-training 3D CNN in a weakly-supervised manner.
Despite the tremendous progresses, performing learning on
a specific dataset usually focuses on a particular channel
of videos (e.g., action) and seldom explores other facets of
videos simultaneously. Taking a video of “making a cake”
from Kinetics dataset as an example (Figure 1), there are
a wide variety of facets, ranging from object, scene, interaction, to action. Nevertheless, Kinetics, as human action
dataset, mainly emphasizes the facet of action, making the
learnt representation mostly aware of the action informa-

14030

