Truly shift-invariant convolutional neural networks
Anadi Chaman
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Ivan Dokmanić
University of Basel

achaman2@illinois.edu

ivan.dokmanic@unibas.ch

Abstract
Thanks to the use of convolution and pooling layers, convolutional neural networks were for a long time thought to
be shift-invariant. However, recent works have shown that
the output of a CNN can change significantly with small
shifts in input—a problem caused by the presence of downsampling (stride) layers. The existing solutions rely either
on data augmentation or on anti-aliasing, both of which
have limitations and neither of which enables perfect shift
invariance. Additionally, the gains obtained from these
methods do not extend to image patterns not seen during
training. To address these challenges, we propose adaptive
polyphase sampling (APS), a simple sub-sampling scheme
that allows convolutional neural networks to achieve 100%
consistency in classification performance under shifts, without any loss in accuracy. With APS, the networks exhibit
perfect consistency to shifts even before training, making it
the first approach that makes convolutional neural networks
truly shift-invariant.

1. Introduction
The output of an image classifier should be invariant to
small shifts in the image. For a long time, convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) were simply assumed to exhibit
this desirable property [36, 37, 38, 39]. This was thanks to
the use of convolutional layers which are shift equivariant,
and non-linearities and pooling layers which progressively
build stability to deformations [6, 42]. However, recent
works have shown that CNNs are in fact not shift-invariant
[2, 58, 18, 34, 31]. Azulay and Weiss [2] show that the
output of a CNN trained for classification can change with
a probability of 30% with merely a one-pixel shift in input
images. Related works [31, 34] have also revealed that
CNNs can encode absolute spatial location in images: a
consequence of a lack of shift invariance.

Code available at https://github.com/achaman2/truly_
shift_invariant_cnns.

Unshifted image

Unshifted image

Shifted image

Shifted image

Conventional linear downsampling
(a)

Our proposed non-linear sampling
(b)

Figure 1. (a) Conventional downsampling is not robust to shifts.
It samples image pixels at fixed locations on the grid (shown with
small squares). Shifting the image changes pixel intensities located on the fixed grid, resulting in a different subsampled output.
(b) By choosing the sampling grid that supports pixels with highest
energy, our approach results in shift invariance.

One of the key reasons why CNNs are not shift-invariant
is downsampling1 [2, 58], or stride, which is a linear operation that samples evenly spaced image pixels located
at fixed positions on the grid and discards the rest. As
shown in Fig. 1(a), the results of downsampling an image
and its shifted version can be significantly different. This
is because shifting an image can change the pixel intensities located over the sampling grid. Various measures have
been proposed in literature to counter this problem. With
data augmentation [48], the output of a CNN can be made
more robust to shifts by training it on randomly shifted versions of input images [2, 58]. This, however, improves
the network’s invariance only for image patterns seen during training [2]. Anti-aliasing or blurring spreads sharp
image features across their neighbouring pixels which improves structural similarity between subsampled outputs of
an image and its shifted version (Fig. 2(a)-(c)). One instance of this technique are strided average pooling layers [38]. Azulay and Weiss [2] showed that anti-aliasing
1 Layers like strided max-pooling in CNNs can be regarded as a combination of a dense max-pooling operation followed by downsampling.

3773

