MAZE: Data-Free Model Stealing Attack Using
Zeroth-Order Gradient Estimation
Sanjay Kariyappa
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta GA, USA

Atul Prakash
University of Michigan
Ann Arbor MI, USA

Moinuddin K Qureshi
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta GA, USA

sanjaykariyappa@gatech.edu

aprakash@umich.edu

moin@gatech.edu

Abstract
High quality Machine Learning (ML) models are often considered valuable intellectual property by companies.
Model Stealing (MS) attacks allow an adversary with blackbox access to a ML model to replicate its functionality by
training a clone model using the predictions of the target
model for different inputs. However, best available existing
MS attacks fail to produce a high-accuracy clone without
access to the target dataset or a representative dataset necessary to query the target model. In this paper, we show
that preventing access to the target dataset is not an adequate defense to protect a model. We propose MAZE – a
data-free model stealing attack using zeroth-order gradient
estimation that produces high-accuracy clones. In contrast
to prior works, MAZE uses only synthetic data created using a generative model to perform MS.
Our evaluation with four image classification models
shows that MAZE provides a normalized clone accuracy
in the range of 0.90⇥ to 0.99⇥, and outperforms even the
recent attacks that rely on partial data (JBDA, clone accuracy 0.13⇥ to 0.69⇥) and on surrogate data (KnockoffNets,
clone accuracy 0.52⇥ to 0.97⇥). We also study an extension of MAZE in the partial-data setting, and develop
MAZE-PD, which generates synthetic data closer to the
target distribution. MAZE-PD further improves the clone
accuracy (0.97⇥ to 1.0⇥) and reduces the query budget required for the attack by 2⇥-24⇥.

1. Introduction
The ability of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) to achieve
state of the art performances in a wide variety of challenging
computer-vision tasks has spurred the wide-spread adoption of these models by companies to enable various products and services such as self-driving cars, license plate
reading, disease diagnosis from medical images, activity
classification from images and video, and smart cameras.

As the performance of ML models scales with the training data [11], companies invest significantly in collecting
vast amounts of data to train high-performance ML models. Protecting the confidentiality of these models is vital
for companies to maintain a competitive advantage and to
prevent the stolen model from being misused by an adversary to compromise security and privacy. For example, an
adversary can use the stolen model to craft adversarial examples [9, 30, 32], compromise user membership privacy
through membership inference attacks [29, 34, 21], and leak
sensitive user data used to train the model through model inversion attacks [6, 35, 38]. Thus, ML models are considered
valuable intellectual properties of the owner and are closely
guarded against theft and data leaks.
Step 1: Construct Training dataset by querying the target model

(a)

x0 , y0
x1 , y1
x2 , y2

x3
y3 = T (x3 )

Dataset

Black -Box
Target Model (T )

Step 2: Use the constructed dataset to train the clone model

(b)

x0 , y0
x1 , y1
x2 , y2
· ·
xn , yn

Dataset

Clone Model (C)

Figure 1. Model stealing attacks: The target model is queried using a set of inputs {xi }n
i=1 to obtain a labeled training dataset
{xi , yi }n
i=1 , which is used to train the clone model.

Model functionality stealing attacks compromise the
confidentiality of ML models by allowing an adversary to
train a clone model that closely mimics the predictions
of the target model, effectively copying its functionality.
These attacks only require black-box access to the target
model where the adversary can access the predictions of
the model for any given input. Fig. 1 illustrates the steps
involved in carrying out a MS attack. The adversary first
113814

