Roses are Red, Violets are Blue... But Should VQA expect Them To?
Corentin Kervadec1,2 Grigory Antipov1 Moez Baccouche1 Christian Wolf2
1
Orange, Cesson-Sévigné, France. 2 LIRIS, INSA-Lyon, UMR CNRS 5205, France
corentinkervadec.github.io {grigory.antipov, moez.baccouche}@orange.com christian.wolf@insa-lyon.fr

Abstract
Models for Visual Question Answering (VQA) are notorious for their tendency to rely on dataset biases, as the
large and unbalanced diversity of questions and concepts
involved and tends to prevent models from learning to “reason”, leading them to perform “educated guesses” instead.
In this paper, we claim that the standard evaluation metric, which consists in measuring the overall in-domain accuracy, is misleading. Since questions and concepts are
unbalanced, this tends to favor models which exploit subtle training set statistics. Alternatively, naively introducing
artificial distribution shifts between train and test splits is
also not completely satisfying. First, the shifts do not reflect real-world tendencies, resulting in unsuitable models;
second, since the shifts are handcrafted, trained models are
specifically designed for this particular setting, and do not
generalize to other configurations. We propose the GQAOOD benchmark designed to overcome these concerns: we
measure and compare accuracy over both rare and frequent
question-answer pairs, and argue that the former is better
suited to the evaluation of reasoning abilities, which we experimentally validate with models trained to more or less
exploit biases. In a large-scale study involving 7 VQA models and 3 bias reduction techniques, we also experimentally
demonstrate that these models fail to address questions involving infrequent concepts and provide recommendations
for future directions of research.

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA), i.e. the task of answering a question posed over an image, is often seen as a
testbed for the capability of learning-based systems to perform high-level reasoning. This multimodal problem is notorious for its diversity, meaning that VQA models are required to learn various high-level general representations of
concepts of the physical world as well as their interactions.
Efforts to learn the necessary high-level reasoning from
large-scale datasets depend on the absence of harmful biases in the data, which could provide unwanted shortcuts

Question groups
(context)

Group: objects on walls
(…)

“What is on
the wall?”

(…)

”P “M
“
“S “S
“C “L
t h
ic ir M Pai
tu ro C nt VIS ar” elf BU otto eft”
re r” A in -O (G ”: TD n : B
”: : L N [ g ” R T B
d
(Q S 3 : B AC A UT +B ess UTD
ue TM 1], AN LE ns D P[9 er +
st [4 M 4 , L we +R ] t”: LM
io ], M [1 X r) U
[9
n B N[ 7] M : BI
]
pr UT 8
ER
[7
io D ] ,
T
]
r) [ 3
[2
6]
]

Figure 1. We address bias exploitation in VQA and propose a new
benchmark for Out-Of-Distribution evaluation containing distribution shifts tailored to different question groups with highly imbalanced distributions. A new evaluation metric based on rareness
inside each question group, here shown for ”objects on walls”, is
experimentally demonstrated to be less prone to bias exploitation.
We show that SOTA methods (7 VQA models and 3 bias reduction
methods) reproduce biases in training data.

to learning in the form of “Clever Hans” effects. Unfortunately, and in spite of recent efforts [11, 15], most VQA
datasets remain very imbalanced. Common concepts are
significantly more frequent, e.g the presence of a “red rose”,
compared to out of context concepts like the presence of a
“zebra in a city”. This causes the tendency of models to
overly rely on biases, hindering generalisation [7, 9]. Despite a general consensus on this diagnostic, systemic evaluations of error distributions are rare. In particular, overall
accuracy is still the major, and often unique, metric used to
evaluate models and methods, although it is clearly insufficient. Several questions remain open. How is error distributed? Are true positives due to reasoning or to exploitation of bias? What is the prediction accuracy on infrequent
vs. frequent concepts? How can we validate models in Out
Of Distribution (OOD)-settings?
In this work we propose a new benchmark and a study
of State-Of-The-Art (SOTA) VQA models, which allows to
precisely answer these questions. The proposed new evaluation protocol is complementary to existing ones, but al12776

