Adaptive Convolutions for Structure-Aware Style Transfer
Prashanth Chandran1,2

Gaspard Zoss1,2

Paulo Gotardo1

Markus Gross1,2

Derek Bradley1

1) DisneyResearch|Studios, Zurich
2) Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
{chandrap,gaspard.zoss,grossm}@inf.ethz.ch, {paulo.gotardo,derek.bradley}@disneyresearch.com
Style Transfer

Style Image

Content Image

Style-based Generation

AdaIN

AdaConv (Ours)

Figure 1: We propose Adaptive Convolutions (AdaConv), an extension of Adaptive Instance Normalization (AdaIN) for
image style transfer, which is able to transfer both statistical and structural style elements. AdaConv can also be applied to
generative models such as StyleGAN for photorealistic image synthesis on a multitude of datasets1 .

Abstract
Style transfer between images is an artistic application
of CNNs, where the ‘style’ of one image is transferred onto
another image while preserving the latter’s content. The
state of the art in neural style transfer is based on Adaptive
Instance Normalization (AdaIN), a technique that transfers
the statistical properties of style features to a content image, and can transfer a large number of styles in real time.
However, AdaIN is a global operation; thus local geometric
structures in the style image are often ignored during the
transfer. We propose Adaptive Convolutions (AdaConv), a
generic extension of AdaIN, to allow for the simultaneous
transfer of both statistical and structural styles in real time.
Apart from style transfer, our method can also be readily
extended to style-based image generation, and other tasks
where AdaIN has already been adopted.

1. Introduction
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have been used to explore and manipulate the style of im-

ages. Image style is often defined by image features such
as overall color and local structure of brush strokes, in the
context of paintings, or the pose and expression of a face
in generative image applications. Style is also defined at
different resolutions, and thus can include both the global
identity of a face as well as the local structure of freckles on
the skin. Research in this area gained a lot of momentum
with the advent of neural style transfer, originally proposed
by Gatys et al. [8], where a CNN is trained to reproduce
the content of one input image, but rendered with the style
of another image. In a similar spirit, generative adversarial
networks (GANs) have been used to produce realistic synthetic images with style defined by a random vector input,
for example in the creation of synthetic face images [18].
The widespread approach for manipulating style is
through adaptive instance normalization (AdaIN), a method
that transforms the mean and variance of image features.
For example, AdaIN is often used to transfer feature statistics of a style image onto a content image. Since its definition by Huang et al. in 2017 [13], this operation has already become commonplace in CNN-based image manipulation literature. One major drawback of AdaIN, however,

7972

