RSTNet: Captioning with Adaptive Attention on Visual and Non-Visual Words
Xuying Zhang1 , Xiaoshuai Sun12 ,* Yunpeng Luo1 , Jiayi Ji1 , Yiyi Zhou1 ,
Yongjian Wu2 , Feiyue Huang2 , Rongrong Ji124
1
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics,
Xiamen University, 361005, China. 2 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University.
3
Youtu Lab, Tencent. 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.
zhangxuying@stu.xmu.edu.cn, xssun@xmu.edu.cn, {lyricpoem1997,jjyxmu}@gmail.com,
zhouyiyi@xmu.edu.cn, {littlekenwu,garyhuang}@tencent.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn

h

Abstract
Recent progress on visual question answering has explored the merits of grid features for vision language tasks.
Meanwhile, transformer-based models have shown remarkable performance in various sequence prediction problems. However, the spatial information loss of grid features caused by flattening operation, as well as the defect
of the transformer model in distinguishing visual words and
non visual words, are still left unexplored. In this paper,
we first propose Grid-Augmented (GA) module, in which
relative geometry features between grids are incorporated
to enhance visual representations. Then, we build a BERTbased language model to extract language context and propose Adaptive-Attention (AA) module on top of a transformer decoder to adaptively measure the contribution of
visual and language cues before making decisions for word
prediction. To prove the generality of our proposals, we
apply the two modules to the vanilla transformer model to
build our Relationship-Sensitive Transformer (RSTNet) for
image captioning task. The proposed model is tested on
the MSCOCO benchmark, where it achieves new state-ofart results on both the Karpathy test split and the online
test server. Source code is available at GitHub 1 .

1. Introduction
Image captioning task aims to automatically generate a
natural language sentence to describe the visual content of
a given image. The encoder-decoder framework inspired
by neural machine translation [34] has been widely adopted
by captioning models[39, 40, 41, 5, 25], in which the CNN
based encoder extracts visual features and the RNN based
decoder generates the output sentence. Besides, the atten* corresponding author
1 https://github.com/zhangxuying1004/RSTNet

i

⋯ i ⋯j ⋯
j

h×w
0

w

Caption: A man hitting a tennis
ball with a racquet.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. This paper aims at reducing the spatial information loss
of features and characterizing the visualizability of words in Captioning task. (a) shows the loss of spatial information when the
grid features are flattened and fed to the transformer encoder. (b)
illustrates the examples of visual (red) and non-visual (blue) word.

tion mechanism was introduced in order to help the model
focus on the relevant positions when generating each word
[41, 16]. Based on the encoder-decoder framework, most
efforts to improve image captioning model focus on two
main aspects: a) optimizing the visual features extracted
from the input image [2, 42, 12], and b) improving the
model structure for feature processing [41, 2, 23, 6, 28].
In terms of visual representation, region-based visual
features [2] have become the dominant approach in major
vision and language tasks like image captioning and visual
question answering. However, the region extraction process is so time-consuming that currently most of the models
with region features are directly trained and evaluated on
cached visual features. Recently, Jiang et al. [15] revisited
the grid features for VQA and demonstrated that grid features extracted from exactly the same layer of region feature
detector [30] work quite well, both in speed and accuracy.
In this paper, we also utilize grid features as the main visual representation for our captioning model. Nevertheless,
grid features are flattened when fed to a transformer model,
which inevitably leads to the loss of spatial information, as
shown in Figure 1(a). Thus, we propose Grid-Augmented
(GA) module which incorporates the spatial geometric relationships between relative locations into grids in order to
facilitate a more comprehensive use of the grid features.

15465

