Fair Feature Distillation for Visual Recognition
Sangwon Jung1∗, Donggyu Lee1∗, Taeeon Park1∗ and Taesup Moon2†
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{s.jung, ldk308, pte1236}@skku.edu, tsmoon@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Teacher

Fairness is becoming an increasingly crucial issue for
computer vision, especially in the human-related decision
systems. However, achieving algorithmic fairness, which
makes a model produce indiscriminative outcomes against
protected groups, is still an unresolved problem. In this
paper, we devise a systematic approach which reduces algorithmic biases via feature distillation for visual recognition tasks, dubbed as MMD-based Fair Distillation (MFD).
While the distillation technique has been widely used in
general to improve the prediction accuracy, to the best of
our knowledge, there has been no explicit work that also
tries to improve fairness via distillation. Furthermore, We
give a theoretical justification of our MFD on the effect of
knowledge distillation and fairness. Throughout the extensive experiments, we show our MFD significantly mitigates
the bias against specific minorities without any loss of the
accuracy on both synthetic and real-world face datasets.

1. Introduction
Based on the remarkable performance of deep neural networks, computer vision has become one of the core technologies in many applications that affect various aspects of
society; e.g., facial recognition [24], AI-assisted hiring [25],
healthcare diagnostics [13], and law enforcement [11]. Due
to these social applications of computer vision algorithms,
it is becoming increasingly essential for them to be fair;
namely, the outcomes of systems should not be discriminative against any certain groups on the basis of sensitive
attributes. For example, any automated system that incorporates photographs into a decision process (e.g., job interview) should not rely on certain sensitive attributes, such as
race or gender [29]. However, recent studies demonstrate
that commercial API systems for facial analysis expose the
gender/race bias in widely used face datasets [6, 34].
In this work, we are interested in the setting in which an
∗ The first three authors have contributed equally.
† Corresponding author (E-mail: tsmoon@snu.ac.kr)

Common Skin ColorFacial correlated
Features Features

Unattractive

⋯
Attractive

Fair Student

Transfer
Attractive

⋯
Attractive

Figure 1. An illustrative example of motivation to our work. The
“teacher” model may depend heavily on the skin color when deciding whether the face is attractive, while it may also have learned
useful common (unbiased) facial features. To train a fair “student”
model via feature distillation, only the unbiased common features
from the teacher should be transferred to the student so that both
high accuracy and fairness can be achieved.

already deployed model has been identified as unfair. The
usual approach of the so-called in-processing methods to
mitigate the unfair bias is to re-train the model from scratch
with an additional fairness constraint [1, 18, 37]. However,
such approaches typically do not utilize any predictive information already learned out by the deployed model, and
hence, would lead to sacrificing the accuracy for the improved fairness. To address above limitation, the knowledge
distillation (KD) [16] technique can be considered as a potential tool for leveraging the deployed model’s predictive
power while re-training with fairness constraints. Nonetheless, the typical existing KD methods [16, 30, 38, 31, 17]
focused only on improving the accuracy, and considering
both the accuracy and fairness during the process of KD is
not straightforward. We aim to resolve this challenge by
proposing a new fairness-aware feature distillation scheme.
Figure 1 illustrates the key idea of our work. We assume
that even when the original deployed model, the “teacher”
model, may be heavily biased (i.e., heavily use the sensi-

12115

