Searching for Fast Model Families on Datacenter Accelerators
Sheng Li, Mingxing Tan, Ruoming Pang, Andrew Li, Liqun Cheng, Quoc V. Le, Norman P. Jouppi
Google
{lsheng,tanmingxing,rpang,andrewyli,liquncheng,qvl,jouppi}@google.com

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS), together with model
scaling, has shown remarkable progress in designing high
accuracy and fast convolutional architecture families. However, as neither NAS nor model scaling considers sufficient
hardware architecture details, they do not take full advantage of the emerging datacenter (DC) accelerators. In this
paper, we search for fast and accurate CNN model families
for efficient inference on DC accelerators. We first analyze
DC accelerators and find that existing CNNs suffer from
insufficient operational intensity, parallelism, and execution efficiency and exhibit FLOPs-latency nonproportionality. These insights let us create a DC-accelerator-optimized
search space, with space-to-depth, space-to-batch, hybrid
fused convolution structures with vanilla and depthwise convolutions, and block-wise activation functions. We further
propose a latency-aware compound scaling (LACS), the first
multi-objective compound scaling method optimizing both
accuracy and latency. Our LACS discovers that network
depth should grow much faster than image size and network width, which is quite different from the observations
from previous compound scaling. With the new search space
and LACS, our search and scaling on datacenter accelerators results in a new model series named EfficientNet-X.
EfficientNet-X is up to more than 2X faster than EfficientNet (a model series with state-of-the-art trade-off on FLOPs
and accuracy) on TPUv3 and GPUv100, with comparable
accuracy. EfficientNet-X is also up to 7X faster than recent RegNet and ResNeSt on TPUv3 and GPUv100. Source
code is at https://github.com/tensorflow/tpu/tree/
master/models/official/efficientnet/tpu

1. Introduction
As Moore’s Law is slowing down, more specialized
datacenter (DC) accelerators such as GPUs [43, 14] and
TPUs [32, 20, 15, 42] have been developed to keep up with
the increasing demand of machine learning (ML) models.
With the increasing complexity of ML model architectures
and accelerator architectures, there is a fast-widening gap
between achieved performance and available performance.

Figure 1: Unified accelerator-optimized NAS and Latencyaware Compound Scaling (LACS) to search model families
optimized for TPUs and GPUs. The same multi-objective
with both latency and accuracy is used for both NAS and
model scaling. For a given accelerator, a base model (m1)
is obtained via NAS with a new search space tailored to
DC accelerators. The new latency-aware compound scaling
(LACS) searches for scaling coefficients on m1 to form the
model family. Both processes are executed separately on
TPU and GPU, resulting in two families of final models.
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [65, 9, 66, 11], a new
paradigm of assembling models automatically, has the potential to bridge the gap. Modern NAS usually aims at designing
a family of models for different accuracy-speed trade-offs
for different use cases. Because of the high cost associated
with searching for the entire family of models, model scaling
is commonly used to achieve this goal by scaling [25, 57]
up from a base model to form a model family. However, on
specialized DC accelerators the fast-widening gap remains
even with NAS and model scaling, because they do not have
sufficient visibility into hardware architecture details and
thus cannot design optimal model families for them.
In this paper, we aim at bridging this gap and designing model families with high accuracy and inference speed,
by taking into consideration hardware architecture details
of TPUs and GPUs for both NAS and model scaling. We
first analyze DC accelerators to find performance bottlenecks. Our analysis reveals the root cause of the recent
observed FLOPs-latency nonpropotionality [51]. We discover that SOTA CNNs suffer from low operational intensity
18085

