Global2Local: Efficient Structure Search for Video Action Segmentation
Shang-Hua Gao1 *
Qi Han1 *
Pai Peng2
Liang Wang3
TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University1

Zhong-Yu Li1
Ming-Ming Cheng1 †
Tencent2
NLPR3

http://mmcheng.net/g2lsearch

Abstract
Temporal receptive fields of models play an important
role in action segmentation. Large receptive fields facilitate
the long-term relations among video clips while small receptive fields help capture the local details. Existing methods construct models with hand-designed receptive fields in
layers. Can we effectively search for receptive field combinations to replace hand-designed patterns? To answer this
question, we propose to find better receptive field combinations through a global-to-local search scheme. Our search
scheme exploits both global search to find the coarse combinations and local search to get the refined receptive field
combination patterns further. The global search finds possible coarse combinations other than human-designed patterns. On top of the global search, we propose an expectation guided iterative local search scheme to refine combinations effectively. Our global-to-local search can be plugged
into existing action segmentation methods to achieve stateof-the-art performance. The source code is publicly available on http://mmcheng.net/g2lsearch.

1. Introduction
Action recognition segments the action of each video
frame, playing an important role in computer vision applications such as clips tagging [59], video surveillance [8, 9],
and anomaly detection [54]. While conventional works [4,
17,18,56] have continuously refresh the recognition performance of short trimmed videos containing a single activity,
segmenting each frame densely in long untrimmed videos
remains challenging as those videos contain many activities with different temporal lengths. Temporal convolutional networks (TCN) [12,16,35,40,65] are widely adapted
in action segmentation tasks with their ability to capture
both long-term and short-term information. Appropriate receptive fields in layers are crucial for TCN as large recep* Equal contribution
† M.M. Cheng (cmm@nankai.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

...

...

...

operators

...

... ...

... ...

...

dilations

Figure 1. Search space comparison between searching for network
architecture and receptive field combinations. Left: Network architecture search mostly search for several operations with different functions. Right: The search space of receptive field combinations is huge. The white, green, blue nodes and orange shade
represent the dilation rate candidates, the sparse search space in
global search, one of the global searched results, and the local
search space.

tive fields contribute to long-term dependencies while small
receptive fields benefit the local details. State-of-the-art
(SOTA) methods [5, 29, 39, 40, 65] rely on human-designed
receptive field combinations, i.e., dilation rate or pooling
size in each layer, to make the trade-off between capturing
long and short term dependencies. Questions have raised:
Are there other effective receptive field combinations that
perform comparable or better than hand-designed patterns?
Will the receptive field combinations vary among different
datasets? To answer those questions, we propose to find
the possible receptive field combinations in a coarse-to-fine
scheme through the global-to-local search.
As shown in Fig. 1, unlike the existing network architecture search spaces [3, 27, 43] that only contain several
operation options within a layer, the available search space
of receptive field combinations could be huge. Suppose
a TCN has L convolutional layers and D possible receptive fields in each layer. There are DL possible combinations, i.e., the number of possible receptive field combinations in MS-TCN [12] is 102440 . Directly apply network architecture searching algorithms [27, 41, 43, 66] to
such a huge search space is impractical. For example,
conventional reward-based searching methods [42, 47, 66]
are not suitable for CNN-based models with a huge search

16805

