Automatic Correction of Internal Units in Generative Neural Networks
Ali Tousi1,∗,
Haedong Jeong1,2,∗,
Jiyeon Han1 ,
Hwanil Choi1 ,
Jaesik Choi1,3,†
1
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea
2
Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), South Korea
3
INEEJI, South Korea
{ali.tousi, haedong.jeong, j.han, hwanil.choi, jaesik.choi}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have shown
satisfactory performance in synthetic image generation by
devising complex network structure and adversarial training scheme. Even though GANs are able to synthesize realistic images, there exists a number of generated images
with defective visual patterns which are known as artifacts.
While most of the recent work tries to ﬁx artifact generations by perturbing latent code, few investigate internal
units of a generator to ﬁx them. In this work, we devise a
method that automatically identiﬁes the internal units generating various types of artifact images. We further propose the sequential correction algorithm which adjusts the
generation ﬂow by modifying the detected artifact units to
improve the quality of generation while preserving the original outline. Our method outperforms the baseline method
in terms of FID-score and shows satisfactory results with
human evaluation.

1. Introduction
In recent years, GANs have become more powerful in
terms of producing photo-realistic images [13, 12] which
are often hard to distinguish from real samples. In addition, they have become increasingly better at producing diverse sets of generated samples. These outstanding abilities pave way for GANs to be employed in various real-life
domains [9, 18]. The main focus of existing work in the
GAN domain has been on improving the quality of synthesis by changing the training scheme or devising more complex models. Despite considerable successes, GANs still
suffer from producing outputs that contain unrealistic regions, so-called artifacts, which make them unsuitable for
being employed in mission-critical applications. As a result, examining the root cause of such phenomena and pos-

sible solutions to enhance the overall quality has proved to
be important.
Recent work removes artifact areas by perturbing the
latent codes [22]. Defective units are removed based on
understanding the representation of internal units and human annotation [3]. Unlike the previous methods, we identify defective units by learning a classiﬁer from annotated
samples. Furthermore, by utilizing an obtained explanation
map, we devise our own global multi-layer artifact unit ablation scheme which enhances the quality of defective generations while preserving plausible generations.
In our approach, we ﬁrst annotate randomly sampled
generations into two categories, Normal and Artifact, based
on predeﬁned criteria. Then we train a classiﬁer on all the
annotated generations and some randomly sampled real images to classify images into their corresponding categories.
Our trained classiﬁer can generate an estimated mask for defective regions by employing an explanation method [21].
By measuring the alignment between an individual internal unit’s activation and the defective regions’ segmentation
mask, we identify units inducing artifacts. In order to correct the artifact areas in the generations, we ablate units with
the highest overlap score.
In summary, the contribution of our work is three-fold:
• We compile a large dataset of curated ﬂawed generations and provide a comprehensive analysis on artifact
generations.
• We identify defective units in a generative model by
measuring the intersection-over-union (IoU) of the
unit’s activation map and pseudo artifact region masks
obtained by training a simple classiﬁer on our dataset.
• We propose an artifact removal method by globally
ablating defective units which enhances the quality
of artifact samples while maintaining normal samples
from drastic change. We further improve the approach
by sequentially ablating the defective units throughout
consequent layers.

∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding Author

7932

