NBNet: Noise Basis Learning for Image Denoising with Subspace Projection
Shen Cheng1 Yuzhi Wang1 Haibin Huang2 Donghao Liu1 Haoqiang Fan1 Shuaicheng Liu3,1 *
Megvii Technology 2 Kuaishou Technology
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
https://github.com/megvii-research/NBNet

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce NBNet, a novel framework
for image denoising. Unlike previous works, we propose
to tackle this challenging problem from a new perspective:
noise reduction by image-adaptive projection. Specifically,
we propose to train a network that can separate signal and
noise by learning a set of reconstruction basis in the feature space. Subsequently, image denosing can be achieved
by selecting corresponding basis of the signal subspace and
projecting the input into such space. Our key insight is that
projection can naturally maintain the local structure of input signal, especially for areas with low light or weak textures. Towards this end, we propose SSA, a non-local attention module we design to explicitly learn the basis generation as well as subspace projection. We further incorporate SSA with NBNet, a UNet structured network designed
for end-to-end image denosing based. We conduct evaluations on benchmarks, including SIDD and DND, and NBNet
achieves state-of-the-art performance on PSNR and SSIM
with significantly less computational cost.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is a fundamental and long lasting task in
image processing and computer vision. The main challenging is to recover a clean signal x from the noisy observation
y, with the additive noise n, namely:
y =x+n

(1)

This problem is ill-posed as both the image term x and the
noise term n are unknown and can hardly be separated. Towards this end, many denoising methods utilize image prior
and a noise model to estimate either image or noise from the
noisy observation. For example, traditional methods such as
NLM [9] and BM3D [14] use the local similarity of image
* Corresponding author

Denoising Performance (PSNR)

1

40
DANet
39.47 dB
9.1 M
3.71 Gflops

38

VDN
39.28 dB
7.8 M
12.37 Gflops

36

NBNet
39.75 dB
13.3 M
22.2 Gflops
RIDNet
38.71 dB
1.5 M
24.5 Gflops

MIRNet
39.72 dB
31.8 M
196.76 Gflops

34
CBDNet
30.78 dB
4.34 M
10.8 Gflops

32
30
2

4

8

16

32

64

128

256

Computational Cost (GFlops)

Figure 1: PSNRs at different computational cost and parameter amount of our method and previous methods in SIDD
[1]. The proposed NBNet achieves SOTA performance with
a balanced computational requirement.

and the independence of noise, and wavelet denoising [34]
utilizes the sparsity of image in transformed domain.
Recent deep neural networks (DNN) based denoising
methods [40, 12, 53, 21, 44, 30, 42] usually implicitly utilize image prior and noise distribution learned from a large
set of paired training data.
Although previous CNN-based methods have achieved
tremendous success, it is still challenging to recover high
quality images in hard scenes such as weak textures or highfrequency details. Our key observation is that convolutional
networks usually depend on local filter response to separate
noise and signal. While in hard scenes with low signalnoise-ratio (SNR), local response can easily get confused
without additional global structure information.
In this paper, we utilize non-local image information by
projection. The basic concept of image projection is illustrated in Fig. 2, where a set of image basis vectors are generated from the input image, then we reconstruct the image
inside the subspace spanned by these basis vectors. As natural images usually lie in a low-rank signal subspace, by
properly learning and generating the basis vectors, the reconstructed image can keep most original information and

4896

