StablePose: Learning 6D Object Poses from Geometrically Stable Patches
Yifei Shi*

Junwen Huang*
Xin Xu
Yifan Zhang
National University of Defense Technology

Kai Xu†

Abstract
We introduce the concept of geometric stability to the
problem of 6D object pose estimation and propose to learn
pose inference based on geometrically stable patches extracted from observed 3D point clouds. According to the
theory of geometric stability analysis, a minimal set of three
planar/cylindrical patches are geometrically stable and determine the full 6DoFs of the object pose. We train a deep
neural network to regress 6D object pose based on geometrically stable patch groups via learning both intra-patch geometric features and inter-patch contextual features. A subnetwork is jointly trained to predict per-patch poses. This
auxiliary task is a relaxation of the group pose prediction:
A single patch cannot determine the full 6DoFs but is able
to improve pose accuracy in its corresponding DoFs. Working with patch groups makes our method generalize well for
random occlusion and unseen instances. The method is easily amenable to resolve symmetry ambiguities. Our method
achieves the state-of-the-art results on public benchmarks
compared not only to depth-only but also to RGBD methods. It also performs well in category-level pose estimation.

1. Introduction
The problem of object pose estimation is to determine
the 6D rigid transformation from the local object coordinate
system to the camera reference frame. Robust and accurate
object pose estimation is of primary importance in a variety of applications ranging from robotic manipulation and
localization to augmented reality. Recent advances either
predict correspondences between observations and template
models [36], or regress pose directly [49]. In these tasks,
RGB features learned with convolutional neural networks
have been predominantly adopted with notable success [17].
Object pose inference with only color information, however, find difficulty in handling texture-less objects or unseen surface texture/appearance. In human perception, object pose hinges on object geometry [42]. Humans cognize shapes and their poses simultaneously and in a coupled way [11] in order to achieve a so-called invariant object
* Joint first authors
† Corresponding author: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com

(b)
(c)

(a)

(d)

Figure 1: Given the 3D point cloud (b) of a detected object
(a), StablePose is trained to predict its 6D pose based on
a geometrically stable patch group containing the blue, the
orange and the green patches. Each patch determines a few
DoFs and they altogether pin down all six DoFs (c, d).
recognition [23]. Geometry enables a natural and powerful
pose perception not only mitigating the distraction of color
and appearance but also facilitating generalization to random occlusion and unseen instances.
3D geometric information does have been utilized for
pose inference, both in traditional [9, 44] and in learningbased methods [52, 6], especially with the proliferation of
depth cameras. The most straightforward use is to perform ICP-based pose refinement with the geometric information [40, 30]. Most deep learning approaches learn depth
features to enhance color features [46]. Some others infer
object poses from geometric features learned on 3D point
clouds [12] or voxels [45]. These geometric features, however, are learned without an explicit guidance on the correlation between shape and pose, making pose reasoning based
on them lack of interpretability and weak in generality.
We propose to learn object pose inference based on 3D
surface patches extracted from the point cloud of a singleview depth image. In particular, we focus on planar and
cylindrical patches which are omnipresent on the surface
of household objects. This design choice stems from two
key insights. First, patches are neither too local to capture
meaningful geometric information, nor too global to be repeatable and generalizable across object instances. Second,
each patch determines a specific set of DoFs of object pose.
A minimal set of geometrically stable patches can lock all
six DoFs according to the theory of geometric stability (or
slippage) analysis [13]. It is therefore possible to accurately
reason about 6D object poses over a small group of geometrically stable patches (Figure 1). Each stable group usually

15222

