Self-Supervised Collision Handling via Generative 3D Garment Models
for Virtual Try-On
Igor Santesteban1

Nils Thuerey2

Miguel A. Otaduy1

Dan Casas1

1

2

Universidad Rey Juan Carlos, Spain
Technical University of Munich, Germany
first.last@{urjc.es}{tum.de}

Figure 1: Our data-driven method regresses deformed garments via a generative model that is trained to avoid collisions.

Abstract
We propose a new generative model for 3D garment deformations that enables us to learn, for the first time, a
data-driven method for virtual try-on that effectively addresses garment-body collisions. In contrast to existing
methods that require an undesirable postprocessing step
to fix garment-body interpenetrations at test time, our approach directly outputs 3D garment configurations that do
not collide with the underlying body. Key to our success
is a new canonical space for garments that removes poseand-shape deformations already captured by a new diffused
human body model, which extrapolates body surface properties such as skinning weights and blendshapes to any 3D
point. We leverage this representation to train a generative model with a novel self-supervised collision term that
learns to reliably solve garment-body interpenetrations. We
extensively evaluate and compare our results with recently
proposed data-driven methods, and show that our method
is the first to successfully address garment-body contact in
unseen body shapes and motions, without compromising realism and detail.

1. Introduction
The digitalization of 3D garments has important applications in many areas of our everyday lives such as online

shopping, video games, visual effects, and fashion design,
and it has traditionally been addressed with physics-based
methods [37, 38]. However, even if these methods offer solutions that generalize well to any type of garment, produce
physically-accurate results, and solve body-garment contact, they require computationally expensive runtime evaluations. Consequently, they do not meet the combined robustness and performance needed for real-time applications
such as virtual try-on. Furthermore, they are not easily differentiable and cannot be integrated into computer vision
pipelines that, for example, fit deformable models into images to extract information about the scene.
Data-driven methods have emerged as a popular alternative to physics-based methods. The core idea is to learn
a function that mimics the garment behavior observed in a
large dataset. To this end, recent methods leverage the capability of neural networks to learn nonlinear functions, and
propose differentiable models that output 3D deformed garments as a function of the target shape, motion, style, size,
and other design parameters [62, 53, 41, 61, 64, 16, 31].
These methods showcase great realism and robustness,
however, we identify a fundamental limitation in all existing
works: despite using a loss term that penalizes unphysical
body-garment interpenetrations at training time [16, 4], predicted garments commonly suffer from body-garment interpenetrations in test sequences. This is usually addressed
with an added postprocessing step that pushes the problem-

11763

