Uncertainty Reduction for Model Adaptation in Semantic Segmentation
Prabhu Teja S a, b
a
Idiap Research Institute,

François Fleuret a, c
b
EPFL, c University of Geneva

prabhu.teja@idiap.ch, francois.fleuret@unige.ch

Abstract
Traditional methods for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) targeting semantic segmentation exploit information common to the source and target domains, using
both labeled source data and unlabeled target data. In this
paper, we investigate a setting where the source data is unavailable, but the classifier trained on the source data is;
hence named “model adaptation”. Such a scenario arises
when data sharing is prohibited, for instance, because of
privacy, or Intellectual Property (IP) issues.
To tackle this problem, we propose a method that reduces the uncertainty of predictions on the target domain
data. We accomplish this in two ways: minimizing the entropy of the predicted posterior, and maximizing the noise
robustness of the feature representation. We show the efficacy of our method on the transfer of segmentation from
computer generated images to real-world driving images,
and transfer between data collected in different cities, and
surprisingly reach performance comparable with that of the
methods that have access to source data.

both time and economic, creating annotated datasets for
each scenario is impractical, motivating the re-use or transfer of knowledge from available images to requisite application.

1. Introduction

The problem of transfer for segmentation has been predominantly investigated in literature (see Section 4) in two
settings: adapting a model trained on synthetically generated images to real images, and adapting a model to cities
different than the ones it has been trained for. We too adopt
these settings for study in this paper. The synthetic-to-real
images adaptation has attracted a lot of attention as the cost
of generating segmentation ground truth for graphically rendered frames like GTA [58], or Synthia [60] is substantially
lower. Richter et al. [58] labeled a total of 24,966 frames
at an average of 7 seconds per frame, a large drop from 90
minutes taken for Cityscapes. However, due the nature of
their generation, these synthetic images have a significant
domain gap to the real images, which results in a large drop
in the performance of networks trained on synthetic data
when they are used on real images. Similarly, given the existing real world datasets like Cityscapes, it is paramount
that the knowledge learned on these datasets is effectively
transferred to different scenarios, without having to provide
annotated data for each scenario.

The successes of deep learning, especially in semantic
segmentation, have been driven in large part by large architectures [10, 9]. While architectural improvements have
made tremendous strides in improving performance, these
large computation machines require vast amounts of data to
be trained adequately. A few large densely labeled datasets
such as Cityscapes [17], or Berkeley Deep Drive [73] exist, but producing them, for instance for a new use case
due to a different environment, or sensors, is very laborious and expensive; Cordts et al. [17] reports that each image required about 90 minutes for labeling and verification.
Added to the difficulty of collecting data for segmentation,
minor changes in conditions like change of cities between
train and test results in a drop of performance [15], as so
does change in lighting conditions [19], as it violates the
pivotal assumption of test and train data being sampled from
the same distribution [57]. Thus, owing to the large costs,

A large portion of the methods that has been devoted to
tackling this problem, like some of the ones reviewed in
Section 4, require the labeled source data to be available
along with the unlabeled target data for the adaptation process. We, in this paper, focus on the problem where the
source data itself is not available but the source trained classifier is [16]. This is similar to life-long learning [63], where
the goal is to adapt to several tasks over several domains,
and the only information payload that is carried over is the
model itself. Differing from that, we are not concerned with
preserving the performance on the source task. The current
problem of source data-less transfer is pertinent when there
exist data sharing restrictions on the source data; a common
way to circumvent this is to share the trained classifier from
which the input data itself cannot be reconstructed. A classical application is in medical image processing, where patient data cannot be freely shared due to privacy concerns,

9613

