PointNetLK Revisited
Xueqian Li1 Jhony Kaesemodel Pontes1 Simon Lucey2,3
1
Argo AI 2 The University of Adelaide 3 Carnegie Mellon University
xueqianl@alumni.cmu.edu

jpontes@argo.ai

simon.lucey@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
We address the generalization ability of recent learningbased point cloud registration methods. Despite their success, these approaches tend to have poor performance
when applied to mismatched conditions that are not wellrepresented in the training set, such as unseen object categories, different complex scenes, or unknown depth sensors. In these circumstances, it has often been better to
rely on classical non-learning methods (e.g., Iterative Closest Point), which have better generalization ability. Hybrid
learning methods, that use learning for predicting point
correspondences and then a deterministic step for alignment, have offered some respite, but are still limited in their
generalization abilities. We revisit a recent innovation—
PointNetLK [1]—and show that the inclusion of an analytical Jacobian can exhibit remarkable generalization properties while reaping the inherent fidelity benefits of a learning
framework. Our approach not only outperforms the stateof-the-art in mismatched conditions but also produces results competitive with current learning methods when operating on real-world test data close to the training set.

1. Introduction
Imagine a situation where you want to align two point
clouds—but have little to no knowledge about the sensor
noise, point density, or scene complexity before applying
your algorithm (see Fig. 1). Under these circumstances,
modern learning-based 3D point alignment methods exhibit
surprisingly poor performance. This is a common experience within many industrial robotic and vision applications. The usual strategy is to instead rely on classical nonlearning methods for 3D point alignment—such as Iterative Closest Point (ICP) [4]—whose performance is inferior to what is now possible through learning-based methods [16, 32] but can generalize well to unknown conditions. An obvious drawback here is the hand-crafted guesswork associated with these non-learning methods, which

Figure 1. Our analytical derivation of PointNetLK can be trained
on a clean, dense, synthetic 3D object dataset and still accurately
align noisy, sparse, real-world 3D scenes. Green is the template
point cloud, purple is the registered point cloud, and the orange
point clouds are an object training set. ξ are the rigid transformation parameters inferred by our method.

can make their performance less than desirable.
In this paper, we advocate for a revisiting of the recent
PointNetLK algorithm [1]. We propose a novel derivation,
which circumvents many of its current limitations in terms
of robustness and fidelity. Our approach employs an analytical Jacobian matrix that can be decomposed into feature
and warp components. A specific advantage of this decomposition is the ability to modify the analytical warp Jacobian
without having to re-train the PointNet features. We demonstrate how this property can be used to great effect through
a voxelization process that can accommodate the alignment
of complex real-world scenes (i.e., 3DMatch [44]) by training solely on clean, dense synthetic objects (i.e., ModelNet [37]). Further, in matched train-test conditions, we
show that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art hybrid
methods, including correspondence-based methods [35,43],
and the original PointNetLK of Aoki et al. Finally, we
demonstrate how our approach can achieve results competitive with those of the state-of-the-art Deep Global Registration (DGR) [8] method on real-world scenes, even when
the latter is trained under matched conditions. These results
are in stark contrast to those presented by Aoki et al. whose
Code available at https://github.com/Lilac-Lee/PointNetLK Revisited.git.

12763

