Optimal Quantization using Scaled Codebook
Yerlan Idelbayev*
University of California, Merced

Pavlo Molchanov
NVIDIA Corporation

Maying Shen
NVIDIA Corporation

yidelbayev@ucmerced.edu

pmolchanov@nvidia.com

mshen@nvidia.com

Hongxu Yin
NVIDIA Corporation

Miguel Á. Carreira-Perpiñán
University of California, Merced

Jose M. Alvarez
NVIDIA Corporation

dannyy@nvidia.com

mcarreira-perpinan@ucmerced.edu

josea@nvidia.com

Abstract
We study the problem of quantizing N sorted, scalar datapoints with a fixed codebook containing K entries that are
allowed to be rescaled. The problem is defined as finding
the optimal scaling factor α and the datapoint assignments
into the α-scaled codebook to minimize the squared error between original and quantized points. Previously, the
globally optimal algorithms for this problem were derived
only for certain codebooks (binary and ternary) or under
the assumption of certain distributions (Gaussian, Laplacian). By studying the properties of the optimal quantizer,
we derive an O(N K log K) algorithm that is guaranteed
to find the optimal quantization parameters for any fixed
codebook regardless of data distribution. We apply our algorithm to synthetic and real-world neural network quantization problems and demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach.

1. Introduction
The appealing efficacy of modern deep neural networks
in a wide spectrum of tasks generally comes with a seemingly sharp increase in network complexity. The resulting computation burden hinges network deployment to realworld tasks that typically face stringent resources and constraints, e.g., mobile applications or autonomous driving. A
myriad of approaches has thus been proposed to reduce network redundancy, quantization being the most popular and
simple-to-use approach. The central question behind quantization is around weight simplification: how one could reassign a large number of high-precision weights from the
network, to a far less diverse set of points specified by a
codebook, hence drastically cut down on required compute.
Despite remarkable insights into this problem, theoretical

analysis lacks far behind, leaving no viable guarantees to
optimality of any sort even in the substeps of this process.
In this work we consider a general formulation of the
scaled codebook quantization problem: given a sorted1 data
vector w with elements w1 ≤ w2 ≤ · · · ≤ wN and a fixed
codebook C = {c1 , c2 , . . . , cK } ⊂ R such that c1 < c2 <
· · · < cK we would like to learn the optimal rescaling of
the codebook (by a scalar α > 0) and the corresponding
assignments of datapoints into the codebook entries so that
the ℓ2 quantization error (MSE) is minimized:
min

α, z1 ,...,zN

s.t.

L OSS(α, Z) =

K
N X
X

znk (wn − α ck )2

n=1 k=1

zTn 1 = 1,

(1)

K

zn ∈ {0, 1}

Here, zn is a binary assignment vector defined for each datapoint wn : if znk = 1 then the datapoint wn is assigned to
the codebook entry ck .
The problems of this type arise in various settings of signal processing and have recently gained a significant interest in the field of neural network compression. For instance,
if we set C = {0, ±1, ±2... ± 27 } we recover the symmetric variant of INT8 quantization scheme of Jacob et al. [1]
which is particularly advantageous for efficient inference,
and currently has become a standard part of deep-learning
frameworks with many accompanying studies and implementations [2, 3]. With a codebook of C = {−1, 0, 1}
we recover the scaled ternary quantization scheme, and if
we set C = {0, ±21 , ±22 , . . . , ±2b } we recover a scaled
powers-of-two quantization scheme.
Previously, it was believed that the general formulation
of scaled quantization problem (1) is hard to optimize [4]
and requires exponential-time algorithm [5]. Therefore,
most of the approaches in the literature used heuristic search
or alternating optimization without any optimality guarantees. In this paper, we present an optimal algorithm that
1 We do not include the cost of sorting into our analysis.

* Work performed during a Summer Internship at NVIDIA.

12095

