Learning Semantic-Aware Dynamics for Video Prediction
Xinzhu Bei
UCLA Vision Lab

Yanchao Yang
Stanford University

Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab

xzbei@cs.ucla.edu

yanchaoy@cs.stanford.edu

soatto@cs.ucla.edu

Abstract
We propose an architecture and training scheme to predict video frames by explicitly modeling dis-occlusions and
capturing the evolution of semantically consistent regions
in the video. The scene layout (semantic map) and motion
(optical flow) are decomposed into layers, which are predicted and fused with their context to generate future layouts and motions. The appearance of the scene is warped
from past frames using the predicted motion in co-visible
regions; dis-occluded regions are synthesized with contentaware inpainting utilizing the predicted scene layout. The
result is a predictive model that explicitly represents objects
and learns their class-specific motion, which we evaluate
on video prediction benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Anticipating the future is critical for autonomous agents
to operate intelligently in the environment, such as for navigation, manipulation, and other forms of physical interaction. We hypothesize that decomposing the scene into independent entities, each with its own attributes, is beneficial
to prediction. For example, in Fig. 1, different objects have
different geometry and motion, which induces distinctive
temporal changes in the video.
We propose a video prediction architecture that explicitly
models the different dynamics of semantically consistent regions (Fig. 2). The model, described in detail in Sec. 3.1,
decomposes the video into regions, corresponding to different semantic classes in the scene, and learns class-specific
characteristics while ensuring that their re-composition can
predict the image, along with class labels and flow fields.
Unlike warping the past using globally predicted flow
fields [20, 19, 27, 9], in our semantic-aware dynamic model
(SADM), local regions are represented by binary semantic
masks, whose evolution is simpler and easier to learn than
the motion of the entire video frames (see Fig. 1). Each of
the regions is predicted and then fused with its content to
generate future semantic maps and flow fields. The prediction in co-visible regions of future frames is warped from

Figure 1. Different representations (video frame, semantic map,
flow field) have dynamics with different complexity. Also, different classes have different dynamics within a given representation.
Top: a sequence of video frames (left), semantic maps (middle),
and flow fields (right). Bottom: dynamics or changes visualized in
terms of their difference. The dynamics in video frames is much
more complex than that in semantic maps and flow fields.

the past, with dis-occlusion detection mediated by the predicted semantic maps. Furthermore, the dis-occluded regions are filled-in by a generative model or conditional renderer, trained with not only the warped images, but also
the predicted semantic maps, enabling more structured and
semantically-aware synthesis. Modeling dis-occlusions explicitly spares the model the effort otherwise needed to learn
this complex phenomenon.
We incorporate semantic segmentation (scene layout),
optical flow (scene motion) and synthesis (scene appearance) into a complete generative model for videos, which
facilitates semantically and geometrically consistent prediction of complete video frames. SADM achieves state-ofthe-art performance in video prediction benchmarks such
as [7, 11, 10].

2. Related Work
Video generation methods produce image sequences either from noise [41] or other input including pose [5] and
text [26]. SVG-LP [8] proposes to sample noise from

902

