RobustNet: Improving Domain Generalization in Urban-Scene Segmentation
via Instance Selective Whitening
Sungha Choi*1,3 Sanghun Jung*2 Huiwon Yun4 Joanne T. Kim3
Seungryong Kim3 Jaegul Choo2
1

Ours

LG AI Research 2 KAIST 3 Korea University 4 Sogang University

Unseen Domain Images

Baseline

Ours

Unseen Domain Images

Baseline

(a)

(b)

(c)
Figure 1. Segmentation results on unseen domains (i.e., BDD-100K [60] and RainCityscapes [19]) with the models trained on
Cityscapes [9]. Note that Cityscapes does not contain the following types of images: (a) low-illuminated, (b) rainy, and (c) unexpected
scenes. Our method makes reasonable predictions in these three cases, while the baseline [5] model completely fails on them.

Abstract
Enhancing the generalization capability of deep neural
networks to unseen domains is crucial for safety-critical
applications in the real world such as autonomous driving. To address this issue, this paper proposes a novel instance selective whitening loss to improve the robustness
of the segmentation networks for unseen domains. Our approach disentangles the domain-specific style and domaininvariant content encoded in higher-order statistics (i.e.,
feature covariance) of the feature representations and selectively removes only the style information causing domain
shift. As shown in Fig. 1, our method provides reasonable
predictions for (a) low-illuminated, (b) rainy, and (c) unseen structures. These types of images are not included in
the training dataset, where the baseline shows a significant
performance drop, contrary to ours. Being simple yet effective, our approach improves the robustness of various backbone networks without additional computational cost. We
conduct extensive experiments in urban-scene segmentation
and show the superiority of our approach to existing work.
Our code is available at this link1 .
* indicates equal contribution
1 https://github.com/shachoi/RobustNet.

1. Introduction
When deploying deep neural networks (DNNs) trained
on a given dataset (i.e., source domain) in real-world unseen
data (i.e., target domain), DNNs often fail to perform properly due to the domain shift. Overcoming this issue is crucial, especially for safety-critical applications such as autonomous driving. In particular, real-world data consist of
unexpected and unseen samples, for example, those images
taken under diverse illumination, adverse weather conditions, or from different locations. It is generally impossible
to model such a full data distribution with limited training
data, so reducing the domain gap between source and target domains has been a long-standing problem in computer
vision.
Domain adaptation (DA) is an approach to mitigate the
performance degradation caused by such a domain gap [3,
12, 18, 11, 65, 39, 58, 41, 50]. Generally, DA focuses on
adapting the source domain distribution to that of the target
domain, but it requires access to the samples in the target
domain, which limits their applicability. When we set the
entire real world as a target domain, it is difficult in pactice
to obtain data samples that fully cover the target domain.
Domain generalization (DG) overcomes this limitation

11580

