Spoken Moments: Learning Joint Audio-Visual Representations from Video
Descriptions
Mathew Monfort*
MIT

SouYoung Jin*
MIT

Alexander Liu
MIT

David Harwath
UT Austin

mmonfort@mit.edu

souyoung@mit.edu

alexhliu@mit.edu

harwath@cs.utexas.edu

Rogerio Feris
IBM Research

James Glass
MIT

Aude Oliva
MIT

rsferis@us.ibm.com

glass@csail.mit.edu

oliva@mit.edu

Abstract
When people observe events, they are able to abstract key
information and build concise summaries of what is happening. These summaries include contextual and semantic information describing the important high-level details
(what, where, who and how) of the observed event and exclude background information that is deemed unimportant
to the observer. With this in mind, the descriptions people
generate for videos of different dynamic events can greatly
improve our understanding of the key information of interest in each video. These descriptions can be captured in
captions that provide expanded attributes for video labeling
(e.g. actions/objects/scenes/sentiment/etc.) while allowing
us to gain new insight into what people find important or
necessary to summarize specific events. Existing caption
datasets for video understanding are either small in scale or
restricted to a specific domain. To address this, we present
the Spoken Moments (S-MiT) dataset of 500k spoken captions each attributed to a unique short video depicting a
broad range of different events. We collect our descriptions
using audio recordings to ensure that they remain as natural and concise as possible while allowing us to scale the
size of a large classification dataset. In order to utilize our
proposed dataset, we present a novel Adaptive Mean Margin (AMM) approach to contrastive learning and evaluate
our models on video/caption retrieval on multiple datasets.
We show that our AMM approach consistently improves our
results and that models trained on our Spoken Moments
dataset generalize better than those trained on other videocaption datasets.
http://moments.csail.mit.edu/spoken.html

* equal contribution

1. Introduction
Video understanding has typically been focused on action recognition and object tracking as the temporal aspect of videos lends itself strongly to the task of representing motion, a key component of an action. Breaking
down video analysis to simple tasks, such as action recognition, allows for efficient data annotation for building large
datasets to train deep learning models [31, 45, 21] which
has been extremely successful for images with object annotations [34]. A main difficulty is that, in contrast to an
image, a video often captures an interaction between agents
and objects that evolves over time. These interactions can
be as simple as “a person picking up a glass of water”, but
even in this case three different objects (“person”, “glass”
and “water”) are included in the interaction. Additionally,
the video may also continue to depict the “person drinking from a glass” and the “person putting the glass back
down on the table”. These sequential events present additional challenges for video datasets where single annotations may not be sufficient to explain the events depicted.
Multi-label approaches to video annotation have attempted
to address this problem by labeling multiple actions in a
video [46, 22, 72]. However, these methods focus on single domain annotations, such as actions or objects, and do
not capture additional contextual information, such as “person angrily putting down the dirty glass on a rusted table”,
which can change the interpretation of an event and how it
fits into a sequence of observations.
A solution for capturing more fully the content of video
is to annotate multiple actions or objects in each video
[22, 71, 46, 49]. However labels like “drinking”, “glass”,
only provide a portion of the information needed to interpret the veracity of the event. Additional narratives may
include intuitive descriptions and intentions, such as “an exhausted man picks up a dirty glass of water and drinks from

14871

