Transitional Adaptation of Pretrained Models for Visual Storytelling
Youngjae Yu1∗, Jiwan Chung2⋆ , Heeseung Yun2 , Jongseok Kim3 , Gunhee Kim2
1
Allen Institute for AI, 2 Seoul National University, 3 Violet
{yj.yu, jiwanchung, heeseung.yun, js.kim}@vision.snu.ac.kr, gunhee@snu.ac.kr
https://vision.snu.ac.kr/projects/TAPM

Abstract
Previous models for vision-to-language generation tasks
usually pretrain a visual encoder and a language generator
in the respective domains and jointly finetune them with the
target task. However, this direct transfer practice may suffer from the discord between visual specificity and language
fluency since they are often separately trained from large
corpora of visual and text data with no common ground. In
this work, we claim that a transitional adaptation task is
required between pretraining and finetuning to harmonize
the visual encoder and the language model for challenging
downstream target tasks like visual storytelling. We propose
a novel approach named Transitional Adaptation of Pretrained Model (TAPM) that adapts the multi-modal modules
to each other with a simpler alignment task between visual
inputs only with no need for text labels. Through extensive
experiments, we show that the adaptation step significantly
improves the performance of multiple language models for
sequential video and image captioning tasks. We achieve
new state-of-the-art performance on both language metrics
and human evaluation in the multi-sentence description task
of LSMDC 2019 [50] and the image storytelling task of
VIST [18]. Our experiments reveal that this improvement
in caption quality does not depend on the specific choice of
language models.

1. Introduction
Most models for vision-to-language generation tasks
consist of a visual encoder to extract visual information
from input images or videos, a language model to generate text sentences, and a mechanism to weld the two modules into one harmonized architecture. For example, recent
models for visual captioning [7, 59] adopt a pretrained visual encoder and a pretrained language generator and then
optimize the target cross-modal generation objective with
the downstream datasets [63, 40, 49, 67, 69, 74]. In this pro∗ Equal Contribution

Pretrained
visual encoder
Pretrained
Finetuning
generator
(Target task learning)
(a) Traditional image/video captioning
Pretrained
visual encoder
Pretrained
generator

Encoder

Generator

Encoder

Encoder

Generator

Generator

Transitional Adaptation

Finetuning

(b) Adaptive image/video captioning
Figure 1. Comparison between existing captioning models and
our Transitional Adaptation of Pretrained Model (TAPM). (a) Previous captioning models start from a pretrained visual encoder and
a language generator and then directly finetune with the downstream datasets. (b) TAPM includes a simple pretext task as an
adaptation process that harmonizes the generator with the visual
encoder before optimizing the target objective.

cess, however, no transitional adaptation step has proposed
to match the potentially substantial differences between the
information stored in the visual encoder and the language
generator, as they are separately trained from large sets of
visual and text data with no common ground (e.g. images
from ImageNet and text from Wikipedia).
This work is motivated by that this direct transfer of pretrained models to a downstream task may suffer from the
dissonance between visual specificity and language fluency.
For example, finetuning pretrained language models on another target task may result in catastrophic forgetting of the
language generation capability [8, 66]. Moreover, existing
captioning models have often been criticized for not sufficiently conditioning on the visual context and thus lack
visual discriminability [34, 36].
Considering the potentially vast gap between the nature
of the information stored in the visual encoder and the language decoder, it would be difficult for them to work in harmony at once for another challenging objective of vision-

12658

