DiNTS: Differentiable Neural Network Topology Search
for 3D Medical Image Segmentation
Yufan He1

Dong Yang2 Holger Roth2 Can Zhao2
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 NVIDIA

0.1

Abstract
Recently, neural architecture search (NAS) has been applied to automatically search high-performance networks
for medical image segmentation. The NAS search space
usually contains a network topology level (controlling connections among cells with different spatial scales) and a
cell level (operations within each cell). Existing methods either require long searching time for large-scale 3D
image datasets, or are limited to pre-defined topologies
(such as U-shaped or single-path) . In this work, we focus on three important aspects of NAS in 3D medical image
segmentation: flexible multi-path network topology, high
search efficiency, and budgeted GPU memory usage. A
novel differentiable search framework is proposed to support fast gradient-based search within a highly flexible
network topology search space. The discretization of the
searched optimal continuous model in differentiable scheme
may produce a sub-optimal final discrete model (discretization gap). Therefore, we propose a topology loss to alleviate
this problem. In addition, the GPU memory usage for the
searched 3D model is limited with budget constraints during search. Our Differentiable Network Topology Search
scheme (DiNTS) is evaluated on the Medical Segmentation
Decathlon (MSD) challenge, which contains ten challenging segmentation tasks. Our method achieves the state-ofthe-art performance and the top ranking on the MSD challenge leaderboard.

1. Introduction
Automated medical image segmentation is essential for
many clinical applications like finding new biomarkers and
monitoring disease progression. The recent developments
in deep neural network architectures have achieved great
performance improvements in image segmentation. Manually designed networks, like U-Net [34], have been widely
used in different tasks. However, the diversity of medical
image segmentation tasks could be extremely high since the
image characteristics & appearances can be completely distinct for different modalities and the presentation of diseases

Daguang Xu2

𝜷𝟏

0.9

0.9

0.1

𝜷𝟐

0.8
0.1

0.8
0.1

0.1

0.1

𝜷𝟑

0.9
0.1

0.9
0.1

𝜷𝟏 +𝜷𝟐 +𝜷𝟑 =1

Discretization

Search

Continuous Model

Gap

Discrete Model

Figure 1. Limitations of existing differentiable topology search
formulation. E.g. in Auto-DeepLab [21], each edge in the topology search space is given a probability β. The probabilities of input edges to a node sum to one, which means only one input edge
for each node would be selected. A single-path discrete model (red
path) is extracted from the continuous searched model. This can
result in a large “discretization gap” between the feature flow of
the searched continuous model and the final discrete model.

can vary considerably. This makes the direct application of
even a successful network like U-Net [34] to a new task less
likely to be optimal.
The neural architecture search (NAS) algorithms [49]
have been proposed to automatically discover the optimal architectures within a search space. The NAS search
space for segmentation usually contains two levels: network topology level and cell level. The network topology
controls the connections among cells and decides the flow
of the feature maps across different spatial scales. The cell
level decides the specific operations on the feature maps.
A more flexible search space has more potential to contain
better performing architectures.
In terms of the search methods in finding the optimal architecture from the search space, evolutionary or reinforcement learning-based [49, 33] algorithms are usually time
consuming. C2FNAS [45] takes 333 GPU days to search
one 3D segmentation network using the evolutionary-based
methods, which is too computationally expensive for common use cases. Differentiable architecture search [23] is
much more efficient and Auto-DeepLab [21] is the first
work to apply differentiable search for segmentation network topology. However, Auto-DeepLab’s differentiable
formulation limits the searched network topology. As
shown in Fig. 1, this formulation assumes that only one in-

5841

