Space-Time Distillation for Video Super-Resolution
Zeyu Xiao Xueyang Fu Jie Huang Zhen Cheng Zhiwei Xiong∗
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Compact video super-resolution (VSR) networks can be
easily deployed on resource-limited devices, e.g., smartphones and wearable devices, but have considerable performance gaps compared with complicated VSR networks
that require a large amount of computing resources. In
this paper, we aim to improve the performance of compact
VSR networks without changing their original architectures, through a knowledge distillation approach that transfers knowledge from a complicated VSR network to a compact one. Specifically, we propose a space-time distillation
(STD) scheme to exploit both spatial and temporal knowledge in the VSR task. For space distillation, we extract spatial attention maps that hint the high-frequency video content from both networks, which are further used for transferring spatial modeling capabilities. For time distillation, we
narrow the performance gap between compact models and
complicated models by distilling the feature similarity of
the temporal memory cells, which are encoded from the sequence of feature maps generated in the training clips using
ConvLSTM. During the training process, STD can be easily
incorporated into any network without changing the original network architecture. Experimental results on standard
benchmarks demonstrate that, in resource-constrained situations, the proposed method notably improves the performance of existing VSR networks without increasing the inference time.

1. Introduction
Video super-resolution (VSR) aims to generate a
high-resolution (HR) video from its corresponding lowresolution (LR) observation. In the deep learning era, a
variety of elaborately designed VSR networks can achieve
promising super-resolution performance, yet at the cost of a
large amount of computing resources. It is thus difficult to
deploy complicated VSR networks on resource-limited devices, e.g., smartphones and wearable devices. On the other
hand, compact VSR networks can be easily deployed on
these devices due to their lightweight architectures. However, their ability to model spatial-temporal correlations is
meanwhile limited due to simple architectures, which further limits their super-resolution performance.
∗ Correspondence should be addressed to zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

Figure 1: Comparisons on the runtime and the reconstruction quality (PSNR) of different methods (both SISR and VSR methods
are included). The running time is the average execution time for
super-resolving a video clip of spatial resolution 180 × 120 with
the scale factor equal to 4 on an NVIDIA 1080Ti GPU. The PSNR
value refers to the average over Vid4-Walk [41].

Different from single image super-resolution (SISR) [5,
39, 42, 40, 4, 18, 48, 2], a key step in VSR is to align
different frames, either explicitly or implicitly. A majority of VSR methods contain the motion compensation module. For example, Kappeler et al. [17] slightly modify SRCNN [4] and extract features from frames that are aligned
by optical flow. However, estimating optical flow itself is
a challenging and time-consuming task [13, 31]. Inaccurate estimated optical flow leads to artifacts in the flowbased VSR methods. To avoid explicitly calculating optical flow, some recent methods exploit the motion information in an implicit manner. For example, the dynamic
upsampling filters [16] and the progressive fusion residual
blocks [43] are designed to explore flow-free motion compensation. It is especially worth mentioning that, as the
winner of the NTIRE2019 challenges on video restoration
and enhancement [24, 25], EDVR [37] utilizes a combination of pyramid, cascading, and deformable structures for
multi-frame alignment. Together with temporal and spatial
attention modules for information fusion, EDVR achieves
state-of-the-art VSR results. Although implicit frame alignment improves computational efficiency to a certain extent,
these large and complex networks still require considerable
computing resources and are not competent to resource-

2113

