Depth Completion using Plane-Residual Representation
Byeong-Uk Lee
Kyunghyun Lee
In So Kweon
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
Daejeon, Republic of Korea
{byeonguk.lee, kyunghyun.lee, iskweon77}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
The basic framework of depth completion is to predict a
pixel-wise dense depth map using very sparse input data.
In this paper, we try to solve this problem in a more effective way, by reformulating the regression-based depth estimation problem into a combination of depth plane classification and residual regression. Our proposed approach
is to initially densify sparse depth information by figuring
out which plane a pixel should lie among a number of discretized depth planes, and then calculate the final depth
value by predicting the distance from the specified plane.
This will help the network to lessen the burden of directly
regressing the absolute depth information from none, and
to effectively obtain more accurate depth prediction result
with less computation power and inference time. To do so,
we firstly introduce a novel way of interpreting depth information with the closest depth plane label p and a residual value r, as we call it, Plane-Residual (PR) representation. We also propose a depth completion network utilizing
PR representation consisting of a shared encoder and two
decoders, where one classifies the pixel’s depth plane label, while the other one regresses the normalized distance
from the classified depth plane. By interpreting depth information in PR representation and using our corresponding depth completion network, we were able to acquire improved depth completion performance with faster computation, compared to previous approaches.

1. Introduction
Many different computer vision algorithms are becoming more reachable in our everyday life, starting from
a smartphone camera and augmented reality (AR) / virtual reality (VR) applications to autonomous driving and
even more complicated robotics tasks. In order to solve
these problems efficiently, obtaining precise and reliable 3D
scene information is crucial. 3D reconstruction has been
studied for many years and certainly can be categorized as
one of the traditional computer vision tasks, but it is still a

core technology. There are various ways of obtaining 3D
information, such as monocular depth prediction, structure
from motion, and multi-view stereo. However, 3D reconstruction using additional sensors alongside an RGB camera
like secondary camera, depth sensors, or radar will be more
effective, since it can utilize more accurate depth measurements as prior information. Given that most of the recent
mobile devices have more than one camera and even a LiDAR sensor, it is widely acceptable that 3D reconstruction
by integrating multiple sensor inputs is a more efficient and
practical approach.
While stereo matching being one of the most conventional and reliable ways in 3D reconstruction, it shows its
weakness in depth prediction on the farther area due to the
physical restriction for large baseline between stereo cameras. Therefore, using a depth sensor to obtain more accurate and absolute initial depth information is also preferred. However, one of the major downsides of commercialized depth sensors, such as 3D LiDAR, Kinect, and RealSense, is the sparsity of the measurement. Addressing this
problem, various approaches emerged trying to densify, i.e.,
‘complete’ the sparse depth measurement into a dense depth
map, namely, ‘depth completion’.
In recent years, there have been many different methods trying to solve depth completion using deep learning, starting from Ma and Karaman [18]. The challenging part of these algorithms is that regression-based approaches have difficulties in maintaining the information of
the object boundary and may show mixed depth results [14].
A few early works addressed these difficulties by maximizing the information from the RGB input and refining
the initial depth regression output to get better final results [3, 17, 16, 26, 4, 2, 21]. Other algorithms tried to
utilize additional information that can be inferred from the
depth map, such as surface normal, to give more geometrical guidance to the training process [16, 28, 22]. While
these algorithms showed some promising outcomes, they
still lack in preserving edge information and often require
a large amount of computation power, as in heavy network
memory and longer inference time, which are not suitable

13916

