3D CNNs with Adaptive Temporal Feature Resolutions
Mohsen Fayyaz1,∗ , Emad Bahrami1,∗ ,
Ali Diba2 , Mehdi Noroozi3 , Ehsan Adeli4 , Luc Van Gool2,5 , Juergen Gall1
1
University of Bonn, 2 KU Leuven, 3 Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence,
4
Standford University, 5 ETH Zürich
{lastname}@iai.uni-bonn.de, emadbahramirad@gmail.com,
{firstname.lastname}@kuleuven.be, mehdi.noroozi@de.bosch.de, eadeli@stanford.edu

Abstract
While state-of-the-art 3D Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) achieve very good results on action recognition datasets, they are computationally very expensive and
require many GFLOPs. While the GFLOPs of a 3D CNN
can be decreased by reducing the temporal feature resolution within the network, there is no setting that is optimal for all input clips. In this work, we therefore introduce
a differentiable Similarity Guided Sampling (SGS) module,
which can be plugged into any existing 3D CNN architecture. SGS empowers 3D CNNs by learning the similarity
of temporal features and grouping similar features together.
As a result, the temporal feature resolution is not anymore
static but it varies for each input video clip. By integrating SGS as an additional layer within current 3D CNNs, we
can convert them into much more efficient 3D CNNs with
adaptive temporal feature resolutions (ATFR). Our evaluations show that the proposed module improves the stateof-the-art by reducing the computational cost (GFLOPs)
by half while preserving or even improving the accuracy.
We evaluate our module by adding it to multiple state-ofthe-art 3D CNNs on various datasets such as Kinetics600, Kinetics-400, mini-Kinetics, Something-Something V2,
UCF101, and HMDB51.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there has been a tremendous progress
for video processing in the light of new and complex deep
learning architectures, which are based on variants of 3D
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [24, 9, 7, 4, 6, 12,
8]. They are trained for a specific number of input frames,
⋆ Mohsen Fayyaz and Emad Bahrami equally contributed to this work.
Emad Bahrami contributed to this project while he was a visiting researcher at the Computer Vision Group of the University of Bonn.

typically between 16 to 64 frames. For classifying a longer
video, they slide over the video and the outputs are then aggregated. These networks, however, are often very expensive to train and heavy to deploy for inference task. In order
to reduce the inference time, [15, 20] proposed to process
not all parts of a video with the same 3D CNN. While [15]
trains a second network that decides for each chunk of input frames if it should be processed by the more expensive
3D CNN, [20] uses a fix scheme where a subset of the input chunks are processed by an expensive 3D CNN and the
other chunks by a less expensive 3D CNN. The latter then
uses an RNN to fuse the outputs of the different 3D CNNs.
Although both approaches effectively reduce the GFLOPS
during inference, they increase the training time since two
instead of one network need to be trained. Furthermore,
they do not reduce the computational cost of the 3D CNNs
themselves.
In this work, we propose an approach that makes 3D
CNNs more efficient for training and inference. Our proposal is based on the observation that the computational cost
of a 3D CNN depends on the temporal resolution it operates
on at each stage of the network. While the temporal resolution can be different at different stages, the schemes that
define how the temporal resolution is reduced is hard-coded
and thus the same for all videos. However, it is impossible
to define a scheme that is optimal for all videos. If the temporal resolution is too much reduced, the network is forced
to discard important information for some videos. This results in a decrease of the action recognition accuracy performance. Vice versa, a high temporal resolution results in
highly redundant feature maps and increases the computational time, which makes the 3D CNN highly inefficient for
most videos. In this work, we therefore address the question
of how a 3D CNN can dynamically adapt its computational
resources in a way such that not more resources than necessary are used for each input chunk.
In order to address this question, we propose to exploit the redundancy within temporal features such that 3D
14731

