VoxelContext-Net: An Octree based Framework for Point Cloud Compression
Zizheng Que
Beihang University

Guo Lu*
Beijing Institute of Technology

Dong Xu
University of Sydney

quezizheng@buaa.edu.cn

guo.lu@bit.edu.cn

dong.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

...

In this paper, we propose a two-stage deep learning
framework called VoxelContext-Net for both static and dynamic point cloud compression. Taking advantages of both
octree based methods and voxel based schemes, our approach employs the voxel context to compress the octree
structured data. Specifically, we first extract the local voxel
representation that encodes the spatial neighbouring context information for each node in the constructed octree.
Then, in the entropy coding stage, we propose a voxel context based deep entropy model to compress the symbols of
non-leaf nodes in a lossless way. Furthermore, for dynamic
point cloud compression, we additionally introduce the local voxel representations from the temporal neighbouring
point clouds to exploit temporal dependency. More importantly, to alleviate the distortion from the octree construction procedure, we propose a voxel context based 3D coordinate refinement method to produce more accurate reconstructed point cloud at the decoder side, which is applicable to both static and dynamic point cloud compression.
The comprehensive experiments on both static and dynamic
point cloud benchmark datasets(e.g., ScanNet and Semantic
KITTI) clearly demonstrate the effectiveness of our newly
proposed method VoxelContext-Net for 3D point cloud geometry compression.

1. Introduction
Due to the rapid population of 3D sensors such as LiDAR, there is an increasing research interest to compress
tremendous amount of 3D point cloud data for a broad range
of applications (e.g., autonomous driving). When compared
with image and video compression [35, 32, 4, 37, 31, 19],
it is a more challenging task to compress a set of orderless
3D points from point clouds.
Recently, several deep learning methods were developed for point cloud compression. For example, Wang
et al. [36] transformed the point cloud data to the voxel
representation in order to capture the spatial dependency,
* Guo Lu is the corresponding author.

ancestor
nodes

...

...
Tree-node
Context
Tree-node
Context
Entropy
Model
Distribution

(a)

neighbouring
nodes

... Voxel Context

...
Distribution

Entropy
Model

(b)

Figure 1. Comparison between two context generation approaches
for learning the entropy model based on the octree structured data.
(a) Tree-node context used in [15]. (b) Local voxel context employed in our approach.

and then they employed the existing image compression
method [2] for point cloud compression. Other recent
works [39] and [16] directly compressed the raw point
cloud data by using the existing backbone networks (e.g.,
PointNet/PointNet++ [25, 26]) for feature encoding. These
voxel-based or point-based methods can take advantage
of the existing image compression or point cloud analysis
techniques. However, the voxel-based methods ignore the
sparsity characteristic of point clouds and thus suffer from
the relatively high computational complexity [36] while the
point based methods are inefficient when processing large
point cloud data [39]. In [15], Huang et al. used the octree to organize the point cloud data and proposed an entropy model to exploit the dependency between multiple
parent nodes and each child node (see Figure 1(a)). Although their approach inherits the benefits for efficiently
processing octree structured point cloud data, the strong dependency among the neighboring octree nodes at the same
depth level is unfortunately ignored in their octree-based
entropy model [15]. Furthermore, the distortions are also
introduced after converting the raw point cloud to the octree structured data, which further degrades the compression performance. Besides, their approach is only designed
for static point cloud compression, which may limit the performance for dynamic point cloud compression.
To address these issues, we propose a new learning based
point cloud compression method VoxelContext-Net by exploiting the voxel context in the octree based framework.
Our approach takes advantage of the efficient data organization ability from the octree based methods and the spatial
modeling capability from the voxel based methods, which

6042

