Learning Cross-Modal Retrieval with Noisy Labels
Peng Hu1,2
Xi Peng1 *
Hongyuan Zhu2
Liangli Zhen3
Jie Lin2
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China
2
Institute for Infocomm Research, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore
3
Institute of High Performance Computing, Agency for Science, Technology and Research, Singapore

Abstract
Recently, cross-modal retrieval is emerging with the help
of deep multimodal learning. However, even for unimodal
data, collecting large-scale well-annotated data is expensive and time-consuming, and not to mention the additional
challenges from multiple modalities. Although crowdsourcing annotation, e.g., Amazon’s Mechanical Turk, can
be utilized to mitigate the labeling cost, but leading to the
unavoidable noise in labels for the non-expert annotating.
To tackle the challenge, this paper presents a general Multimodal Robust Learning framework (MRL) for learning with
multimodal noisy labels to mitigate noisy samples and correlate distinct modalities simultaneously. To be specific, we
propose a Robust Clustering loss (RC) to make the deep
networks focus on clean samples instead of noisy ones. Besides, a simple yet effective multimodal loss function, called
Multimodal Contrastive loss (MC), is proposed to maximize the mutual information between different modalities,
thus alleviating the interference of noisy samples and crossmodal discrepancy. Extensive experiments are conducted
on four widely-used multimodal datasets to demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed approach by comparing to 14
state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
With rapid growth of multimedia data, cross-modal retrieval becomes a compelling topic in the multimodal learning community due to its flexibility in retrieving semantically relevant samples across distinct modalities, e.g., image query text [6, 16]. However, most existing methods
require clean-annotated training data, which are expensive
and time-consuming. Although some unsupervised multimodal learning methods can mitigate such labeling pressure, their performance is usually much worse than the supervised counterparts’ [60]. To balance performance and
labeling cost, semi-supervised multimodal learning meth* Corresponding author: Xi Peng (pengx.gm@gmail.com).

ods are proposed to simultaneously utilize labeled and unlabeled data to learn common discriminative representations [61, 17]. However, semi-supervised approaches still
require a certain number of clean-annotated data to reach
reasonable performance.
To alleviate the high labeling cost, some non-expert
sources, e.g., Amazon’s Mechanical Turk and the surrounding tags of collected data, can be used to annotate largescale data, but resulting in unavoidable noise in labels [48].
Some recent unimodal studies reveal that DNNs easily overfit to noisy labels leading to poor generalization performance [59, 28]. It is challenging to learn with noisy labels. To tackle the challenge, numerous studies are conducted to explore how to robustly learn with noisy labels,
such as correction methods [49, 9], MentorNet [19, 58], and
Co-teaching [10]. Although they achieve promising performance in the unimodal scenario, they cannot simultaneously tackle multiple modalities, such as real-world multimedia data. Hence, it is significant and valuable to explore
how to learn satisfactory representations from multimodal
data with noisy labels, but which is rarely touched in previous works.
We perform an empirical study of recent cross-modal
learning methods under noisy labels with results shown in
Figure 2. From the figure, one can see that the networks
will fast overfit to the noisy training set with a widely-used
loss function cross-entropy [50, 53] in multimodal learning. Moreover, different modalities exist a large diversity
in validation set since they may lay in completely different
spaces with heterogeneity, making learning from noisy samples more difficult. Lastly, noisy labels can confuse the discriminative connections across distinct modalities, resulting in difficulty bridging the heterogeneous gap. Thus, it is
more challenging and complex to consider both noisy labels
and cross-modal discrepancy simultaneously.
To address the aforementioned problems, we propose a
Multimodal Robust Learning framework (MRL) to simultaneously mitigate the influence of noisy samples and narrow the heterogeneous gap in this paper. The pipeline of
the proposed method is shown in Figure 1 wherein our
15403

