Learning Feature Aggregation for Deep 3D Morphable Models
Zhixiang Chen
Imperial College London

Tae-Kyun Kim
Imperial College London and KAIST

zhixiang.chen@imperial.ac.uk

tk.kim@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
3D morphable models are widely used for the shape representation of an object class in computer vision and graphics applications. In this work, we focus on deep 3D morphable models that directly apply deep learning on 3D mesh
data with a hierarchical structure to capture information at
multiple scales. While great efforts have been made to design the convolution operator, how to best aggregate vertex features across hierarchical levels deserves further attention. In contrast to resorting to mesh decimation, we
propose an attention based module to learn mapping matrices for better feature aggregation across hierarchical levels. Specifically, the mapping matrices are generated by
a compatibility function of the keys and queries. The keys
and queries are trainable variables, learned by optimizing
the target objective, and shared by all data samples of the
same object class. Our proposed module can be used as a
train-only drop-in replacement for the feature aggregation
in existing architectures for both downsampling and upsampling. Our experiments show that through the end-to-end
training of the mapping matrices, we achieve state-of-theart results on a variety of 3D shape datasets in comparison
to existing morphable models.

1. Introduction
The 3D morphable models play a core role in many 3D
applications, including identity recognition, shape retrieval,
shape completion, animation and 3D reconstruction from
2D images [46, 42, 26]. 3D morphable models encode raw
3D shapes into latent variables, from which the shapes can
be reconstructed to some approximation by interacting with
the 3D shape model. In this work, we are particularly interested in 3D mesh shapes that share a common template
and are already aligned to the template. The commonly
employed encoding approaches are the linear encoding of
Principal Component Analysis [1, 26, 44, 53] or manually
defined blendshape [45, 24, 8] for human face, skinned vertex based models like Skinned Multi-Person Linear Model [30] and hand model with articulated and non-rigid de-

formations [38] for body and hand and non-linear encodings of autoencoder neural nets [43]. Compared to the classical linear models, the non-linear models, especially deep
learning based models, offer the possibility to capture detailed deformations like wrinkles and surpass them in terms
of generalization, compactness and specificity [40].
Recently, there is an emerging interest in generalizing
CNNs to meshes with operations directly defined on meshes [37, 9]. Both isotropic [37] and anisotropic [9] convolutions have been introduced for meshes with a fixed topology. Feature aggregation is defined for the downsampling
and upsampling of vertex features and combined with convolutions to construct mesh autoencoders [37]. Despite the
success of such models, the feature aggregation across hierarchical levels is determined by a preprocessing stage that
maintains surface error approximations with quadric metrics [17] rather than by optimizing the learning objective.
Such procedure limits the representation power of the morphable model to capture fine grained deformations.
In this work, we propose an attention based feature aggregation strategy to construct hierarchical representations
for 3D meshes with a fixed topology (Fig. 1(a)). Instead
of using the precomputed matrices (Fig. 1(b)), we propose
to learn the mapping matrices along with the convolutions in the network (Fig. 1(c)). The attention based mapping
module introduces keys and queries as trainable variables
that are shared by all data samples in the dataset. With
keys and queries standing for the vertices at the preceding and succeeding levels respectively, the mapping matrices are derived by a compatibility function of the keys and
queries. This allows the receptive fields and aggregation
weights to be simultaneously learned. By varying the number of keys and queries, this module can be used for either
downsampling or upsampling. Since only mapping matrices are needed for inference, we can detach the attention
based mapping module once training is finished to avoid
additional cost at inference stage. We evaluate our method
on the reconstruction task which serves as a fundamental
testbed for further applications. We quantitatively and qualitatively show the results on three 3D human shape datasets:
faces, bodies, and hands. As a drop-in replacement for ex-

13164

