Network Pruning via Performance Maximization
Shangqian Gao1 , Feihu Huang1 , Weidong Cai2 , and Heng Huang* 1,3
1

Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Pittsburgh, PA, USA
2
School of Computer Science, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia
3
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA

shg84@pitt.edu, huangfeihu2018@gmail.com, tom.cai@sydney.edu.au, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
Channel pruning is a class of powerful methods for
model compression. When pruning a neural network, it’s
ideal to obtain a sub-network with higher accuracy. However, a sub-network does not necessarily have high accuracy with low classification loss (loss-metric mismatch).
In the paper, we first consider the loss-metric mismatch
problem for pruning and propose a novel channel pruning
method for Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) by directly maximizing the performance (i.e., accuracy) of subnetworks. Specifically, we train a stand-alone neural network to predict sub-networks’ performance and then maximize the output of the network as a proxy of accuracy to
guide pruning. Training such a performance prediction network efficiently is not an easy task, and it may potentially
suffer from the problem of catastrophic forgetting and the
imbalance distribution of sub-networks. To deal with this
challenge, we introduce a corresponding episodic memory
to update and collect sub-networks during the pruning process. In the experiment section, we further demonstrate
that the gradients from the performance prediction network
and the classification loss have different directions. Extensive experimental results show that the proposed method
can achieve state-of-the-art performance with ResNet, MobileNetV2, and ShuffleNetV2+ on ImageNet and CIFAR-10.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have demonstrated great successes in many computer vision and machine learning applications, like classification [32], detection [47, 48], action recognition [51] and self-driving
cars [2]. To achieve better performances on these tasks, the
* This work was partially supported by NSF IIS 1845666, 1852606,
1838627, 1837956, 1956002, 2040588.

design of CNNs becomes more and more complex in terms
of depth and width [52, 13, 21] since AlexNet [32]. However, the huge consumption of computing power and memory footprint prevents these complex CNNs to be deployed
on embedded or mobile devices. To overcome this problem,
model compression emerges as a promising solution to get
a compact sub-network from the original model. Popular
model compression techniques include weight pruning [12],
quantization [3], structural pruning [34] and so on.
Channel pruning, which belongs to structural pruning,
effectively reduces FLOPs and memory footprint from the
original model without any post-processing steps. On the
contrary, weight pruning or quantization usually requires
specifically designed software or hardware to achieve actual acceleration. As a result, we aim to develop a novel
model compression method for channel pruning.
In the context of channel pruning, a sub-network with
high accuracy is believed as a good candidate for the final
solution [16, 37]. To find such a sub-network, many existing
channel pruning approaches [28, 57, 58] use the classification loss as guidance. However, the classification loss is not
always a good approximation to the accuracy, which is also
termed as loss-metric mismatch [20]. To tackle this problem, we train a performance prediction network to predict
the accuracy of sub-networks. We then guide the search of
sub-networks by directly maximizing the accuracy. In addition, we do not abandon the classification loss (usually,
cross-entropy loss), and both classification loss and performance maximization are considered in the final pruning
problem defined in Eq. 8, which is inspired by the idea of
multi-objective learning. The rationale behind this is that
both the classification loss and performance maximization
provide useful but different information for pruning, and
merging them will lead to better results.
The training of the performance prediction network has
several difficulties. How to collect samples for training this
network is not clear. Random sampling often produces triv-

9270

