Learning Neural Representation of Camera Pose with Matrix Representation of
Pose Shift via View Synthesis
Yaxuan Zhu, Ruiqi Gao, Siyuan Huang, Song-Chun Zhu, and Ying Nian Wu
Department of Statistics, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA)
{yaxuanzhu, ruiqigao, huangsiyuan}@ucla.edu, {sczhu, ywu}@stat.ucla.edu

Abstract
How to effectively represent camera pose is an essential
problem in 3D computer vision, especially in tasks such as
camera pose regression and novel view synthesis. Traditionally, 3D position of the camera is represented by Cartesian coordinate and the orientation is represented by Euler
angle or quaternions. These representations are manually
designed, which may not be the most effective representation for downstream tasks. In this work, we propose an
approach to learn neural representations of camera poses
and 3D scenes, coupled with neural representations of local camera movements. Specifically, the camera pose and
3D scene are represented as vectors and the local camera
movement is represented as a matrix operating on the vector
of the camera pose. We demonstrate that the camera movement can further be parametrized by a matrix Lie algebra
that underlies a rotation system in the neural space. The
vector representations are then concatenated and generate
the posed 2D image through a decoder network. The model
is learned from only posed 2D images and corresponding
camera poses, without access to depths or shapes. We conduct extensive experiments on synthetic and real datasets.
The results show that compared with other camera pose representations, our learned representation is more robust to
noise in novel view synthesis and more effective in camera
pose regression.

1. Introduction
With the advance of deep neural network (DNN), there
has been a series of successful works that employ DNN in
camera pose estimation [17, 16, 2, 26, 1, 20] or object pose
estimation [5]. In contrast, novel view synthesis is in the
opposite direction that maps the camera pose and 3D scene
representation back to the posed 2D image under certain
view [6, 30]. A fundamental problem in both lines of work
is to find effective representations of the camera pose [39].
Existing methods include representing the agent’s position

in 3D Cartesian coordinate, and the 3D orientation can be
represented by Euler angle, axis-angle, SO(3) rotation matrices, quaternions or log quaternions. These representations are mainly defined in manually designed coordinates
where each dimension has highly abstract semantics, which
could be suboptimal when involved in the optimization with
deep neural networks. It is desirable to have learning-based
representations for camera poses.
Recently, [8] proposes a representational model of
grid cells in the entorhinal cortex of mammalian brains.
Grid cells have been found participating in mental selfnavigation and they fire at strikingly regular hexagon grids
of positions when the agent moves within an open field. The
representational model in [8] consists of a vector representation of agent’s self-position, coupled with a matrix representation of agent’s self-motion. When the agent undergoes
a certain self-motion in the 2D space, the vector of selfposition is rotated by the matrix of self-motion on a 2D submanifold in the mental space. Such a model achieves selfnavigation and learns hexagon grid patterns of grid cells,
which has the promise to be biologically plausible.
Inspired by [8, 9], we propose an approach towards
learning neural representation of camera pose, coupled with
representation of local camera movement. Specifically,
given 2D posed images of a 3D scene and their corresponding camera poses, we assume a shared vector representation
for the underlying 3D scene and a distinct vector representation for the camera pose of each 2D image. When the camera has a local displacement, the vector of 3D scene remains
unchanged while the vector of camera pose is rotated by the
matrix representation of camera movement (Figure 1). We
further parametrize the matrix representation by matrix Lie
group and the corresponding matrix Lie algebra. The vector
representations of camera poses and matrix presentations of
camera movements can be shared across multiple scenes,
so that they can be learned from multiple scenes to boost
performance. The vectors of 3D scene and camera pose are
concatenated together to generate the 2D image through a
decoder network (Figure 2). The model is learned with only
posed 2D images and camera poses, without extra knowl-

9959

