Iterative Filter Adaptive Network for Single Image Defocus Deblurring
Junyong Lee

Hyeongseok Son

Jaesung Rim
POSTECH

Sunghyun Cho

Seungyong Lee

{junyonglee, sonhs, jsrim123, s.cho, leesy}@postech.ac.kr
https://github.com/codeslake/IFAN

Abstract
We propose a novel end-to-end learning-based approach
for single image defocus deblurring. The proposed approach is equipped with a novel Iterative Filter Adaptive Network (IFAN) that is specifically designed to handle spatially-varying and large defocus blur. For adaptively
handling spatially-varying blur, IFAN predicts pixel-wise
deblurring filters, which are applied to defocused features
of an input image to generate deblurred features. For effectively managing large blur, IFAN models deblurring filters
as stacks of small-sized separable filters. Predicted separable deblurring filters are applied to defocused features using a novel Iterative Adaptive Convolution (IAC) layer. We
also propose a training scheme based on defocus disparity
estimation and reblurring, which significantly boosts the deblurring quality. We demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance both quantitatively and qualitatively on real-world images.

1. Introduction
Defocus deblurring aims to restore an all-in-focus image
from a defocused image, and is highly demanded by daily
photographers to remove unwanted blur. Moreover, restored
all-in-focus images can greatly facilitate high-level vision
tasks such as semantic segmentation [21, 30] and object
detection [6, 3]. Despite the usefulness, defocus deblurring
remains a challenging problem as defocus blur is spatially
varying in size, and its shape also varies across the image.
A conventional strategy [28, 7, 22, 5, 12, 14] is to
model defocus blur as a combination of different convolution results obtained by applying predefined kernels to a
sharp image. It estimates per-pixel blur kernels based on
the blur model and then performs non-blind deconvolution
[8, 15, 13]. However, this approach often fails due to the restrictive blur model, which disregards the nonlinearity of
a real-world blur and constrains defocus blur in specific
shapes such as disc [7] or Gaussian kernels [28, 22, 12, 14].

Recently, Abuolaim and Brown [1] proposed the first
end-to-end learning-based method, DPDNet, which does
not rely on a specific blur model, but directly restores a
sharp image. Thanks to the end-to-end learning, DPDNet
outperforms previous approaches for real-world defocused
images. They show that dual-pixel data obtainable from
some modern cameras can significantly boost the deblurring
performance, and present a dual-pixel defocus deblurring
(DPDD) dataset. However, ringing artifacts and remaining
blur can often be found in their results, mainly due to its
naı̈ve UNet [26] architecture, which is not flexible enough
to deal with spatially-varying and large blur [37].
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end network embedded with our novel Iterative Filter Adaptive Network (IFAN)
for single image defocus deblurring. IFAN is specifically
designed for the effective handling of spatially-varying and
large defocus blur. To handle the spatially-varying nature
of defocus blur, IFAN adopts an adaptive filter prediction
scheme motivated by recent filter adaptive networks (FANs)
[35, 37]. Specifically, IFAN does not directly predict pixel
values, but generates spatially-adaptive per-pixel deblurring
filters, which are then applied to features from an input defocus blurred image to generate deblurred features.
To efficiently handle large defocus blur that requires
large receptive fields, IFAN predicts stacks of small-sized
separable filters instead of conventional filters unlike previous FANs. To apply predicted separable filters to features, we also propose a novel Iterative Adaptive Convolution (IAC) layer that iteratively applies separable filters to
features. As a result, IFAN significantly improves the deblurring quality at a low computational cost in the presence
of spatially-varying and large defocus blur.
To further improve the single image deblurring quality,
we train our network with novel defocus-specific tasks: defocus disparity estimation and reblurring. The learning of
defocus disparity estimation exploits dual-pixel data, which
provides stereo images with a tiny baseline, whose disparities are proportional to defocus blur magnitudes [9, 24, 1].
Leveraging dual-pixel stereo images, we train IFAN to pre-

2034

