We are More than Our Joints: Predicting how 3D Bodies Move
Yan Zhang1 , Michael J. Black2 , Siyu Tang1
1
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

Figure 1: We represent the body in motion with a set of 3D markers on the body surface. Given a time sequence of markers
from the past (white), MOJO predicts diverse marker sequences in the future (orange) with 3D bodies they represent (gray).

Abstract
A key step towards understanding human behavior is the
prediction of 3D human motion. Successful solutions have
many applications in human tracking, HCI, and graphics.
Most previous work focuses on predicting a time series of
future 3D joint locations given a sequence 3D joints from
the past. This Euclidean formulation generally works better than predicting pose in terms of joint rotations. Body
joint locations, however, do not fully constrain 3D human
pose, leaving degrees of freedom (like rotation about a
limb) undefined. Note that 3D joints can be viewed as a
sparse point cloud. Thus the problem of human motion
prediction can be seen as a problem of point cloud prediction. With this observation, we instead predict a sparse
set of locations on the body surface that correspond to motion capture markers. Given such markers, we fit a parametric body model to recover the 3D body of the person.
These sparse surface markers also carry detailed information about human movement that is not present in the joints,
increasing the naturalness of the predicted motions. Using the AMASS dataset, we train MOJO (More than Our
JOints), which is a novel variational autoencoder with a la-

tent DCT space that generates motions from latent frequencies. MOJO preserves the full temporal resolution of the
input motion, and sampling from the latent frequencies explicitly introduces high-frequency components into the generated motion. We note that motion prediction methods accumulate errors over time, resulting in joints or markers
that diverge from true human bodies. To address this, we
fit the SMPL-X body model to the predictions at each time
step, projecting the solution back onto the space of valid
bodies, before propagating the new markers in time. Quantitative and qualitative experiments show that our approach
produces state-of-the-art results and realistic 3D body animations. The code is available for research purposes at
https://yz-cnsdqz.github.io/MOJO/MOJO.html.

1. Introduction
Human motion prediction has been extensively studied
as a way to understand and model human behavior. Provided the recent past motion of a person, the goal is to predict either a deterministic or diverse set of plausible motions
in the near future. While useful for animation, AR, and
VR, predicting human movement is much more valuable be-

3372

