iVPF: Numerical Invertible Volume Preserving Flow for
Efficient Lossless Compression
Shifeng Zhang

Chen Zhang Ning Kang
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab

Zhenguo Li

{zhangshifeng4, chenzhang10, kang.ning2, li.zhenguo}@huawei.com

Abstract
It is nontrivial to store rapidly growing big data nowadays, which demands high-performance lossless compression techniques. Likelihood-based generative models have
witnessed their success on lossless compression, where flow
based models are desirable in allowing exact data likelihood optimisation with bijective mappings. However, common continuous flows are in contradiction with the discreteness of coding schemes, which requires either 1) imposing strict constraints on flow models that degrades the performance or 2) coding numerous bijective mapping errors
which reduces the efficiency. In this paper, we investigate
volume preserving flows for lossless compression and show
that a bijective mapping without error is possible. We propose Numerical Invertible Volume Preserving Flow (iVPF)
which is derived from the general volume preserving flows.
By introducing novel computation algorithms on flow models, an exact bijective mapping is achieved without any numerical error. We also propose a lossless compression algorithm based on iVPF. Experiments on various datasets
show that the algorithm based on iVPF achieves state-ofthe-art compression ratio over lightweight compression algorithms.

1. Introduction
Lossless compression is widely applied to efficiently
store a growing amount of data in the big data era. It is indicated by Shannon’s source coding theorem that the optimal
codeword length is lower bounded by the entropy of the data
distribution [25]. Many coding methods [18, 39, 9] succeed
in reaching the theoretical codelength, and are widely applied in various compression algorithms [10, 6, 30, 31].
Probabilistic modelling techniques can be adopted for
lossless compression with coding algorithms, in which
the minimum possible codelength would be essentially
bounded by the negative log-likelihood of the probabilistic model. Recent advances of deep generative models

Figure 1. Illustration of IDF(++), LBB and the proposed iVPF
model. VPF denotes volume preserving flow. Flow layers with
darker colour denotes higher expressive power. The compression
codelength and coding time are listed below (lower is better).

have shown great success in maximising the likelihood of
various types of data including images [22, 21, 32, 8],
videos [24, 19] and audios [29, 28]. Various lossless compression algorithms have been discovered based on different
types of generative models [26, 35, 15, 3, 13, 36, 23, 27, 5].
They witnessed better compression ratio compared to those
without machine learning techniques.
In this paper, we focus on coding with flow-based generative models [8, 21, 8, 29, 24]. Although variational autoencoders (VAEs) [22, 11] and auto-regressive [32, 37] models are both probabilistic models, they either suffer from inferior likelihood estimation (VAEs), or involve huge computational overhead (auto-regressive). Normalising flow
models admit bijective mappings between input data and
latent variables, and the latter is adopted for likelihood
computation given the prior. However, common flows are
continuous and numerical errors always occur for forward
and inverse computation [2], while lossless compression involves discrete data and any numerical error is unaccept-

620

