Self-Supervised Pillar Motion Learning for Autonomous Driving
Chenxu Luo1,2
1
QCraft

Xiaodong Yang1 Alan Yuille2
2
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Autonomous driving can benefit from motion behavior
comprehension when interacting with diverse traffic participants in highly dynamic environments. Recently, there has
been a growing interest in estimating class-agnostic motion directly from point clouds. Current motion estimation
methods usually require vast amount of annotated training data from self-driving scenes. However, manually labeling point clouds is notoriously difficult, error-prone and
time-consuming. In this paper, we seek to answer the research question of whether the abundant unlabeled data
collections can be utilized for accurate and efficient motion
learning. To this end, we propose a learning framework
that leverages free supervisory signals from point clouds
and paired camera images to estimate motion purely via
self-supervision. Our model involves a point cloud based
structural consistency augmented with probabilistic motion
masking as well as a cross-sensor motion regularization to
realize the desired self-supervision. Experiments reveal that
our approach performs competitively to supervised methods, and achieves the state-of-the-art result when combining our self-supervised model with supervised fine-tuning.

1. Introduction
Understanding the motion of various traffic agents is crucial for self-driving vehicles to be able to safely operate in
dynamic environments. Motion provides pivotal information to facilitate a variety of onboard modules ranging from
detection, tracking, prediction to planning. A self-driving
vehicle is typically equipped with multiple sensors, and the
most commonly used one is LiDAR. How to represent and
extract temporal motion from point clouds is therefore one
of the fundamental research problems in autonomous driving [9, 20, 39]. This is however challenging in the sense
that (1) there exist numerous agent categories and each category exhibits specific motion behavior; (2) point cloud is
sparse and lacks of exact correspondence between sweeps;
and (3) estimating process is required to meet tight runtime
constraint and limited onboard computation.
This work was done while C. Luo was interning at QCraft.

Figure 1. An overview of the proposed self-supervised pillar motion learning by our designed free supervisory signals from point
clouds and paired camera images. (a) illustrates a point cloud in
BEV with the dotted gray lines showing the field of view of the
back right camera. (b) shows the projected points with color encoding optical flow (ego-motion factorized out) on the back right
camera image. Note that the white points are static. We attach the
original optical flow of this image on bottom right for reference.
(c) is the predicted pillar motion field, where hue and saturation
correspond to motion direction and magnitude, and the gray are
static pillars. (d) demonstrates a zoomed-in area of (c).

A traditional autonomy stack usually performs motion
estimation by first recognizing other traffic participants in
the scene and then predicting how the scene might progress
given their current states [9, 18]. However, most recognition models are only trained to classify and localize objects
from a handful of known categories. This closed-set scenario is apparently insufficient for a practical autonomy system to perceive motion of a large diversity of instances that
are not seen during training. As the lower-level information compared to object semantics, motion should be ideally estimated in an open-set setting irrespective of whether
objects belong to a known or unknown category. One appealing way to predict class-agnostic motion is to estimate
scene flow from point clouds by estimating the 3D velocity of each point [20, 24]. Unfortunately, this dense motion
filed prediction is currently computationally prohibitive to

3183

