DualAST: Dual Style-Learning Networks for Artistic Style Transfer
Haibo Chen, Lei Zhao∗ , Zhizhong Wang, Huiming Zhang
Zhiwen Zuo, Ailin Li, Wei Xing∗ , Dongming Lu
College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University
{cshbchen, cszhl, endywon, qinglanwuji, zzwcs, liailin, wxing, ldm}@zju.edu.cn

Figure 1: Stylization examples generated by our proposed DualAST. The first row shows several artworks from Claude
Monet, which are taken as the style images. The first column shows the content images. The rest of the images are new
artworks generated by our model.

Abstract
Artistic style transfer is an image editing task that aims
at repainting everyday photographs with learned artistic
styles. Existing methods learn styles from either a single
style example or a collection of artworks. Accordingly, the
stylization results are either inferior in visual quality or
limited in style controllability. To tackle this problem, we
propose a novel Dual Style-Learning Artistic Style Transfer (DualAST) framework to learn simultaneously both the
holistic artist-style (from a collection of artworks) and the
specific artwork-style (from a single style image): the artiststyle sets the tone (i.e., the overall feeling) for the stylized
image, while the artwork-style determines the details of the
stylized image, such as color and texture. Moreover, we in* Corresponding author

troduce a Style-Control Block (SCB) to adjust the styles of
generated images with a set of learnable style-control factors. We conduct extensive experiments to evaluate the performance of the proposed framework, the results of which
confirm the superiority of our method.

1. Introduction
Artistic style transfer aims to transfer the styles of artworks onto arbitrary photographs to create novel artistic
images. The study on this topic has drawn much attention
in recent years due to its scientific and artistic values. To
achieve satisfying and convincing stylizations, it is very important to clarify the characteristics of artwork creation.
First, each artist has a specific painting style, which is
distinguishable from others. We can get a good grasp of an

872

