Separating Skills and Concepts for Novel Visual Question Answering
Spencer Whitehead1∗, Hui Wu2 , Heng Ji1 , Rogerio Feris2 , Kate Saenko2,3
1
UIUC 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, IBM Research 3 Boston University
{srw5,hengji}@illinois.edu, {wuhu,rsferis}@us.ibm.com, saenko@bu.edu

Abstract
Generalization to out-of-distribution data has been a
problem for Visual Question Answering (VQA) models. To
measure generalization to novel questions, we propose to
separate them into “skills” and “concepts”. “Skills” are
visual tasks, such as counting or attribute recognition, and
are applied to “concepts” mentioned in the question, such
as objects and people. VQA methods should be able to
compose skills and concepts in novel ways, regardless of
whether the specific composition has been seen in training,
yet we demonstrate that existing models have much to improve upon towards handling new compositions. We present
a novel method for learning to compose skills and concepts
that separates these two factors implicitly within a model
by learning grounded concept representations and disentangling the encoding of skills from that of concepts. We
enforce these properties with a novel contrastive learning
procedure that does not rely on external annotations and
can be learned from unlabeled image-question pairs. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach for
improving compositional and grounding performance.1

Figure 1. We propose a new view of compositionality in VQA that
explores the ability to answer questions about unseen compositions of skills (e.g., color) and concepts (e.g., car). We present a
method that learns to separate skills and concepts that can utilize
both labeled and unlabeled image-question pairs in order to generalize to novel questions with new skill-concept compositions and
new concepts.

1. Introduction
When humans answer questions, such as in Visual Question Answering (VQA), we first interpret the question, dissecting its content into parts (like concepts, relations, actions, question types), and then we select and execute the
skill (or plan/program) necessary to produce an answer
based on this information and the relevant knowledge base
(e.g., the image) [25, 34, 54, 57]. The skills needed to produce an answer are general and can be applied to (composed
with) many types of question-specific content. For example, if one can answer questions about “colors” for a variety
of objects as well as recognize and answer questions about
“cars”, then questions like “What color is the car?” should
be straightforward to answer even if this specific composition has yet to be seen (Fig. 1). This ability of seam∗ Work was partly done as an intern at the MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab.
1 Code: https://github.com/SpencerWhitehead/novelvqa

lessly adapting and composing conceptual representations
with skills is crucial to demonstrating true understanding of
VQA and learning to generalize from less labeled data.
Compositionality is recognized as one of the essential
properties of human cognition [33], but more research is
still needed on incorporating compositionality into models
and developing data-efficient, generalizable systems. While
much progress has been made to achieve better performance
on standard VQA test benchmarks [4, 16, 32, 56], most
state-of-the-art models are still designed without any notion
of built-in compositionality and tend to entangle skills and
concepts in their learned representations. Some previous
work has studied the lack of generalization ability of VQA
models, and evaluated models using test splits with different answer distributions from the training data. However,
this measurement only indirectly addresses the central issue

5632

