SOON: Scenario Oriented Object Navigation with Graph-based Exploration
Fengda Zhu1

Xiwen Liang2
Yi Zhu3
Qizhi Yu4
Xiaojun Chang1 *
Xiaodan Liang2
1
Monash University 2 Sun Yat-sen University
3
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 Zhijiang Laboratory
zhufengda@yahoo.com
qyu@ieee.org

liangcici5@gmail.com
cxj273@gmail.com

Abstract
The ability to navigate like a human towards a languageguided target from anywhere in a 3D embodied environment
is one of the ‘holy grail’ goals of intelligent robots. Most
visual navigation benchmarks, however, focus on navigating toward a target from a fixed starting point, guided by
an elaborate set of instructions that depicts step-by-step.
This approach deviates from real-world problems in which
human-only describes what the object and its surrounding
look like and asks the robot to start navigation from anywhere. Accordingly, in this paper, we introduce a Scenario
Oriented Object Navigation (SOON) task. In this task, an
agent is required to navigate from an arbitrary position in
a 3D embodied environment to localize a target following
a scene description. To give a promising direction to solve
this task, we propose a novel graph-based exploration (GBE)
method, which models the navigation state as a graph and introduces a novel graph-based exploration approach to learn
knowledge from the graph and stabilize training by learning
sub-optimal trajectories. We also propose a new large-scale
benchmark named From Anywhere to Object (FAO) dataset.
To avoid target ambiguity, the descriptions in FAO provide
rich semantic scene information includes: object attribute,
object relationship, region description, and nearby region
description. Our experiments reveal that the proposed GBE
outperforms various state-of-the-arts on both FAO and R2R
datasets. And the ablation studies on FAO validates the
quality of the dataset.

1. Introduction
Recent research efforts [49, 19, 17, 47, 33, 45, 32] have
achieved great success in embodied navigation tasks. The
agent is able to reach the target by following a variety of
instructions, such as a word (e.g. object name or room
name) [49, 40], a question-answer pair [11, 18], a natural
* Corresponding author.

zhu.yee@outlook.com

xdliang328@gmail.com

language sentence [3] or a dialogue consisting of multiple
sentences [45, 55].
However, these navigation approaches are still far from
real-world navigation activities. Current vision language
based navigation tasks such as Vision-language Navigation
(VLN) [3], Navigation from Dialog History (NDH) [45]
focus on navigating to a target by a fixed trajectory, guided
by an elaborate set of instructions that outlines every step.
These approaches fail to consider the case in which the
complex instruction provided only target description while
the starting point is not fixed. In real-world applications,
people often do not provide detailed step-by-step instructions
and expect the robot to be capable of self-exploration and
autonomous decision-making. We claim that the ability to
navigate towards a language-guided target from anywhere in
a 3D embodied environment like human would be of great
importance to an intelligent robot.
To address these problems, we propose a new task, named
Vision Situated Object Navigation (SOON), where an agent
is instructed to find a thoroughly described target object
inside a house. The navigation instructions in SOON are
target-oriented rather than step-by-step babysitter as in previous benchmarks. There are two major features that makes
our task unique: target orienting and starting independence.
A brief example of a navigation process in SOON is illustrated in Fig. 1. Firstly, different from conventional object
navigation tasks defined in [49, 40], instructions in SOON
play a guidance role in addition to distinguish a target object class. An instruction contains thorough descriptions to
guide the agent to find a unique object from anywhere in the
house. After receiving an instruction in SOON, the agent
first searches a larger-scale area according to the region descriptions in the instruction, and then gradually narrows the
search space to the target area. Compared with step-by-step
navigation settings [3] or object-goal navigation settings [49],
this kind of coarse-to-fine navigation process is more closely
resembles a real-world situation. Moreover, the SOON task
is starting-independent. Since the language instructions contain geographic region descriptions rather than trajectory

12689

