Single-View 3D Object Reconstruction from Shape Priors in Memory
Shuo Yang1
Min Xu1 *
Haozhe Xie2
Stuart Perry1
Jiahao Xia1
1
School of Electrical and Data Engineering, University of Technology Sydney
2
Harbin Institute of Technology
{shuo.yang,jiahao.xia}@student.uts.edu.au
{min.xu,stuart.perry}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Existing methods for single-view 3D object reconstruction directly learn to transform image features into 3D representations. However, these methods are vulnerable to images containing noisy backgrounds and heavy occlusions
because the extracted image features do not contain enough
information to reconstruct high-quality 3D shapes. Humans
routinely use incomplete or noisy visual cues from an image to retrieve similar 3D shapes from their memory and
reconstruct the 3D shape of an object. Inspired by this, we
propose a novel method, named Mem3D, that explicitly constructs shape priors to supplement the missing information
in the image. Specifically, the shape priors are in the forms
of “image-voxel” pairs in the memory network, which is
stored by a well-designed writing strategy during training.
We also propose a voxel triplet loss function that helps to
retrieve the precise 3D shapes that are highly related to the
input image from shape priors. The LSTM-based shape encoder is introduced to extract information from the retrieved
3D shapes, which are useful in recovering the 3D shape
of an object that is heavily occluded or in complex environments. Experimental results demonstrate that Mem3D
significantly improves reconstruction quality and performs
favorably against state-of-the-art methods on the ShapeNet
and Pix3D datasets.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing object 3D shape from a single-view RGB
image is a vital but challenging computer vision task in
robotics, CAD, and virtual and augmented reality applications. Humans can easily infer the 3D shape of an object
from a single image due to sufficient prior knowledge and
an innate ability for visual understanding and reasoning.
However, this is an extremely difficult and ill-posed problem for a machine vision systems because a single-view im* Corresponding Author.

Input

cshzxie@gmail.com

3D-R2N2

Pix2Vox++

Ours

Heavy Occlusion
Input

3D-R2N2

Pix2Vox++

Ours

Noisy Background
Figure 1. Compared with the current state-of-the-arts method
Pix2Vox++ [36] and classic method 3D-R2N2 [4], the proposed
method are more robust in reconstructing the 3D shape of an object
from a single image that contains occlusion or noisy backgrounds.

age can not provide sufficient information for the object to
be reconstructed.
Most of the existing learning-based methods for singleview 3D reconstruction extract features from a single RGB
image, then transform it into a 3D representation. These
methods achieve promising results on the synthetic datasets
(ShapeNet [2]). However, as shown in Figure 1, they usually have trouble reconstructing the 3D shape of an object
from real-world images. The performance gap between the
real-world and synthetic datasets are caused by the quality
of image features. The features extracted from images with
noisy backgrounds or heavy occlusions usually contain insufficient useful information for 3D reconstruction.
Humans can infer a reasonable 3D shape of an object
from a single image, even with incomplete or noisy visual
cues. This is due to the fact that humans retrieve similar
shapes from their memories and apply these shape priors to
recover the shape of hidden and noisy parts of the object.
Motivated by human vision, we propose a novel memory-

3152

