Bridging the Visual Gap: Wide-Range Image Blending
Chia-Ni Lu
Ya-Chu Chang
Wei-Chen Chiu
National Chiao Tung University (NCTU), Taiwan
MediaTek-NCTU Research Center, Taiwan
julialu67.cs08g@nctu.edu.tw

First Input Photo Second Input Photo

jenna.cs07g@nctu.edu.tw

Resultant Panorama-1

walon@cs.nctu.edu.tw

Resultant Panorama-2

Figure 1: Given two different input photos (the first and the second columns), our wide-range image blending model is able
to seamlessly blend them into a novel panoramic image by generating smooth transition in the intermediate region between
them. Here we show several examples of the resultant panoramas, where the result in the third column is produced by putting
the first input photo (highlighted by blue dashed lines) on the left and the second input photo (highlighted by red dashed
lines) on the right, while the fourth column is obtained with using opposite spatial arrangement.

Abstract
In this paper we propose a new problem scenario in image processing, wide-range image blending, which aims to
smoothly merge two different input photos into a panorama
by generating novel image content for the intermediate region between them. Although such problem is closely related to the topics of image inpainting, image outpainting,
and image blending, none of the approaches from these topics is able to easily address it. We introduce an effective
deep-learning model to realize wide-range image blending,
where a novel Bidirectional Content Transfer module is proposed to perform the conditional prediction for the feature
representation of the intermediate region via recurrent neural networks. In addition to ensuring the spatial and semantic consistency during the blending, we also adopt the
contextual attention mechanism as well as the adversarial
learning scheme in our proposed method for improving the
visual quality of the resultant panorama. We experimentally demonstrate that our proposed method is not only able
to produce visually appealing results for wide-range image blending, but also able to provide superior performance
with respect to several baselines built upon the state-of-theart image inpainting and outpainting approaches.

1. Introduction
Digital image processing, which carries out computerbased processing and manipulation on image data, has been
playing an important role in our daily life, such as image
inpainting for image restoration or object removal, image
blending for image composition, and image outpainting (i.e.
extrapolation) for digital content generation. In this paper,
we propose a novel task of image processing: wide-range
image blending, in which it aims to smoothly merge two
different images into a panorama by generating novel image
content for the intermediate region between them, as shown
in Figure 1. Such technique can contribute to bringing in
more interesting ways for the content generation and image
composition. For example, we could easily create a full
panoramic image based on the photos taken by the front and
rear cameras of a cellphone via applying wide-range image
blending on them with two opposite spatial arrangements
(i.e. one is putting the front photo on the left and the rear
photo on the right, while the other one is opposite).
The main challenge of wide-range image blending lies
in the requirement that the generated content for the intermediate region should be not only visually realistic but also
semantically reasonable to achieve seamless transition from

843

