What Can Style Transfer and Paintings Do For Model Robustness?
Hubert Lin1
1

Mitchell van Zuijlen2

Sylvia C. Pont2

1

2

Cornell University

{hubert, kb}@cs.cornell.edu

2

Maarten W.A. Wijntjes2

Kavita Bala1

Delft University of Technology

{m.j.p.vanzuijlen, s.c.pont, m.w.a.wijntjes}@tudelft.nl

Abstract
A common strategy for improving model robustness is
through data augmentations. Data augmentations encourage models to learn desired invariances, such as invariance
to horizontal flipping or small changes in color. Recent work
has shown that arbitrary style transfer can be used as a form
of data augmentation to encourage invariance to textures by
creating painting-like images from photographs. However, a
stylized photograph is not quite the same as an artist-created
painting. Artists depict perceptually meaningful cues in
paintings so that humans can recognize salient components
in scenes, an emphasis which is not enforced in style transfer.
Therefore, we study how style transfer and paintings differ
in their impact on model robustness. First, we investigate
the role of paintings as style images for stylization-based
data augmentation. We find that style transfer functions well
even without paintings as style images. Second, we show
that learning from paintings as a form of perceptual data
augmentation can improve model robustness. Finally, we
investigate the invariances learned from stylization and from
paintings, and show that models learn different invariances
from these differing forms of data. Our results provide insights into how stylization improves model robustness, and
provide evidence that artist-created paintings can be a valuable source of data for model robustness. Code and data are
available at: https://github.com/hubertsgithub/
style_painting_robustness

1. Introduction
Model robustness can be defined as the capability of a
model to generalize to unseen image distributions. These can
be the result of real-world effects, like weather and camera
noise [13], adversarial noise [23], or distribution shifts due to
differences in environments in which the images are captured.
The performance of standard recognition models can degrade
drastically in these settings, but robust models are critical for
applications such as self-driving or medical diagnostics.
A common strategy is to improve generalization through
data augmentation [45, 8, 14, 23]. Conventional data augmentation applies transformations to encourage invariance
to heuristic rules (e.g., flipping for invariance to image mirroring). Recent work has found that image stylization can
encourage models to learn invariance to texture [10]. While

style transfer has focused on visual fidelity [17], we argue
that current style transfer models do not yet fully capture
the essence of artistic paintings. For example, a family of
style transfer algorithms act by manipulating feature distributions to create a stylized photo which holistically mimics
a painting [22] – in effect, mid-level textures are manipulated in the stylized photo. However, paintings are more
than a style filter applied to a photo. An artist can choose
lighting, contours, and scene context to convey realism in
important scene regions while foregoing perceptual details
less important areas. This artistic manipulation can affect
our perceptual understanding of the scene.
In this paper, we explore a series of hypotheses to understand how style transfer and paintings impact model robustness. Fig. 1 illustrates that various types of images can
differently affect model robustness. First, we examine how
style images play a role in stylization-based data augmentation in Section 4. Second, we investigate the role of paintings
as a form of training data, and contrast it to other artforms
such as sketches in Section 5. Finally, we probe models to
empirically understand their learned invariances, and discuss
how style transfer and artistic paintings can contribute to
robust natural image recognition models in Section 6. Our
contributions are:
• We demonstrate that arbitrary style transfer can be used
as effective data augmentation even without painting
style images. We attribute their effectiveness to the
diversity of style images rather than artistic style.
• We argue that paintings can be considered a form of
perceptual data augmentation, and demonstrate that it
can improve model robustness. We contrast paintings
with other forms of art such as sketches.
• We explore the invariances learned from arbitrary style
transfer, learned artistic style transfer, and paintings.
We find that models do not learn the same invariances
from stylized photos and paintings, and show that the
learned invariances are complementary.

2. Related Work
Model Robustness. Recent work in robustness for CNNs
has focused on both adversarial robustness [5] as well as
robustness to real-world transformations [13, 11]. This view
111028

