Look Closer to Segment Better:
Boundary Patch Refinement for Instance Segmentation
Chufeng Tang1∗ Hang Chen1∗ Xiao Li1 Jianmin Li1 Zhaoxiang Zhang2 Xiaolin Hu1†
State Key Laboratory of Intelligent Technology and Systems, THU-Bosch JCML Center,
BNRist, Institute for AI, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2
Institute of Automation, CAS & University of Chinese Academy of Sciences &
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS
1

{tcf18, chenhang20, lixiao20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn

{lijianmin, xlhu}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Mask R-CNN

Tremendous efforts have been made on instance segmentation but the mask quality is still not satisfactory. The
boundaries of predicted instance masks are usually imprecise due to the low spatial resolution of feature maps and the
imbalance problem caused by the extremely low proportion
of boundary pixels. To address these issues, we propose a
conceptually simple yet effective post-processing refinement
framework to improve the boundary quality based on the
results of any instance segmentation model, termed BPR.
Following the idea of looking closer to segment boundaries
better, we extract and refine a series of small boundary
patches along the predicted instance boundaries. The refinement is accomplished by a boundary patch refinement
network at higher resolution. The proposed BPR framework
yields significant improvements over the Mask R-CNN baseline on Cityscapes benchmark, especially on the boundaryaware metrics. Moreover, by applying the BPR framework
to the “PolyTransform + SegFix” baseline, we reached 1st
place on the Cityscapes leaderboard. Code is available at
https://github.com/tinyalpha/BPR.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation, which aims to assign a pixelwise instance mask with a category label to each object
in an image, has great potential in various computer vision applications, such as autonomous driving and robotics.
Mask R-CNN [13] is a prevailing two-stage instance segmentation framework, which first employs a Faster R-CNN
[32] detector to detect objects in an image and further per∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Ours

Figure 1: Left: Instance segmentation results and the extracted boundary patches of Mask R-CNN. Right: After the
refinement of our BPR framework, the instance mask aligns
better with object boundaries. Best viewed with zoom-in.

forms binary segmentation within each detected bounding
box. Other methods [14, 25] built upon Mask R-CNN
consistently achieve superior performance. Driven by the
recent development of one-stage detectors [22, 37, 53],
a number of one-stage instance segmentation frameworks
[2, 3, 6, 19, 36, 40, 41, 42, 46, 51] have been proposed.
However, the quality of the predicted instance mask is
still not satisfactory. One of the most important problems
is the imprecise segmentation around instance boundaries.
As shown in Figure 1(left), the predicted instance masks of
Mask R-CNN are coarse and not well-aligned with the real
object boundaries. Empirically, correcting the error pixels near object boundaries can improve the mask quality a
lot. We conducted an upper bound analysis in Table 1. A
large gain (9.4/14.2/17.8 in AP) can be obtained by simply
replacing the predictions with ground-truth labels for pixels within a certain Euclidean distance (1px/2px/3px) to the
predicted boundaries, especially for small objects.

13926

