Hierarchical Layout-Aware Graph Convolutional Network
for Unified Aesthetics Assessment
Dongyu She1 , Yu-Kun Lai2 , Gaoxiong Yi3 , Kun Xu1 *
Tsinghua University 2 Cardiff University 3 Tencent

1

Abstract
Learning computational models of image aesthetics can
have a substantial impact on visual art and graphic design. Although automatic image aesthetics assessment is
a challenging topic by its subjective nature, psychological
studies have confirmed a strong correlation between image layouts and perceived image quality. While previous
state-of-the-art methods attempt to learn holistic information using deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs),
our approach is motivated by the fact that Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) architecture is conceivably more
suited for modeling complex relations among image regions
than vanilla convolutional layers. Specifically, we present a
Hierarchical Layout-Aware Graph Convolutional Network
(HLA-GCN) to capture layout information. It is a dedicated double-subnet neural network consisting of two LAGCN modules. The first LA-GCN module constructs an
aesthetics-related graph in the coordinate space and performs reasoning over spatial nodes. The second LA-GCN
module performs graph reasoning after aggregating significant regions in a latent space. The model output is a hierarchical representation with layout-aware features from both
spatial and aggregated nodes for unified aesthetics assessment. Extensive evaluations show that our proposed model
outperforms the state-of-the-art on the AVA and AADB
datasets across three different tasks. The code is available
at http://github.com/days1011/HLAGCN .

1. Introduction
Automatic image aesthetics assessment (IAA) has attracted increasing attention in recent years due to its potential applications, e.g., image retrieval, album photo recommendation, image enhancement [7,14,44], etc. Early efforts focus on extracting elaborately designed hand-crafted
features according to the known photographic principles,
e.g., the rule-of-thirds [8], color harmony [35], and global
* Corresponding author, xukun@tsinghua.edu.cn

Figure 1. To capture layout information over the whole input
space, we first partition an image into spatial nodes. Features from
the disjoint regions (denoted in colors) in the coordinate space are
then projected into the latent space for efficient graph reasoning.

image layout [16, 30]. With the advance of Convolution
Neural Networks (CNNs) [20], recent methods aim to map
image aesthetics to different types of formulations using
CNNs, i.e., binary classification labels [25, 40], aesthetic
scores [37] and their distributions [3, 10, 11]. Although significant progress has been achieved, the performance of employing CNNs for IAA is often compromised due to the following two main inherent constraints.
First, general deep aesthetic models require additional
operations (e.g., cropping, warping, or padding) to generate the fixed-size input needed for mini-batch compatibility. However, the altered object aspect ratios or image layouts often impair the image aesthetics and introduce label
noise for representation learning. Several methods try to
address such limitations by either feeding the original-sized
images [10, 29] or incorporating multiple patches [28, 41]
into the network, which slows down the training and inference process significantly. Second, the layout information
is crucial for assessing visual aesthetics since the appropriate arrangement of visual elements in the photograph can
add balance and harmony [31, 46]. For example, Fig. 1 (a)

8475

