Fully Understanding Generic Objects:
Modeling, Segmentation, and Reconstruction
Feng Liu
Luan Tran Xiaoming Liu
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{liufeng6, tranluan, liuxm}@msu.edu

Abstract
Inferring 3D structure of a generic object from a 2D image is a long-standing objective of computer vision. Conventional approaches either learn completely from CADgenerated synthetic data, which have difficulty in inference
from real images, or generate 2.5D depth image via intrinsic decomposition, which is limited compared to the full 3D
reconstruction. One fundamental challenge lies in how to
leverage numerous real 2D images without any 3D ground
truth. To address this issue, we take an alternative approach
with semi-supervised learning. That is, for a 2D image of
a generic object, we decompose it into latent representations of category, shape, albedo, lighting and camera projection matrix, decode the representations to segmented 3D
shape and albedo respectively, and fuse these components
to render an image well approximating the input image. Using a category-adaptive 3D joint occupancy field (JOF),
we show that the complete shape and albedo modeling enables us to leverage real 2D images in both modeling and
model fitting. The effectiveness of our approach is demonstrated through superior 3D reconstruction from a single
image, being either synthetic or real, and shape segmentation. Code is available at http://cvlab.cse.msu.
edu/project-fully3dobject.html.

1. Introduction
Understanding 3D structure of objects observed from a
single view is a fundamental computer vision problem with
applications in robotics, 3D perception [2], and AR/VR.
As humans, we are able to effortlessly infer the full 3D
shape when monocularly looking at an object. Endowing
machines with this ability remains extremely challenging.
With rises of deep learning, many have shown humanlevel accuracy on 2D vision tasks, e.g., detection [3, 4],
recognition [54, 55], alignment [72]. One key reason for
this success is the abundance of labeled data. Thus, the decent performance can be obtained via supervised learning.

Figure 1. Our semi-supervised method learns a universal model of
multiple generic objects. During inference, the jointly learnt fitting
module decomposes a real 2D image into albedo, segmented full
3D shape, illumination, and camera projection.

Yet, extending this success to supervised learning for 3D inference is far behind due to limited availability of 3D labels.
In this case, researchers focus on using synthetic datasets
such as ShapeNet [5] containing textured CAD models. To
form image-shape pairs for supervised training, many 2D
images can be rendered from CAD models. However, using
synthetic data alone has two drawbacks. Firstly, making
3D object instances is labor intensive and requires computer graphics expertise, thus not scalable for all object
categories. Secondly, the performance of a synthetic-datatrained model often drops on real imagery, due to the obvious domain gap. In light of this, self-supervised methods
can be promising to explore, considering the readily available real-world 2D images for any object categories, e.g.,
ImageNet [44]. If those images can be effectively used in
either 3D object modeling or model fitting, it can have a
great impact on 3D object reconstruction.
Early attempts [28, 59] on 3D modeling from 2D images
in a self-supervised fashion are limited on exploiting 2D images. Given an image, they mainly learn 3D models to re-

7423

