Scan2Cap: Context-aware Dense Captioning in RGB-D Scans
Dave Zhenyu Chen1
Ali Gholami2
Matthias Nießner1
Angel X. Chang2
1
2
Technical University of Munich
Simon Fraser University
https://daveredrum.github.io/Scan2Cap/

Figure 1: We introduce the task of dense captioning in RGB-D scans with a model that can densely localize objects in a 3D
scene and describe them using natural language in a single forward pass.

Abstract
We introduce the task of dense captioning in 3D scans
from commodity RGB-D sensors. As input, we assume a
point cloud of a 3D scene; the expected output is the bounding boxes along with the descriptions for the underlying
objects. To address the 3D object detection and description problems, we propose Scan2Cap, an end-to-end trained
method, to detect objects in the input scene and describe
them in natural language. We use an attention mechanism
that generates descriptive tokens while referring to the related components in the local context. To reflect object relations (i.e. relative spatial relations) in the generated captions, we use a message passing graph module to facilitate
learning object relation features. Our method can effectively localize and describe 3D objects in scenes from the
ScanRefer dataset, outperforming 2D baseline methods by a
significant margin (27.61% CiDEr@0.5IoU improvement).

1. Introduction
The intersection of visual scene understanding [45, 20]
and natural language processing [49, 13] is a rich and active area of research. Specifically, there has been a lot of
work on image captioning [51, 27, 52, 33, 2] and the related task of dense captioning [27, 26, 53, 56, 28, 31]. In
dense captioning, individual objects are localized in an im-

age and each object is described using natural language. So
far, dense captioning work has operated purely on 2D visual
data, most commonly single-view images that are limited by
the field of view. Images are inherently viewpoint specific
and scale agnostic, and fail to capture the physical extent
of 3D objects (i.e. the actual size of the objects) and their
locations in the environment.
In this work, we introduce the new task of dense captioning in 3D scenes. We aim to jointly localize and describe
each object in a 3D scene. We show that leveraging the 3D
information of an object such as actual object size or object
location results in more accurate descriptions.
Apart from the 2D constraints in images, even seminal
work on dense captioning suffers from aperture issues [56].
Object relations are often neglected while describing scene
objects, which makes the task more challenging. We address this problem with a graph-based attentive captioning
architecture that jointly learns object features and object relation features on the instance level, and generates descriptive tokens. Specifically, our proposed method (referred to
as Scan2Cap) consists of two critical components: 1) Relational Graph facilitates learning the object features and
object relation features using a message passing neural network; 2) Context-aware Attention Captioning generates the
descriptive tokens while attending to the object and object
relation features. In summary, our contribution is fourfold:
• We introduce the 3D dense captioning task to densely

3193

