Weakly Supervised Instance Segmentation for Videos
with Temporal Mask Consistency
Qing Liu∗
Johns Hopkins University

Vignesh Ramanathan
Facebook

Dhruv Mahajan
Facebook

qingliu@jhu.edu

vigneshr@fb.com

dhruvm@fb.com

Alan Yuille
Johns Hopkins University

Zhenheng Yang
Facebook

alan.l.yuille@gmail.com

zhenheny@gmail.com

Abstract
Weakly supervised instance segmentation reduces the
cost of annotations required to train models. However,
existing approaches which rely only on image-level class
labels predominantly suffer from errors due to (a) partial segmentation of objects and (b) missing object predictions. We show that these issues can be better addressed
by training with weakly labeled videos instead of images.
In videos, motion and temporal consistency of predictions
across frames provide complementary signals which can
help segmentation. We are the first to explore the use of
these video signals to tackle weakly supervised instance
segmentation. We propose two ways to leverage this information in our model. First, we adapt inter-pixel relation network (IRN) [1] to effectively incorporate motion
information during training. Second, we introduce a new
MaskConsist module, which addresses the problem of missing object instances by transferring stable predictions between neighboring frames during training. We demonstrate
that both approaches together improve the instance segmentation metric AP50 on video frames of two datasets:
Youtube-VIS and Cityscapes by 5% and 3% respectively.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is a challenging task, where all
object instances in an image have to be detected and
segmented. This task has seen rapid progress in recent
years [13, 28, 5], partly due to the availability of large
datasets like COCO [26]. However, it can be forbiddingly
expensive to build datasets at this scale for a new domain of
images or videos, since segmentation boundaries have to be
annotated for every object in an image.
Alternatively, weak labels like classification labels can
be used to train instance segmentation models [54, 7, 55, 1,
∗ This work is done during Qing Liu’s internship at Facebook.

flowIRN

(a) Partial instance segmentation
Frame t

Frame t +𝛿

MaskConsist

(b) Missing object instance

Figure 1. Two types of error for IRN [1] trained with still images:
(a) partial segmentation and (b) missing instance. We observe optical flow is able to capture pixels of the same instance better (circles
in (a)) and we propose flowIRN to model this information. In (b),
a fish is missed on one frame. We propose MaskConsist to leverage temporal consistency and transfer stable mask predictions to
neighboring frames during training.

21, 12, 37, 2]. While weak labels are significantly cheaper
to annotate, training weakly supervised models can be far
more challenging. They typically suffer from two sources
of error: (a) partial instance segmentation and (b) missing object instances, as shown in Fig. 1. Weakly supervised methods often identify only the most discriminative
object regions that help predict the class label. This results
in partial segmentation of objects, as shown in Fig. 1(a).
For instance, the recent work on weakly supervised instance segmentation IRN [1] relies on class activation maps
(CAMs) [53], which suffer from this issue as also observed
in other works [20, 48, 52]. Further, CAMs do not differentiate between overlapping instances of the same class. It
can also miss object instances when multiple instances are
present in an image, as shown in Fig. 1(b). In particular, an
instance could be segmented in one image but not in another
image where it is occluded or its pose alters.
Interestingly, these issues are less severe in videos,
where object motion provides an additional signal for in-

13968

