Generalizable Pedestrian Detection: The Elephant In The Room
Irtiza Hasan 1 , Shengcai Liao1,† , Jinpeng Li1 , Saad Ullah Akram2 , Ling Shao1
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence (IIAI)1 , Aalto University, Finland2
{irtiza.hasan,shengcai.liao,jinpeng.li,ling.shao}@inceptioniai.org, saad.akram@aalto.fi

Abstract
Pedestrian detection is used in many vision based applications ranging from video surveillance to autonomous
driving. Despite achieving high performance, it is still
largely unknown how well existing detectors generalize to
unseen data. This is important because a practical detector should be ready to use in various scenarios in applications. To this end, we conduct a comprehensive study
in this paper, using a general principle of direct crossdataset evaluation. Through this study, we find that existing
state-of-the-art pedestrian detectors, though perform quite
well when trained and tested on the same dataset, generalize poorly in cross dataset evaluation. We demonstrate
that there are two reasons for this trend. Firstly, their designs (e.g. anchor settings) may be biased towards popular benchmarks in the traditional single-dataset training
and test pipeline, but as a result largely limit their generalization capability. Secondly, the training source is generally not dense in pedestrians and diverse in scenarios.
Under direct cross-dataset evaluation, surprisingly, we find
that a general purpose object detector, without pedestriantailored adaptation in design, generalizes much better compared to existing state-of-the-art pedestrian detectors. Furthermore, we illustrate that diverse and dense datasets, collected by crawling the web, serve to be an efficient source of
pre-training for pedestrian detection. Accordingly, we propose a progressive training pipeline and find that it works
well for autonomous-driving oriented pedestrian detection.
Consequently, the study conducted in this paper suggests
that more emphasis should be put on cross-dataset evaluation for the future design of generalizable pedestrian detectors. Code and models can be accessed at https:
//github.com/hasanirtiza/Pedestron.

1. Introduction
Pedestrian detection is one of the longest standing prob† Corresponding author.

lems in computer vision. Numerous real-world applications, such as, autonomous driving [9, 17], video surveillance [16], action recognition [48] and tracking [21] rely
on accurate pedestrian/person detection. Recently, convolutional neural network (CNNs) based approaches have
shown considerable progress in the field of pedestrian detection, where on certain benchmarks, the progress is within
striking distance of a human baseline as shown in Fig. 1 left.
However, some current pedestrian detection methods
show signs of over-fitting to source datasets, especially in
the case of autonomous driving. As shown in Fig. 1 right,
current pedestrian detectors, do not generalize well to other
(target) pedestrian detection datasets, even when trained on
a relatively large scale dataset which is reasonably closer to
the target domain. This problem prevents pedestrian detection from scaling up to real-world applications.
Despite being a key problem, generalizable pedestrian
detection has not received much attention in the past. More
importantly, reasons behind poor performances of pedestrian detectors in cross-dataset evaluation has not been properly investigated or discussed. In this paper, we argue that
this is mainly due to the fact that the current state-of-the-art
pedestrian detectors are tailored for target datasets and their
overall design is biased towards target datasets, thus reducing their generalization. Secondly, the training source is
generally not dense in pedestrians and diverse in scenarios.
Since current state-of-the-art methods are based on deep
learning, their performance depend heavily on the quantity
and quality of data and there is some evidence that the performance on some computer vision tasks (e.g. image classification) keeps improving at least up-to billions of samples
[29].
At present, all autonomous driving related datasets have
at least three main limitations, 1) limited number of unique
pedestrians, 2) low pedestrian density, i.e. the challenging
occlusion samples are relatively rare, and 3) limited diversity as the datasets are captured by a small team primarily
for dataset creation instead of curating them from more diverse sources (e.g. youtube, facebook, etc.).
In last couple of years, few large and diverse datasets,
CrowdHuman [35], WiderPerson [51] and Wider Pedestrian
111328

