Diverse Branch Block: Building a Convolution as an Inception-like Unit
Xiaohan Ding 1∗ Xiangyu Zhang 2 Jungong Han 3 Guiguang Ding 1†
1
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist);
School of Software, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
MEGVII Technology
3
Computer Science Department, Aberystwyth University, SY23 3FL, UK
dxh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
jungonghan77@gmail.com

Abstract
We propose a universal building block of Convolutional
Neural Network (ConvNet) to improve the performance
without any inference-time costs. The block is named Diverse Branch Block (DBB), which enhances the representational capacity of a single convolution by combining diverse
branches of different scales and complexities to enrich the
feature space, including sequences of convolutions, multiscale convolutions, and average pooling. After training, a
DBB can be equivalently converted into a single conv layer
for deployment. Unlike the advancements of novel ConvNet architectures, DBB complicates the training-time microstructure while maintaining the macro architecture, so
that it can be used as a drop-in replacement for regular
conv layers of any architecture. In this way, the model can
be trained to reach a higher level of performance and then
transformed into the original inference-time structure for
inference. DBB improves ConvNets on image classification
(up to 1.9% higher top-1 accuracy on ImageNet), object
detection and semantic segmentation. The PyTorch code
and models are released at https://github.com/
DingXiaoH/DiverseBranchBlock.

1. Introduction
Improving the performance of Convolutional Neural
Network (ConvNet) has always been a heated research
topic. On one hand, the advancements in architecture design, e.g., the Inception models [27, 28, 26, 15], have re∗ This work is supported by The National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2017YFA0700800), the National Natural
Science Foundation of China (No.61925107, No.U1936202) and Beijing
Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI). Xiaohan Ding is funded by the
Baidu Scholarship Program 2019 (http://scholarship.baidu.
com/). This work is done during Xiaohan Ding’s internship at MEGVII.
† Corresponding author.

zhangxiangyu@megvii.com
dinggg@tsinghua.edu.cn

vealed that the multi-branch topology and combination of
various paths with different scales and complexities can enrich the feature space and improve the performance. However, the complicated structure usually slows down the inference, as a combination of small operators (e.g., concatenation of 1 × 1 conv and pooling) is not friendly to the devices with strong parallel computing powers like GPU [21].
On the other hand, more parameters and connections
usually lead to higher performance, but the size of ConvNet
we deploy cannot increase arbitrarily due to the business
requirements and hardware constraints. Considering this,
we usually judge the quality of a ConvNet by the trade-off
between performance and inference-time costs such as the
latency, memory footprint and number of parameters. In
the common cases, we train the models on powerful GPU
workstations and deploy them onto efficiency-sensitive devices, so we consider it acceptable to improve the performance with the costs of more training resources, as long as
the deployed model keeps the same size.
In this paper, we seek to insert complicated structures
into numerous ConvNet architectures to improve the performance while keeping the original inference-time costs. To
this end, we decouple the training-time and inference-time
network structure by complicating the model only during
training and converting it back into the original structure
for inference. Naturally, we require such extra training-time
structures to be 1) effective in improving the training-time
model’s performance and 2) able to transform into the original inference-time structure.
For the usability and universality, we upgrade the basic
ConvNet component, K × K conv, into a powerful block
named Diverse Branch Block (DBB) (Fig. 1). As a building block, DBB is complementary to the other efforts to improve ConvNet, e.g., architecture design [12, 24, 13, 21, 23,
35], neural architecture search [2, 39, 22, 20, 19], data augmentation and training methods [25, 5, 33] and fulfills the
above two requirements by the following two properties:

10886

