VDSM: Unsupervised Video Disentanglement with State-Space Modeling and
Deep Mixtures of Experts
Matthew J. Vowels

Necati Cihan Camgoz

Richard Bowden

m.j.vowels@surrey.ac.uk

n.camgoz@surrey.ac.uk

r.bowden@surrey.ac.uk

Centre for Vision, Speech and Signal Processing
University of Surrey
Guildford, UK

Abstract
Disentangled representations support a range of downstream tasks including causal reasoning, generative modeling, and fair machine learning. Unfortunately, disentanglement has been shown to be impossible without the incorporation of supervision or inductive bias. Given that supervision is often expensive or infeasible to acquire, we choose
to incorporate structural inductive bias and present an unsupervised, deep State-Space-Model for Video Disentanglement (VDSM). The model disentangles latent time-varying
and dynamic factors via the incorporation of hierarchical
structure with a dynamic prior and a Mixture of Experts decoder. VDSM learns separate disentangled representations
for the identity of the object or person in the video, and for
the action being performed. We evaluate VDSM across a
range of qualitative and quantitative tasks including identity and dynamics transfer, sequence generation, Fréchet Inception Distance, and factor classification. VDSM achieves
state-of-the-art performance and exceeds adversarial methods, even when the methods use additional supervision.

1. Introduction
In general, humans are able to reason about the identity
of an object and the object’s motion independently, thereby
implying that identity and motion are considered as disentangled generative attributes [38, 9]. In other words, a
change to an object’s motion does not affect the object’s
identity. For example, in sign language translation, the
canonical form of a gesture exists independently of the identity or appearance of the signer. In order to reason independently about the latent factors underlying identity and
motion, it is therefore desirable to seek disentanglement.
Achieving disentangled representations is a long standing goal for machine learning, and supports causal reasoning [72, 10, 90, 97], fair machine learning [63, 66, 20, 99],

Target Action

Source ID

Source ID
Target Action

Source ID

Source ID

Figure 1. VDSM action transfer for the Sprites dataset [60]. The
target action embedding is transferred swapped with one from a
different identity and the sequence is generated.

generalizability [41, 13], structured/controllable inference
and prediction [106], attribute transfer [14, 73], and improved performance on downstream tasks [9, 57, 79, 74,
98]. Unfortunately, being able to consistently learn a disentangled representation such that the factors correspond with
meaningful attributes has been shown to be both theoretically and empirically impossible without the use of some
form of supervision or inductive bias [21, 64]. However,
acquiring high-quality supervision is expensive and timeconsuming. Whilst many methods rely on such supervision,
we consider how the implicit structure embedded in video
data can be leveraged and reflected in the structure of the
model, in order to achieve unsupervised disentanglement.
We propose Video Disentanglement via State-SpaceModeling (VDSM). VDSM is motivated by a careful consideration of the generative structure of a video sequence,
which is assumed to be composed of identity (i.e. the
canonical appearance of an object or person), an action

8176

