MobileDets: Searching for Object Detection Architectures for Mobile
Accelerators
Yunyang Xiong∗
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Hanxiao Liu∗
Google

Suyog Gupta
Google

yxiong43@wisc.edu

hanxiaol@google.com

suyoggupta@google.com

Berkin Akin, Gabriel Bender, Yongzhe Wang, Pieter-Jan Kindermans, Mingxing Tan
Google
{bakin,gbender,yongzhe,pikinder,tanmingxing}@google.com

Vikas Singh
University of Wisconsin-Madison

Bo Chen
Google

vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu

bochen@google.com

Abstract
Inverted bottleneck layers, which are built upon depthwise convolutions, have been the predominant building
blocks in state-of-the-art object detection models on mobile
devices. In this work, we investigate the optimality of this
design pattern over a broad range of mobile accelerators
by revisiting the usefulness of regular convolutions. We discover that regular convolutions are a potent component to
boost the latency-accuracy trade-off for object detection on
accelerators, provided that they are placed strategically in
the network via neural architecture search. By incorporating regular convolutions in the search space and directly
optimizing the network architectures for object detection,
we obtain a family of object detection models, MobileDets,
that achieve state-of-the-art results across mobile accelerators. On the COCO object detection task, MobileDets
outperform MobileNetV3+SSDLite by 1.7 mAP at comparable mobile CPU inference latencies. MobileDets also
outperform MobileNetV2+SSDLite by 1.9 mAP on mobile
CPUs, 3.7 mAP on Google EdgeTPU, 3.4 mAP on Qualcomm Hexagon DSP and 2.7 mAP on Nvidia Jetson GPU
without increasing latency. Moreover, MobileDets are comparable with the state-of-the-art MnasFPN on mobile CPUs
even without using the feature pyramid, and achieve better
mAP scores on both EdgeTPUs and DSPs with up to 2×
speedup. Code and models are available in the TensorFlow
Object Detection API [16]: https://github.com/
tensorflow/models/tree/master/research/
object_detection.
∗ Equal contribution.

1. Introduction
In many computer vision applications it can be observed
that higher capacity networks lead to superior performance
[29, 44, 15, 24]. However, they are often more resourceconsuming. This makes it challenging to find models with
the right quality-compute trade-off for deployment on edge
devices with limited inference budgets.
A lot of effort has been devoted to the manual design
of lightweight neural architectures for edge devices [14, 27,
42, 39]. Unfortunately, relying on human expertise is timeconsuming and can be sub-optimal. This problem is made
worse by the speed at which new hardware platforms are released. In many cases, these newer platforms have differing
performance characteristics which make a previously developed model sub-optimal.
To address the need for automated tuning of neural network architectures, many methods have been proposed.
In particular, neural architecture search (NAS) methods
[5, 32, 30, 13, 10] have demonstrated a superior ability in
finding models that are not only accurate but also efficient
on a specific hardware platform.
Despite many advancements in NAS algorithms [43, 24,
1, 19, 5, 32, 40, 30, 13, 10], it is remarkable that inverted
bottlenecks (IBN) [27] remain the predominant building
block in state-of-the-art mobile models. IBN-only search
spaces have also been the go-to setup in a majority of the
related NAS publications [30, 5, 32, 13]. IBN layers rely
heavily on depthwise and depthwise separable convolutions
[28]. The resulting models have relatively low FLOPS and
parameter counts, and can be executed efficiently on CPUs.
However, the advantage of depthwise convolutions for
13825

