DI-Fusion: Online Implicit 3D Reconstruction with Deep Priors
Jiahui Huang Shi-Sheng Huang Haoxuan Song Shi-Min Hu*
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing

Abstract

1. Introduction
Online 3D dense reconstruction has made great progress
in the past ten years [3, 6, 12, 25, 38, 39, 51], enabling
a wide range of applications including augmented reality,
robotic navigation and games. Technically most of the previous depth fusion approaches focus on the globally consistent 3D reconstruction with bundle adjustment [3, 12]
or loop closure [51] techniques. However, the underlying
representation for the 3D scene itself has seldom changed
ever since the success of VoxelHashing [39] with Signed
Distance Function (SDF) integration on a sparse set of voxels [10]. This leads to the drawback of previous depth fusion
systems that often costs a huge amount of memory storage
even for moderate-sized 3D scenes. Besides, the geometric
quality could be unsatisfactory with non-complete regions
or objects [13] due to the uncertainties caused by sensor
noise or scan ambiguities such as view occlusions.
On the other hand, recent efforts from the deep geometry learning community have demonstrated the power of im* corresponding author.

Time

Previous online 3D dense reconstruction methods struggle to achieve the balance between memory storage and surface quality, largely due to the usage of stagnant underlying
geometry representation, such as TSDF (truncated signed
distance functions) or surfels, without any knowledge of the
scene priors. In this paper, we present DI-Fusion (Deep
Implicit Fusion), based on a novel 3D representation, i.e.
Probabilistic Local Implicit Voxels (PLIVoxs), for online
3D reconstruction with a commodity RGB-D camera. Our
PLIVox encodes scene priors considering both the local
geometry and uncertainty parameterized by a deep neural network. With such deep priors, we are able to perform online implicit 3D reconstruction achieving state-ofthe-art camera trajectory estimation accuracy and mapping
quality, while achieving better storage efficiency compared
with previous online 3D reconstruction approaches. Our
implementation is available at https://www.github.
com/huangjh-pub/di-fusion.

Textured
reconstruction

Estimated
geometry
uncertainty

Figure 1. DI-Fusion incrementally builds up a continuous 3D
scene from an RGB-D sequence. The tracking and mapping algorithm are fully based on our novel local deep implicit scene representation incorporating learned priors, where both the geometry
and its uncertainty are estimated.

plicit geometric representation parameterized by neural networks [8, 34, 40]. By representing the geometry as a continuous implicit function, the underlying shape can be extracted at arbitrary resolution, which introduces more flexibilities. These methods are also efficient since the network
structure used to regress implicit function only consists of
simple fully connected layers. Another important feature of
such deep implicit representation is the capability to encode
geometric priors, which enables many applications such as
shape interpolation or reconstruction [40]. This capability
can be generalized to scene-level by decomposing and encoding the implicit fields in local voxels, leading to highquality reconstruction agnostic to semantics [4, 24].
The power of such deep implicit representation motivates us to incorporate it into online 3D dense reconstruction systems. By encoding meaningful scene priors with a
continuous function, we can achieve improved surface reconstruction as well as accurate camera trajectory. However, several challenges need to be overcome before this
new representation can be successfully applied in an online
fusion scenario: (1) geometric uncertainty need to be explicitly modeled against sensor noise or view occlusion, (2)
an accurate camera tracking formulation based on such an

8932

