Sparse Multi-Path Corrections in Fringe Projection Profilometry
Yu Zhang
Nanjing University

Daniel Lau
University of Kentucky

Abstract
Three-dimensional scanning by means of structured light
illumination is an active imaging technique involving projecting and capturing a series of striped patterns and then
using the observed warping of stripes to reconstruct the target object’s surface through triangulating each pixel in the
camera to a unique projector coordinate corresponding to
a particular feature in the projected patterns. The undesirable phenomenon of multi-path occurs when a camera
pixel simultaneously sees features from multiple projector
coordinates. Bimodal multi-path is a particularly common
situation found along step edges, where the camera pixel
sees both a foreground and background surface. Generalized from bimodal multi-path, this paper examines the
phenomenon of sparse or N -modal multi-path as a more
general case, where the camera pixel sees no fewer than
two reflective surfaces, resulting in decoding errors. Using
fringe projection profilometry, our proposed solution is to
treat each camera pixel as an underdetermined linear system of equations and to find the sparsest (least number of
paths) solution by taking an application-specific Bayesian
learning approach. We validate this algorithm with both
simulations and a number of challenging real-world scenarios, demonstrating that it outperforms state-of-the-art
techniques.

1. Introduction
In a digital camera, each pixel on the focal plane array
records the average light measured across the pixel’s field of
view, and, in some cases, the pixel simultaneously records
light from multiple paths, such as when a pixel sees the edge
of the foreground object along with the non-occluded background object. In this situation, the collected intensity/color
will be a weighted sum of the foreground and background
intensity/color, depending on how much of the foreground
object takes up the pixel’s field of view (Fig. 1). Separating out the foreground and background contributions
plays a fundamental role in a range of classic imaging tasks,
such as image matting, where the alpha channel represents
the weighting of the foreground and background compo-

David Wipf
Amazon

Sensor array
Lens
FoV

Figure 1. Illustrations of the causes of sparse multi-path and its
representations in both 2D and 3D imaging. From left to right
are the FoV of a pixel on the sensor array during the imaging
procedure, a classic image matting task [30], and an ideal step
edge compared with a reconstructed step edge under the effect of
multi-path in the structured light or time-of-flight imaging techniques [55].
camera

camera

camera
target

target

A

P

B

projector

sparse
multipath

projector

sparse projector
multipath

target
A

B

sparse
multipath

Figure 2. Illustration of sparse multi-path scenarios in (left) a
curved reflective surface, (middle) a step edge, and (right) a semitransparent surface in front of an opaque target with foreground
pixel A and background pixel B.

nents [47, 31]. In 3D imaging, the collecting of foreground
and background light paths along a step edge can result in
either a predictable smoothing of the step edge in the 3D reconstruction or a catastrophic, unpredictable displacement
of edge points [36, 54]. Fig. 2 illustrates three kinds of challenging sparse multi-path scenarios, including a curved reflective surface, a step edge, and a semi-transparent surface
in front of an opaque target. Regardless of the outcome,
the multi-path problem is unavoidable in any scanning situation, including structured light [23, 53] and time-of-flight
(ToF) [36, 34, 16], but it is an especially prevalent problem
in structured light as very little research has been performed
on the topic, and it has been largely ignored by the computer vision and computational imaging community until
recently.
With the rapid development of deep learning in com-

13344

