Every Annotation Counts: Multi-label Deep Supervision
for Medical Image Segmentation
Simon Reiß1,2 Constantin Seibold1 Alexander Freytag2 Erik Rodner2,3 Rainer Stiefelhagen1
1

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 2 Carl Zeiss AG 3 University of Applied Sciences Berlin
{simon.reiss,constantin.seibold,rainer.stiefelhagen}@kit.edu

Abstract
Pixel-wise segmentation is one of the most data and annotation hungry tasks in our field. Providing representative and accurate annotations is often mission-critical especially for challenging medical applications. In this paper, we propose a semi-weakly supervised segmentation algorithm to overcome this barrier. Our approach is based on
a new formulation of deep supervision and student-teacher
model and allows for easy integration of different supervision signals. In contrast to previous work, we show that
care has to be taken how deep supervision is integrated in
lower layers and we present multi-label deep supervision as
the most important secret ingredient for success. With our
novel training regime for segmentation that flexibly makes
use of images that are either fully labeled, marked with
bounding boxes, just global labels, or not at all, we are
able to cut the requirement for expensive labels by 94.22%
– narrowing the gap to the best fully supervised baseline to
only 5% mean IoU. Our approach is validated by extensive
experiments on retinal fluid segmentation and we provide an
in-depth analysis of the anticipated effect each annotation
type can have in boosting segmentation performance.

1. Introduction
Medical imaging tools have become a central part in modern health care. In direct consequence, hundreds of millions
of 2D- and 3D-images are recorded per year [41]. With
this ever-growing number, medical personnel has become
increasingly entangled in their evaluation. Deep learning
with the use of artificial neural networks has found use to alleviate the necessary effort needed for interpretation of such
images. However, training these models requires enormous
amounts of annotated data, especially in case of semantic
segmentation. The annotation process for this task is already extremely difficult in real-world scenarios such as in
urban street-scenes, where the pixel-wise annotation process of a single image could span up to 90 minutes [15].

Figure 1. Annotations for segmentation are costly, especially when
experts need to provide them. We show how our semi-weakly
semantic segmentation method can use different annotation types
and how the recognition performance benefits from them.

This problem is amplified in the medical domain as we
further require domain experts to annotate data who are
severely time-restricted due to their clinical work. Thus,
we are faced with the problem of minimizing the needed
annotation effort while maximizing model accuracy.
The majority of existing approaches follow two orthogonal paths: incorporating non-annotated data [24] which is
fast to obtain or using cheap weak labels with different levels of quality ranging from image-level [10, 23, 32, 47] over
single point [7] to bounding box annotations [29, 55]. Both
these so called semi- and weakly-supervised approaches led
to great insights and convincing results. However, they ignore that practical applications are often faced with several
types of supervision simultaneously (Fig. 1).
In very common scenarios, we are provided with a small
pixel-wise annotated data set, with automatically parsed
image-level labels from medical reports, and with large
amounts of additional unlabeled data from the same distribution. Currently, it is largely unanswered how such diverse
supervision types can be unified to train a semantic segmentation system. To this end, we go beyond standard weaklyor semi-supervised learning and investigate also the semiweakly supervised setting in the low-resource scenario of

9532

