SSLayout360: Semi-Supervised Indoor Layout Estimation from 360◦ Panorama
Phi Vu Tran
Flyreel AI Research
vuptran@flyreel.co

Abstract
Recent years have seen flourishing research on both semisupervised learning and 3D room layout reconstruction. In
this work, we explore the intersection of these two fields
to advance the research objective of enabling more accurate 3D indoor scene modeling with less labeled data. We
propose the first approach to learn representations of room
corners and boundaries by using a combination of labeled
and unlabeled data for improved layout estimation in a 360◦
panoramic scene. Through extensive comparative experiments, we demonstrate that our approach can advance layout estimation of complex indoor scenes using as few as 20
labeled examples. When coupled with a layout predictor
pre-trained on synthetic data, our semi-supervised method
matches the fully supervised counterpart using only 12% of
the labels. Our work takes an important first step towards robust semi-supervised layout estimation that can enable many
applications in 3D perception with limited labeled data.

1. Introduction
The task of inferring room layout from a single view 360◦
panoramic image has been gaining much attention from the
computer vision community in the past several years. The
problem addresses an important step towards holistic indoor
scene understanding that can enable structured 3D modeling
of the physical environment. Recent state-of-the-art methods
[33, 36, 40] have made substantial progress towards accurate
3D room layout reconstruction by adopting large and powerful neural network architectures for representation learning.
However, there are several challenges associated with acquiring vast quantities of high-quality room layout annotations
to supervise deep neural networks. For one, it is difficult to
consistently annotate cluttered scenes with ambiguous wall
boundaries, especially in rooms with complex layouts that
contain many corners. The lack of large-scale labeled data
with precise layout annotations for panoramic scenes further
hinders the progress of this important problem that has many
pertinent applications in 3D computer vision.
At the same time, recent years have seen flourishing re-

Figure 1. The effective use of unlabeled data improves complex
3D layout estimation with limited labels. We compare predicted
layout boundary lines from a state-of-the-art supervised model [33]
trained on 1,650 labels (cyan) with our proposed semi-supervised
model (magenta) and show that our model’s predictions follow
more closely to the ground truth (green lines) using just 100 labels.

search on deep semi-supervised learning (SSL) [3, 34, 37]
that can leverage abundant unlabeled data for enhanced learning and generalization in the limited labeled data setting. The
success of deep SSL has been mostly demonstrated on the
relatively simple task of image classification, where the labeling procedure is the binary indication for the presence or
absence of an object class. To our knowledge, the principles
of SSL have not been studied in conjunction with room layout estimation, a complex and challenging task that depends
on fine-grained human annotations, which presents an effective and efficient opportunity to improve learning with few
annotated examples, as illustrated in Figure 1. In this work,
we propose to explore and evaluate the potential contribution
of unlabeled data for 3D room layout estimation, with the

15353

