Explaining Classifiers using Adversarial Perturbations on the Perceptual Ball
Andrew Elliott∗
Uni. of Glasgow/Turing Institute

Stephen Law∗
UCL/Turing Institute

Chris Russell†
Amazon Tübingen

andrew.elliott@glasgow.ac.uk

stephen.law@ucl.ac.uk

cmruss@amazon.com

Abstract
We present a simple regularization of adversarial perturbations based upon the perceptual loss. While the resulting
perturbations remain imperceptible to the human eye, they
differ from existing adversarial perturbations in that they
are semi-sparse alterations that highlight objects and regions of interest while leaving the background unaltered. As
a semantically meaningful adverse perturbations, it forms a
bridge between counterfactual explanations and adversarial perturbations in the space of images.
We evaluate our approach on several standard explainability benchmarks, namely, weak localization, insertiondeletion, and the pointing game demonstrating that perceptually regularized counterfactuals are an effective explanation for image-based classifiers.

1. Introduction
We address the gap between counterfactual explanations
[53] and adversarial perturbations [48], and show why minimal changes in image data that results in a change in classifier response does not result in semantically meaningful
alteration. One might hope that the smallest edit to alter
classifier response of an image labeled as bird should alter the bird pixels, but in practice adversarial perturbations
make non-local changes that break the classifier. We show
how penalizing changes in the mid-level classifier response
with a perceptual loss stops this breakage and instead results in semantically meaningful changes that highlight the
extent of objects in images (see Figs. 1,2).
Outside of computer vision [53], counterfactual explanations are a popular method in explainable AI. They find the
smallest change needed to alter the decision of a classifier,
and on tabular data, can give explanations such as:
“The loan was denied as your income was £30,000. If it
had been £45,000, you would have been offered a loan.”
∗ Equal contribution
† Much of this work was done prior to joining Amazon.

Figure 1. Object localization. From left to right: Original image;
Magnitude of the perceptual perturbations; Dominant connected
component and the bounding box from automatic object detection.
Despite the flowers our method highlights the butterfly as salient.

The close relationship between adversarial perturbations
and counterfactual explanations follows from the definitions
in philosophy and folk psychology of a counterfactual explanation as answering the question “What is a minimal
change that would result in a different outcome?” When
applied to classifiers, these counterfactual explanations are
simply adversarial perturbations, by a different name. As
such, it is interesting to ask, why adversarial perturbations
don’t work as explanations: Why are they imperceptible?
and: Why don’t they localize on objects?
Two compelling arguments for the existence of imperceptible adversarial perturbations in images have been offered. The first due to [16] remarks that they are simply an
artifact of a high-dimensional space, and thus, it is entirely
expected that a small perturbation of every pixel can add up
to a large change in the classifier response, and that in fact
the same behavior is found in linear classifiers.
A second argument attempts to understand why sparse
(potentially single pixel) attacks exist and attributes the effectiveness of adversarial perturbations to exploding gradients. ‘Exploding gradients’ refers to the phenomenon where
changes in functional response grow exponentially with the
depth of the network, relative to a change of input of fixed
magnitude. These exploding gradients are an issue known
to afflict the learning of Recurrent Neural Networks [30],
and the deep networks common to computer vision. This
phenomenon occurs because, by construction, neural networks form a product of (convolutional) matrix operations
interlaced with nonlinearities; and for directions/locations

10693

