ReNAS: Relativistic Evaluation of Neural Architecture Search
Yixing Xu1 , Yunhe Wang1 , Kai Han1 , Yehui Tang14 , Shangling Jui2 , Chunjing Xu1 , Chang Xu3
1
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, 2 Huawei Technologies
3
The University of Sydney, 4 Peking University
{yixing.xu, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com; c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
An effective and efficient architecture performance evaluation scheme is essential for the success of Neural Architecture Search (NAS). To save computational cost, most of
existing NAS algorithms often train and evaluate intermediate neural architectures on a small proxy dataset with limited training epochs. But it is difficult to expect an accurate
performance estimation of an architecture in such a coarse
evaluation way. This paper advocates a new neural architecture evaluation scheme, which aims to determine which
architecture would perform better instead of accurately predict the absolute architecture performance. Therefore, we
propose a relativistic architecture performance predictor in
NAS (ReNAS). We encode neural architectures into feature
tensors, and further refining the representations with the
predictor. The proposed relativistic performance predictor
can be deployed in discrete searching methods to search for
the desired architectures without additional evaluation. Experimental results on NAS-Bench-101 dataset suggests that,
sampling 424 (0.1% of the entire search space) neural architectures and their corresponding validation performance
is already enough for learning an accurate architecture performance predictor. The accuracies of our searched neural architectures on NAS-Bench-101 and NAS-Bench-201
datasets are higher than that of the state-of-the-art methods and show the priority of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the emergence of many
well-known Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), (e.g.
VGG [35], ResNet [15], MobileNet [16]). They have
achieved state-of-the-art results in many real-world applications [26, 32, 35, 48, 39, 14, 6, 5]. However, the design
of these sophisticated CNNs were heavily relied on human
expert experience. Thus, it is attractive to investigate an automatic way to design neural network architectures without
human intervention. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has
been proposed to address this need [4, 17, 27, 28, 45, 38].

Motivated by different searching strategies and assumptions, a number of NAS algorithms have been proposed to
increase the search speed and the performance of the resulting network [3, 18, 36, 21], including discrete searching
methods such as Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) based methods [24, 29, 31], Reinforcement Learning (RL) based methods [2, 30, 49, 50], and continuous searching methods such
as DARTS [25] and CARS [44].
There have been a large body of works focusing on designing different searching methods. However, the architecture evaluation scheme has not been sufficiently studied
yet. For the sake of evaluation efficiency, early stopping strategy is often adopted in the architecture evaluation phase
of discrete searching methods. Based on the intermediate
performance of a super-net, continuous searching methods optimize a series of learnable parameters to select layers
or operations in deep neural networks. Nevertheless, these
coarse architecture evaluations could prevent us from selecting the optimal neural architecture (detailed information
can be found in Sec.3.1). A recent report suggested that the
performances of the networks discovered by current NAS
frameworks are similar to that of random search [33, 43].
Most recently, there is an alternative way to evaluate neural architecture by learning a performance predictor. For example, Domhan et al. proposed a weight probabilistic model to extrapolate the performance from the first part of a
learning curve [9]. Klein et al. used a Bayesian neural network to predict unobserved learning curves [20]. These two
methods rely on Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling procedures and hand-crafted curve function, which
are computationally expensive. Deng et al. [8] developed
a unified way to encode individual layers into vectors and
brought them together to form an integrated description via
LSTM, and directly predicted the performance of a network
architecture. Sun et al. [37] proposed an end-to-end off-line
performance predictor based on random forest.
Methods mentioned above focused on predicting the
exact performance of a given neural architecture with
element-wise loss function such as mean squared error
(MSE) or least absolute error (L1). However, in neural ar-

4411

