Intelligent Carpet: Inferring 3D Human Pose from Tactile Signals
Yiyue Luo, Yunzhu Li, Michael Foshey, Wan Shou, Pratyusha Sharma,
Tomás Palacios, Antonio Torralba, Wojciech Matusik
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
{yiyueluo, liyunzhu, mfoshey, wanshou, pratyuss, tpalacios, torralba, wojciech}@mit.edu

z
x

y

RBG
Image

Data Collection Setup

y

x
y

x
y

x
y

x
y

x
y

Reconstructed
3D Skeleton

Pressure
Map

x

Figure 1. Left: A low-cost, high-density, large-scale intelligent carpet system to capture the real-time human-floor tactile interactions.
Right: The inferred 3D human pose from the captured tactile interactions of a person standing up from a sitting position.

Abstract
Daily human activities, e.g., locomotion, exercises, and
resting, are heavily guided by the tactile interactions between the human and the ground. In this work, leveraging
such tactile interactions, we propose a 3D human pose estimation approach using the pressure maps recorded by a
tactile carpet as input. We build a low-cost, high-density,
large-scale intelligent carpet, which enables the real-time
recordings of human-floor tactile interactions in a seamless manner. We collect a synchronized tactile and visual
dataset on various human activities. Employing a state-ofthe-art camera-based pose estimation model as supervision,
we design and implement a deep neural network model to
infer 3D human poses using only the tactile information.
Our pipeline can be further scaled up to multi-person pose
estimation. We evaluate our system and demonstrate its potential applications in diverse fields.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation is critical in action recognition
[30, 52], gaming [26], healthcare [64, 36, 22], and robotics
[34]. Significant advances have been made to estimate human pose by extracting skeletal kinematics from images
and videos. However, camera-based pose estimation remains challenging when occlusion happens, which is in-

evitable during daily activities. Further, the rising demand
for privacy also promotes development in non-vision-based
human pose estimation systems [63, 62]. Since most human activities are dependent on the contact between the
human and the environment, we present a pose estimation approach using tactile interactions between humans
and the ground. Recently, various smart floor or carpet
systems have been proposed for human movement detection [11, 2, 48, 7, 3, 60, 40, 16, 1], and posture recognition
[25, 50]. Previous work has also demonstrated the feasibility of using pressure images for pose estimation [6, 9, 8].
However, these studies mainly focus on the estimation of
poses where a large portion of the body is in direct contact with the sensing surface, e.g., resting postures. A more
challenging task is to infer 3D human pose from the limited
pressure imprints involved in complicated daily activities,
e.g., using feet pressure distribution to reconstruct the pose
of the head and limbs. So far, complex 3D human pose estimation and modeling using tactile information, spanning a
diverse set of human activities including locomotion, resting, and daily exercises, have not been available.
In this study, we first develop an intelligent carpet –
a large integrated tactile sensing array consisting of over
9,000 pressure sensors, covering over 36 square feet, which
can be seamlessly embedded on the floor. Coupled with
readout circuits, our system enables real-time recordings

11255

