Neural Auto-Exposure for High-Dynamic Range Object Detection
Emmanuel Onzon
Algolux

Fahim Mannan
Algolux

Abstract
Real-world scenes have a dynamic range of up to 280 dB
that todays imaging sensors cannot directly capture. Existing live vision pipelines tackle this fundamental challenge
by relying on high dynamic range (HDR) sensors that try to
recover HDR images from multiple captures with different
exposures. While HDR sensors substantially increase the
dynamic range, they are not without disadvantages, including severe artifacts for dynamic scenes, reduced fill-factor,
lower resolution, and high sensor cost. At the same time,
traditional auto-exposure methods for low-dynamic range
sensors have advanced as proprietary methods relying on
image statistics separated from downstream vision algorithms. In this work, we revisit auto-exposure control as
an alternative to HDR sensors. We propose a neural network for exposure selection that is trained jointly, end-toend with an object detector and an image signal processing (ISP) pipeline. To this end, we use an HDR dataset
for automotive object detection and an HDR training procedure. We validate that the proposed neural auto-exposure
control, which is tailored to object detection, outperforms
conventional auto-exposure methods by more than 6 points
in mean average precision (mAP).

1. Introduction
From no ambient illumination at night to bright sunny
day conditions, the range of possible luminances computer
vision systems have to measure and analyze can exceed
280 dB, expressed here as the ratio of the highest to the
lowest luminance value [54]. While the luminance range
found at the same time in a typical outdoor scene is 120 dB,
it is the “edge cases” that are challenging. For example,
exiting a tunnel can include scene regions with almost no
ambient illumination, the sun, and scene points with intermediate luminances, all in one image. Capturing this large
dynamic range has been an open challenge for image sensing, and today’s conventional CMOS image sensors are capable of acquiring around 60-70 dB in a single capture [51].
This sensing constraint poses a fundamental problem for
low-level and high-level vision tasks in uncontrolled scenarios, and it is critical for applications that base decision-

Felix Heide
Princeton University, Algolux

making on vision modules in-the-wild, including outdoor
robotics, drones, self-driving vehicles, driver assistance systems, navigation, and remote sensing.
To overcome this limitation, existing vision pipelines
rely on HDR sensors that acquire multiple captures with
different exposures of the same scene. A large body of
work explores different HDR sensor designs and acquisition strategies [59, 8, 51], with sequential capture methods [67, 69, 47, 64] and sensors that split each pixel into
two sub-pixels [66, 29, 30, 2] as the most successfully deployed HDR sensor architectures. Although modern HDR
sensors are capable of capturing up to 140 dB at increasing
resolutions, e.g., OnSemi AR0820AT, the employed multicapture acquisition approach comes with fundamental limitations. As exposures are different in length or start at different times, dynamic scenes cause motion artefacts that are
an open problem to eliminate [11, 63, 2]. Custom sensor architectures come at the cost of reduced fill-factor, and hence
resolution, and sensor cost, compared to conventional intensity sensors. Moreover, capturing HDR images does not
only require a sensor that can measure the scene but also
necessitates optics for HDR acquisition, without glare and
lens flare. Note also that in contrast to LDR sensors, interleaved HDR sensors cannot implement global shutter acquisition.
In this work, we revisit low dynamic range (LDR) sensors, paired with learned exposure control, as a computational alternative to the popular direction of HDR sensors. Existing auto-exposure (AE) control methods have
been largely designed as proprietary compute blocks, often embedded by the sensor manufacturer on the same silicon as the sensor, producing perceptually pleasing images
for human consumption. Conventional AE methods rely
on image statistics [56, 4, 58], such as histogram or gradient statistics, and, as such, do not receive feedback from
the task-specific vision module that ingests the camera images. Similarly, the vision module responsible for a higherlevel vision task is designed, trained, and evaluated offline,
often using JPEG images without any dependence on the
live imaging pipeline [16, 43, 7]. We explore whether departing from conventional AE methods developed in isolation and instead learning a neural exposure control that is

7710

