Exploiting Aliasing for Manga Restoration
Minshan Xie1,2,∗ Menghan Xia1,∗ Tien-Tsin Wong1,2,†
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality and Human Interaction Technology, SIAT, CAS
{msxie, mhxia, ttwong}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
As a popular entertainment art form, manga enriches the
line drawings details with bitonal screentones. However,
manga resources over the Internet usually show screentone artifacts because of inappropriate scanning/rescaling
resolution. In this paper, we propose an innovative twostage method to restore quality bitonal manga from degraded ones. Our key observation is that the aliasing induced by downsampling bitonal screentones can be utilized
as informative clues to infer the original resolution and
screentones. First, we predict the target resolution from
the degraded manga via the Scale Estimation Network (SENet) with spatial voting scheme. Then, at the target resolution, we restore the region-wise bitonal screentones via
the Manga Restoration Network (MR-Net) discriminatively,
depending on the degradation degree. Specifically, the original screentones are directly restored in pattern-identifiable
regions, and visually plausible screentones are synthesized
in pattern-agnostic regions. Quantitative evaluation on
synthetic data and visual assessment on real-world cases
illustrate the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Manga, also known as Japanese comics, is a popular
entertainment art form. One of the key differences between manga and other illustration types is the use of
screentones, regular or stochastic black-and-white patterns
to render intensity, textures and shadings (Figure 1(a)).
Although furnishing impressive visual impact, the existence
of screentones makes it tricky to resample manga images.
For instance, when being undersampled, the bitonal regular patterns may get ruined and present incoherent visual
effects (Figure 1(c)). Unfortunately, it is common to see
such screentone artifacts from the manga images over the
Internet (e.g. Manga109 [16]), probably due to the poor
∗ Equal contributions.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Standard manga

(b) Blow-up

(c) Degraded manga

Figure 1: The screentones in the manga image with insufficient resolution are blurry while the desired screentones
should be sharply bitonal. The image comes from the
Manga109 dataset [16]. Akuhamu c Arai Satoshi
scanners or storage limitation in the old days. In this
background, we are motivated to restore these low-quality
legacy mangas and show their original appearances.
Unlike natural images dominating with low-frequency
components, manga images mainly consist of regular highfrequency patterns that are pickier at the representing resolution. Specifically, for a quality bitonal manga image
of resolution T , it is generally impossible to present the
screentones in a both bitonal and perceptually consistent
manner on the resolution S 6= Tk ∈ {kT |k = 1, 2, 3, ..., n}.
That means, to restore a manga image, we first need to
figure out a target resolution that is able to present the
potential target screentones, and then restore the screentones from the degraded ones at that scale. Apparently,
this tricky requirement excludes the feasibility of existing
Single Image Super-Resolution (SISR) methods [3, 5, 8]
and image restoration methods [15, 30, 2, 19]. Instead, our
key idea is inspired by an interesting observation that the
aliasing caused by downsampling the bitonal screentones is
usually distinctive on the downscaling factor and screentone
type, as illustrated in Figure 2. These may serve as
informative clues to infer the original screentones and their
associated resolution.
To this end, we propose an innovative two-stage manga
restoration method. First, we utilize the Scale Estimation
Network (SE-Net) to predict the target resolution from the
degraded screentones. There are usually multiple screen-

13405

