PatchMatch-Based Neighborhood Consensus for Semantic Correspondence
Jae Yong Lee1

Joseph DeGol2
1

Victor Fragoso2
2

University of Illinois

Sudipta N. Sinha2

Microsoft

Abstract
We address estimating dense correspondences between
two images depicting different but semantically related
scenes. End-to-end trainable deep neural networks incorporating neighborhood consensus cues are currently the
best methods for this task. However, these architectures require exhaustive matching and 4D convolutions over matching costs for all pairs of feature map pixels. This makes
them computationally expensive. We present a more efficient neighborhood consensus approach based on PatchMatch. For higher accuracy, we propose to use a learned
local 4D scoring function for evaluating candidates during
the PatchMatch iterations. We have devised an approach
to jointly train the scoring function and the feature extraction modules by embedding them into a proxy model which
is end-to-end differentiable. The modules are trained in a
supervised setting using a cross-entropy loss to directly incorporate sparse keypoint supervision. Our evaluation on
PF-PASCAL and SPAIR -71K shows that our method significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art on both datasets
while also being faster and using less memory.

1. Introduction
Computing pixel correspondence in two or more images is a fundamental step in computer vision tasks ranging from 3D vision [1, 7, 13, 19, 43, 51] to image editing [21, 2, 3, 8, 12, 52] and scene understanding [11, 36,
33]. The problem variants where the images depict the same
scene (e.g., stereo, optical flow, and wide baseline matching) are extensively studied and many methods already exist [39, 4, 14, 42, 44, 16]. We address the dense semantic
correspondence task [36, 28, 54, 22] where the two input
images depict common visual concepts. The goal is to find
corresponding pixels for semantically related object parts
or scene elements as shown in Figure 1. Large intra-class
appearance and shape variations make semantic correspondence challenging, and it continues to receive much attention from the community [46, 58, 47, 49, 33, 34].
The top performing methods for computing semantic
Code available at http://github.com/leejaeyong7/PMNC

Source

NC-Net

Target

ANC-Net

PMNC (Ours)

Figure 1: The top row shows an image pair from PFPASCAL with ground truth keypoint annotations. The bottom row shows transferred keypoints on the target image computed using NC-Net [46], ANC-Net [34], and our
method (PMNC). Errors are shown using red lines connecting the predicted orange keypoints to the expected green
keypoints. PMNC outperforms NC-Net and ANC-Net on
this example and produces state-of-the-art results on the
PF-PASCAL and SPAIR -71K datasets.

correspondences rely on neighborhood consensus, which
refers to a variety of techniques for filtering sparse feature
matches or dense pixel correspondence based on 2D spatial context. While hand-crafted neighbourhood consensus
filters have long been in use [50, 6, 35], Rocco et al. proposed NC-Net [49], the first trainable neighborhood consensus neural network containing multiple 4D convolutional
layers for robust match filtering. ANC-Net [34] proposed
a similar model with adaptive non-isotropic 4D convolution
kernels. However, both methods sacrifice computational efficiency in favor of accuracy. The multiple 4D convolution
layers in these models cause high memory usage and high

13153

