Keypoint-graph-driven learning framework for object pose estimation
Shaobo Zhang, Wanqing Zhao,* Ziyu Guan, Xianlin Peng, Jinye Peng
Northwest University
Xi’an, China
{ zhangshaobo@stumail., zhaowq@, ziyuguan@, pxl@, pjy@}nwu.edu.cn

Abstract
Many recent 6D pose estimation methods exploited object 3D models to generate synthetic images for training
because labels come for free. However, due to the domain
shift of data distributions between real images and synthetic
images, the network trained only on synthetic images fails
to capture robust features in real images for 6D pose estimation. We propose to solve this problem by making the
network insensitive to different domains, rather than taking the more difficult route of forcing synthetic images to
be similar to real images. Inspired by domain adaption
methods, a Domain Adaptive Keypoints Detection Network
(DAKDN) including a domain adaption layer is used to
minimize the discrepancy of deep features between synthetic
and real images. A unique challenge here is the lack of
ground truth labels (i.e., keypoints) for real images. Fortunately, the geometry relations between keypoints are invariant under real/synthetic domains. Hence, we propose to use
the domain-invariant geometry structure among keypoints
as a “bridge” constraint to optimize DAKDN for 6D pose
estimation across domains. Specifically, DAKDN employs a
Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) block to learn the geometry structure from synthetic images and uses the GCN to
guide the training for real images. The 6D poses of objects
are calculated using Perspective-n-Point (PnP) algorithm
based on the predicted keypoints. Experiments show that
our method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches without manual poses labels and competes with approaches using manual poses labels.

1. Introduction
Detecting 3D objects and estimating their 6D poses is an
important task in many computer vision applications e.g.,
augmented reality, robotics, machine vision. Recently, deep
learning approaches [13, 39, 4, 29, 34, 10, 26, 24, 25, 18, 3]
have shown impressive results of pose estimation in RGB
* Corresponding author

images. However, they require a large amount of manual
labels including the 2D keypoints, masks, 6D poses of objects, and other extra labels, which are usually very costly.
Therefore, some works [33, 12, 41, 36] have tried to
train on synthetic images rendered from the 3D models of
objects, yielding a great data source with pose labels free
of charge. However, there is significant discrepancy (e.g.,
appearance, illumination conditions) between 3D models
and real objects. This discrepancy between synthetic and
real images is called domain shift. Directly training a network using only the source domain data (i.e., synthetic images) fails to capture robust features in the target domain
data (i.e., real images), causing reduced performance for
6D pose estimation. To improve the performance on real
images, AAE [33] and DPOD [41] apply additional augmentations including rendering images in various lighting
conditions and backgrounds with image noise to simulate
real environments. Unfortunately, data augmentation is usually unable to reproduce the statistics produced by realworld counterparts. Self6D [36] utilizes predicted masks
on real images to get domain-independent properties as constraints to refine the pose estimated by the network trained
on physically-based renderings. Although the physicallybased rendering can generate high-quality synthetic images
to simulate real environments, the domain gap in mask prediction still exists and may limit the performance of pose
refinement.
To overcome the domain shift, some transfer learning
methods [35, 19, 17] add unlabeled target data into the training process. Besides training the model on source domain
data, these methods minimize the distance of features distribution between the source and target domain data by directly optimizing a representation generated by an adaption
layer to accomplish domain transfer. However, due to the
high complexity of the predicted information of 6D pose
estimation task, the performance of directly using unlabeled
target data for learning 6D pose estimation cross domains is
still far from satisfactory.
In this paper, we aim to address this cross-domain object 6D pose estimation problem. Inspired by the above
11065

