Discrete-continuous Action Space Policy Gradient-based Attention for
Image-Text Matching

1

Shiyang Yan1 *, Li Yu1 , Yuan Xie2 *
Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
2
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
elyotyan@gmail.com, li.yu@nuist.edu.cn, yxie@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Image-text matching is an important multi-modal task
with massive applications. It tries to match the image and
the text with similar semantic information. Existing approaches do not explicitly transform the different modalities into a common space. Meanwhile, the attention mechanism which is widely used in image-text matching models
does not have supervision. We propose a novel attention
scheme which projects the image and text embedding into
a common space and optimises the attention weights directly towards the evaluation metrics. The proposed attention scheme can be considered as a kind of supervised attention and requiring no additional annotations. It is trained
via a novel Discrete-continuous action space policy gradient algorithm, which is more effective in modelling complex
action space than previous continuous action space policy
gradient. We evaluate the proposed methods on two widelyused benchmark datasets: Flickr30k and MS-COCO, outperforming the previous approaches by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Computer Vision and Natural Language Processing are
two important areas of modern artificial intelligence, which
can be processed jointly in cross-modal tasks. A large
amount of research has been conducted to bridge the vision and language modalities [32, 35, 5, 19, 18]. Image-text
matching or retrieval is one of the critical topics in this area,
which has a huge application scope in many real-world scenarios. The image-text matching requires a machine learning model to extract the high-level semantic representations
and measure the similarities across modalities accordingly.
Existing methods use deep learning models to extract
the image and language features, and apply various metric learning techniques to automatically find the semantic similarities between the samples from the two modali* Corresponding Author

Figure 1: Our Motivations: The attention weights are
utilised as a projection from each modality to a common
space. Existing continuous PG assumes a simple Normal
distribution. Instead, we considered the mean values as discrete actions first and then use multiple Normal distributions to form a compound distribution, which is more realistic. Best Viewed in Colour.

ties [5, 19, 18]. Metric learning is powerful in visual semantic embedding as it tries to measure and manipulate
the similarities between samples regardless of the domain
differences. However, it is not designed to perform an explicit transformation from one modality to another, often
leading to sub-optimal performance. Though there are approaches apply Instance Loss [37], i.e., a classification over
image and text categories, to form a multi-task learning approach with metric learning loss for image-text matching,
the performance gain is limited as the Instance Loss optimises the embedding in the category domain, which does
not perform explicit transformation either. An image often
contains many fine-grained objects. A flat vector representation from a vanilla deep CNN model such as ResNet [9] is
not powerful enough to discover these objects and their relationships. Hence, advanced methods employ image features
from a pre-trained object detector [28] and apply the visual
attention mechanism [35] on these features to discriminate
the important features over irrelevant ones [1]. Attention
mechanism plays a significant role in varying computer vi-

8096

