Closed-Form Factorization of Latent Semantics in GANs
Yujun Shen
Bolei Zhou
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{sy116, bzhou}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Pose on CelebA-HQ Faces (PGGAN)

Orientation on LSUN Cars (StyleGAN)

Expression on Anime Faces (StyleGAN)

Body Pose on LSUN Cats (StyleGAN)

Pose on ImageNet Magpies (BigGAN)

Layout on LSUN Bedrooms (StyleGAN2)

Figure 1. Versatile interpretable directions of the latent space unsupervisedly discovered in different GAN models including
PGGAN [16], StyleGAN [17], BigGAN [4], and StyleGAN2 [18]. For each set of images, the middle one is the original output, while the
left and the right are the output images by moving the latent code toward and backward the interpretable direction found by SeFa.

Abstract
A rich set of interpretable dimensions has been shown to
emerge in the latent space of the Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) trained for synthesizing images. In
order to identify such latent dimensions for image editing,
previous methods typically annotate a collection of synthesized samples and train linear classifiers in the latent
space. However, they require a clear definition of the target
attribute as well as the corresponding manual annotations,
limiting their applications in practice. In this work, we
examine the internal representation learned by GANs to
reveal the underlying variation factors in an unsupervised
manner. In particular, we take a closer look into the generation mechanism of GANs and further propose a closed-

form factorization algorithm for latent semantic discovery
by directly decomposing the pre-trained weights. With
a lightning-fast implementation, our approach is capable
of not only finding semantically meaningful dimensions
comparably to the state-of-the-art supervised methods, but
also resulting in far more versatile concepts across multiple
GAN models trained on a wide range of datasets.1

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8] have
achieved tremendous success in image synthesis [16, 17,
4, 18]. It has been recently found that when learning to
1 Project page is at https://genforce.github.io/sefa/.

1532

