Anchor-Constrained Viterbi for Set-Supervised Action Segmentation
Jun Li
Oregon State University

Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University

liju2@oregonstate.edu

sinisa@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
This paper is about action segmentation under weak supervision in training, where the ground truth provides only
a set of actions present, but neither their temporal ordering
nor when they occur in a training video. We use a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) grounded on a multilayer perceptron (MLP) to label video frames, and thus generate a
pseudo-ground truth for the subsequent pseudo-supervised
training. In testing, a Monte Carlo sampling of action sets
seen in training is used to generate candidate temporal sequences of actions, and select the maximum posterior sequence. Our key contribution is a new anchor-constrained
Viterbi algorithm (ACV) for generating the pseudo-ground
truth, where anchors are salient action parts estimated for
each action from a given ground-truth set. Our evaluation on the tasks of action segmentation and alignment on
the benchmark Breakfast, MPII Cooking2, Hollywood Extended datasets demonstrates our superior performance relative to that of prior work.

1. Introduction
This paper is about action segmentation by labeling
video frames with action classes under weak, set-level supervision in training. In the set-supervised training, the
ground truth is a set of actions present in a training video,
but their temporal ordering, the number of action instances,
and their start and end frames are unknown. This is an important problem arising in many recent applications, such
as, those dealing with big video datasets with automatically
generated set-level annotations (e.g., via word-based video
retrievals from Youtube), for which human annotations are
not available (e.g. because scaling human annotations over
numerous video retrieval results is difficult). Our main challenge is that the provided ground truth – being a set with
arbitrarily ordered distinct labels of action classes – does
not provide sufficient constraints for a reliable learning of
action segmentation.
Prior work typically adopts the following framework.
In training, an action model is used to label every video

frame, and thus generate a pseudo-ground truth for the subsequent pseudo-supervised training of the model. In testing,
a Monte Carlo sampling is first used to generate candidate
temporal sequences of actions, and then the learned model
is applied to identify the best scoring candidate sequence as
the solution of action segmentation. Differences among existing approaches mostly lie in how the pseudo-ground truth
is generated. For example, in [27], binary classifiers are independently trained for each action to label frames using
multi-instance learning. Such a training, however, cannot
learn temporal spans of and transitions between actions, so
these parameters are heuristically set in [27] for an HMM
inference on test videos. The approach in [20] casts the setsupervised training as the NP-hard “all-color shortest path”
problem [1], where frame labeling of a training video is
constrained such that every action label from the groundtruth set appears at least once. For generating the pseudoground truth, they infer an HMM using a greedy two-step
algorithm called set-constrained Viterbi (SCV). The SCV
first produces an initial action segmentation by running the
vanilla Viterbi, and then flips low-scoring frame labels to
actions that have been missed in the initial segmentation but
are present in the ground-truth set. Thus, the SCV produces
an approximate solution to the NP-hard problem by projection to the legal domain. There are many shortcomings of
[20] related to the heuristic, greedy flipping of frame labels.
In this paper, we improve the most critical step of the
above framework – generation of the pseudo-ground truth.
As in [20], we also pose the set-supervised training as the
“all-color shortest path” problem [1]. Our key difference is
that we formulate a more effective differentiable approximation to this NP-hard problem that allows for an endto-end training, reduces training complexity, and ultimately
leads to significant performance gains over [20].
As illustrated in Fig. 1, all legal action segmentations of
a training video can be represented by distinct paths in a
directed video segmentation graph. A legal (or valid) path
includes every action from the ground-truth set at least once.
Our goal is to efficiently identify the highest-scoring valid
path. For this scoring, we use an HMM grounded via a
two-layer MLP onto video frames, as shown in Fig. 2. In-

9806

