DeFLOCNet: Deep Image Editing via Flexible Low-level Controls
Hongyu Liu1

Ziyu Wan2 Wei Huang3 Yibing Song4 * Xintong Han1
Jing Liao2 Bin Jiang3 Wei Liu5
1
2
Huya Inc
City University of Hong Kong 3 Hunan University
4
Tencent AI Lab 5 Tencent Data Platform

{liuhongyu1,hanxintong}@huya.com
yibingsong.cv@gmail.com

(a) Input

(b) Ours

(c) Input

ziyuwan2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
wl2223@columbia.edu

(d) Ours

(e) Input

(f) Ours

(g) Original

Figure 1. Diversified image editing results under free-form input configurations. There is a face or a natural image with arbitrary hole
regions. Without any user inputs shown in (a), our DeFLOCNet automatically fills hole regions shown in (b), which is the same as the
image inpainting scenario. Given additional low-level controls (e.g., coarse sketch lines in (c), both lines and colors in (e)), our DeFLOCNet
injects these controls directly into structure generation blocks for both user-intended and visually pleasant content creations in (d) and (f).

Abstract
User-intended visual content fills the hole regions of an
input image in the image editing scenario. The coarse lowlevel inputs, which typically consist of sparse sketch lines
and color dots, convey user intentions for content creation
(i.e., free-form editing). While existing methods combine an
input image and these low-level controls for CNN inputs,
the corresponding feature representations are not sufficient
to convey user intentions, leading to unfaithfully generated
content. In this paper, we propose DeFLOCNet which relies on a deep encoder-decoder CNN to retain the guidance of these controls in the deep feature representations.
In each skip-connection layer, we design a structure generation block. Instead of attaching low-level controls to an input image, we inject these controls directly into each structure generation block for sketch line refinement and color
propagation in the CNN feature space. We then concatenate
the modulated features with the original decoder features
for structure generation. Meanwhile, DeFLOCNet involves
* Y. Song is the corresponding author. The results and code are available
at https://github.com/KumapowerLIU/DeFLOCNet.

another decoder branch for texture generation and detail
enhancement. Both structures and textures are rendered in
the decoder, leading to user-intended editing results. Experiments on benchmarks demonstrate that DeFLOCNet effectively transforms different user intentions to create visually
pleasing content.

1. Introduction
The investigation on image editing is growing as it reduces significant manual efforts during image content generation. Benefiting from the realistic image representations
brought by convolutional neural networks (CNNs), image
editing is able to create meaningful while visually pleasant content. As shown in Fig. 1, users can draw arbitrary
holes in a natural image as inputs to indicate the regions to
be edited. If there are no further inputs given as shown in
(a), image editing degenerates to image inpainting, where
CNNs automatically fill hole regions by producing coherent image content as shown in (b). If there are additional
inputs from users (e.g., lines in (c) and both lines and colors
in (e)), CNNs will create meaningful content accordingly

10765

