Anycost GANs for Interactive Image Synthesis and Editing
Ji Lin1,2 *

Richard Zhang2
1
MIT

{jilin, songhan}@mit.edu

2

Frieder Ganz2
Adobe Research

Song Han1
CMU

Jun-Yan Zhu2,3

3

{rizhang, ganz}@adobe.com

junyanz@cs.cmu.edu

input
projected
2x faster
4x faster
8x faster
edit: no smile
8x faster
edit: hair color
8x faster
(a) input images (b) Anycost GANs provide consistent outputs for projected latent code
(c) Consistency remains after editing

Figure 1: Anycost GAN can be executed at flexible computation costs (fast preview with low cost and high-quality output
with full cost), enabling interactive image editing with quick preview. The low-cost sub-generator produces consistent outputs
compared to the full-cost generator during both image projection and latent code traversal, making the sub-generator an
accurate proxy for various editing tasks (e.g., no smile, changing hair color). Interactive demos are available here.

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have enabled
photorealistic image synthesis and editing. However, due to
the high computational cost of large-scale generators (e.g.,
StyleGAN2), it usually takes seconds to see the results of
a single edit on edge devices, prohibiting interactive user
experience. In this paper, inspired by quick preview features
in modern rendering software, we propose Anycost GAN
for interactive natural image editing. We train the Anycost
GAN to support elastic resolutions and channels for faster
image generation at versatile speeds. Running subsets of the
full generator produce outputs that are perceptually similar
to the full generator, making them a good proxy for quick
preview. By using sampling-based multi-resolution training, adaptive-channel training, and a generator-conditioned
discriminator, the anycost generator can be evaluated at
various configurations while achieving better image quality
compared to separately trained models. Furthermore, we
develop new encoder training and latent code optimization
techniques to encourage consistency between the different
sub-generators during image projection. Anycost GAN can
be executed at various cost budgets (up to 10× computation
reduction) and adapt to a wide range of hardware and la∗ Part of the work done during an internship at Adobe Research.

tency requirements. When deployed on desktop CPUs and
edge devices, our model can provide perceptually similar
previews at 6-12× speedup, enabling interactive image editing. The code and demo are publicly available.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [17] have excelled at synthesizing diverse and realistic images from randomly sampled latent codes [41, 42, 43, 57, 6]. Furthermore,
a user can transform the generated outputs (e.g., add smiling
to a portrait) by tweaking the latent code [61, 38, 42, 24, 65].
In real-world use cases, a user would often like to edit a natural image rather than generating random samples. To achieve
this, one can project the image into the image manifold of
GANs by finding a latent code that reconstructs the image,
and then modify the code to produce final outputs [79].
Despite its photorealistic results and versatile editing ability, modern deep generative models incur huge computational costs, prohibiting edge deployment. For example,
the StyleGAN2 generator [43] consumes 144G MACs, 36×
larger compared to ResNet-50 [26]. The expensive model
often introduces a several-second delay for a single edit,
leading to a sub-optimal user experience and shorter battery
life when used on an edge device.
Modern 2D/3D content creation workflows, such as the

14986

