L2M-GAN: Learning to Manipulate Latent Space Semantics
for Facial Attribute Editing
Guoxing Yang1,2 Nanyi Fei1 Mingyu Ding3 Guangzhen Liu1 Zhiwu Lu1,2 Tao Xiang4
1
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
2
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
3
The University of Hong Kong 4 University of Surrey, UK
luzhiwu@ruc.edu.cn

Source

Smiling

Gender

Age

Bangs

Eyeglasses

Figure 1. Attribute editing results by our L2M-GAN on CelebA-HQ. The first column shows the real source images, and each of the other
columns shows the results of editing a specific attribute. Each edited image has an attribute value opposite to that of the source one.

Abstract
A deep facial attribute editing model strives to meet two
requirements: (1) attribute correctness – the target attribute
should correctly appear on the edited face image; (2) irrelevance preservation – any irrelevant information (e.g.,
identity) should not be changed after editing. Meeting both
requirements challenges the state-of-the-art works which
resort to either spatial attention or latent space factorization. Specifically, the former assume that each attribute has
well-defined local support regions; they are often more effective for editing a local attribute than a global one. The
latter factorize the latent space of a fixed pretrained GAN
into different attribute-relevant parts, but they cannot be
trained end-to-end with the GAN, leading to sub-optimal solutions. To overcome these limitations, we propose a novel
latent space factorization model, called L2M-GAN, which is
learned end-to-end and effective for editing both local and

global attributes. The key novel components are: (1) A latent space vector of the GAN is factorized into an attributerelevant and irrelevant codes with an orthogonality constraint imposed to ensure disentanglement. (2) An attributerelevant code transformer is learned to manipulate the attribute value; crucially, the transformed code are subject
to the same orthogonality constraint. By forcing both the
original attribute-relevant latent code and the edited code
to be disentangled from any attribute-irrelevant code, our
model strikes the perfect balance between attribute correctness and irrelevance preservation. Extensive experiments
on CelebA-HQ show that our L2M-GAN achieves significant improvements over the state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Facial attribute editing [45, 48, 54, 3, 4, 29, 47], i.e.,
manipulating the semantic attributes of a real face image, has a wide range of real-world application scenarios

2951

