Distribution Alignment: A Unified Framework for Long-tail Visual Recognition
Songyang Zhang1,3,5, * Zeming Li2 Shipeng Yan1 Xuming He1,4 Jian Sun2
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 Megvii Technology 3 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
5
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
{zhangsy1, yanshp, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn, {lizeming,sunjian}@megvii.com

1.0

Abstract

Empirical Classifier Bound
Baseline

Despite the recent success of deep neural networks, it
remains challenging to effectively model the long-tail class
distribution in visual recognition tasks. To address this problem, we first investigate the performance bottleneck of the
two-stage learning framework via ablative study. Motivated
by our discovery, we propose a unified distribution alignment
strategy for long-tail visual recognition. Specifically, we develop an adaptive calibration function that enables us to
adjust the classification scores for each data point. We then
introduce a generalized re-weight method in the two-stage
learning to balance the class prior, which provides a flexible
and unified solution to diverse scenarios in visual recognition tasks. We validate our method by extensive experiments
on four tasks, including image classification, semantic segmentation, object detection, and instance segmentation. Our
approach achieves the state-of-the-art results across all four
recognition tasks with a simple and unified framework.

1. Introduction
While deep convolutional networks have achieved great
successes in many vision tasks, it usually requires a large
number of training examples for each visual category. More
importantly, prior research mostly focuses on learning from
a balanced dataset [22], where different object classes are
approximately evenly distributed. However, for large-scale
vision recognition tasks, partially due to the non-uniform
distribution of natural object classes and varying annotation
costs, we typically learn from datasets with a long-tail class
label distribution. In such scenarios, the number of training
instances per class varies significantly, from as few as one
example for tail classes to hundreds or thousands for head
classes [48, 26, 14, 51, 49, 36].
* This work was done when Songyang Zhang was a research intern
at Megvii Technology. This work was supported by Shanghai NSF
Grant (No. 18ZR1425100), National Key R&D Program of China (No.
2017YFA0700800), and Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI).
Code is available: https://github.com/Megvii-BaseDetection/DisAlign

Per-class Accuracy(%)

0.8
0.6
0.4

Head

Body

Tail

0.2
0.0

200

400

600

Sorted Class Index

800

1000

Figure 1: Per-class performance of the two-stage learning baseline and our empirical classification bound on
ImageNet-LT val split. Two methods share the same representation while our bound setting retrains the classifier head
with the balanced full dataset.
The intrinsic long-tail property of our visual data introduces a multitude of challenges for recognition in the
wild [1], as a deep network model has to simultaneously cope
with imbalanced annotations among the head and mediumsized classes, and few-shot learning in the tail classes. A
naively learned model would be largely dominated by those
few head classes while its performance is much degraded for
many other tail classes.
Early works on re-balancing data distribution focus on
learning one-stage models, which achieve limited successes
due to lack of principled design in their strategies [2, 33, 3,
9, 26, 41]. More recent efforts aim to improve the long-tail
prediction by decoupling the representation learning and
classifier head learning [19, 28, 35, 38, 23]. However, such
a two-stage strategy typically relies on heuristic design to
adjust the decision boundary of the initially learned classifier
head, which often requires tedious hyper-parameter tuning
in practice. This severely limits its capacity to resolve the
mismatch between imbalanced training data distribution
and balanced evaluation metrics.
In this work, we first perform an ablative analysis on the
two-stage learning strategy to shed light on its performance
bottleneck. Specifically, our study estimates an ‘ideal’ clas12361

