LiDAR-based Panoptic Segmentation via Dynamic Shifting Network
Fangzhou Hong1,3 Hui Zhou2 Xinge Zhu3 Hongsheng Li3,4 Ziwei Liu1
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Sensetime Research
3
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
School of CST, Xidian University
{fangzhou001, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg
zx018@ie.cuhk.edu.hk
Things Classes

zhouhui@sensetime.com

hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Stuff Classes
Car #5

Road

Car #2

Car #4

Car #6

Vegetation

Building

Original Points’
Regressed Centers

k1

k2

p1
c11

p1

p1
c12

…
c22
k1

p2

k2
p2

c21

Weighting

Car #3

x1

x2
Weighting

Car #1

p2

i) Generate Shift Candidates cij
ii) Calculate Shift Targets xi
with Kernel Functions kj for Each Regressed Centers pi

(a) LiDAR-based Panoptic Segmentation

(b) Dynamic Shifting

Figure 1: As shown in (a), LiDAR-based panoptic segmentation requires instance-level segmentation for things classes and
semantic-level segmentation for stuff classes. (b) shows the core operation of the proposed dynamic shifting where several
shift candidates are weighted to obtain the optimal shift target for each regressed center.

Abstract
With the rapid advances of autonomous driving, it becomes critical to equip its sensing system with more holistic
3D perception. However, existing works focus on parsing
either the objects (e.g. cars and pedestrians) or scenes (e.g.
trees and buildings) from the LiDAR sensor. In this work,
we address the task of LiDAR-based panoptic segmentation, which aims to parse both objects and scenes in a unified manner. As one of the first endeavors towards this new
challenging task, we propose the Dynamic Shifting Network
(DS-Net), which serves as an effective panoptic segmentation framework in the point cloud realm. In particular, DSNet has three appealing properties: 1) strong backbone design. DS-Net adopts the cylinder convolution that is specifically designed for LiDAR point clouds. The extracted features are shared by the semantic branch and the instance
branch which operates in a bottom-up clustering style. 2)
Dynamic Shifting for complex point distributions. We observe that commonly-used clustering algorithms like BFS or
DBSCAN are incapable of handling complex autonomous
driving scenes with non-uniform point cloud distributions
and varying instance sizes. Thus, we present an efficient learnable clustering module, dynamic shifting, which

adapts kernel functions on-the-fly for different instances. 3)
Consensus-driven Fusion. Finally, consensus-driven fusion is used to deal with the disagreement between semantic and instance predictions. To comprehensively evaluate the performance of LiDAR-based panoptic segmentation, we construct and curate benchmarks from two largescale autonomous driving LiDAR datasets, SemanticKITTI
and nuScenes. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
proposed DS-Net achieves superior accuracies over current
state-of-the-art methods. Notably, we achieve 1st place on
the public leaderboard of SemanticKITTI, outperforming
2nd place by 2.6% in terms of the PQ metric 1 .

1. Introduction
Autonomous driving, one of the most promising applications of computer vision, has achieved rapid progress in
recent years. Perception system, one of the most important
modules in autonomous driving, has also attracted extensive
studies in previous research works. Admittedly, the classic tasks of 3D object detection [18, 24, 32] and semantic
segmentation [20, 30, 35] have developed relatively mature
1 Accessed at 2020-11-16.
Codes are available at https : / /
github.com/hongfz16/DS-Net.

13090

