Rethinking BiSeNet For Real-time Semantic Segmentation
Mingyuan Fan,* Shenqi Lai,* Junshi Huang†, Xiaoming Wei†, Zhenhua Chai,
Junfeng Luo, Xiaolin Wei
Meituan
{fanmingyuan, laishenqi, huangjunshi, weixiaoming, chaizhenhua,
luojunfeng, weixiaolin02}@meituan.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a classic and fundamental
topic in computer vision, which aims to assign pixellevel labels in images. The prosperity of deep learning
greatly promotes the performance of semantic segmentation
by making various breakthroughs [18, 27, 22, 4], coming
with fast-growing demands in many applications, e.g., autonomous driving, video surveillance, robot sensing, and so
* Equal contribution.
† Co-corresponding author.

STDC2-Seg75
DF2-Seg2

76

STDC1-Seg75

DF2-Seg1

Mean IoU(%)

BiSeNet [28, 27] has been proved to be a popular twostream network for real-time segmentation. However, its
principle of adding an extra path to encode spatial information is time-consuming, and the backbones borrowed from
pretrained tasks, e.g., image classification, may be inefficient for image segmentation due to the deficiency of taskspecific design. To handle these problems, we propose a
novel and efficient structure named Short-Term Dense Concatenate network (STDC network) by removing structure redundancy. Specifically, we gradually reduce the dimension
of feature maps and use the aggregation of them for image representation, which forms the basic module of STDC
network. In the decoder, we propose a Detail Aggregation module by integrating the learning of spatial information into low-level layers in single-stream manner. Finally,
the low-level features and deep features are fused to predict the final segmentation results. Extensive experiments
on Cityscapes and CamVid dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our method by achieving promising trade-off
between segmentation accuracy and inference speed. On
Cityscapes, we achieve 71.9% mIoU on the test set with
a speed of 250.4 FPS on NVIDIA GTX 1080Ti, which is
45.2% faster than the latest methods, and achieve 76.8%
mIoU with 97.0 FPS while inferring on higher resolution
images. Code is available at https://github.com/
MichaelFan01/STDC-Seg.

78

BiSeNetV2-L

74

BiSeNetV1 B

HMSeg
DF1-Seg

72
DFANet A
DABNet
ICNet

70
68

GAS
CAS

SFNet

STDC2-Seg50

STDC1-Seg50
BiSeNetV2
FasterSeg
DF1-Seg-d8
TinyHMSeg

DFANet A'
BiSeNetV1 A
Fast-SCNN
DFANet B

66
0

20

40

60

80 100 120 140 160 180 200 220 240 260 280

Inference Speed (FPS)

Figure 1. Speed-Accuracy performance comparison on the
Cityscapes test set. Our methods are presented in red dots while
other methods are presented in blue dots. Our approaches achieve
state-of-the-art speed-accuracy trade-off.

on. These applications motivate researchers to explore effective and efficient segmentation networks, particularly for
mobile field.
To fulfill those demands, many researchers propose to
design low-latency, high-efficiency CNN models with satisfactory segmentation accuracy. These real-time semantic segmentation methods have achieved promising performance on various benchmarks. For real-time inference,
some works, e.g., DFANet [18] and BiSeNetV1 [28] choose
the lightweight backbones and investigate ways of feature
fusion or aggregation modules to compensate for the drop
of accuracy. However, these lightweight backbones borrowed from image classification task may not be perfect for
image segmentation problem due to the deficiency of taskspecific design. Besides the choice of lightweight backbones, restricting the input image size is another commonly
used method to promote the inference speed. Smaller input resolution seems to be effective, but it can easily neglect the detailed appearance around boundaries and small
objects. To tackle this problem, as shown in Figure 2(a),
BiSeNet [28, 27] adopt multi-path framework to combine
the low-level details and high-level semantics. However,

9716

