Unsupervised Hyperbolic Metric Learning
Jiexi Yan1 , Lei Luo3 , Cheng Deng1 ,* Heng Huang2,3
1
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA
3
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA 94043, USA
{jxyan1995,luoleipitt, chdeng.xd}@gmail.com, heng.huang@pitt.edu

Abstract
Learning feature embedding directly from images without any human supervision is a very challenging and essential task in the field of computer vision and machine learning. Following the paradigm in supervised manner, most
existing unsupervised metric learning approaches mainly
focus on binary similarity in Euclidean space. However,
these methods cannot achieve promising performance in
many practical applications, where the manual information
is lacking and data exhibits non-Euclidean latent anatomy.
To address this limitation, we propose an Unsupervised Hyperbolic Metric Learning method with Hierarchical Similarity. It considers the natural hierarchies of data by taking
advantage of Hyperbolic metric learning and hierarchical
clustering, which can effectively excavate richer similarity information beyond binary in modeling. More importantly, we design a new loss function to capture the hierarchical similarity among samples to enhance the stability
of the proposed method. Extensive experimental results on
benchmark datasets demonstrate that our method achieves
state-of-the-art performance compared with current unsupervised deep metric learning approaches.

1. Introduction
Learning a precise distance metric for similarity measurement is a key ingredient of various computer vision
tasks, such as face recognition [13, 50], image classification
[5, 53, 6], and person re-identification [52]. Therefore, metric learning has aroused much attention and many classical
methods have been proposed in the past decades [6, 45, 13].
With the resurgence of deep neural networks, Deep Metric
Learning (DML) has emerged as a powerful tool in many
practical applications [34, 30, 2, 29, 44]. It targets at seeking a reliable embedding space by virtue of nonlinear deep
neural networks, where a well-designed metric loss func* J.Y. and L.L. made equal contributions, C.D. is corresponding author.

tion brings positive samples closer to anchors, but pushes
negative samples far away from the anchors.
Most of the existing DML methods usually use largescale data for training. They can be roughly divided into
two categories: structure-learning methods and hard mining methods. For the former, the crucial point is to construct a proper loss function that plays a key role in many
well-known DML methods. To this end, numbers of objectives [5, 34, 30, 40, 35, 29, 32, 20], including commonlyused contrastive loss [5], triplet loss [34] and lifted structure
loss [30], have been reported to mine underlying similarity
relationships among training data in the literature. While
the second category, i.e., hard mining approaches, intends
to enhance the discriminative ability of the learned embedding by sampling meaningful hard examples. Since training
with numerous easy examples may suffer from inefficiency
and poor performance, hard sample mining has become a
prevalent technique in DML [30, 15, 12, 10, 9, 36].
However, in real-world tasks, supervised DML methods
are often inapplicable since the labeled data is not available. To address this issue, many unsupervised deep learning algorithms have been introduced [48, 51, 17, 49], which
attempt to learn the inherent structure of training data without using explicitly-provided labels. A common unsupervised DML manner mines potential sample relationship by
an auxiliary algorithm such as clustering, and then utilizes
the learned pair-wise information as input to perform the
DML task. For example, MOM [18] exploits a random walk
process to discover the neighborhood of unlabeled data in
the manifold space and the Euclidean space to excavate the
pairwise information. Compared with the ground truth, the
learned pairwise information usually contains label noise,
which makes the DML stage unstable. Therefore, how
to discover more semantic information as supervision is
still a big challenge. Moreover, inspired by self-supervised
learning [17, 49], TAC-CCL [24] integrates self-supervised
module into the common unsupervised DML framework to
boost the performance. Nonetheless, this algorithm ignores
the latent metric information of unlabeled data. It is not

12465

