Jigsaw Clustering for Unsupervised Visual Representation Learning
Pengguang Chen1

Shu Liu2

Jiaya Jia1,2

The Chinese University of Hong Kong1 SmartMore2
{pgchen, leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk liushuhust@gmail.com
Abstract
Unsupervised representation learning with contrastive
learning achieved great success. This line of methods duplicate each training batch to construct contrastive pairs,
making each training batch and its augmented version forwarded simultaneously and leading to additional computation. We propose a new jigsaw clustering pretext task in this
paper, which only needs to forward each training batch itself, and reduces the training cost. Our method makes use of
information from both intra- and inter-images, and outperforms previous single-batch based ones by a large margin.
It is even comparable to the contrastive learning methods
when only half of training batches are used.
Our method indicates that multiple batches during training are not necessary, and opens the door for future research of single-batch unsupervised methods. Our models trained on ImageNet datasets achieve state-of-the-art
results with linear classification, outperforming previous
single-batch methods by 2.6%. Models transferred to
COCO datasets outperforms MoCo v2 by 0.4% with only
half of the training batches. Our pretrained models outperform supervised ImageNet pretrained models on CIFAR-10
and CIFAR-100 datasets by 0.9% and 4.1% respectively.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised visual representation learning, or selfsupervised learning, is a long-standing problem, which aims
at obtaining general feature extractors without human supervision. This goal is usually achieved by carefully designing pretext tasks without annotation to train feature extractors.
According to the definition of pretext tasks, most mainstream approaches fall into two classes: intra-image tasks
and inter-images tasks. Intra-image approaches, including
colorization [43, 20] and jigsaw puzzle [29], design a transform of one image and train the network to learn the transform. Since only the training batch itself is forwarded each
time, we name them single-batch methods. This kind of

Original Images

Input batch

Split

Shuffle

Stitch

Target: Recover the input batch to original images

Figure 1. Sketch of our proposed pretext task. Images in the
same batch are split into multiple patches, which are shuffled and
stitched to form a new batch as input images for the network. The
target is to recover the batch similar to the original images. We use
two images here as an example.

tasks can be achieved using only one image’s information,
limiting the learning ability of feature extractors.
Inter-images tasks are developed rapidly in recent years,
which require the network to discriminate among different
images. Contrastive learning is popular now since it reduces
the distance between representation of positive pairs and enlarges the distance between representation of negative pairs.
To construct positive pairs, another batch of images with
different augmented views are used in the training process
[5, 15, 26]. Since each training batch and its augmented version are forwarded simultaneously, we name these methods
dual-batches methods. They greatly raise resource required
for training an unsupervised feature extractor. The way to
design an efficient single-batch based method with similar
performance to dual-batches methods is still an open problem.
In this paper, we propose a framework for efficient training of unsupervised models using Jigsaw Clustering (JigClu). Our method combines advantages of solving jigsaw puzzles and contrastive learning, and makes use of
both intra- and inter-image information to guide feature
extractor. It learns more comprehensive representations.
Our method only needs a single batch during training and
yet greatly improves results compared to other single-batch

11526

