CondenseNet V2: Sparse Feature Reactivation for Deep Networks
Le Yang1∗ Haojun Jiang1∗ Ruojin Cai2 Yulin Wang1 Shiji Song1 Gao Huang1† Qi Tian3
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
2
Cornell University 3 Huawei Cloud & AI
{yangle15, jhj20, wang-yl19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, rc844@cornell.edu,
{shijis, gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn, tian.qi1@huawei.com

Abstract
Reusing features in deep networks through dense connectivity is an effective way to achieve high computational
efficiency. The recent proposed CondenseNet [14] has shown
that this mechanism can be further improved if redundant features are removed. In this paper, we propose an alternative
approach named sparse feature reactivation (SFR), aiming
at actively increasing the utility of features for reusing. In
the proposed network, named CondenseNetV2, each layer
can simultaneously learn to 1) selectively reuse a set of most
important features from preceding layers; and 2) actively
update a set of preceding features to increase their utility for
later layers. Our experiments show that the proposed models achieve promising performance on image classification
(ImageNet and CIFAR) and object detection (MS COCO) in
terms of both theoretical efficiency and practical speed.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved remarkable success in the past few years [30, 7, 15].
However, their state-of-the-art performance is usually fueled
with sufficient computational resources, which hinders deploying deep models on low-compute platforms, e.g., mobile
phones and Internet of Things (IoT) products. This issue
has motivated a number of researchers on designing efficient
CNN architectures [15, 3, 11, 40, 24, 31]. Among these
efforts, DenseNet [15] is a promising architecture that improves the computational efficiency by reusing early features
with dense connections.
Recently, it has been shown that dense connectivity may
introduce a large number of redundancies when the network
becomes deeper [14]. In a dense network, the output of a
layer will never be modified once it is produced. Given that
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a) DenseNet

(b) CondenseNet

Features from -th layer
Input features of

-th layer

Convolutional layer
Copy
Removed connection
Reactivation connection

(c) Ours

Figure 1. Different feature reuse patterns in (a) DenseNet [15], (b)
CondenseNet [14] and (c) Ours.

shallow features will be repeatedly processed by their following layers, directly exploiting them in deep layers might be
inefficient or even redundant. CondenseNet [14] alleviates
this problem via strategically pruning less important connections in DenseNet. ShuffleNetV2 [24] shares a similar spirit,
where early features are dropped according to layer-distance,
leading to an exponentially decaying of long-distance feature
re-usage. Although both models show their effectiveness,
we hypothesize that straightforwardly abandoning long connections is overly aggressive. These early features which are
considered to be “obsolete ” at deeper layers may contain
useful information, which can benefit network generalization
ability, and potentially contribute to a more efficient model
if properly utilized.
In this paper, instead of directly discarding obsolete features, we are interested in whether we can revive them to
make obsolete features useful again. To this end, we develop a novel module to conduct feature reactivation, which
learns to update shallow features and enables them to be
more efficiently reused by deep layers. Our main idea is
illustrated in Figure 1. Compared to DenseNet [15] and
CondenseNet [14], where earlier features keep unchanged

3569

