General Multi-label Image Classification with Transformers
Jack Lanchantin, Tianlu Wang, Vicente Ordonez, Yanjun Qi
University of Virginia
{jjl5sw,tianlu,vicente,yq2h}@virginia.edu

During Training

Abstract

Predict Masked Labels

Multi-label image classification is the task of predicting
a set of labels corresponding to objects, attributes or other
entities present in an image. In this work we propose the
Classification Transformer (C-Tran), a general framework
for multi-label image classification that leverages Transformers to exploit the complex dependencies among visual
features and labels. Our approach consists of a Transformer encoder trained to predict a set of target labels
given an input set of masked labels, and visual features
from a convolutional neural network. A key ingredient of
our method is a label mask training objective that uses a
ternary encoding scheme to represent the state of the labels as positive, negative, or unknown during training. Our
model shows state-of-the-art performance on challenging
datasets such as COCO and Visual Genome. Moreover, because our model explicitly represents the label state during
training, it is more general by allowing us to produce improved results for images with partial or extra label annotations during inference. We demonstrate this additional capability in the COCO, Visual Genome, News-500, and CUB
image datasets.

1. Introduction
Images in real-world applications generally portray many
objects and complex situations. Multi-label image classification is a visual recognition task that aims to predict
a set of labels corresponding to objects, attributes, or actions given an input image [18, 48, 50, 52, 6, 31, 10]. This
task goes beyond the more thoroughly studied problem of
single-label multi-class classification where the objective is
to extract and associate image features with a single concept
per image. In the multi-label setting, the output set of labels
has some structure that reflect the structure of the world. For
example, dolphin is unlikely to co-occur with grass, while
knife is more likely to appear next to a fork. Effective models for multi-label classification aim to extract good visual
features that are predictive of image labels, but also exploit
the complex relations and dependencies between visual features and labels, and among labels themselves.

C-Tran

Mask Random Labels

During Inference
Predict All Labels

C-Tran

Mask Everything

Figure 1. We propose a transformer-based model for multi-label
During Training
During a target
Inference
image classification
that exploits dependencies among
set
of labels using an
encoder
transformer. During training,
the model
Predict
Masked Labels
Predict
Masked Labels
learns to reconstruct a partial set of labels given randomly masked
input label embeddings and image features. During inference, our
model can be conditioned only on visual input or a combination of
C-Tran
C-Tran
visual input and
partial labels, leading to superior results.

To this end, we present the Classification Transformer
(C-Tran), a multi-label classification framework that leverages a Transformer
encoder
Transformers
have
Mask Random
Labels [49].
Mask Everything
demonstrated a remarkable capability of being able to exploit dependencies among sets of inputs using multi-headed
Duringlayers.
TrainingIn our approach, a During
self-attention
Transformer
enInference
coder is trained to reconstruct a set of target labels given
Predict Masked Labels
Predict Masked Labels
an input set of masked label embeddings and a set of features obtained from a convolutional neural network. C-Tran
uses label masking during training to represent the state of
the labels asC-Tran
positive, negative, or unknown – C-Tran
analogous to
how language models are trained with masked tokens [15].
At test time, C-Tran is able to predict a set of target labels
using only input visual features by masking all the input
labels as unknown. Figure 1 gives an overview of this stratMask Random Labels
Mask Everything
egy. We demonstrate that this approach leads to superior results on a number of benchmarks compared to other recent
approaches that exploit label relations using graph convolutional networks and other recently proposed strategies.
Beyond obtaining state-of-the-art results on standard
multi-label classification, C-Tran is a more general model
for reasoning under prior label observations. Because our
approach explicitly models the label state (positive, nega-

16478

