Benchmarking Representation Learning for Natural World Image Collections
Grant Van Horn1 Elijah Cole2 Sara Beery2 Kimberly Wilber3 Serge Belongie1,3 Oisin Mac Aodha4
1
2
3
4
Cornell University
Caltech
Google
University of Edinburgh
www.github.com/visipedia/newt

Abstract
Recent progress in self-supervised learning has resulted
in models that are capable of extracting rich representations
from image collections without requiring any explicit label
supervision. However, to date the vast majority of these
approaches have restricted themselves to training on standard benchmark datasets such as ImageNet. We argue that
fine-grained visual categorization problems, such as plant
and animal species classification, provide an informative
testbed for self-supervised learning. In order to facilitate
progress in this area we present two new natural world visual classification datasets, iNat2021 and NeWT. The former consists of 2.7M images from 10k different species uploaded by users of the citizen science application iNaturalist. We designed the latter, NeWT, in collaboration with
domain experts with the aim of benchmarking the performance of representation learning algorithms on a suite of
challenging natural world binary classification tasks that
go beyond standard species classification. These two new
datasets allow us to explore questions related to large-scale
representation and transfer learning in the context of finegrained categories. We provide a comprehensive analysis
of feature extractors trained with and without supervision
on ImageNet and iNat2021, shedding light on the strengths
and weaknesses of different learned features across a diverse set of tasks. We find that features produced by standard supervised methods still outperform those produced by
self-supervised approaches such as SimCLR. However, improved self-supervised learning methods are constantly being released and the iNat2021 and NeWT datasets are a
valuable resource for tracking their progress.

1. Introduction
Learning representations of images through selfsupervision alone has seen impressive advancement over
the last few years. There are tantalizing results that show
self-supervised methods, fine-tuned with 1% of the training labels, reaching the performance of their fully supervised counterparts [9]. In many domains, aggregating large

Standard Tasks
What species?

NeWT Tasks
Behavior? Health?
Age?

Media Collection

...

Context?

Visual Question

Figure 1. Existing fine-grained image datasets are typically focused on a single task e.g. species identification. As natural world
media collections grow, we have the opportunity to extract information beyond species labels to answer important ecological
questions. For example, with the help of community scientists, researchers from the NHMLA were able to curate over 500 images
of alligator lizards mating, a phenomenon seldomly recorded in
the existing scientific literature [18]. We analyze if trained feature
extractors can answer similar novel image understanding questions with minimal additional training and present NeWT, a diverse benchmark of natural world visual understanding tasks such
as animal health, life-stage, behavior, among others.

amounts of data is typically not the bottleneck. Rather, it
is the subsequent labeling of that data that consumes vast
amounts of money and time. This is further compounded
in fine-grained domains, e.g. medicine or the natural world,
where sufficiently well trained annotators are few or their
time is expensive. If the benefits of self-supervised learning come to full fruition, then the applicability and impact
of computer vision models across many domains will see a
rapid increase.
One particular domain that is well suited for this type of
advancement is the study of the natural world through photographs collected by communities of enthusiasts. Websites
such as iNaturalist [1] and eBird [54] amass large collections of media annually. To date, there are 60M images in
iNaturalist spanning the tree of life and 25M images of birds
from around the world in eBird, both representing pointin-time records of wildlife. Identifying the species in an
image has been well studied by the computer vision com-

12884

