A Realistic Evaluation of Semi-Supervised Learning
for Fine-Grained Classification
Jong-Chyi Su
Zezhou Cheng
Subhransu Maji
University of Massachusetts Amherst
{jcsu, zezhoucheng, smaji}@cs.umass.edu

Aves dataset

Abstract

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) aims to exploit unlabeled
data to train models from a few labels, making them practical for applications where labels are a bottleneck. Yet, the
current literature on SSL with deep networks for image classification has two main shortcomings. First, most methods
are evaluated on curated datasets such as CIFAR, SVHN,
or ImageNet, where class distribution is or is close to uniform and unlabeled data contains no novel classes. This
is implicit in methods that rely on the assumption that the
data is uniformly clustered, use a uniform instead of classbalanced loss, or categorize unlabeled data into one of the
labeled classes. In practice, however, class distribution can
be highly unbalanced or even unknown, and the unlabeled
data may contain novel classes. How effective is SSL in
these situations?
Second, most literature has focused on training models

70

60

60

50

50

Accuracy

Accuracy

We evaluate the effectiveness of semi-supervised learning
(SSL) on a realistic benchmark where data exhibits considerable class imbalance and contains images from novel
classes. Our benchmark consists of two fine-grained classification datasets obtained by sampling classes from the Aves
and Fungi taxonomy. We find that recently proposed SSL
methods provide significant benefits, and can effectively use
out-of-class data to improve performance when deep networks are trained from scratch. Yet their performance pales
in comparison to a transfer learning baseline, an alternative
approach for learning from a few examples. Furthermore,
in the transfer setting, while existing SSL methods provide
improvements, the presence of out-of-class is often detrimental. In this setting, standard fine-tuning followed by
distillation-based self-training is the most robust. Our work
suggests that semi-supervised learning with experts on realistic datasets may require different strategies than those
currently prevalent in the literature.

Fungi dataset

70

40

40

30

30

Uin
Uin + Uout

20
10

Baseline
Oracle

scratch

ImageNet

iNat

Uin
Uin + Uout

20
10

Baseline
Oracle

scratch

ImageNet

iNat

Figure 1. Accuracy of semi-supervised learning (SSL) algorithms
on the Semi-Aves and Semi-Fungi datasets (see Fig. 2) using (i)
different pre-trained models, and (ii) in-class (Uin ) and out-of-class
(Uin + Uout ) unlabeled data. The performances of the supervised
baseline and supervised oracle are also shown. Transfer learning
from experts is far more effective than SSL from scratch, while
in the transfer setting SSL provides modest gains. Though out-ofclass data (Uout ) is valuable when training from scratch, it is not
the case when training from experts (details in Tab. 2 and 3).

from scratch. However, a practical approach for few-shot
learning is to use expert models trained on large labeled
datasets such as ImageNet [36] or iNaturalist [46]. What
gains does SSL provide in this setting, especially since many
SSL methods are based on learning invariances from data
based on transformations which might have already been
learned by the experts during supervised training? Moreover,
is out-of-domain data beneficial when experts are available?
Our paper aims to answer these questions by conducting a systematic study of SSL techniques (Fig. 1) on two
fine-grained classification datasets that exhibit a long-tailed
distribution of classes and contain a large number of outof-class images (Fig. 2). These datasets are obtained by
sampling classes under the Aves (birds) and Fungi taxonomy.
The out-of-class images are other Aves (or Fungi) images
not belonging to the classes within the labeled set. The first
dataset was part of the semi-supervised challenge at FGVC7
workshop [41], while the second one is constructed from

12966

