Single Pair Cross-Modality Super Resolution
Guy Shacht

Dov Danon
Sharon Fogel
Tel Aviv University

Abstract
Non-visual imaging sensors are widely used in the industry for different purposes. Those sensors are more expensive than visual (RGB) sensors, and usually produce images
with lower resolution. To this end, Cross-Modality SuperResolution methods were introduced, where an RGB image
of a high-resolution assists in increasing the resolution of
a low-resolution modality. However, fusing images from
different modalities is not a trivial task, since each multimodal pair varies greatly in its internal correlations. For
this reason, traditional state-of-the-arts which are trained
on external datasets often struggle with yielding an artifactfree result that is still loyal to the target modality characteristics.
We present CMSR, a single-pair approach for CrossModality Super-Resolution. The network is internally
trained on the two input images only, in a self-supervised
manner, learns their internal statistics and correlations, and
applies them to up-sample the target modality. CMSR contains an internal transformer which is trained on-the-fly together with the up-sampling process itself and without supervision, to allow dealing with pairs that are only weakly
aligned. We show that CMSR produces state-of-the-art super resolved images, yet without introducing artifacts or irrelevant details that originate from the RGB image only.

1. Introduction
Super-Resolution (SR) methods are used to increase the
spatial resolution and improve the level-of-detail of digital
images, while preserving the image content. Such methods
have important applications for multiple industries, such as
health-care, agriculture, defense and film. ([26]) In recent
years, more advanced methods of SR have been heavily
based on Deep Learning. ([12, 21, 4])
The need for super-resolution becomes even more
prominent when dealing with sensors that capture other
modalities, different than the visible light spectrum, since
those sensors typically produce images with substantially
lower resolution. ([18, 25]) For example, Infra-Red (IR)
camera sensors are more expensive than classical camera

Daniel Cohen-Or

sensors, and their output images commonly have much
lower spatial resolution. To bridge that gap in level-ofdetail, Joint Cross-Modality methods were developed. The
idea is to use the higher-resolution RGB modality to guide
the process of super-resolution on images taken by the lower
resolution sensor, taking advantage of the finer details found
in the RGB images. The challenge is to remain loyal to the
target modality characteristics and to avoid adding redundant artifacts or textures that may be present only in the
RGB modality.
In this work, learning is performed internally, relying
solely on the input pair of images. This approach does
not require any training data, and therefore avoids the need
for a modal-specific dataset, relying solely on the internal
image-specific statistics instead. ([6]) Using an internal
super-resolution method is particularly strong in the context of cross-modality, since it allows the network to fit to
the unique properties and the modality characteristics of the
specific input pair. This feature stands in contrast to the
somewhat impractical task of generalizing to a large crossmodal image dataset; each multi-modal pair is inherently
unique in its internal correlations, and therefore must be
treated differently.
State-of-the-art Joint Cross-Modality SR methods rely
on the assumption that their multiple inputs are well
aligned. ([1, 2, 36, 8, 27, 24, 22]) Thus, they perform well
only when the input images were captured by different sensors placed in the exact same position, and taken at the exact same time. As to be shown, in real-life scenarios perfect
alignment of multiple sensors is often hard to achieve. In
our work, we present new means to allow the two modalities to be moderately misaligned, namely weakly aligned.
Our network contains a learnable deformation component
that implicitly aligns details in the two images together.
More specifically, our architecture includes a deformation
model that aligns details from the RGB image to the target
modality in a coarse-to-fine manner, before they are fused
together. The network does not use any explicit supervision
for the deformation sub-task, but rather optimizes the deformation parameters to adhere to the super-resolution goal.
Figures 1 and 8 present cases where a weakly aligned pair

6378

