Learning Statistical Texture for Semantic Segmentation
Lanyun Zhu1 * Deyi Ji2 * Shiping Zhu1† Weihao Gan2† Wei Wu2
Beihang University 1 SenseTime Research 2

Junjie Yan2

{zhulanyun, shiping.zhu}@buaa.edu.cn
{jideyi, ganweihao, wuwei, yanjunjie}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Existing semantic segmentation works mainly focus on
learning the contextual information in high-level semantic
features with CNNs. In order to maintain a precise boundary, low-level texture features are directly skip-connected
into the deeper layers. Nevertheless, texture features are
not only about local structure, but also include global statistical knowledge of the input image. In this paper, we
fully take advantages of the low-level texture features and
propose a novel Statistical Texture Learning Network (STLNet) for semantic segmentation. For the first time, STLNet analyzes the distribution of low level information and
efficiently utilizes them for the task. Specifically, a novel
Quantization and Counting Operator (QCO) is designed
to describe the texture information in a statistical manner.
Based on QCO, two modules are introduced: (1) Texture
Enhance Module (TEM), to capture texture-related information and enhance the texture details; (2) Pyramid Texture
Feature Extraction Module (PTFEM), to effectively extract
the statistical texture features from multiple scales. Through
extensive experiments, we show that the proposed STLNet achieves state-of-the-art performance on three semantic segmentation benchmarks: Cityscapes, PASCAL Context
and ADE20K.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to predict a label for each
pixel in an image. It is one of the most fundamental problems in computer vision, and is widely applied in a lot of
areas such as automatic driving and human-machine interaction.
Recent semantic segmentation methods mainly focus on
exploiting the contextual information in high-level features
with deep fully convolution based networks [23]. However,
only using high-level features from deep layers results in
* The first two authors contributed equally. Work done at SenseTime.
Lanyun Zhu firstly proposed the paper idea.
† Corresponding Author.

(a) Structural Texture

(b) Statistical Texture

Figure 1. Examples of the structural texture and statistical texture
of a image. (a) shows the convolution filters of shallow layers
and the corresponding extracted structural texture in typical CNN
pipeline. (b) shows the original histogram, equalized histogram
and image after statistical texture enhancement, respectively.

coarse and inaccurate output, as they are extracted from a
large receptive field and miss some crucial low-level details, such as edges. To alleviate this problem, people employ skip connection to fuse low- and high-level features.
DeepLabv3+ [4] directly combines feature maps from shallow layers and deep layers before feeding them into the prediction head. Some FPN-like methods [25, 19, 30] employ
encoder-decoder structure with lateral path to refine features
in a top-down manner, where multi-scale boundaries are implicitly learned. SFNet [17] then applies a semantic flow to
align detailed object boundaries from different levels. All of
them show that low-level local features in shallow CNN layers provide the structural texture information, such as edge,
which is essential for pixel-wise segmentation task.
From the perspective of digital image processing, image texture is not only about the local structural property,

12537

