Inferring CAD Modeling Sequences Using Zone Graphs
Xianghao Xu
Brown University

Wenzhe Peng
MIT

Chin-Yi Cheng
Autodesk Research

Karl D.D. Willis
Autodesk Research

Daniel Ritchie
Brown University

Abstract
In computer-aided design (CAD), the ability to “reverse
engineer” the modeling steps used to create 3D shapes is
a long-sought-after goal. This process can be decomposed
into two sub-problems: converting an input mesh or point
cloud into a boundary representation (or B-rep), and then
inferring modeling operations which construct this B-rep.
In this paper, we present a new system for solving the second sub-problem. Central to our approach is a new geometric representation: the zone graph. Zones are the set
of solid regions formed by extending all B-Rep faces and
partitioning space with them; a zone graph has these zones
as its nodes, with edges denoting geometric adjacencies between them. Zone graphs allow us to tractably work with
industry-standard CAD operations, unlike prior work using
CSG with parametric primitives. We focus on CAD programs consisting of sketch + extrude + Boolean operations,
which are common in CAD practice. We phrase our problem as search in the space of such extrusions permitted by
the zone graph, and we train a graph neural network to
score potential extrusions in order to accelerate the search.
We show that our approach outperforms an existing CSG
inference baseline in terms of geometric reconstruction accuracy and reconstruction time, while also creating more
plausible modeling sequences.

1. Introduction
Many real-world 3D objects begin their existence as
parametric CAD programs. If one could recover such programs for everyday objects, it would enable powerful editing and re-purposing abilities, with many applications in
mechanical and industrial design. As such, it’s unsurprising that this problem has become a popular research topic
in the graphics, vision, and machine learning communities,
with multiple recent papers examining how to infer CADlike programs for an input shape [22, 7, 30, 8, 16].
This work was done partially during Xianghao Xu and Wenzhe Peng’s
internship at Autodesk Research

Input B-rep

Step 1

Zone Graph

Step 2

Step 3

Step 4

Figure 1: A solid shape (top-left) can be decomposed into a
graph of zones which make up its interior volume and surrounding space (top-right). This representation permits efficient search for modeling sequences that reconstruct the
shape, using industry standard modeling operations (bottom). Light red lines in the zone graph indicate connections
between zone nodes. In the bottom modeling sequence,
green denotes sketch + extrude + union and red denotes
sketch + extrude + difference.

One property shared by these works is their use of constructive solid geometry (CSG) as a modeling language. In
CSG, shapes are formed by combining primitive solids (e.g.
spheres, cylinders, boxes) with Boolean union, intersection,
and difference. Its small library of parametric primitive
shapes makes it appealing for CAD program inference, as
this reduces the search space of possible programs.
Unfortunately, parametric primitive CSG is not the modeling language used by CAD practitioners today. Instead,
modern CAD workflows use feature-based modeling, in
which a solid object is created by iteratively adding features such as holes, slots, or bosses [13]. Feature creation is
typically performed via operations on surfaces, as these are
intuitive for users to reason about: for instance, creating a
slot in the surface of an object by sketching the profile of the

6062

