Tangent Space Backpropagation for 3D Transformation Groups
Zachary Teed and Jia Deng
Princeton University
{zteed,jiadeng}@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of performing backpropagation
for computation graphs involving 3D transformation groups
SO(3), SE(3), and Sim(3). 3D transformation groups
are widely used in 3D vision and robotics, but they do not
form vector spaces and instead lie on smooth manifolds.
The standard backpropagation approach, which embeds 3D
transformations in Euclidean spaces, suffers from numerical difficulties. We introduce a new library, which exploits
the group structure of 3D transformations and performs
backpropagation in the tangent spaces of manifolds. We
show that our approach is numerically more stable, easier to implement, and beneficial to a diverse set of tasks.
Our plug-and-play PyTorch library is available at https:
//github.com/princeton-vl/lietorch.

1. Introduction
3D transformation groups—SO(3), SE(3), Sim(3)—
have been extensively used in a wide range of computer vision and robotics problems. Important applications include
SLAM, 6-dof pose estimation, multiview reconstruction, inverse kinematics, pose graph optimization, geometric registration, and scene flow. In these domains, the state of
the system—configuration of robotic joints, camera poses,
non-rigid deformations—can be naturally represented as 3D
transformations.
Recently, many of these problems have been approached
using deep learning, either in an end-to-end manner[31,
10, 40, 8, 38, 22, 18] or composed as hybrid systems[21,
11, 29, 19]. A key ingredient of deep learning is autodifferentiation, in particular, backpropagation through a
computation graph. A variety of general-purpose deep
learning libraries such as PyTorch [27] and TensorFlow [1]
have been developed such that backpropagation is automatically performed by the library—users only need to specify
the computation graph and supply any custom operations.
A basic assumption of existing deep learning libraries is
that a computation graph represents a composition of mappings between Euclidean spaces. That is, each node of

the graph represents a differentiable mappings between Euclidean spaces, e.g. from Rm to Rn . This assumption allows
us to use the standard definition of the gradient of a function
∂f
∂f
∂f
f (x) : Rn → R as ∂f
∂x = [ ∂x1 , ∂x2 , . . . , ∂xn ], and use the
∂f
∂x
chain rule to backpropagate the gradient: ∂f
∂y = ∂x · ∂y ,
∂xi
where ∂x
∂y is the Jacobian matrix ( ∂yj ).
However, this assumption breaks down when the computation graph involves 3D transformations, such as when
a network iteratively updates its estimate of the camera
pose [31, 40, 33, 10, 20]. 3D transformations do not form
vector spaces and instead lie on smooth manifolds; the notion of addition is undefined and the standard notion of gradient defined in Euclidean spaces does not apply.
A typical approach in prior work is to embed the 3D
transforms in a Euclidean space. For example, a rigid body
transform from SE(3) is represented as a 4 × 4 matrix and
treated as a vector in R16 . That is, SE(3) corresponds to
a subset of R16 , or more specifically, an embedded submanifold of R16 . Functions involving SE(3) such as the
exponential map and the inverse are replaced with their extensions in the embedding space, i.e. the matrix exponential
and the matrix inverse:
exp : se(3) 7→ SE(3) −→ exp : R6 7→ R4×4
inv : SE(3) 7→ SE(3) −→ inv : R4×4 7→ R4×4 .

(1)

Now, the computation graph involves only Euclidean objects, and backpropagation can be performed as usual as
long as the Jacobian of exp and inv can be calculated.
There are several problems with this approach. First,
while the extended functions such as the matrix exponential
are smooth as a whole, the individual substeps needed for
computing the backward passes often contain singularities.
As a result, small deviations off the manifold can result in
numerical instabilities causing gradients to explode. It can
often be quite difficult to implement these functions in libraries such as PyTorch[27] and Tensorflow[1] in a way that
numerically stable gradients are achieved through automatic
differentiation. As a case in point, the commonly used PyTorch3D library[28] returns nan-gradients when the identity
matrix is given as input the matrix log. Furthermore, some

10338

