Seeing Behind Objects for 3D Multi-Object Tracking in RGB-D Sequences
Norman Müller1
1

Yu-Shiang Wong2

Technical University of Munich

Niloy J. Mitra2,3
2

Angela Dai1

University College London

3

Matthias Nießner1
Adobe Research

Figure 1. Our method learns to see behind objects in RGB-D sequences in order to achieve robust dynamic object tracking; we predict the
complete underlying geometry of each object beyond the observed view, which enables finding correspondences which can more reliably
persist over time, under various view changes and object motion. From an input RGB-D frame, we first perform 3D object detection, then
jointly infer for each object its complete geometry and dense correspondence mapping to its canonical space. These correspondences on
the predicted complete object geometry help to provide robust multi-object tracking over time.

Abstract
Multi-object tracking from RGB-D video sequences is a
challenging problem due to the combination of changing
viewpoints, motion, and occlusions over time. We observe
that having the complete geometry of objects aids in their
tracking, and thus propose to jointly infer the complete geometry of objects as well as track them, for rigidly moving
objects over time. Our key insight is that inferring the complete geometry of the objects significantly helps in tracking. By hallucinating unseen regions of objects, we can obtain additional correspondences between the same instance,
thus providing robust tracking even under strong change of
appearance. From a sequence of RGB-D frames, we detect
objects in each frame and learn to predict their complete
object geometry as well as a dense correspondence mapping into a canonical space. This allows us to derive 6DoF
poses for the objects in each frame, along with their corre-

spondence between frames, providing robust object tracking
across the RGB-D sequence. Experiments on both synthetic
and real-world RGB-D data demonstrate that we achieve
state-of-the-art performance on dynamic object tracking.
Furthermore, we show that our object completion significantly helps tracking, providing an improvement of 6.5% in
mean MOTA.

1. Introduction
Understanding how objects move over time is fundamental towards higher-level perception of real-world environments, with applications ranging from mixed reality to
robotic perception. In the context of static scenes, significant progress has been made in RGB-D tracking and reconstruction [22, 17, 23, 32, 5, 9]; however, the assumption of a
static environment significantly limits applicability to realworld environments which are often dynamic, with objects

6071

