Hybrid Message Passing with Performance-Driven Structures for Facial Action
Unit Detection
Tengfei Song1 , Zijun Cui2 , Wenming Zheng1 , and Qiang Ji2
1
Southeast University
2
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
songtf@seu.edu.cn, cuiz3@rpi.edu, wenming zheng@seu.edu.cn, qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Message passing neural network has been an effective
method to represent dependencies among nodes by propagating messages. However, most of message passing algorithms focus on one structure and messages are estimated
by one single approach. For real-world data, like facial
action units (AUs), the dependencies may vary in terms
of different expressions and individuals. In this paper, we
propose a novel hybrid message passing neural network
with performance-driven structures (HMP-PS), which combines complementary message passing methods and captures more possible structures in a Bayesian manner. Particularly, a performance-driven Monte Carlo Markov Chain
sampling method is proposed for generating high performance graph structures. Besides, hybrid message passing
is proposed to combine different types of messages, which
provide the complementary information. The contribution
of each type of message is adaptively adjusted along with
different inputs. The experiments on two widely used benchmark datasets, i.e., BP4D and DISFA, validate that our proposed method can achieve the state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Facial action units (AUs) detection is an essential technique to analyze human expressions in the field of artificial
intelligence. Ekman proposed Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [10] to model the relation between facial muscle movements, i.e., AUs, and facial expressions. Therefore, more studies estimate the human emotions and facial
behaviors via facial AU detection.
Convolutional neural networks (CNN) [15, 27, 41, 26,
44] have been extensively applied to various classification
and regression tasks because of the powerful local feature
representation capabilities. However, for facial AU detection, the structural information and dependencies among

Figure 1. Some facial images and AU occurrences for happiness
expression. The AUs with blue nodes are common AU occurrences and the AUs with green nodes are different AU occurrences.
Even for the same expression, the AU occurrences and dependencies may be different. For example, AU6 (Cheek Raiser) occurs in
the first image and does not occur in the second image.

different AUs [17] should be taken into consideration during AU detection. CNN can not fully characterize the relationships among different AUs. Recently, graph neural
networks [13, 7, 9], also called message passing neural networks (MPNN), have been popular algorithm to characterize the objects and their dependencies. Recent studies
[23, 11] employ message passing neural networks to solve
facial AU related tasks.
Generally, previous studies [17, 38] utilized prior knowledge from FACS or training labels to define the graph
structure so as to represent the dependencies among AUs.
These common dependencies among AUs can provide useful structural information. However, one type of constant
relationship among AUs is not sufficient to fully characterize the sophisticated correlations among AUs. The dependencies among AUs may vary given different expressions.
Besides, individual difference is also a factor to induce different correlations among AUs. Even for the same expression, as shown in Figure 1, AU occurrences can be different. Therefore, different graph structures should be taken
into consideration for effectively capturing different types
of dependencies for AU detection.

6267

