Learned Initializations for Optimizing Coordinate-Based Neural Representations
Matthew Tancik∗1
Ben Mildenhall∗1
Terrance Wang1
Divi Schmidt1
Pratul P. Srinivasan2
Jonathan T. Barron2
Ren Ng1
2
1
UC Berkeley
Google Research

Abstract

Input Coordinate

x

Coordinate-based neural representations have shown
significant promise as an alternative to discrete, arraybased representations for complex low dimensional signals.
However, optimizing a coordinate-based network from randomly initialized weights for each new signal is inefficient.
We propose applying standard meta-learning algorithms to
learn the initial weight parameters for these fully-connected
networks based on the underlying class of signals being represented (e.g., images of faces or 3D models of chairs). Despite requiring only a minor change in implementation, using these learned initial weights enables faster convergence
during optimization and can serve as a strong prior over
the signal class being modeled, resulting in better generalization when only partial observations of a given signal
are available. We explore these benefits across a variety of
tasks, including representing 2D images, reconstructing CT
scans, and recovering 3D shapes and scenes from 2D image
observations.

1. Introduction
Recent work has demonstrated the potential of representing complex low-dimensional signals using deep fullyconnected neural networks (typically referred to as multilayer perceptrons, or MLPs). A coordinate-based neural
representation fθ for a given signal is an MLP (with weights
θ) that is optimized to map from an input coordinate x to the
signal’s value at that coordinate. For example, fθ could map
from 2D pixel coordinates to RGB color values to encode
an image. Unlike a signal stored as a discretely sampled
array of values, a coordinate-based neural representation is
continuous and is not constrained to have a fixed spatial resolution. This fact has recently been exploited to design representations for 3D shapes (which typically occupy a small
2D subset of 3D space) that do not require cubic storage
complexity, in contrast to 3D voxel grids [22, 24, 27, 34].
* Authors contributed equally to this work.

y

Meta-Learned
Initialization

R G

B

Value at
Coordinate

Standard
Initialization

Figure 1. A coordinate-based MLP, illustrated on the left, takes a
coordinate as input and outputs a value at that location. For example, the network could take in a pixel coordinate (x, y) and emit
the (R, G, B) color at that pixel as output, thereby representing
a 2D image. The network weights θ are typically optimized via
gradient descent to produce the desired image, as depicted on the
right. However, finding good parameters can be computationally
expensive, and the full optimization process must be repeated for
each new target. We propose using meta-learning to find initial
network weights θ0∗ that allow for faster convergence and better
generalization.

However, one limitation of these neural representations
is that computing network weights θ that reproduce a given
signal typically requires solving an optimization problem
by running many steps of gradient descent. This can take
between seconds (when encoding a small image) and hours
(when solving an inverse problem to recover a high resolution radiance field, as in NeRF [24]). Common approaches
to address this issue include concatenating a latent vector to
the input coordinate and supervising a single neural network
to represent an entire class of signals [22, 27], or training a
hypernetwork to map from signal observations (or a latent
code) to MLP weights [33, 34]. However, each of these
strategies is restricted to representing only signals within its
learned latent space, potentially limiting its ability to express previously unseen target signals.
Recent work [32] has shown that optimization-based
meta-learning can dramatically reduce the number of gra-

2846

