Visual Room Rearrangement
Luca Weihs1

Matt Deitke1,2
1

Aniruddha Kembhavi1,2

Roozbeh Mottaghi1,2

2
PRIOR @ Allen Institute for AI
University of Washington
ai2thor.allenai.org/rearrangement

Figure 1: An instance of the Room Rearrangement task. Objects begin in the positions indicated by the solid 3D bounding
boxes. An agent must walk through the room and record the objects it sees. The agent is then removed, and objects are moved
to the locations indicated by the dashed bounding boxes. The agent is then reintroduced into the room and must interact with
objects (moving or opening them) to return the room to its original state.

Abstract
There has been a significant recent progress in the field
of Embodied AI with researchers developing models and
algorithms enabling embodied agents to navigate and interact within completely unseen environments. In this paper, we propose a new dataset and baseline models for the
task of Rearrangement. We particularly focus on the task
of Room Rearrangement: an agent begins by exploring a
room and recording objects’ initial configurations. We then
remove the agent and change the poses and states (e.g.,
open/closed) of some objects in the room. The agent must
restore the initial configurations of all objects in the room.
Our dataset, named RoomR, includes 6,000 distinct rearrangement settings involving 72 different object types in 120
scenes. Our experiments show that solving this challenging
interactive task that involves navigation and object interaction is beyond the capabilities of the current state-of-the-art
techniques for embodied tasks and we are still very far from
achieving perfect performance on these types of tasks.

1. Introduction
One of the longstanding goals of Embodied AI is to build
agents that interact with their surrounding world and perform tasks. Recently, navigation and instruction following
tasks have gained popularity [1, 2, 4] in the Embodied AI
community. These tasks are the building blocks of interactive embodied agents, and over the past few years, we
have observed remarkable progress regarding the development of models and algorithms. However, a typical assumption for these tasks is that the environment is static; namely,
the agent can move within the environment but cannot interact with objects or modify their state. The ability to interact
with and change its environment is crucial for any artificial embodied agent and cannot be studied in static environments. There is a general trend towards interactive tasks
[50, 41, 49]. These tasks focus on specific aspects of interaction such as object manipulation, long-horizon planning and understanding pre-condition and post-conditions
of actions. In this paper, we address a more comprehensive
task in a visually rich environment that can subsume each
of these skills.

5922

