TediGAN: Text-Guided Diverse Face Image Generation and Manipulation
Weihao Xia1
weihaox@outlook.com

Yujiu Yang1∗

Jing-Hao Xue2

yang.yujiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Baoyuan Wu3,4†

jinghao.xue@ucl.ac.uk

wubaoyuan@cuhk.edu.cn

1

In this work, we propose TediGAN, a novel framework
for multi-modal image generation and manipulation with
textual descriptions. The proposed method consists of three
components: StyleGAN inversion module, visual-linguistic
similarity learning, and instance-level optimization. The
inversion module maps real images to the latent space
of a well-trained StyleGAN. The visual-linguistic similarity learns the text-image matching by mapping the image
and text into a common embedding space. The instancelevel optimization is for identity preservation in manipulation. Our model can produce diverse and high-quality
images with an unprecedented resolution at 10242 . Using a control mechanism based on style-mixing, our TediGAN inherently supports image synthesis with multi-modal
inputs, such as sketches or semantic labels, with or without instance guidance. To facilitate text-guided multimodal synthesis, we propose the Multi-Modal CelebA-HQ,
a large-scale dataset consisting of real face images and
corresponding semantic segmentation map, sketch, and
textual descriptions. Extensive experiments on the introduced dataset demonstrate the superior performance
of our proposed method. Code and data are available
at https://github.com/weihaox/TediGAN.

1. Introduction
How to create or edit an image of the desired content
without tedious manual operations is a difficult but mean∗ Yujiu Yang is the corresponding author. This research was partially
supported by the Key Program of National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant No. U1903213 and the Guangdong Basic and Applied
Basic Research Foundation (No. 2019A1515011387).
† Baoyuan Wu is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grant No. 62076213, the University Development Fund of the Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen under Grant No. 01001810, and
the Special Project Fund of Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data under
grant No. T00120210003.

(b) Multi-Modal Synthesis

Abstract

(a) Continuous Operations

Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, China
2
Department of Statistical Science, University College London, UK
3
School of Data Science, Chinese University of Hongkong, Shenzhen, China
4
Secure Computing Lab of Big Data, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data, Shenzhen, China

This woman is
smiling. She has
short black hair.

He is wearing
heavy makeup.

He is a young man.

He is old.

He is wearing eyeglasses.

This young man
has red hair.

Figure 1. Our TediGAN is the first method that unifies text-guided
image generation and manipulation into one same framework,
leading to naturally continuous operations from generation to manipulation (a), and inherently supports image synthesis with multimodal inputs (b), such as sketches or semantic labels with or without instance (texts or real images) guidance.

ingful task. To make image generation and manipulation
more readily and user-friendly, recent studies have been focusing on the image synthesis conditioned on a variety of
guidance, such as sketch [9, 37], semantic label [11, 36], or
textual description [26, 39]. Despite the success of its label
and sketch counterparts, most state-of-the-art text-guided
image generation and manipulation methods are only able
to produce low-quality images [28, 8]. Those aiming at
generating high-quality images from texts typically design
a multi-stage architecture and train their models in a progressive manner. To be more specific, there are usually
three stages in the main module, and each stage contains
a generator and a discriminator. Three stages are trained at
the same time, and progressively generate images of three
different scales, i.e., 642 → 1282 → 2562 . The initial
image with rough shape and color would be refined to a
high-resolution one. However, the multi-stage training process is time-consuming and cumbersome, making the afore-

2256

