Partially View-aligned Representation Learning
with Noise-robust Contrastive Loss
Mouxing Yang1 , Yunfan Li1 , Zhenyu Huang1 , Zitao Liu2 , Peng Hu1 , Xi Peng1∗
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University.
2
TAL Education Group, Beijing China.
{yangmouxing, yunfanli.gm, zyhuang.gm, zitao.jerry.liu, penghu.ml, pengx.gm}@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Multi-view Representation Learning (MvRL) [2, 16, 24,
37, 44] aims at learning consistent representations from
∗ Corresponding author

···

···

···

···

···

In real-world applications, it is common that only a portion of data is aligned across views due to spatial, temporal, or spatiotemporal asynchronism, thus leading to the
so-called Partially View-aligned Problem (PVP). To solve
such a less-touched problem without the help of labels, we
propose simultaneously learning representation and aligning data using a noise-robust contrastive loss. In brief, for
each sample from one view, our method aims to identify
its within-category counterparts from other views, and thus
the cross-view correspondence could be established. As the
contrastive learning needs data pairs as input, we construct
positive pairs using the known correspondences and negative pairs using random sampling. To alleviate or even eliminate the influence of the false negatives caused by random
sampling, we propose a noise-robust contrastive loss that
could adaptively prevent the false negatives from dominating the network optimization. To the best of our knowledge,
this could be the first successful attempt of enabling contrastive learning robust to noisy labels. In fact, this work
might remarkably enrich the learning paradigm with noisy
labels. More specifically, the traditional noisy labels are defined as incorrect annotations for the supervised tasks such
as classification. In contrast, this work proposes that the
view correspondence might be false, which is remarkably
different from the widely-accepted definition of noisy label.
Extensive experiments show the promising performance of
our method comparing with 10 state-of-the-art multi-view
approaches in the clustering and classification tasks. The
code will be publicly released at https://pengxi.me.

···

Abstract

View 1

View 2

View 1

View 2

View 1

View 2

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. The motivation of this paper. In the figure, different
colors denote different instances which will present in multiple
views, different shapes indicate different categories, and the dotted line denotes the desired correspondence. (a) Partially Viewaligned problem: only a portion of data is with the known correspondence due to complexity of data collection and transmission;
(b) Instance-level alignment: it aims to establish the correspondence between two cross-view samples of the same instance; (c)
Category-level alignment: each pair consists of the samples belonging to the same category. Considering the downstream tasks
such as clustering and classification, category-level alignment is
more desirable than instance-level alignment due to its higher accessibility and scalability.

multi-view/modal data to facilitate the downstream tasks including but not limited to clustering, classification, and retrieval. The success of all existing works [2, 37, 44] heavily
relies on two assumptions, i.e., the completeness of data and
the consistency of views. To be specific, the completeness
assumption requires that the instances are presented in all
views, and the consistency assumption requires that the data
from different views must be strictly aligned. When one
of these two assumptions is unsatisfied, it is impossible to
perform MvRL. In practice, however, the two assumptions
could be easily violated in data collection or transmission,

1134

