Deep Gaussian Scale Mixture Prior for Spectral Compressive Imaging
Tao Huang1 Weisheng Dong1 * Xin Yuan2 * Jinjian Wu1 Guangming Shi1
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Xidian University 2 Bell Labs
thuang 666@stu.xidian.edu.cn

wsdong@mail.xidian.edu.cn

jinjian.wu@mail.xidian.edu.cn

xyuan@bell-labs.com

gmshi@xidian.edu.cn

Abstract
In coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI)
system, the real-world hyperspectral image (HSI) can be reconstructed from the captured compressive image in a snapshot. Model-based HSI reconstruction methods employed
hand-crafted priors to solve the reconstruction problem, but
most of which achieved limited success due to the poor representation capability of these hand-crafted priors. Deep
learning based methods learning the mappings between the
compressive images and the HSIs directly achieved much
better results. Yet, it is nontrivial to design a powerful deep
network heuristically for achieving satisfied results. In this
paper, we propose a novel HSI reconstruction method based
on the Maximum a Posterior (MAP) estimation framework
using learned Gaussian Scale Mixture (GSM) prior. Different from existing GSM models using hand-crafted scale
priors (e.g., the Jeffrey’s prior), we propose to learn the
scale prior through a deep convolutional neural network
(DCNN). Furthermore, we also propose to estimate the local means of the GSM models by the DCNN. All the parameters of the MAP estimation algorithm and the DCNN
parameters are jointly optimized through end-to-end training. Extensive experimental results on both synthetic and
real datasets demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms existing state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at https://see.xidian.edu.cn/faculty/
wsdong/Projects/DGSM-SCI.htm.

1. Introduction
Compared with traditional RGB images, hyperspectral
images (HSIs) have more spectral bands and can describe
the characteristics of material in the imaged scene more accurately. Relying on its rich spectral information, HSIs are
beneficial to many computer vision tasks, e.g., object recognition [33], detection [40] and tracking [34]. The conven* Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. A single shot measurement captured by [22] and 28 reconstructed spectral channels using our proposed method.

tional imaging systems with single 1D or 2D sensor require
a long time to scan the scene, failing to capture dynamic
objects. Recently, many coded aperture snapshot spectral
imaging (CASSI) systems [8, 22, 23, 35] have been proposed to capture the 3D HSIs at video rate. CASSI utilizes
a physical mask and a disperser to modulate different wavelength signals, and mixes all modulated signals to generate
a single 2D compressive image. Then a reconstruction algorithm is employed to reconstruct the 3D HSI from the 2D
compressive image. As shown in Fig. 1, 28 spectral bands have been reconstructed from a 2D compressive image
(measurement) captured by a real CASSI system [22].
Therefore, reconstruction algorithms play a pivot role in
CASSI. To solve this ill-posed inverse problem, previous
model-based methods adopted hand-crafted priors to regularize the reconstruction process. In GAP-TV [43], the total
variation prior was introduced to solve the HSI reconstruction problem. Based on the assumption that HSIs have sparse representations with respective to some dictionaries,
sparse-based methods [14, 17, 35] exploited the ℓ1 sparsity to regularize the solution. Considering that the pixels of

16216

