Scaling Local Self-Attention for Parameter Efficient Visual Backbones
Ashish Vaswani
Google Research
avaswani@google.com

Prajit Ramachandran
Google Research
prajit@google.com

Niki Parmar
Google Research
parmar@google.com

Blake Hechtman
Google Research
blakehechtman@google.com

Abstract
Self-attention has the promise of improving computer vision systems due to parameter-independent scaling of receptive fields and content-dependent interactions, in contrast to
parameter-dependent scaling and content-independent interactions of convolutions. Self-attention models have recently
been shown to have encouraging improvements on accuracyparameter trade-offs compared to baseline convolutional
models such as ResNet-50. In this work, we develop selfattention models that can outperform not just the canonical
baseline models, but even the high-performing convolutional
models. We propose two extensions to self-attention that,
in conjunction with a more efficient implementation of selfattention, improve the speed, memory usage, and accuracy
of these models. We leverage these improvements to develop
a new self-attention model family, HaloNets, which reach
state-of-the-art accuracies on the parameter-limited setting
of the ImageNet classification benchmark. In preliminary
transfer learning experiments, we find that HaloNet models
outperform much larger models and have better inference
performance. On harder tasks such as object detection and
instance segmentation, our simple local self-attention and
convolutional hybrids show improvements over very strong
baselines. These results mark another step in demonstrating
the efficacy of self-attention models on settings traditionally
dominated by convolutions. 1

1. Introduction
Vision and natural language processing (NLP) systems
divide the landscape of computational primitives. While
self-attention is the primary workhorse in NLP, convolutions
1 Please refer to https://arxiv.org/abs/2103.12731 for a longer version.

Aravind Srinivas
UC Berkeley
aravind@cs.berkeley.edu
Jonathon Shlens
Google Research
shlens@google.com

are ubiquitous in nearly all vision models. Convolutions embody the principle of local processing, to learn local spatial
features such as edges and texture that are abundant in images. On the other hand, the Transformer [53] showed that
self-attention is an effective and computationally efficient
mechanism for capturing global interactions between words
in a sentence. Self-attention has several properties that make
it a good fit for vision: (a) content-based interactions as
opposed to content-independent interactions of convolution;
(b) parameter-independent scaling of receptive field size
as opposed to parameter-dependent scaling of convolution;
(c) empirical ability to capture long-range dependencies for
use in larger images; (d) flexibility to handle and integrate
multiple types of data that appear in vision, such as pixels [55, 2, 40, 62], point clouds [59], sequence conditioning
information [58], and graphs [29]. Self-attention may also
be regarded as an adaptive nonlinearity paralleling a long
history of techniques in computer vision, such as bilateral
filtering [36] and non-local means [3].
Several recent papers [2, 39, 10, 62, 46] have attempted
using self-attention primitives to improve image classification accuracy over the strong and commonly used ResNet
backbones [14, 15]. Among them, the Stand-Alone SelfAttention (SASA) [39] is a fully self-attentive model that
replaces every spatial convolution with local self-attention,
which improves the performance of ResNet backbones
while having fewer parameters and floating point operations. While conceptually promising, these models lag behind state-of-the-art convolutional models in image classification. State-of-the-art convolutional models [51, 63, 38] use
a variety of scaling techniques to achieve strong performance
across a range of computation and parameter regimes.
In this work, we aim to develop and understand techniques for scaling local self-attention models to outperform
some of the best convolutional models. Scaling self-attention

12894

