Understanding and Simplifying Perceptual Distances
Dan Amir and Yair Weiss
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
{dan.amir,yair.weiss}@mail.huji.ac.il

Abstract
Perceptual metrics based on features of deep Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have shown remarkable
success when used as loss functions in a range of computer vision problems and significantly outperform classical losses such as L1 or L2 in pixel space. The source of
this success remains somewhat mysterious, especially since
a good loss does not require a particular CNN architecture
nor a particular training method. In this paper we show that
similar success can be achieved even with losses based on
features of a deep CNN with random filters. We use the tool
of infinite CNNs to derive an analytical form for perceptual similarity in such CNNs, and prove that the perceptual
distance between two images is equivalent to the maximum
mean discrepancy (MMD) distance between local distributions of small patches in the two images. We use this equivalence to propose a simple metric for comparing two images
which directly computes the MMD between local distributions of patches in the two images. Our proposed metric is
simple to understand, requires no deep networks, and gives
comparable performance to perceptual metrics in a range
of computer vision tasks.

1. Introduction
Following the enormous success of CNNs for object
recognition tasks [37, 24] and evidence for the generality
of their learned representations [11], Gatys et al. [15] suggested comparing images in the feature space of such networks’ intermediate layers instead of in pixel space. They
suggested that such representations are more sensitive to
the semantic content of the image and less to the exact appearance of the objects in the image. Following their success, the use of perceptual losses has spread and showed
promising results for a variety of tasks: ranging from image
restoration tasks, such as super-resolution [20, 26], image
deblurring [25] and image inpainting [28], image generation [12, 14] and image domain transfer [6]. Despite its
universal success and applicability, perceptual losses suffer
from several drawbacks:

• Computational cost - computing intermediate feature
representations and propagating gradients backwards
through a large object recognition CNN can be very
expensive.
• Domain specificity - while representations learned on
ImageNet [10] tend to transfer well to a range of computer vision tasks, such features may not be applicable for domains where the image statistics differ drastically from those in ImageNet.
• Interpretability - it is not well understood when, how
and why perceptual losses succeed, and how to tune
their hyperparameters. As evidence for the severity of
this problem, one can observe the large inconsistency
in the literature in the choice of most hyper-parameters
for perceptual loss - the choice of specific layers (or
combinations of them), whether features are extracted
pre or post activation and whether to normalize activations prior to distance computation.
In this work we derive a better understanding of the reasons behind the success of the commonly used perceptual
losses, and use this understanding to derive a simpler, well
understood loss that can serve as an alternative. Specifically, we show that losses based on CNNs with random filters are almost equally “perceptual” and can serve as a suitable loss function in image prediction tasks. We then use
the recent tool of infinite random networks to derive an analytical form for perceptual loss in such CNNs. Specifically,
we prove that the perceptual distance between two images
is equivalent to the maximum mean discrepancy (MMD)
distance between local distributions of small patches in the
two images. We use this equivalence to propose a simple
metric for comparing two images which directly computes
the MMD between the distribution of patches in the two images. Our proposed metric is simple to understand, requires
no deep networks, and gives comparable performance to
perceptual metrics in a range of computer vision tasks.

1.1. The Success of Perceptual Losses
The effectiveness of perceptual losses compared to standard losses is evidenced by two empirical successes: (1)
112226

