Cross-View Gait Recognition with Deep Universal Linear Embeddings
Shaoxiong Zhang, Yunhong Wang, Annan Li ∗
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems,
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
{zhangsx, yhwang, liannan}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Gait is considered an attractive biometric identifier for
its non-invasive and non-cooperative features compared
with other biometric identifiers such as fingerprint and
iris. At present, cross-view gait recognition methods always
establish representations from various deep convolutional
networks for recognition and ignore the potential dynamical
information of the gait sequences. If assuming that pedestrians have different walking patterns, gait recognition can
be performed by calculating their dynamical features from
each view. This paper introduces the Koopman operator
theory to gait recognition, which can find an embedding space for a global linear approximation of a nonlinear dynamical system. Furthermore, a novel framework based on
convolutional variational autoencoder and deep Koopman
embedding is proposed to approximate the Koopman operators, which is used as dynamical features from the linearized embedding space for cross-view gait recognition. It
gives solid physical interpretability for a gait recognition
system. Experiments on a large public dataset, OU-MVLP,
prove the effectiveness of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Gait recognition aims to identify people by recognizing
their body shape and walking patterns. Compared to other
biometrics such as fingerprint or iris, gait requires relatively
low cooperation and can be performed at a longer distance.
Besides, it is also difficult to camouflage. Therefore, gait
recognition can be applied in some special senses such as
criminal investigation [28].
Although the progress is encouraging, gait recognition
still suffers from many external factors such as carrying
condition, varying pace, clothing, and camera viewpoints,
which degrade the performance of gait recognition systems. Among all these unfavorable factors, camera viewpoints
could be the most tricky one [43]. Prior arts proved that the
∗ Corresponding author.

ConvNet
Fusion

Fusion

Encoder

Discriminative Space

(a)

Koopman Space

Fusion

𝐾2

𝐾1

Koopman Matrices

(b)

Figure 1. Previous works focus on feature fusion of gait silhouette
sequences and search for discriminative space where distance is
small for the feature pair with the same identity (a). We calculate dynamical features in the Koopman space where gait images
evolve linearly (b), and then we recognize them from their dynamical features.

performance of a single-view gait recognition system would
drop drastically if the viewpoint is changed [43, 34].
To solve these problems, many deep learning models have been proposed for cross-view gait recognition and
achieved great performances. In general, such approaches
can be grouped into two categories, i.e. appearance-based
approaches and model-based approaches, respectively. The
former [43, 5, 33, 50, 45] is mainstream for gait recognition
in the past few years. These methods extract features from
gait silhouette images and optimize the intra-individual distance in the feature space by metric learning loss functions
without gait cycle modeling. In addition, temporal fusion
units [6, 9, 44, 5, 8, 23] and part-division units [17, 5, 8, 50]
are proposed to combine features of silhouette sequences
and local parts.
The model-based gait recognition [2, 22, 24] focus on reconstructing body structures from gait sequences in a mathematical manner. A three-dimensional model conveys more
information than a two-dimensional one and can be con-

9095

