Harmonious Semantic Line Detection via Maximal Weight Clique Selection
Dongkwon Jin, Wonhui Park
Korea University

Seong-Gyun Jeong
42dot.ai

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

dongkwonjin, whpark@mcl.korea.ac.kr

seonggyun.jeong@42dot.ai

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
A novel algorithm to detect an optimal set of semantic lines is proposed in this work. We develop two networks: selection network (S-Net) and harmonization network (H-Net). First, S-Net computes the probabilities and
offsets of line candidates. Second, we ﬁlter out irrelevant
lines through a selection-and-removal process. Third, we
construct a complete graph, whose edge weights are computed by H-Net. Finally, we determine a maximal weight
clique representing an optimal set of semantic lines. Moreover, to assess the overall harmony of detected lines, we
propose a novel metric, called HIoU. Experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed algorithm can detect harmonious semantic lines effectively and efﬁciently. Our codes
are available at https://github.com/dongkwonjin/SemanticLine-MWCS.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Figure 1: In each scene, straight lines approximating region
boundaries are shown in (a). Among them, three subsets of
lines are shown in (b), (c), and (d), which are insufﬁcient,
over-segmenting, and sub-optimal for describing the composition of the scene, respectively. In contrast, an optimal
set of semantic lines in (e) convey the composition of the
scene harmoniously.

1. Introduction
A semantic line [16, 19] is deﬁned as a meaningful line,
separating different semantic regions in a scene, which is
approximated by an end-to-end straight line. A group of
semantic lines in an image can be regarded as optimal, when
they convey the composition of the image harmoniously, as
shown in Figure 1(e). Thus, in an optimal set, the lines
should harmonize with one another.
Semantic lines provide important visual cues in highlevel image understanding [7,9,12,18,20,21,36]. In photography, semantic lines, such as horizontal, vertical, and symmetric ones, are essential composition components. Harmony of such lines are closely related to subjective quality
of a photograph [7, 18, 20]. In autonomous driving systems [9, 12, 13], boundaries of road lanes and sidewalks
should be detected reliably to control vehicle maneuvers,
which can be also described by semantic lines. Moreover,
dominant parallel lines intersect at vanishing points [21,36]
under perspective projection, conveying depth impression.
They are also semantic lines [16]. However, it is challenging to detect semantic lines, which are often unobvious and
implied by complex boundaries of semantic regions.

Many techniques have been developed to detect line
segments in a scene by exploiting hand-crafted features
[1, 4, 23, 28] or deep features [15, 22, 31, 37]. However,
they may extract redundant short line segments or focus
on identifying obvious line structures in man-made environments. Recently, several attempts have been made to detect semantic lines [10, 16, 19, 29, 32]. Horizon lines, which
are a speciﬁc type of semantic lines, have been estimated
by CNN-based methods [29, 32]. In [10, 16, 19], semantic
line detectors have been proposed. They have two stages:
line detection and reﬁnement. In the detection stage, deep
line features are extracted to classify line candidates, but
implied lines may be undetected or the computational cost
for extracting discriminative features can be too high. In
the reﬁnement stage, redundant lines are removed through
non-maximum suppression (NMS) or pairwise comparison.
Although these techniques provide promising results, they
may fail to consider the harmony between detected lines and
thus may yield sub-optimal results, as shown in Figure 1(d).
In this paper, a novel algorithm to detect an optimal set

16737

