Multi-Label Activity Recognition using Activity-specific Features and Activity
Correlations
Yanyi Zhang,1 Xinyu Li, 1,2 Ivan Marsic 1
1

Rutgers University–New Brunswick, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
2
Amazon Web Services

Abstract
Multi-label activity recognition is designed for recognizing multiple activities that are performed simultaneously or
sequentially in each video. Most recent activity recognition networks focus on single-activities, that assume only
one activity in each video. These networks extract shared
features for all the activities, which are not designed for
multi-label activities. We introduce an approach to multilabel activity recognition that extracts independent feature
descriptors for each activity and learns activity correlations. This structure can be trained end-to-end and plugged
into any existing network structures for video classification.
Our method outperformed state-of-the-art approaches on
four multi-label activity recognition datasets. To better understand the activity-specific features that the system generated, we visualized these activity-specific features in the
Charades dataset. The code will be released later.

1. Introduction
Activity recognition has been studied in recent years due
to its great potential in real-world applications. Recent activity recognition researches [31, 46, 18, 33] focused on
single-activity recognition assuming that each video contains only one activity, without considering a multi-label
problem where a video may contain multiple activities (concurrent or sequential). Multi-label activity recognition is an
understudied field but has more general real-world use cases
(e.g., sports activity recognition [47, 5], or daily life activity recognition [44]). Most of the recent multi-label activity
recognition methods are derived from structures for single
activities that generate a shared feature vector and apply sigmoid as the output activation function [35, 55, 7, 57, 12, 59].
Although these approaches enable the network to provide
multi-label outputs, the features are not designed for multilabel activities.
We introduce our mechanism to recognize multi-label
activities from another angle by generating independent fea-

Figure 1: System overview using an example from Charades. The system first generates k independent feature snippets (“observations”) that focus on different key regions from the video (arms, blankets, and clothes).
The activity-specific features are then generated by independently combining these observations. The weights of the observations that contribute
to activity-specific features are represented as lines with different colors
(black, red, and blue). The thicker lines denote higher weights. For
example, the activity-specif ic f eatures1 (holding a blanket) are obtained by combining information from observation1 (focuses on arms)
and observation2 (focuses on clothes). The system finally learns correlations between activity-specific features and provide multi-label activity
predictions.

ture descriptors for different activities. We named these feature descriptors “activity-specific features”. This mechanism generates activity-specific features in two stages. The
first-stage network (Figure 1, middle) summarizes the feature maps extracted by the backbone network (3D convolution layers) and generates a set of independent feature
snippets by applying independent spatio-temporal attention
for each snippet. We name these feature snippets “observations”. In the second stage (Figure 1, right), the network learns activity-specific features from different combinations of observations for different activities. In this way,
each activity is represented as an independent set of feature descriptors (activity-specific features). The multi-label
activity predictions can then be made based on the activityspecific features. Unlike most of the previous approaches
[35, 55, 7, 57, 12, 59] that generate a shared feature vec114625

