Learning Compositional Radiance Fields of Dynamic Human Heads
Ziyan Wang1,3
Timur Bagautdinov3
Stephen Lombardi3
Tomas Simon3
Jason Saragih3
Jessica Hodgins1,2
Michael Zollhöfer3
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Facebook AI Research 3 Facebook Reality Labs Research

Abstract
Photorealistic rendering of dynamic humans is an important capability for telepresence systems, virtual shopping, special effects in movies, and interactive experiences
such as games. Recently, neural rendering methods have
been developed to create high-fidelity models of humans
and objects. Some of these methods do not produce results with high-enough fidelity for driveable human models
(Neural Volumes) whereas others have extremely long rendering times (NeRF). We propose a novel compositional 3D
representation that combines the best of previous methods
to produce both higher-resolution and faster results. Our
representation bridges the gap between discrete and continuous volumetric representations by combining a coarse
3D-structure-aware grid of animation codes with a continuous learned scene function that maps every position and
its corresponding local animation code to a view-dependent
emitted radiance and local volume density. Differentiable
volume rendering is employed to compute photo-realistic
novel views of the human head and upper body as well
as to train our novel representation end-to-end using only
2D supervision. In addition, we show that the learned dynamic radiance field can be used to synthesize novel unseen expressions based on a global animation code. Our
approach achieves state-of-the-art results for synthesizing
novel views of dynamic human heads and the upper body.
See our project page1 for more results.

1. Introduction
Modeling, rendering, and animating dynamic human
heads at high fidelity, for example for virtual reality remote communication applications, is a highly challenging
research problem because of the tremendous complexity of
the geometry of the human head and the appearance variations of human skin, hair, teeth, and eyes. Skin exhibits
subsurface scattering and shows fine-scale geometric porelevel detail, while the human eyes and teeth are both translu1 https://ziyanw1.github.io/hybrid nerf/

cent and reflective at the same time. High fidelity modeling
and rendering of human hair is challenging due to its thin
geometric structure and light scattering properties. Importantly, the face is not static, but changes dynamically with
expression and posture.
Recent work on neural rendering learns either discrete
or continuous neural scene representations to achieve viewpoint and animation controllable rendering. Discrete neural
scene representations are based on meshes [32, 15, 19, 8,
31], point clouds [34, 1, 21], voxel grids [17, 29], or multiplane images [36, 22]. However, each of these representations has drawbacks: Meshes, even if dynamically textured [16], struggle to model thin and detailed structures,
such as hair. Point clouds, by design, do not provide connectivity information and thus lead to undefined signals in
areas of sparse sampling, while making explicit occlusion
reasoning challenging. Multi-plane images yield photorealistic rendering results under constrained camera motion,
but produce ’stack of cards’-like artifacts [36] when the
camera moves freely. Volumetric representations [17] based
on discrete uniform voxel grids are capable of modeling thin
structures, e.g., hair, using semi-transparency. While these
approaches achieve impressive results, they are hard to scale
up due to their innate cubic memory complexity.
To circumvent the cubic memory complexity of these approaches, researchers have proposed continuous volumetric scene representations based on fully-connected networks
that map world coordinates to a local feature representation. Scene Representation Networks (SRNs) [30] employ
sphere marching to extract the local feature vector for every
point on the surface, before mapping to pixel colors. This
approach is limited to modeling diffuse objects, making it
unsuitable for representing human heads at high fidelity.
Neural radiance fields [23] have shown impressive results for synthesizing novel views of static scenes at impressive accuracy by mapping world coordinates to viewdependent emitted radiance and local volume density. A
very recent extension [14] speeds up rendering by applying
a static Octree to cull free space. While they have shown
first results on a simple synthetic dynamic sequence, it is
unclear how to extend the approach to learn and render

5704

