Pixel Codec Avatars
Shugao Ma
Tomas Simon
Jason Saragih
Dawei Wang
Yuecheng Li
Fernando De La Torre
Yaser Sheikh
Facebook Reality Labs Research
{shugao, tsimon, jsaragih, dawei.wang, yuecheng.li, ftorre, yasers}@fb.com

Abstract
Telecommunication with photorealistic avatars in virtual
or augmented reality is a promising path for achieving authentic face-to-face communication in 3D over remote physical distances. In this work, we present the Pixel Codec
Avatars (PiCA): a deep generative model of 3D human
faces that achieves state of the art reconstruction performance while being computationally efficient and adaptive to
the rendering conditions during execution. Our model combines two core ideas: (1) a fully convolutional architecture
for decoding spatially varying features, and (2) a renderingadaptive per-pixel decoder. Both techniques are integrated
via a dense surface representation that is learned in a
weakly-supervised manner from low-topology mesh tracking over training images. We demonstrate that PiCA improves reconstruction over existing techniques across testing expressions and views on persons of different gender
and skin tone. Importantly, we show that the PiCA model
is much smaller than the state-of-art baseline model, and
makes multi-person telecommunicaiton possible: on a single Oculus Quest 2 mobile VR headset, 5 avatars are rendered in realtime in the same scene.

1. Introduction

Figure 1. An multi-person configuration for teleconference in VR.
At normal interpersonal distances [20], the head occupies only
a subset of pixels in the display, where the amount of coverage
largely depends on distance to the viewer. Roughly half of the
head is not visible from any viewing angle due to self occlusion.
Our method avoids wasting computation on areas that do not directly contribute to the final image. In first row we show the generated and rasterized geometry, along with texture maps showing
visible pixels from the corresponding views; in the second row we
show the rendered avatars and the percentage of pixels they cover
over the entire image.

Photorealistic Telepresence in Virtual Reality (VR) as
proposed in [10, 26], describes a technology for enabling
authentic communication over remote distances that each
communicating party feels the genuine co-location presence of the others. At the core of this technology is the
Codec Avatar, which is a high fidelity animatable human
face model, implemented as the decoder network of a Variational AutoEncoder (VAE). Imagine a two-way communication setting. At the transmitter end, an encoding process
is performed: cameras mounted on transmitter’s VR headset capture partial facial images and an encoder model encodes the captured images into latent code of the decoder
in realtime. At the receiver end a decoding process is performed: upon receiving the latent code over the internet,

the decoder decodes the avatar’s geometry and appearance
so that the transmitter’s realtime photorealistic face can be
rendered onto the VR display.
Multi-person communication via Photorealistic VR
Telepresence will enable applications that are in great need
in the modern society, such as family re-union over far physical distances in which each member genuinely feels the
co-location presences of the others, or collaboration in remote working where team members can effectively communicate face-to-face in 3D. However, rendering with the
decoder model proposed in [10] does not scale well with
the number of communicating parties. Specifically, a full

64

