MUST-GAN: Multi-level Statistics Transfer for Self-driven Person Image
Generation

1

Tianxiang Ma1,2 , Bo Peng2,3 , Wei Wang2 , Jing Dong2∗
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
3
State Key Laboratory of Information Security, IIE, CAS
tianxiang.ma@cripac.ia.ac.cn, {bo.peng, wwang, jdong}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

Self-driven

Source A Source B

Pa

Target
Pose

Ours

Loss

Pose-guided person image generation usually involves
using paired source-target images to supervise the training, which significantly increases the data preparation effort and limits the application of the models. To deal with
this problem, we propose a novel multi-level statistics transfer model, which disentangles and transfers multi-level appearance features from person images and merges them
with pose features to reconstruct the source person images
themselves. So that the source images can be used as supervision for self-driven person image generation. Specifically,
our model extracts multi-level features from the appearance
encoder and learns the optimal appearance representation
through attention mechanism and attributes statistics. Then
we transfer them to a pose-guided generator for re-fusion
of appearance and pose. Our approach allows for flexible
manipulation of person appearance and pose properties to
perform pose transfer and clothes style transfer tasks. Experimental results on the DeepFashion dataset demonstrate
our method’s superiority compared with state-of-the-art supervised and unsupervised methods. In addition, our approach also performs well in the wild.

1. Introduction
Person image generation has been gaining attention in
recent years, which aims to generate the person image as
realistic as possible, and at the same time, to transfer the
source person image to a target pose. It has great potential
for applications, like virtual try-on, clothing texture editing,
controllable person manipulation, and so on.
Recently, many researchers have contributed to this
topic, with most of the work focusing on pose-guided person image generation [24, 35, 29, 45, 37, 18, 27, 31]. Many
person image generation models [24, 35, 45, 18, 27, 31] use
* Corresponding author.

Ia

MUST-GAN

(a) Training

Pb

Ia

MUST-GAN

(b) Inference of pose transfer

(c) Results of pose transfer and clothes style transfer

Figure 1. Self-driven person image generation and visualization of
pose transfer with clothes style transfer. Our model can be trained
in a self-driven way without paired source-target images and flexibly controls the appearance and pose attributes to achieve pose
transfer and clothes style transfer in inference. The images in (c)
show the generated results using this model for simultaneous pose
and cloths style transfer. Source A is transferred to the target pose,
and its clothes are replaced by source B’s.

paired source-target images for supervised training. However, the paired images require a lot of time and workforce
to collect, limiting the usage scenarios of these models.
There are also some unsupervised person image generation
methods [29, 3, 37], but the quality of their generated images is not fine.
In this paper, we propose a self-driven approach for
person image generation without using any paired sourcetarget images during training, as shown in Figure 1(a).
Specifically, we propose a novel multi-level statistics transfer model, which can disentangle and transfer multi-level
appearance features for person images. The source image
can be used as supervision information for person image
generation without paired source-target training data. Our
method allows for flexible manipulation of pose and appear-

13622

