Refine Myself by Teaching Myself :
Feature Refinement via Self-Knowledge Distillation
Mingi Ji1 Seungjae Shin1 Seunghyun Hwang2 Gibeom Park1 Il-Chul Moon1,3
1

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST)

2

Looko Inc. 3 Summary.AI

qwertgfdcvb@kaist.ac.kr tmdwo0910@kaist.ac.kr shhwang@acloset.app pgb1227@kaist.ac.kr icmoon@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Knowledge distillation is a method of transferring the
knowledge from a pretrained complex teacher model to a
student model, so a smaller network can replace a large
teacher network at the deployment stage. To reduce the necessity of training a large teacher model, the recent literatures introduced a self-knowledge distillation, which trains
a student network progressively to distill its own knowledge without a pretrained teacher network. While Selfknowledge distillation is largely divided into a data augmentation based approach and an auxiliary network based
approach, the data augmentation approach looses its local information in the augmentation process, which hinders its applicability to diverse vision tasks, such as semantic segmentation. Moreover, these knowledge distillation approaches do not receive the refined feature maps,
which are prevalent in the object detection and semantic segmentation community. This paper proposes a novel
self-knowledge distillation method, Feature Refinement via
Self-Knowledge Distillation (FRSKD), which utilizes an
auxiliary self-teacher network to transfer a refined knowledge for the classifier network. Our proposed method,
FRSKD, can utilize both soft label and feature-map distillations for the self-knowledge distillation. Therefore, FRSKD
can be applied to classification, and semantic segmentation, which emphasize preserving the local information.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of FRSKD by enumerating its performance improvements in diverse tasks and
benchmark datasets. The implemented code is available at
https://github.com/MingiJi/FRSKD.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been applied to various ﬁelds of computer vision due to the exponential advancement of convolutional neural networks [7, 27, 12].
To distribute the success at the mobile devices, the vision task needs to overcome the limited computing re-

'
$

'
$

Parameter
Shared
'
$

'
$

Augmentation
(a) Knowledge Distillation

(b) Self-Knowledge Distillation via
Data-augmentation
'
$

'$

'$

'$

'
$

(c) Self-Knowledge Distillation
via Auxiliary Classifiers

'
$

(d) Feature Refinement
via Self-Knowledge Distillation

Figure 1: Comparison of various distillation methods. The
black line is the forward path; the green line is the soft label distillation; and the orange line is the feature distillation. (a) Conventional knowledge distillation method with
pretrained teacher [9, 26, 36, 14, 1]. (b) Self-knowledge
distillation method via data augmentation [32, 35, 18]. (c)
Auxiliary weak classiﬁer based self-knowledge distillation,
which creates a set of layer-wise classiﬁers to generate a
backpropagation signal at each layer, and the layer-wise
classiﬁer produce its estimation from the layer’s feature distillations of the orange line and the logit distillations of the
green line [39]. (d) Our proposed method. The original
classiﬁer provides original feature as an input to the auxiliary self-teacher network (blue blocks). Afterwards, the
self-teacher network distills the reﬁned feature-map to the
original classiﬁer (orange lines).
sources [11, 41]. To solve this problem, the model compression has been a crucial research task, and knowledge
distillation has been a prominent technology with a good
compression and equivalent performances [9].
Knowledge distillation is a method of transferring the
knowledge from a pretrained teacher network to a student
network, so a smaller network can replace a large teacher
network at the deployment stage. Knowledge distillation
utilizes the teacher’s knowledge through receiving either 1)
class predictions as soft labels [9]; 2) penultimate layer outputs [29, 21, 23], or 3) feature-maps including spatial in-

10664

