Explore Image Deblurring via Encoded Blur Kernel Space
Phong Tran1 Anh Tuan Tran1,2 Quynh Phung 1 Minh Hoai1,3
1
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam, 2 VinUniversity, Hanoi, Vietnam,
3
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11790, USA
{v.phongtt15,v.anhtt152,v.quynhpt29,v.hoainm}@vinai.io

Abstract

Blurry face

This paper introduces a method to encode the blur operators of an arbitrary dataset of sharp-blur image pairs
into a blur kernel space. Assuming the encoded kernel
space is close enough to in-the-wild blur operators, we propose an alternating optimization algorithm for blind image deblurring. It approximates an unseen blur operator by a kernel in the encoded space and searches for the
corresponding sharp image. Unlike recent deep-learningbased methods, our system can handle unseen blur kernel, while avoiding using complicated handcrafted priors
on the blur operator often found in classical methods. Due
to the method’s design, the encoded kernel space is fully
differentiable, thus can be easily adopted in deep neural network models. Moreover, our method can be used
for blur synthesis by transferring existing blur operators
from a given dataset into a new domain. Finally, we provide experimental results to confirm the effectiveness of
the proposed method. The code is available at https:
//github.com/VinAIResearch/blur-kernelspace-exploring.

1. Introduction
Motion blur occurs due to camera shake or rapid movement of objects in a scene. Image deblurring is the task
of removing the blur artifacts to improve the quality of the
captured image. Image deblurring is an important task with
many applications, especially during the current age of mobile devices and handheld cameras. Image deblurring, however, is still an unsolved problem, despite much research
effort over the past decades.
Mathematically, the task of image deblurring is to recover the sharp image x given a blurry image y. One can
assume the below mathematical model that relates x and y:
y = F̂(x, k) + ⌘ ≈ F̂(x, k),

(1)

where F̂(·, k) is the blur operator with the blur kernel k,
and ⌘ is noise. In the simplest form, F̂(·, k) is assumed to

?

blur kernel
space

Sharp face

Figure 1. The space of blur kernels is the missing element for
successful blur removal and synthesis. Previous image debluring
methods either overlooked the importance of this kernel space or
made inadequate assumption about it. In this paper, we propose to
learn this blur kernel space from a dataset of sharp-blurry image
pairs (orange arrows) and leverage this encoded space for image
deblurring (blue arrows).

be a convolution function with k being a convolution kernel
and ⌘ being white Gaussian noise. Given a blurry image
y, the deblurring task is to recover the sharp image x and
optionally the blur operator F̂(·, k).
A popular approach to recover the sharp image is to use
the Maximum A Posterior (MAP) estimate. That is to find
x and k to maximize the posterior propbability P(x, k|y)
assuming F̂ is known. This is equivalent to optimizing:
x, k = argmax P(y|x, k)P(x)P(k).

(2)

x,k

However, this is an ill-posed problem and there are infinitely many pairs of (k, x) that lead to the same probability P(y|x, k), so the key aspect of the above MAP approach
is to define proper models for the prior distributions P(x)
and P(k). In fact, many deblurring methods focus on either
designing handcrafted priors for x and k [2, 12, 20, 27] or
learning the deep image prior [29, 37]. However, all of these
works assume the blur operator is a convolutional operator,

11956

