Binary TTC: A Temporal Geofence for Autonomous Navigation
Orazio Gallo1
1
NVIDIA

Jan Kautz1
2
UC Santa Barbara

Pradeep Sen2

Abstract

1. Introduction
Path planning, whether for robotics or automotive applications, requires accurate perception, which in turn, benefits from depth information. Many modalities exist to infer
depth. Strategies such as lidar estimates depth accurately
but only at sparse locations, in addition to being expensive. Depth can also be estimated with strategies such as
stereo [34], but these introduce issues such as calibration
drift over time.
An alternative is to use a monocular camera—an attractive, low-cost solution, with light maintenance requirements. The motion of the camera induces optical flow between consecutive frames, which carries information on the
scene’s depth. Depth, however, can only be estimated in the
constrained case of static scenes. For dynamic scenes, the
2D flow of a pixel is a function of its depth, its velocity, and
the velocity of the camera. Disentangling these three components is an under-constrained and challenging problem.
This work was done while A. Badki was interning at NVIDIA.
Project page: https://github.com/NVlabs/BiTTC

I0

Q

I1

C

I0

Q

I1

C

B
τ ≤ 0.8 s

moving towards

Time-to-contact (TTC), the time for an object to collide
with the observer’s plane, is a powerful tool for path planning: it is potentially more informative than the depth, velocity, and acceleration of objects in the scene—even for
humans. TTC presents several advantages, including requiring only a monocular, uncalibrated camera. However,
regressing TTC for each pixel is not straightforward, and
most existing methods make over-simplifying assumptions
about the scene. We address this challenge by estimating
TTC via a series of simpler, binary classifications. We predict with low latency whether the observer will collide with
an obstacle within a certain time, which is often more critical than knowing exact, per-pixel TTC. For such scenarios,
our method offers a temporal geofence in 6.4 ms—over 25×
faster than existing methods. Our approach can also estimate per-pixel TTC with arbitrarily fine quantization (including continuous values), when the computational budget
allows for it. To the best of our knowledge, our method is
the first to offer TTC information (binary or coarsely quantized) at sufficiently high frame-rates for practical use.

τ ≤2s
moving away

Abhishek Badki1,2

B

Figure 1: Given I0 and I1 , our binary time-to-contact (TTC) estimation acts as a temporal geofence detecting objects that will
collide with the camera plane within a given time, B . It only
takes 6.4 ms to compute. Our method can also output quantized
TTC, Q , and continuous TTC, C .

Previous approaches either ignore dynamic regions [35], or
use strong scene priors [26, 44, 46, 43, 25] to hallucinate
their depth. Do we really need to disentangle them? The
role of perception is to inform decisions. An object moving towards the camera is more critical than another that is
potentially closer, but moving away from the camera. Differently put, predicting the time at which an object would
make contact with the camera may be more valuable than
knowing its actual depth, velocity, or acceleration [22].
In fact, time-to-contact (TTC), the time for an object to
collide with the camera plane under the current velocity
conditions, is a traditional concept in psychophysics [38,
14] as well as computer vision [37, 5]. TTC can be estimated from the ratio of an object’s depth and its velocity
relative to the camera, even when the problem of regressing
either one independently is ill-posed. However, TTC estimation has its own challenges, forcing most of the existing
approaches to severely constrain their scope. For instance,
they assume that the scene is static, or that a mask for dynamic objects is provided [16, 32]. The recent approach
by Yang and Ramanan tackles some of these challenges by
learning a mapping between optical flow and TTC directly,
thus producing a per-pixel TTC estimate [42]. However,
it relies on accurate optical flow estimation and inherits its
limitations, including its heavy computational load.
Unlike most existing approaches, we side-step the need
to explicitly compute the optical flow. Our learning-based
approach estimates per-pixel TTC directly from images.
We leverage the relationship between an object’s TTC and
the ratio of the size of its image in different frames [5, 15].

12946

