Transformer Interpretability Beyond Attention Visualization
Hila Chefer1 Shir Gur1 Lior Wolf1,2
1
The School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
2
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Abstract
Self-attention techniques, and specifically Transformers,
are dominating the field of text processing and are becoming increasingly popular in computer vision classification
tasks. In order to visualize the parts of the image that
led to a certain classification, existing methods either rely
on the obtained attention maps or employ heuristic propagation along the attention graph. In this work, we propose a novel way to compute relevancy for Transformer
networks. The method assigns local relevance based on
the Deep Taylor Decomposition principle and then propagates these relevancy scores through the layers. This
propagation involves attention layers and skip connections,
which challenge existing methods. Our solution is based
on a specific formulation that is shown to maintain the total relevancy across layers. We benchmark our method
on very recent visual Transformer networks, as well as
on a text classification problem, and demonstrate a clear
advantage over the existing explainability methods. Our
code is available at: https://github.com/hilachefer/Transformer-Explainability.

1. Introduction
Transformers and derived methods [41, 9, 22, 30] are
currently the state-of-the-art methods in almost all NLP
benchmarks. The power of these methods has led to their
adoption in the field of language and vision [23, 40, 38].
More recently, Transformers have become a leading tool
in traditional computer vision tasks, such as object detection [4] and image recognition [6, 11]. The importance of
Transformer networks necessitates tools for the visualization of their decision process. Such a visualization can aid
in debugging the models, help verify that the models are fair
and unbiased, and enable downstream tasks.
The main building block of Transformer networks are
self-attention layers [29, 7], which assign a pairwise attention value between every two tokens. In NLP, a token is
typically a word or a word part. In vision, each token can
be associated with a patch [11, 4]. A common practice when

trying to visualize Transformer models is, therefore, to consider these attentions as a relevancy score [41, 43, 4]. This is
usually done for a single attention layer. Another option is
to combine multiple layers. Simply averaging the attentions
obtained for each token, would lead to blurring of the signal and would not consider the different roles of the layers:
deeper layers are more semantic, but each token accumulates additional context each time self-attention is applied.
The rollout method [1] is an alternative, which reassigns all
attention scores by considering the pairwise attentions and
assuming that attentions are combined linearly into subsequent contexts. The method seems to improve results over
the utilization of a single attention layer. However, as we
show, by relying on simplistic assumptions, irrelevant tokens often become highlighted.
In this work, we follow the line of work that assigns relevancy and propagates it, such that the sum of relevancy
is maintained throughout the layers [27]. While the application of such methods to Transformers has been attempted [42], this was done in a partial way that does not
propagate attention throughout all layers.
Transformer networks heavily rely on skip connection
and attention operators, both involving the mixing of two
activation maps, and each leading to unique challenges.
Moreover, Transformers apply non-linearities other than
ReLU, which result in both positive and negative features.
Because of the non-positive values, skip connections lead,
if not carefully handled, to numerical instabilities. Methods such as LRP [3] for example, tend to fail in such cases.
Self-attention layers form a challenge since a naive propagation through these would not maintain the total amount of
relevancy.
We handle these challenges by first introducing a relevancy propagation rule that is applicable to both positive
and negative attributions. Second, we present a normalization term for non-parametric layers, such as “add” (e.g.
skip-connection) and matrix multiplication. Third, we integrate the attention and the relevancy scores, and combine
the integrated results for multiple attention blocks.
Many of the interpretability methods used in computer
vision are not class-specific in practice, i.e., return the same

782

