FS-Net: Fast Shape-based Network for Category-Level 6D Object Pose
Estimation with Decoupled Rotation Mechanism
Wei Chen 1
2

Xi Jia1

Hyung Jin Chang1

Jinming Duan1

Linlin Shen2

Aleš Leonardis1

1
School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham
Computer Vision Institute, College of Computer Science and Software Engineering, Shenzhen University
{ wxc795, X.Jia.1, a.leonardis}@cs.bham.ac.uk, {H.J.Chang,J.Duan
}@bham.ac.uk,llshen@szu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Estimating 6D object pose plays an essential role in
many computer vision tasks such as augmented reality
1 The code is at https://github.com/DC1991/FS-Net

RGB-based

Translation
& size

3D
mask

Latent
feature

CNN

3D segmentation &
Autoencoder

+

3D deformation

Depth
RGB

In this paper, we focus on category-level 6D pose and
size estimation from a monocular RGB-D image. Previous methods suffer from inefficient category-level pose feature extraction, which leads to low accuracy and inference
speed. To tackle this problem, we propose a fast shapebased network (FS-Net) with efficient category-level feature extraction for 6D pose estimation. First, we design an
orientation aware autoencoder with 3D graph convolution
for latent feature extraction. Thanks to the shift and scaleinvariance properties of 3D graph convolution, the learned
latent feature is insensitive to point shift and object size.
Then, to efficiently decode category-level rotation information from the latent feature, we propose a novel decoupled
rotation mechanism that employs two decoders to complementarily access the rotation information. For translation
and size, we estimate them by two residuals: the difference
between the mean of object points and ground truth translation, and the difference between the mean size of the category and ground truth size, respectively. Finally, to increase
the generalization ability of the FS-Net, we propose an online box-cage based 3D deformation mechanism to augment
the training data. Extensive experiments on two benchmark
datasets show that the proposed method achieves state-ofthe-art performance in both category- and instance-level
6D object pose estimation. Especially in category-level
pose estimation, without extra synthetic data, our method
outperforms existing methods by 6.3% on the NOCS-REAL
dataset 1 .

Residual-based

Rot
aixs1
Rot
aixs2

Shape-based

Figure 1. FS-Net comprises different networks for different tasks.
The RGB-based network is used for 2D object detection, and the
shape-based network is used for 3D segmentation and rotation estimation. The residual-based network is used for translation and
size estimation with segmented points.

[19, 20], virtual reality [2], and smart robotic arm [46, 35].
For instance-level 6D pose estimation, in which training set
and test set contain the same objects, huge progress has
been made in recent years [41, 28, 21, 15, 10]. However,
category-level 6D pose estimation remains challenging as
the object shape and color are various in the same category.
Existing methods addressed this problem by mapping the
different objects in the same category into a uniform model
via RGB feature or RGB-D fusion feature. For example,
Wang et al. [40] trained a modified Mask R-CNN [9] to predict the normalized object coordinate space (NOCS) map of
different objects based on RGB feature, and then computed
the pose with observed depth and NOCS map by Umeyama
algorithm [36]. Chen et al. [4] proposed to learn a canonical
shape space (CASS) to tackle intra-class shape variations
with RGB-D fusion feature [39]. Tian et al. [34] trained a
network to predict the NOCS map of different objects, with
the uniform shape prior learned from a shape collection, and
RGB-D fusion feature [39].
Although these methods achieved state-of-the-art performance, there are still two remaining issues. Firstly, the

1581

