Three Birds with One Stone:
Multi-Task Temporal Action Detection via Recycling Temporal Annotations
Zhihui Li

Lina Yao

School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of New South Wales
zhihuilics@gmail.com, lina.yao@unsw.edu.au

Abstract
Temporal action detection on unconstrained videos has
seen significant research progress in recent years. Deep
learning has achieved enormous success in this direction.
However, collecting large-scale temporal detection datasets
to ensuring promising performance in the real-world is a laborious, impractical and time consuming process. Accordingly, we present a novel improved temporal action localization model that is better able to take advantage of limited
labeled data available. Specifically, we design two auxiliary tasks by reconstructing the available label information
and then facilitate the learning of the temporal action detection model. Each task generates their supervision signal by recycling the original annotations, and are jointly
trained with the temporal action detection model in a multitask learning fashion. Note that the proposed approach can
be pluggable to any region proposal based temporal action detection models. We conduct extensive experiments on
three benchmark datasets, namely THUMOS’14 [15], Charades [35] and ActivityNet [14]. Our experimental results
confirm the effectiveness of the proposed model.

1. Introduction
Video collections have been proliferating with the advance of devices with video recording capabilities. Most of
these videos are untrimmed and only a small part contains
events of interest, while the major part is background. In
continuous videos, temporal action detection (TAD) refers
to the task of simultaneously recognizing actions and precisely localizing them in time. Due to its apparent complexity and enormous usefulness in real-world applications
including video surveillance, video summarization and skill
assessment, TAD has drawn attention from researchers
in the machine learning and computer vision communities [41, 32]. When sufficient labeled training data exists, deep convolutional neural networks can achieve re-

markable performance [18, 11, 48]. However, it is costly,
time-consuming and tedious to acquire a large amount of
segmentation-level label information in continuous videos
for real-world applications.
Researchers have explored different ways to address the
problem of labeled training data shortages for deep learning approaches. Among these approaches, multi-task learning (MTL) [25, 28, 4] is one the most representative examples. MTL mitigates the label shortage problem by training
multiple relevant tasks at the same time [25, 17]. Its goal
is to jointly train multiple relevant tasks with limited supervision information in order to improve the performance
of each task [25]. Its effectiveness has been widely explored. As the number of related tasks increases, MTL is
able to decrease the upper bound of the amount of labeled
training data required, thereby allowing better generalization. MTL approaches can be broadly grouped into two
categories. The first category aims to maximise task-wise
performance by optimising the structures of weight sharing, while the second focuses on weight clustering based on
task-similarity. Both of these approaches have been widely
applied in the field of computer vision tasks including person re-identification [36], depth estimation and scene parsing [40, 44], etc. For example, we can employ Mask RCNN [12] to improve the performance of object detection
by jointly training an instance segmentation task. However,
due to the expensive cost of segmentation mask labels, this
approach is of limited practical benefit.
In this paper, we propose a novel temporal action detection framework that leverages the benefits of multi-task
learning. More specifically, we build the proposed model
from a widely used supervised temporal action detection
framework [41], where a temporal proposal based detector
is provided along with segmentation label information. Using the limited supervision information provided, we construct two auxiliary tasks (e.g. multi-action classification
and localisation confidence estimation), which are used to
improve the performance of temporal action detection in a
multi-task learning fashion. These two tasks generate their

4751

