Learning Goals from Failure
Dave Epstein and Carl Vondrick
Columbia University
aha.cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
We introduce a framework that predicts the goals behind
observable human action in video. Motivated by evidence
in developmental psychology, we leverage video of unintentional action to learn video representations of goals without
direct supervision. Our approach models videos as contextual trajectories that represent both low-level motion and
high-level action features. Experiments and visualizations
show our trained model is able to predict the underlying
goals in video of unintentional action. We also propose a
method to “automatically correct” unintentional action by
leveraging gradient signals of our model to adjust latent
trajectories. Although the model is trained with minimal
supervision, it is competitive with or outperforms baselines
trained on large (supervised) datasets of successfully executed goals, showing that observing unintentional action is
crucial to learning about goals in video.

1. Introduction
Goal-directed action is all around us. Even though Figure 1 shows a person performing an unconventional action
(heating a wine bottle with a blowtorch), we cannot help but
to perceive the action as rational in the context of the goal
(to open the bottle).
Predicting the goal of action may seem challenging be-

cause future goals are not directly observable in video. However, in a series of papers, developmental psychologists
Amanda Woodward and Michael Tomasello demonstrated
that children reason about goals before their second birthday [48, 56], and this reasoning plays a key role in rapid
development of communicative skills [49] and mental representations of the world [2]. Despite the relative ease of this
task for children, machine recognition of goals has remained
challenging.
The hypothesis underlying this paper is that examples of
failure are key missing pieces in action recognition systems.
Without observing unintentional action, we cannot expect
models to discriminate goals from actions. Examples demonstrating unintentional action are necessary to decouple these
two notions, separating between the visible action and the
latent goals. As Efros has been telling us all along, it is all
about the data [20], and negative data doubly so [59].
The main observation behind our approach is that natural
video will contain abundant and rich examples of both intentional and unintentional action [9], which we can leverage for
learning. In our model, video is represented as a trajectory,
and goals are encoded as the path for the trajectory. Given examples of videos with variable success, we present a model
that learns goal-oriented video representations by discriminating between success and failure. Our model captures both
motion and relational features through an attention-based
transformer architecture, allowing end-to-end training.
Our experiments show that failure data is crucial for learn-

Figure 1: What are they doing? While just the action is observable (heating the bottle), we still predict the goal behind the
action (to open the bottle). In this paper, we learn from failure examples to learn representations of goals in video.

11194

