Energy-Based Learning for Scene Graph Generation
Mohammed Suhail1,2 *
Abhay Mittal4
Behjat Siddiquie4
Chris Broaddus4
Jayan Eledath4
Gerard Medioni4
Leonid Sigal1,2,3
1
2
3
4
University of British Columbia
Vector Institute for AI
Canada CIFAR AI Chair
Amazon
suhail33@cs.ubc.ca

mrmittal@amazon.com

eledathj@amazon.com

behjats@amazon.com

medioni@amazon.com

Abstract

chrispb@amazon.com

lsigal@cs.ubc.ca

wave

rock

surfboard

1. Introduction
A scene graph is a graph-based representation of an image which encodes objects along with the relationships between them. Such a representation allows for a comprehensive understanding of images that is useful in several vision
applications, including visual question answering [5, 22],
image captioning [3, 28] and scene synthesis [4, 6].
A typical scene graph generation model comprises of
the object detection network, which extracts object regions
and corresponding features, and a message passing network
with nodes initialized with these region features and edges
accounting for the potential relations among them. The
features are refined, through context aggregation, and then
† Code and pre-trained models available at https://github.
com/mods333/energy-based-scene-graph.
* Work done while interning at Amazon.

ho

ld

riding

on

man

ha

s

s

ha

arm

hair

(b) Cross entropy based training

wave

rock

surfboard

st

s
arm

(a) Input Image

rr

ng

yi

in front of

di

on

ca

an

ng

near

ha

Traditional scene graph generation methods are trained
using cross-entropy losses that treat objects and relationships as independent entities. Such a formulation, however,
ignores the structure in the output space, in an inherently
structured prediction problem. In this work, we introduce
a novel energy-based learning framework for generating
scene graphs. The proposed formulation allows for efficiently incorporating the structure of scene graphs in the
output space. This additional constraint in the learning
framework acts as an inductive bias and allows models to
learn efficiently from a small number of labels. We use the
proposed energy-based framework † to train existing stateof-the-art models and obtain a significant performance improvement, of up to 21% and 27%, on the Visual Genome
[9] and GQA [5] benchmark datasets, respectively. Furthermore, we showcase the learning efficiency of the proposed framework by demonstrating superior performance
in the zero- and few-shot settings where data is scarce.

in
g

near

man

ha

s
hair

(c) Energy based training

Figure 1. Scene Graph Generation: Figure shows scene graphs
generated by a VCTree [22] model trained using conventional
cross-entropy loss (purple) and our proposed energy-based framework (green). We make two crucial observations. First, the model
trained using cross-entropy loss is incapable of consistent structural reasoning (riding is not possible given the rest of the
graph). Second, the trained model tends to be biased, favoring
more frequent relations (e.g., on). Our proposed energy-based
framework is designed, and able, to address these shortcomings.

classified to produce both object (node) and relation (edge)
labels. These networks are often trained end-to-end by minimizing individual cross-entropy losses on both sets of labels. A major drawback of such an approach is that quality
of prediction (loss) is simply proportional to the number of
correctly predicted labels and ignores the rich structure of
the scene graph output space (e.g., correlation or exclusion
among object and relation label sets). In addition, the imbalance in the number of training samples for the relations
results in dominant relations being heavily favored, leading
to biased relation prediction at test time [21].
Figure 1 (b) illustrates the scene graph generated by a
model [22] trained using the cross-entropy loss. Both the

13936

