Clusformer: A Transformer based Clustering Approach to
Unsupervised Large-scale Face and Visual Landmark Recognition

1
1

Xuan-Bac Nguyen1 , Duc Toan Bui1 , Chi Nhan Duong2 , Tien D. Bui2 , Khoa Luu3
VinAI Research, Vietnam 2 Concordia University, Canada 3 University of Arkansas, USA

{v.bacnx2, v.toanbd1}@vinai.io, 2 {dcnhan@ieee.org, bui@encs.concordia.ca}, 3 khoaluu@uark.edu

Abstract
The research in automatic unsupervised visual clustering has received considerable attention over the last couple years. It aims at explaining distributions of unlabeled visual images by clustering them via a parameterized
model of appearance. Graph Convolutional Neural Networks (GCN) have recently been one of the most popular
clustering methods. However, it has reached some limitations. Firstly, it is quite sensitive to hard or noisy samples. Secondly, it is hard to investigate with various deep
network models due to its computational training time. Finally, it is hard to design an end-to-end training model between the deep feature extraction and GCN clustering modeling. This work therefore presents the Clusformer, a simple but new perspective of Transformer based approach,
to automatic visual clustering via its unsupervised attention mechanism. The proposed method is able to robustly
deal with noisy or hard samples. It is also flexible and effective to collaborate with different deep network models
with various model sizes in an end-to-end framework. The
proposed method is evaluated on two popular large-scale
visual databases, i.e. Google Landmark and MS-Celeb1M face database, and outperforms prior unsupervised
clustering methods. Code will be available at https:
//github.com/VinAIResearch/Clusformer

1. Introduction
The research in automatic unsupervised visual clustering, e.g. human faces or landmark photos, has gained considerable prominence lately thanks to the nature of huge
amount of available unlabeled data and the demand of consistent visual recognition algorithms across various challenging conditions. Indeed, stand-alone visual recognition
algorithms, e.g. Face Recognition [36] or Visual Landmark
Recognition [38], are important in practical applications
where there is significant difference between probe and
gallery visual photos [23]. In Face Recognition, the algo-

Figure 1. The proposed Clusformer uses the self-attention mechanism to detect the hard, noisy samples in a cluster, while prior
methods use GCNs that are unable to address this problem completely.

rithms of face recognition in a supervised manner have now
become mature. Compared to the state-of-the-art (SOTA)
results of supervised Face Recognition algorithms [7, 15],
the number of studies in face clustering are still limited. The
solutions are still not as good as supervised methods.
Many complex factors could affect the appearance of a
visual photo, e.g. illumination, poses, occlusions, in realworld scenarios. Providing tolerance to these factors is
the main challenge for accurate visual clustering methods.
Among these factors, lacking of robust features is often the
most important factor to deal with. Visual data is usually
easy to collect but costly to annotate. Therefore, Graph
Convolutional Networks (GCNs) have become one of the
most popular methods to tackle visual clustering in an unsupervised manner. However, recent visual clustering methods, e.g face clustering [14, 27, 18, 40, 39], still have some
limitations, e.g. accurate clustering, algorithm complexity
or computational time.

1.1. Contributions of This Work
This work presents the new Clusformer, a simple but
novel perspective of Transformer based approach, to automatically cluster visual samples in an unsupervised manner. The method is able to robustly deal with noisy and hard
samples thanks to its effective self-attention mechanism. To

10847

