Dynamic Region-Aware Convolution
Jin Chen∗, Xijun Wang∗, Zichao Guo†, Xiangyu Zhang, Jian Sun
MEGVII Technology
{chenjin, wangxijun, guozichao, zhangxiangyu, sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract
We propose a new convolution called Dynamic RegionAware Convolution (DRConv), which can automatically assign multiple filters to corresponding spatial regions where
features have similar representation. In this way, DRConv outperforms standard convolution in modeling semantic variations. Standard convolutional layer can increase
the number of filers to extract more visual elements but results in high computational cost. More gracefully, our DRConv transfers the increasing channel-wise filters to spatial dimension with learnable instructor, which not only improve representation ability of convolution, but also maintains computational cost and the translation-invariance as
standard convolution dose. DRConv is an effective and elegant method for handling complex and variable spatial information distribution. It can substitute standard convolution in any existing networks for its plug-and-play property,
especially to power convolution layers in efficient networks.
We evaluate DRConv on a wide range of models (MobileNet
series, ShuffleNetV2, etc.) and tasks (Classification, Face
Recognition, Detection and Segmentation). On ImageNet
classification, DRConv-based ShuffleNetV2-0.5× achieves
state-of-the-art performance of 67.1% at 46M multiplyadds level with 6.3% relative improvement.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from powerful representation ability, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have made significant
progress in image classification, face recognition, object detection and many other applications. The powerful representation ability of CNNs stems from that different filters
are responsible for extracting information at different level
of abstraction. However, current mainstream convolutional
operations perform in filter sharing manner across spatial
domain, so that more effective information can only be cap∗ Equal contribution. This work is supported by The National Key Research and Development Program of China (No. 2017YFA0700800) and
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI).
† Corresponding author.

argmax(∙)

Conv 𝑘 × 𝑘

guided feature

𝑚

Convs

𝑋

𝑊0

𝑊1

𝑊2

𝐺(𝑋)

𝑊0 𝑊1 𝑊2

guided mask

⋯

Y

Figure 1. Illustration of DRConv with kernel size k × k and region
number m. We get guided feature from X with standard k × k
convolution and get m filters from filter generator module G(·).
The spatial dimension is divided into m regions as guided mask
shows. Every region has individual filter Wi which is shared in
this region and we execute k × k convolution with corresponding
filter in these regions of X to output Y .

tured when these operations are applied repeatedly (e.g., increasing channels and depth with more filters). This repeating manner has several limitations. First, it is computationally inefficient. Second, it causes optimization difficulties
that need to be carefully addressed [13, 33].
Different from the filter sharing methods, to model more
visual elements, some studies focus on making use of the
diversity of semantic information by using multiple filters
in spatial dimension. [10, 29] came up with alternative convolutions to possess individual filter at each pixel in spatial dimension, and we collectively call them local convolution for convenience. Therefore, the feature of each
position will be treated differently, which is more effective to extract the spatial feature than standard convolution.
[29, 27, 26] have shown local convolution’s power on face
recognition task. Although local convolution doesn’t increase the computation complexity compared with standard
convolution, it has two fatal drawbacks. One is to bring

8064

