ReDet: A Rotation-equivariant Detector for Aerial Object Detection
Jiaming Han∗ , Jian Ding∗ , Nan Xue, Gui-Song Xia
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China
{hanjiaming, jian.ding, xuenan, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently, object detection in aerial images has gained
much attention in computer vision. Different from objects
in natural images, aerial objects are often distributed with
arbitrary orientation. Therefore, the detector requires more
parameters to encode the orientation information, which
are often highly redundant and inefficient. Moreover, as ordinary CNNs do not explicitly model the orientation variation, large amounts of rotation augmented data is needed
to train an accurate object detector. In this paper, we
propose a Rotation-equivariant Detector (ReDet) to address these issues, which explicitly encodes rotation equivariance and rotation invariance. More precisely, we incorporate rotation-equivariant networks into the detector
to extract rotation-equivariant features, which can accurately predict the orientation and lead to a huge reduction of model size. Based on the rotation-equivariant features, we also present Rotation-invariant RoI Align (RiRoI
Align), which adaptively extracts rotation-invariant features
from equivariant features according to the orientation of
RoI. Extensive experiments on several challenging aerial
image datasets DOTA-v1.0, DOTA-v1.5 and HRSC2016,
show that our method can achieve state-of-the-art performance on the task of aerial object detection. Compared
with previous best results, our ReDet gains 1.2, 3.5 and
2.6 mAP on DOTA-v1.0, DOTA-v1.5 and HRSC2016 respectively while reducing the number of parameters by 60%
(313 Mb vs. 121 Mb). The code is available at: https:
//github.com/csuhan/ReDet.

1. Introduction
This paper studies the problem of object detection in
aerial images, a recently-emerged challenging problem in
The study of this paper is funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under grant contracts No.61922065,
No.61771350 and No.41820104006 and 61871299. It is also supported
by Supercomputing Center of Wuhan University.
∗ Equal contribution.
Corresponding author: Gui-Song Xia (guisong.xia@whu.edu.cn).

not invariant
to rotation

𝑇𝑇𝑟𝑟

×

CNN
features

𝑇𝑇𝑟𝑟

Input
image

𝑇𝑇𝑟𝑟

rotation-invariant
features

Rotation-equivariant
features

orientation
spatial
alignment

RRoI Align

spatial
alignment

orientation
alignment

RiRoI Align

Figure 1. Illustration of our method (top) and comparisons of
RRoI warping (bottom). CNN features are not equivariant to
the rotation Tr , i.e., feeding a rotated image to CNNs is not the
same as rotating feature maps of the original image. Therefore,
the corresponding RoI features are not invariant to rotation. In
contrast, our method adopts rotation-equivariant CNNs (ReCNN)
to extract rotation-equivariant features. Let I and Φ be the input
and ReCNN respectively, the equivariance of our method can be
expressed as: Φ(Tr I) = Tr Φ(I), i.e., applying a rotation Tr to
the image I is the same as the rotation of features. Since we have
obtained rotation-equivariant features, rotation-invariant features
can be extracted by RRoI warping. While RRoI Align can only
achieve rotation invariance in the spatial dimension, we present
a novel Rotation-invariant RoI (RiRoI) Align to extract rotationinvariant features in both spatial and orientation dimensions.

computer vision [35]. Different from objects in nature images, objects in aerial images are often distributed with arbitrary orientation. To cope with these challenges, aerial
object detection are usually formulated as an oriented object detection task by relying on Oriented Bounding Boxes
(OBBs) representation instead of using Horizontal Bounding Boxes (HBBs) [7, 35, 38, 40].
Recently, many well-designed oriented object detectors
have been proposed and reported promising results on challenging aerial image datasets [21, 35]. In order to achieve
accurate object detection in unconstrained aerial images,
most of them are devoted to extract rotation-invariant features [7, 10, 22, 37]. In practice, Rotated RoI (RRoI) warp-

2786

