Neural Reprojection Error: Merging Feature Learning and
Camera Pose Estimation

1

Hugo Germain1
Vincent Lepetit1
Guillaume Bourmaud2
LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-vallée, France
2
IMS, University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP, CNRS, France

{hugo.germain, vincent.lepetit}@enpc.fr

guillaume.bourmaud@u-bordeaux.fr

Abstract
Absolute camera pose estimation is usually addressed by
sequentially solving two distinct subproblems: First a feature matching problem that seeks to establish putative 2D3D correspondences, and then a Perspective-n-Point problem that minimizes, w.r.t. the camera pose, the sum of socalled Reprojection Errors (RE). We argue that generating
putative 2D-3D correspondences 1) leads to an important
loss of information that needs to be compensated as far as
possible, within RE, through the choice of a robust loss and
the tuning of its hyperparameters and 2) may lead to an RE
that conveys erroneous data to the pose estimator. In this
paper, we introduce the Neural Reprojection Error (NRE) as
a substitute for RE. NRE allows to rethink the camera pose
estimation problem by merging it with the feature learning
problem, hence leveraging richer information than 2D-3D
correspondences and eliminating the need for choosing a
robust loss and its hyperparameters. Thus NRE can be used
as training loss to learn image descriptors tailored for pose
estimation. We also propose a coarse-to-fine optimization
method able to very efficiently minimize a sum of NRE terms
w.r.t. the camera pose. We experimentally demonstrate that
NRE is a good substitute for RE as it significantly improves
both the robustness and the accuracy of the camera pose estimate while being computationally and memory highly efficient. From a broader point of view, we believe this new way
of merging deep learning and 3D geometry may be useful in
other computer vision applications. Source code and model
weights will be made available at hugogermain.com/nre.

1. Introduction
Absolute camera pose estimation is a fundamental step
to many computer vision applications, such as Structurefrom-Motion (SfM) [19, 33, 34, 39] and visual localization [32, 37, 38]. Given a pre-acquired 3D model of the
world, we aim at estimating the most accurate camera pose

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Neural Reprojection Error (NRE) as a substitute for
Reprojection Error (RE): (a) Given a 3D point u, a query image
I and its ground truth camera pose, u can be reprojected into the
image plane of I to obtain a 2D point ×. (b) RE takes as input a
camera pose and a putative 2D-3D correspondence between u and
a 2D location + in I, reprojects u to obtain a 2D point q, computes the euclidean distance between + and q and finally applies
a robust loss function (shown in turquoise as a function of q). In
ambiguous (middle) or multimodal (bottom) cases, generating a
2D-3D correspondence may lead to a loss function that conveys
erroneous data to the pose estimator. (c) NRE does not rely on
2D-3D correspondences, thus + does not exist anymore. Instead,
NRE employs a dense loss map (shown in turquoise as a function
of q) that contains much more information than RE, especially in
ambiguous and multimodal cases. As a result, a pose estimator is
significantly more accurate and robust using NRE than RE.

of an unseen query image. In practice, as illustrated on the
left hand-side of Figure 2, this problem is often addressed
by sequentially solving two distinct subproblems: First, a
feature matching problem that seeks to establish putative
2D-3D correspondences between the 3D point cloud and
the image to be localized, and then a Perspective-n-Point
(PnP) problem that uses these correspondences as inputs to
minimize a sum of so-called reprojection errors w.r.t. the
camera pose. The Reprojection Error (RE) is a function of

414

