3DCaricShop: A Dataset and A Baseline Method for Single-view
3D Caricature Face Reconstruction
Yuda Qiu1
Xiaojie Xu1
Lingteng Qiu1
Yan Pan1
Yushuang Wu1
Weikai Chen2
Xiaoguang Han1, *
†
2
1
SRIBD, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
Tencent Game AI Research Center

Abstract
Caricature is an artistic representation that deliberately
exaggerates the distinctive features of a human face to convey humor or sarcasm. However, reconstructing a 3D caricature from a 2D caricature image remains a challenging
task, mostly due to the lack of data. We propose to ﬁll
this gap by introducing 3DCaricShop, the ﬁrst large-scale
3D caricature dataset that contains 2000 high-quality diversiﬁed 3D caricatures manually crafted by professional
artists. 3DCaricShop also provides rich annotations including a paired 2D caricature image, camera parameters and 3D facial landmarks. To demonstrate the advantage of 3DCaricShop, we present a novel baseline approach for single-view 3D caricature reconstruction. To
ensure a faithful reconstruction with plausible face deformations, we propose to connect the good ends of the detailrich implicit functions and the parametric mesh representations. In particular, we ﬁrst register a template mesh to
the output of the implicit generator and iteratively project
the registration result onto a pre-trained PCA space to resolve artifacts and self-intersections. To deal with the large
deformation during non-rigid registration, we propose a
novel view-collaborative graph convolution network (VCGCN) to extract key points from the implicit mesh for accurate alignment. Our method is able to generate highﬁdelity 3D caricature in a pre-deﬁned mesh topology that
is animation-ready. Extensive experiments have been conducted on 3DCaricShop to verify the signiﬁcance of the
database and the effectiveness of the proposed method. We
will release 3DCaricShop upon publication.

1. Introduction
A caricature is a vivid art form of depicting persons by
abstracting or exaggerating the peculiarities of the facial
features. As a way to convey humor or sarcasm, caricatures
* Corresponding email: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn
† Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data

Figure 1: Left: the proposed 3DCaricShop, a large-scale
repository of 3D caricatures that are manually crafted by
professional artists. It’s richly annotated with 2D caricature images, camera parameters, and 3D facial landmarks.
Right: the proposed baseline method that sets the new state
of the art in single-view 3D caricature reconstruction.
are widely used in entertainment, social events, electronic
games and a variety of artistic creations. While 2D caricatures have gained popularity in comic graphics, there exist
many scenarios, including cartoon character creation, game
avatar customization, custom-made 3D printing, etc., that
the 3D face caricatures remain the mainstream representations. However, creating a high-quality 3D caricature is a
labor-intensive and time-consuming task even for a skilled
artist. Thereby, generating expressive 3D face caricatures
from a minimal input, such as a single image, is a highlydemanding but also challenging task.
Most of the prior works mainly focus on 2D caricature
generation [6, 33, 16], while research on reconstructing 3D
caricatures from 2D caricature images remains vary rare.
Wu et al. [39] propose the ﬁrst work that creates 3D caricature from 2D caricature images using an optimization based
approach. They formulate caricature generation as a problem of deforming the standard 3D face. In particular, they

10236

