Consistent Instance False Positive Improves Fairness in Face Recognition
Xingkun Xu† Yuge Huang† Pengcheng Shen† * Shaoxin Li†
Jilin Li† Feiyue Huang† Yong Li§ Zhen Cui§
†
§
Youtu Lab, Tencent
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
†

{xingkunxu, yugehuang, quantshen, darwinli, jerolinli, garyhuang}@tencent.com
§

{yong.li, zhen.cui}@njust.edu.cn

Abstract
Demographic bias is a significant challenge in practical
face recognition systems. Existing methods heavily rely on
accurate demographic annotations. However, such annotations are usually unavailable in real scenarios. Moreover,
these methods are typically designed for a specific demographic group and are not general enough. In this paper,
we propose a false positive rate penalty loss, which mitigates face recognition bias by increasing the consistency
of instance False Positive Rate (FPR). Specifically, we first
define the instance FPR as the ratio between the number
of the non-target similarities above a unified threshold and
the total number of the non-target similarities. The unified
threshold is estimated for a given total FPR. Then, an additional penalty term, which is in proportion to the ratio of
instance FPR overall FPR, is introduced into the denominator of the softmax-based loss. The larger the instance
FPR, the larger the penalty. By such unequal penalties,
the instance FPRs are supposed to be consistent. Compared with the previous debiasing methods, our method requires no demographic annotations. Thus, it can mitigate
the bias among demographic groups divided by various attributes, and these attributes are not needed to be previously predefined during training. Extensive experimental
results on popular benchmarks demonstrate the superiority
of our method over state-of-the-art competitors. Code and
pre-trained models are available at https://github.
com/xkx0430/FairnessFR.

1. Introduction
With the increasing deployment of face recognition systems, fairness in face recognition has received broad interest from research communities [19, 3, 5, 15, 14, 22]. This
is partially due to the enormous impact brought in our daily
life by face recognition systems. For example, when auto* denotes the corresponding author.

std=7.6

std=0.97

(a) FNR

(b) FPR

Figure 1. FNR and FPR curves of the four races in RFW [19]. FNR
and FPR are calculated with a ResNet34 [2], which is trained on
the public balanced dataset BUPT-Balanced [20]. Lower is better.
Given a specific threshold, PPR varies significantly among different races than FNR. (e.g., the standard deviation (std) of FPR at
Tu =0.31 is 7.6, while the std of FNR at Tu =0.31 is 0.97).)

matic face recognition is applied to crime prevention, unfair
prediction may lead to unfair treatment of individuals across
different demographic groups.
Previous studies [14, 19, 3, 4, 16] mainly improve the
fairness of face recognition in two aspects, i.e., datasets and
algorithms. Since the widely-used public large-scale face
datasets, such as CASIA-WebFace [21], VGGFace2 [1],
and MS-Celeb-1M [6] are collected from the Internet, they
inevitably encode gender, ethnic, and culture biases. Thus,
the works in [14, 19, 18, 9] propose some new face recognition datasets that contain relatively balanced samples in
ethnicity, age, and other facial attributes. However, it is
quite challenging to construct a balanced dataset in various attributes. What is more, the racial bias of the models
trained with such balanced datasets cannot be eliminated
completely [18]. Therefore, a novel algorithm that can mitigate the bias regardless of whether training datasets are
balanced or not is imperative. Recently, several algorithms
supervised by demographic attribute information are introduced to alleviate demographic bias. For example, Wang et
al. [19] propose a deep information maximization adaptation network by transferring recognition knowledge from
1578

