On Focal Loss for Class-Posterior Probability Estimation:
A Theoretical Perspective
Nontawat Charoenphakdee∗
The University of Tokyo / RIKEN AIP

Jayakorn Vongkulbhisal∗
IBM Research

nontawat@ms.k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

jayakornv@ibm.com

Nuttapong Chairatanakul
Tokyo Institute of Technology / RWBC-OIL, AIST

Masashi Sugiyama
RIKEN AIP / The University of Tokyo

nuttapong.crtnk@gmail.com

sugi@k.u-tokyo.ac.jp

Abstract
The focal loss has demonstrated its effectiveness in many
real-world applications such as object detection and image
classification, but its theoretical understanding has been
limited so far. In this paper, we first prove that the focal loss
is classification-calibrated, i.e., its minimizer surely yields
the Bayes-optimal classifier and thus the use of the focal
loss in classification can be theoretically justified. However,
we also prove a negative fact that the focal loss is not strictly
proper, i.e., the confidence score of the classifier obtained
by focal loss minimization does not match the true classposterior probability. This may cause the trained classifier to give an unreliable confidence score, which can be
harmful in critical applications. To mitigate this problem,
we prove that there exists a particular closed-form transformation that can recover the true class-posterior probability
from the outputs of the focal risk minimizer. Our experiments show that our proposed transformation successfully
improves the quality of class-posterior probability estimation and improves the calibration of the trained classifier,
while preserving the same prediction accuracy.

1. Introduction
It is well-known that training classifiers with the same
model architecture can have a huge performance difference
if they are trained using different loss functions [3, 25, 16,
8]. To choose an appropriate loss function, it is highly useful to know theoretical properties of loss functions. For example, let us consider the hinge loss, which is related to the
support vector machine [12, 3]. This loss function is known
to be suitable for classification since minimizing this loss
*Nontawat and Jayakorn contributed equally.

can achieve the Bayes-optimal classifier. However, it is also
known that training with the hinge loss does not give the
Bayes-optimal solutions for bipartite ranking [15, 47] and
class-posterior probability estimation [38]. Such theoretical
drawbacks of the hinge loss have been observed to be relevant in practice as well [37, 47]. Not only the hinge loss, but
many other loss functions have also been analyzed and their
theoretical results have been used as a guideline to choose
an appropriate loss function for many problems, e.g., classification from noisy labels [16, 8, 26], classification with rejection [55, 34], and direct optimization of linear-fractional
metrics [2, 36].
Recently, the focal loss has been proposed as an alternative to the popular cross-entropy loss [25]. This loss function has been shown to be preferable over the cross-entropy
loss when facing the class imbalance problem. Because of
its effectiveness, it has been successfully applied in many
applications, e.g., medical diagnosis [48, 54, 41, 1], speech
processing [46], and natural language processing [40]. Although the focal loss has been successfully applied in many
real-world problems [48, 54, 41, 6, 27, 9, 39, 45, 43, 1],
considerably less attention has been paid to the theoretical
understanding of this loss function. For example, a fundamental question whether we can estimate a class-posterior
probability from the classifier trained with the focal loss
has remained unanswered. Knowing such a property is
highly important when one wants to utilize the prediction
confidence. For example, one may defer the decision to
a human expert when a classifier has low prediction confidence [10, 55, 34, 29, 7], or one may use the prediction
confidence to teach a new model, which has been studied in
the literature of knowledge distillation [20, 51, 28].
Motivated by the usefulness of loss function analysis and
the lack of theoretical understanding of the focal loss, the
goal of this paper is to provide an extensive analysis of this
loss function so that we can use it appropriately for the real-

5202

