Differentiable SLAM-net: Learning Particle SLAM for Visual Navigation
Peter Karkus Shaojun Cai David Hsu
National University of Singapore
karkus@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) remains
challenging for a number of downstream applications, such
as visual robot navigation, because of rapid turns, featureless walls, and poor camera quality. We introduce the Differentiable SLAM Network (SLAM-net) along with a navigation
architecture to enable planar robot navigation in previously
unseen indoor environments. SLAM-net encodes a particle
filter based SLAM algorithm in a differentiable computation graph, and learns task-oriented neural network components by backpropagating through the SLAM algorithm.
Because it can optimize all model components jointly for the
end-objective, SLAM-net learns to be robust in challenging
conditions. We run experiments in the Habitat platform with
different real-world RGB and RGB-D datasets. SLAM-net
significantly outperforms the widely adapted ORB-SLAM in
noisy conditions. Our navigation architecture with SLAMnet improves the state-of-the-art for the Habitat Challenge
2020 PointNav task by a large margin (37% to 64% success).
Project website: http:// sites.google.com/ view/ slamnet

1. Introduction
Modern visual SLAM methods achieve remarkable performance when evaluated on suitable high-quality data [19].
However, in the context of downstream tasks, such as indoor
robot navigation, a number of difﬁculties remain [8; 43; 12].
An imperfect navigation agent captures substantially different images from a human, as it may frequently face featureless walls and produce rapid turns (see Fig. 1). Further,
despite advances in sensor technology, modern robots still
often use cameras with noisy images, low frame rate, and
a narrow ﬁeld-of-view [32]. These factors make feature extraction and association difﬁcult. Relocalization and loop
closure can be challenging due to environmental changes
and repetitive feature. Finally, integrating SLAM into a navigation pipeline is not trivial, because the map representation
must be suitable for downstream planning, it may need to
capture task-dependent information, and planning must be
able to handle map imperfections.

Go to the
kitchen

Figure 1: Visual robot navigation is challenging for SLAM,
e.g., because the robot frequently faces featureless walls; it
rotates quickly; the onboard camera produces noisy images;
the frame rate is low; etc. The images were take by our
navigation agent in the Habitat environment.

This paper introduces the Differentiable SLAM Network (SLAM-net) together with a navigation architecture for
downstream indoor navigation. The key idea of SLAM-net
is to encode a SLAM algorithm in a differentiable computation graph, and learn neural network model components
for the SLAM algorithm end-to-end, by backpropagating
gradients through the algorithm. Concretely SLAM-net encodes the particle ﬁlter based FastSLAM algorithm [44] and
learns mapping, transition and observation models. SLAMnet ﬁlls a gap in the literature on differentiable robot algorithms [55; 23; 34; 35].
The beneﬁt of SLAM-net compared to unstructured learning approaches is that its encoded particle ﬁlter provides a
strong prior for learning. The beneﬁt over classic SLAM
is that all components are learned, and they are directly
optimized for the end-objective. Concretely, SLAM-net
learns RGB and RGB-D observation models for the encoded FastSLAM algorithm, which previously relied on
hand-crafted models and lidar sensors. Further, because of
the task-oriented learning, feature extractors can learn be
more robust against domain speciﬁc challenges, e.g., faced
with downstream navigation; while on the ﬂip side they may
be less reusable across tasks.
We validate SLAM-net for localization with RGB and
RGB-D input, as well as downstream robot navigation in
previously unseen indoor environments. We use the Habitat

2815

