TesseTrack: End-to-End Learnable Multi-Person Articulated 3D Pose Tracking
N Dinesh Reddy1∗ Laurent Guigues2† Leonid Pishchulin2† Jayan Eledath2 Srinivasa G. Narasimhan1
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 Amazon

Abstract
We consider the task of 3D pose estimation and tracking
of multiple people seen in an arbitrary number of camera
feeds. We propose TesseTrack1 , a novel top-down approach
that simultaneously reasons about multiple individuals’ 3D
body joint reconstructions and associations in space and
time in a single end-to-end learnable framework. At the
core of our approach is a novel spatio-temporal formulation that operates in a common voxelized feature space aggregated from single- or multiple camera views. After a person detection step, a 4D CNN produces short-term personspecific representations which are then linked across time
by a differentiable matcher. The linked descriptions are
then merged and deconvolved into 3D poses. This joint
spatio-temporal formulation contrasts with previous piecewise strategies that treat 2D pose estimation, 2D-to-3D lifting, and 3D pose tracking as independent sub-problems that
are error-prone when solved in isolation. Furthermore, unlike previous methods, TesseTrack is robust to changes in
the number of camera views and achieves very good results
even if a single view is available at inference time. Quantitative evaluation of 3D pose reconstruction accuracy on
standard benchmarks shows significant improvements over
the state of the art. Evaluation of multi-person articulated
3D pose tracking in our novel evaluation framework demonstrates the superiority of TesseTrack over strong baselines.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the problem of tracking and reconstructing in 3D articulated poses of multiple individuals seen in an arbitrary number of camera feeds. This
task requires identifying the number of people in the scene,
reconstructing their 3D body joints into consistent skeletons, and associating 3D body joints over time. We do
not make any assumption on the number of available camera views and focus on real-world scenarios that often in∗ Work done during DR internship at Amazon
† Equal Contribution
1 Webpage can be found at http://www.cs.cmu.edu/ ILIM/
˜
projects/IM/TesseTrack/

Frame 0

Frame 100

Frame 200

Figure 1: We illustrate the output of Tessetrack on the Tagging sequence.
The top two row potray the projections of keypoints on two views, while
the bottom row shows the 3D pose tracking. Observe smooth tracking of
people in the wild with moving cameras for long duration of time.

clude multiple close-by interacting individuals, fast motions, self- and person-person occlusions. A key challenge
in such scenarios is that people might strongly overlap and
expose only a subset of body joints due to occlusions or
truncations by image boundaries (c.f . Fig. 1), which makes
it harder to reliably reconstruct and track articulated 3D
human poses. Most multi-view strategies rely on multistage inference [9, 13, 20, 7, 8, 21, 15, 35] to first estimate
2D poses in each frame, cluster same person poses across
views, reconstruct 3D poses from clusters based on triangulation, and finally link 3D poses over time [9, 8]. Solving
each step in isolation is sub-optimal and prone to errors that
cannot be recovered in later stages. This is even more true
for monocular methods [4, 26, 33, 25, 42] where solving
each step in isolation often represents an ill-posed problem.
We propose TesseTrack, a top-down approach that simultaneously addresses 3D body joint reconstructions and
associations in space and time of multiple persons. At
the core of our approach is a novel spatio-temporal formulation that operates in a common voxelized feature space
obtained by casting per-frame deep learning features from
single or multiple views into a discretized 3D voxel volume. First, a 3D CNN is used to localize each person in
115190

