Target-Aware Object Discovery and Association for Unsupervised
Video Multi-Object Segmentation
Tianfei Zhou1 , Jianwu Li2 *, Xueyi Li2 , Ling Shao3
Computer Vision Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2
School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Institute of Technology, China
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
1

Abstract
This paper addresses the task of unsupervised video
multi-object segmentation. Current approaches follow a
two-stage paradigm: 1) detect object proposals using
pre-trained Mask R-CNN, and 2) conduct generic feature
matching for temporal association using re-identification
techniques. However, the generic features, widely used in
both stages, are not reliable for characterizing unseen objects, leading to poor generalization. To address this, we
introduce a novel approach for more accurate and efficient
spatio-temporal segmentation. In particular, to address instance discrimination, we propose to combine foreground
region estimation and instance grouping together in one
network, and additionally introduce temporal guidance for
segmenting each frame, enabling more accurate object discovery. For temporal association, we complement current
video object segmentation architectures with a discriminative appearance model, capable of capturing more finegrained target-specific information. Given object proposals from the instance discrimination network, three essential strategies are adopted to achieve accurate segmentation: 1) target-specific tracking using a memory-augmented
appearance model; 2) target-agnostic verification to trace
possible tracklets for the proposal; 3) adaptive memory updating using the verified segments. We evaluate the proposed approach on DAVIS17 and YouTube-VIS, and the results demonstrate that it outperforms state-of-the-art methods both in segmentation accuracy and inference speed.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised video object segmentation aims at automatically segmenting primary object(s) from the background in unconstrained videos, which is a fundamental vision task. This task has become increasingly popular due
to its potential values in a wide range of real-world ap* Corresponding author: Jianwu Li.

plications, e.g., video compression [17], autonomous driving [14], and human-centric understanding [52, 67]. It also
plays an essential role in collecting large-scale annotated
dataset [34, 63]. However, the task is challenging due to
the lack of prior knowledge about the target objects, as well
as the challenging factors (e.g., occlusions, cluttered background, diverse motion patterns) carried by video data.
Towards better segmenting the prominent foreground objects, early studies typically exploit saliency cues [50, 11]
or objectness priors [25, 64, 56, 66, 27] for identifying
them. More recently, with the advent of deep neural networks, many learning-based models have been proposed to
learn more discriminative video object patterns, by leveraging motion cues [43], addressing spatiotemporal features [23, 68], exploring multi-frame contextual information [32, 48, 61] or using recurrent networks to capture
sequential information [42]. Though impressive results
have been achieved, these approaches mainly focus on foreground/background separation, hindering their applications
in more practical multi-object scenarios.
Unsupervised video multi-object segmentation, with an
elegant and formal definition in [4], is more challenging
as it requires not only discovering instance-agnostic, foreground regions automatically, but also discriminating different object instances and associating the same identities over the entire sequence. To tackle this task, existing methods [33, 42, 49, 65] generally follow the conventional tracking-by-detection paradigm which performs in
a top-down fashion to employ image-aware instance segmentation networks (e.g., Mask R-CNN [18], SOLO [54])
to detect object candidates in individual frames, and associate them over consecutive frames based on object tracking or proposal re-identification (ReID). In addition, to
avoid the negative impact of background objects, many
studies [42, 49, 65] also rely on a foreground/background
separation step to remove background proposals. Even
though these approaches demonstrate compelling performance, they still suffer several limitations. 1) Directly using
image-level instance segmentation networks is insufficient

6985

