Weakly Supervised Video Salient Object Detection
1

Wangbo Zhao1 Jing Zhang2,3 Long Li Nick Barnes2 Nian Liu4 Junwei Han1 ∗
1
The Brain and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Northwestern Polytechnical University
2
Australian National University 3 CSIRO, Australia
4
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
{wangbo.zhao96, zjnwpu, longli.nwpu, liunian228, junweihan2010}@gmail.com,
nick.barnes@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Significant performance improvement has been achieved
for fully-supervised video salient object detection with
the pixel-wise labeled training datasets, which are timeconsuming and expensive to obtain. To relieve the burden of data annotation, we present the first weakly supervised video salient object detection model based on relabeled “fixation guided scribble annotations”. Specifically,
an “Appearance-motion fusion module” and bidirectional
ConvLSTM based framework are proposed to achieve effective multi-modal learning and long-term temporal context modeling based on our new weak annotations. Further, we design a novel foreground-background similarity
loss to further explore the labeling similarity across frames.
A weak annotation boosting strategy is also introduced to
boost our model performance with a new pseudo-label generation technique. Extensive experimental results on six
benchmark video saliency detection datasets illustrate the
effectiveness of our solution1 .

1. Introduction
Video salient object detection (VSOD) models are designed to segment salient objects in both the spatial domain
and the temporal domain. Existing VSOD methods focus
on two different solutions: 1) encoding temporal information using a recurrent network [30, 10, 44], e.g. LSTM; and
2) encoding geometric information using the optical flow
constraint [18, 29]. Although considerable performance improvements have been achieved, we argue that the huge burden of pixel-wise labeling makes VSOD a much more expensive task than the RGB image-based saliency detection
task [14, 23, 22, 48, 43].
The standard pipeline to train a deep video saliency
∗ Corresponding author: Junwei Han (junweihan2010@gmail.com)
1 Our code and data is publicly available at: https://github.
com/wangbo-zhao/WSVSOD.

(a) Image

(b) Full Anno.

(c) Weak Anno.

(d) Image

(e) TENet[29]

(f) Ours

Figure 1. Training with our weak annotation (c), we achieve competitive performance (f) compared with TENet[29] (e).

detection model involves two main steps. Firstly, the
network is pre-trained on an existing static RGB imagebased saliency detection training dataset, e.g. DUTS [35] or
MSRA10K [6]. Then, it is fine-tuned on video saliency detection datasets, e.g. DAVSOD [10] and DAVIS [28]. The
main reason for using this strategy is that video saliency
datasets usually have limited scene diversity. Although the
largest DAVSOD dataset [10] has more than 10K frames
for training, the large redundancy across the frames of each
clip makes it still insufficient to effectively train deep video
saliency models. Specifically, DAVSOD has a total of
107 clips for training and validation, which only indicates
around 107 diverse scenes. Hence, directly training with a
VSOD dataset may lead to poor model generalization ability, as the model may overfit on the highly redundant data.
To obtain an effective video saliency detection model,
existing fully supervised VSOD methods [18, 29, 10] rely
on both RGB image saliency datasets and VSOD training
datasets. The problem behind the above pipeline is the
huge requirement for pixel-wise labeling, which is timeconsuming and expensive to obtain. For example, RGB
image saliency training datasets have more than 10K labeled samples [35, 6]. Further, as shown in Tab. 1, widely
used VSOD training datasets (DAVSOD and DAVIS) con-

16826

