RfD-Net: Point Scene Understanding by Semantic Instance Reconstruction
Yinyu Nie1,2
1
SRIBD, CUHKSZ

Ji Hou3
Xiaoguang Han1,∗
Matthias Nießner3
2
3
Bournemouth University
Technical University of Munich

Figure 1: From an incomplete point cloud (N × 3) of a 3D scene (left), our method learns to jointly understand the 3D objects
with semantic labels, poses (middle) and complete object meshes (right).

Abstract
Semantic scene understanding from point clouds is particularly challenging as the points reflect only a sparse set
of the underlying 3D geometry. Previous works often convert point cloud into regular grids (e.g. voxels or birdeye view images), and resort to grid-based convolutions for
scene understanding. In this work, we introduce RfD-Net
that jointly detects and reconstructs dense object surfaces
directly from raw point clouds. Instead of representing
scenes with regular grids, our method leverages the sparsity of point cloud data and focuses on predicting shapes
that are recognized with high objectness. With this design, we decouple the instance reconstruction into global
object localization and local shape prediction. It not only
eases the difficulty of learning 2-D manifold surfaces from
sparse 3D space, the point clouds in each object proposal
convey shape details that support implicit function learning to reconstruct any high-resolution surfaces. Our experiments indicate that instance detection and reconstruction
present complementary effects, where the shape prediction
head shows consistent effects on improving object detection
with modern 3D proposal network backbones. The qualitative and quantitative evaluations further demonstrate that
our approach consistently outperforms the state-of-the-arts
and improves over 11 of mesh IoU in object reconstruction.

1. Introduction
Semantic scene reconstruction has received increasing
attention in applications such as robot navigation and inte∗ Corresponding Email: hanxiaoguang@cuhk.edu.cn

rior design. It focuses on recovering the object labels, poses
and geometries of objects in a 3D scene from partial observations (e.g. images or 3D scans). With the advance
of 2D CNNs, instance reconstruction from images achieves
appealing results [20, 45, 36, 59, 33] but still bottlenecked
by the depth ambiguity thus resulting in defective object locations. Compared to images, point clouds provide surface
geometry that largely alleviates the object locating issues
[49, 2, 65, 7, 31]. However, its inherent sparseness and irregularity challenge the direct usage of grid-based CNNs on
point clouds for semantic instance reconstruction.
Scanning 3D scenes usually results in missing geometries due to occlusions, view constraints and weak illumination where individual objects cannot be covered in all views.
Prior works have explored various strategies to recover the
missing shapes, e.g. depth inpainting, voxel/TSDF prediction, and shape retrieval. Depth inpainting [23, 47, 28, 55]
aims to complete the depth maps in single views. With 2D
CNNs, these methods achieve pleasing results in surface
points recovery. To complete a scene with occluded contents, many methods extend the 2D CNNs to 3D and naturally represent 3D scenes with voxel/TSDF grids [57, 63,
37, 16, 13, 26, 43, 14]. This strategy also enables decoding
voxel labels to complete scenes at the semantic or instance
level. However, the expensive 3D convolutions in the scene
level make them suffer from the resolution problem. Shape
retrieval [3, 4, 5, 30] provides an alternative method to predict shapes by searching for a CAD model as similar to the
incomplete object as possible. However, the accuracy and
the computation efficiency depends on the model dataset
scale. Compared to voxels/TSDFs, point clouds present
sparsity and are more scalable for efficient learning. To

4608

