Privacy-Preserving Image Features via Adversarial Affine Subspace Embeddings
Mihai Dusmanu1 Johannes L. Schönberger2 Sudipta N. Sinha2 Marc Pollefeys1,2
1
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zürich
Microsoft

Abstract
Many computer vision systems require users to upload image features to the cloud for processing and storage. These
features can be exploited to recover sensitive information
about the scene or subjects, e.g., by reconstructing the appearance of the original image. To address this privacy
concern, we propose a new privacy-preserving feature representation. The core idea of our work is to drop constraints
from each feature descriptor by embedding it within an affine
subspace containing the original feature as well as adversarial feature samples. Feature matching on the privacypreserving representation is enabled based on the notion of
subspace-to-subspace distance. We experimentally demonstrate the effectiveness of our method and its high practical
relevance for the applications of visual localization and
mapping as well as face authentication. Compared to the
original features, our approach makes it significantly more
difficult for an adversary to recover private information.

1. Introduction

Figure 1: Privacy-Preserving Image Features. Inversion
of traditional local image features is a privacy concern in
many applications. Our proposed approach obfuscates the
appearance of the original image by lifting the descriptors to
affine subspaces. Distance between the privacy-preserving
subspaces enables efficient matching of features. The same
concept can be applied to other domains such as face features for biometric authentication. Image credit: laylamoran4battersea (Layla Moran).

Image feature extraction and matching are two fundamental steps in many computer vision applications, such
as 3D reconstruction [1, 2], image retrieval [1, 3], or face
recognition [4]. Image features can be categorized into lowlevel [1, 5], mid-level [3, 6] or high-level [7, 8] depending on
their information content and receptive field. Furthermore,
features can be hand-crafted or learned using data-driven
techniques. However, they are almost always represented
as vectors in high-dimensional feature spaces. Multiple feature vectors are then compared using appropriate distance
metrics, which forms the basis of nearest neighbor search or
other retrieval and recognition techniques.
Recently, there has been rapid progress in feature inversion methods that reconstruct the image appearance from features extracted in the original image [9, 10, 11, 12] as shown
in Figure 1. This raises serious privacy concerns, since images may contain sensitive information about the scene or
subjects. Increased awareness of these privacy issues has
spurred significant efforts to develop privacy-preserving machine learning systems. In recent years, researchers have

proposed a large body of approaches to tackle the various
aspects of the problem, including homomorphic cryptosystems [13], differential privacy [14], federated learning [15],
and specific solutions for camera localization [16, 17].
In this paper, we propose a new feature representation
suitable for visual recognition and matching tasks that makes
it significantly more difficult for an adversary to reconstruct
the image contents. Our approach has only marginal computational overhead, which makes it amenable to a wide range
of practical scenarios. The core idea behind our method is to
represent a descriptor point in Rn as an affine subspace of Rn
passing through the original point. We refer to this process as
lifting. The chosen dimension of the subspace determines a
trade-off between accuracy, runtime, and the level of privacy
of the feature representation. To make inverting the representation difficult, we propose a strategy for constructing
a lifted subspace containing additional adversarial feature
points. We empirically demonstrate strong privacy preservation even for low-dimensional affine subspaces. Pairwise

14267

