Learning Dynamic Network Using a Reuse Gate Function in
Semi-supervised Video Object Segmentation
Hyojin Park1 Jayeon Yoo1 * Seohyeong Jeong1,3 *† Ganesh Venkatesh2 Nojun Kwak1
1
Seoul National University, 2 Facebook Inc., 3 AIRS Company, Hyundai Motor Group

Abstract
Current state-of-the-art approaches for Semi-supervised
Video Object Segmentation (Semi-VOS) propagates information from previous frames to generate segmentation mask
for the current frame. This results in high-quality segmentation across challenging scenarios such as changes
in appearance and occlusion. But it also leads to unnecessary computations for stationary or slow-moving objects where the change across frames is minimal. In this
work, we exploit this observation by using temporal information to quickly identify frames with minimal change
and skip the heavyweight mask generation step. To realize this efficiency, we propose a novel dynamic network that estimates change across frames and decides
which path – computing a full network or reusing previous frame’s feature – to choose depending on the expected similarity. Experimental results show that our approach significantly improves inference speed without much
accuracy degradation on challenging Semi-VOS datasets
– DAVIS 16, DAVIS 17, and YouTube-VOS. Furthermore,
our approach can be applied to multiple Semi-VOS methods demonstrating its generality. The code is available in
https://github.com/HYOJINPARK/Reuse VOS .

1. Introduction
Semi-VOS tracks an object of interest across all the
frames in a video given the ground truth mask of the initial frame. VOS classifies each pixel as belonging to background or a tracked object. This task has wide applicability
to many real-world use cases including autonomous driving,
surveillance, video editing as well as to the emerging class
of augmented reality/mixed reality devices. VOS is a challenging task because it needs to distinguish the target object
from other similar objects in the scene even as target’s appearance changes over time as well as through occlusions.
A variety of methods have been proposed for solving
* Indicate same equal contribution as second authors
† This work was done when Seohyeong Jeong was with SNU

(a)

(b)
Figure 1. (a) Histogram of a range of IoU between the previous and
the current ground truth masks. X-axis is a range of IoU and y-axis
denotes frequency corresponding to the range of IoU. (b) FPS and
accuracy (J&F ) comparison between the baseline model (FRTM
[30]) and ours on videos having high IoU between the previous
and current ground truth masks. The proposed method preserves
the original accuracy while improving the speed a lot.

video object segmentation including online learning [30,
19], mask propagation [17, 3], and template matching [40,
22]. A common theme across most of these previous methods is to use information from previous frames – either just
the first frame, some of the previous frames (first and last
being a popular option) or all the previous frames – to produce high quality segmentation mask.
In this work, we ask a different question
Q: Can we use temporal information to identify when
the object appearance and position has not changed
across frames?
The motivation for doing so would be to skip much of the
expensive computation needed to produce a high-quality
mask for the current frame if that mask is almost the same
as the mask we computed in the previous frame. Instead, we
can produce current frame’s mask using a cheap model that
just makes minor edits to the previous frame’s feature. As

8405

