Generative Classifiers as a Basis for Trustworthy Image Classification
Radek Mackowiak*

Lynton Ardizzone*

Visual Learning Lab, Heidelberg University

Visual Learning Lab, Heidelberg University

Ullrich Köthe

Carsten Rother

Visual Learning Lab, Heidelberg University

Visual Learning Lab, Heidelberg University

∗

equal contribution

Abstract
With the maturing of deep learning systems, trustworthiness
is becoming increasingly important for model assessment.
We understand trustworthiness as the combination of explainability and robustness. Generative classifiers (GCs)
are a promising class of models that are said to naturally
accomplish these qualities. However, this has mostly been
demonstrated on simple datasets such as MNIST and CIFAR
in the past. In this work, we firstly develop an architecture
and training scheme that allows GCs to operate on a more
relevant level of complexity for practical computer vision,
namely the ImageNet challenge. Secondly, we demonstrate
the immense potential of GCs for trustworthy image classification. Explainability and some aspects of robustness
are vastly improved compared to feed-forward models, even
when the GCs are just applied naively. While not all trustworthiness problems are solved completely, we observe that
GCs are a highly promising basis for further algorithms and
modifications. We release our trained model for download
in the hope that it serves as a starting point for other generative classification tasks, in much the same way as pretrained ResNet architectures do for discriminative classification.
Code: github.com/VLL-HD/trustworthy GCs

1. Introduction
Generative classifiers (GCs) and discriminative classifiers (DCs) represent two contrasting ways of solving classification tasks. In short, while standard DCs model the class
probability given an input directly, p(class | image) (e.g.
softmax classification), generative classifiers (GCs) take the
opposite approach: They model the likelihood of the input
image, conditioned on each class, p(image | class). The
actual classification is then performed by finding the class
under which the image has the highest likelihood.
The application of GCs has so far been limited to very

(a) Normal input

Discriminative Classifier Generative Classifier
q(image X | class Y )
q(class Y | image X)
integrates to 1 over images
sums to 1 over classes

0.55

0.45

6.3

6.1

Cat

Dog

Cat

Dog

0.42

0.58

0.014

0.017

Cat

Dog

Cat

Dog

(b) Unrelated input

Figure 1: Example of one advantage of generative classifiers: The class posterior of a DC always sums up to 1,
while the likelihoods of the GC do not have this restriction,
constituting inherently more informative outputs. E.g. the
GC can show if a prediction is uncertain because the input
agrees with both classes, or with neither.
simple datasets such as MNIST, SVHN and CIFAR-10/100.
For any practical image classification tasks, DCs are used
exclusively, due to their excellent discriminative performance. In principle, GCs are said to have various advantages over DCs, which align with the term trustworthiness.
In general agreement with [24], we understand trustworthiness as the combination of explainability and robustness.
Explainability: DCs based on deep neural networks are
notorious for being ‘black boxes’, prompting many developments in the field of explainable AI. In the taxonomy
laid out in [18], most commonly used algorithms fall into
categories I or II: post-hoc methods that visualize how a
network processes information (I), or that show its internal
representations (II). The explanations can vary depending
on the chosen method, and there is no guarantee that the
results faithfully reflect what the DC is doing internally.
In contrast, GCs bring to mind Feynman’s mantra “What
I cannot create, I do not understand”. As GCs are able to
model the input data itself, not just the class posteriors, they

2971

