Human De-occlusion: Invisible Perception and Recovery for Humans
Qiang Zhou1 ,* Shiyin Wang2 , Yitong Wang2 , Zilong Huang1 , Xinggang Wang1†
1
School of EIC, Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 ByteDance Inc.
theodoruszq@gmail.com shiyinwang.ai@bytedance.com wangyitong@pku.edu.cn
zilong.huang2020@gmail.com xgwang@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of human deocclusion which reasons about occluded segmentation
masks and invisible appearance content of humans. In particular, a two-stage framework is proposed to estimate the
invisible portions and recover the content inside. For the
stage of mask completion, a stacked network structure is
devised to refine inaccurate masks from a general instance
segmentation model and predict integrated masks simultaneously. Additionally, the guidance from human parsing
and typical pose masks are leveraged to bring prior information. For the stage of content recovery, a novel parsing
guided attention module is applied to isolate body parts and
capture context information across multiple scales. Besides,
an Amodal Human Perception dataset (AHP) is collected
to settle the task of human de-occlusion. AHP has advantages of providing annotations from real-world scenes and
the number of humans is comparatively larger than other
amodal perception datasets. Based on this dataset, experiments demonstrate that our method performs over the
state-of-the-art techniques in both tasks of mask completion and content recovery. Our AHP dataset is available at
https://sydney0zq.github.io/ahp/.

1. Introduction
Visual recognition tasks have witnessed significant advances driven by deep learning, such as classification [21,
14], detection [38, 10] and segmentation [28, 51]. Despite the achieved progress, amodal perception, i.e. to reason about the occluded parts of objects, is still challenging for vision models. In contrast, it is easy for humans
to interpolate the occluded portions with human visual systems [59, 34]. To reduce the recognition ability gap between the models and humans, recent works have proposed
methods to infer the occluded parts of objects, including es* The work was mainly done during an internship at ByteDance Inc.
† Corresponding author.

Occlusion

Human De-occlusion Model
Mask Completion

De-occlusion

Content Recovery

(a) Pipeline
Portrait Editing

3D Mesh Generation

Pose Estimation

(b) Demo Applications
Figure 1. (a) The pipeline of our framework to tackle the task of
human de-occlusion, which contains two stages of mask completion and content recovery. (b) Some applications which demonstrate better results can be obtained after human de-occlusion.

timating the invisible segmentation [25, 59, 37, 50, 54] and
recovering the invisible content of objects [6, 50, 54].
In this paper, we aim at the problem of estimating the invisible masks and the appearance content for humans. We
refer to such a task as human de-occlusion. Compared with
general amodal perception, human de-occlusion is a more
special and important task, since completing human body
plays key roles in many vision tasks, such as portrait editing [1], 3D mesh generation [19], and pose estimation [11]
as illustrated in Fig 1 (b). Different from common object
de-occlusion task (e.g., vehicle, building, furniture), human de-occlusion presents new challenges in three aspects.
First, humans are non-rigid bodies and their poses vary dramatically. Second, the context relations between humans
and backgrounds are relatively inferior to common objects
which are usually limited to specific scenes. Third, to segment and recover the invisible portions of humans, the algorithm should be able to recognize the occluded body parts
to be aware of symmetrical or interrelated patches.
To precisely generate the invisible masks and the appearance content of humans, we propose a two-stage framework
to accomplish human de-occlusion as shown in Fig 1 (a).
The first stage segments the invisible portions of humans,

3691

