Toward Accurate and Realistic Outfits Visualization with Attention to Details
Kedan Li1,2

Min Jin Chong1,2

Jeffrey Zhang1,2

Jingen Liu3

{kedan, minjin, jeff}@revery.ai, jingenliu@gmail.com
1

University of Illinois, Urbana Champaign. 2 Revery AI Inc. 3 JD AI Research.

Abstract
Virtual try-on methods aim to generate images of fashion models wearing arbitrary combinations of garments.
This is a challenging task because the generated image must
appear realistic and accurately display the interaction between garments. Prior works produce images that are filled
with artifacts and fail to capture important visual details
necessary for commercial applications. We propose Outfit
Visualization Net (OVNet) to capture these important details (e.g. buttons, shading, textures, realistic hemlines, and
interactions between garments) and produce high quality
multiple-garment virtual try-on images. OVNet consists of
1) a semantic layout generator and 2) an image generation pipeline using multiple coordinated warps. We train
the warper to output multiple warps using a cascade loss,
which refines each successive warp to focus on poorly generated regions of a previous warp and yields consistent improvements in detail. In addition, we introduce a method
for matching outfits with the most suitable model and produce significant improvements for both our and other previous try-on methods. Through quantitative and qualitative
analysis, we demonstrate our method generates substantially higher-quality studio images compared to prior works
for multi-garment outfits. An interactive interface powered
by this method has been deployed on fashion e-commerce
websites and received overwhelmingly positive feedback.

1. Introduction
While e-commerce has brought convenience to many aspects of our lives, shopping online is difficult for fashion
consumers who want to try-on garments and outfits before
deciding to buy them [52]. In most online shopping experiences, we are only given a neutral product image of a
garment or a single example of a model wearing the garment, and users have to imagine how the garment would
look in different settings (e.g. with different garments, on
different models etc.). As a result, there has been a considerable amount of literature on synthesizing people wearing
garments [18, 53, 46, 11, 16, 58, 41, 25, 23].

Model 1

Outfit A

Results A-1

Outfit B

Results B-1

Model 2

Outfit C

Results C-2

Outfit D

Results D-2

Figure 1. Our method takes in a model image and multiple neutral
garments images as inputs, and generates a high quality image of
the selected model wearing the garments. Pay careful attention
to details of the garment properties that are accurately portrayed
(e.g., the patterns on the dress (A-1), the unicorn and the string
(C-2), the hemline (C-2), buttons (B-1, D-2), and the lengths of
the garments); the interaction between multiple garments has been
captured (e.g., the collar and sleeve coming out of the sweater (A1), the open outerwear cast shading (B-1, C-2) to the garment beneath); the interaction between the garment and the person is natural (e.g., the loose sleeves, the folds by the arm (D-2), and the
shadows casted on the leg by the dresses); and skin is generated
realistically (B-1). See image without bounding box in Appendix.

Three natural cases arise when shopping online. A user
may want to see (a) any image of a model wearing a chosen set of garments (outfit) to visualize a combination; (b)
any image of themselves wearing the outfit to see how the
garments interact; and (c) an image of themselves wearing
the outfit (the VITON case [18, 53, 46, 11, 16, 58, 25, 23]).
In all cases, users expect the image to capture the visual features of the garments and the physical interactions between

15546

