LipSync3D: Data-Efficient Learning of Personalized 3D Talking Faces from
Video using Pose and Lighting Normalization
Avisek Lahiri1,2∗†

Vivek Kwatra1∗
Christian Frueh1∗
John Lewis1
Chris Bregler1
1
Google Research 2 Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur
{avisek,kwatra,frueh,jplewis,bregler}@google.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present a video-based learning framework for animating personalized 3D talking faces from audio. We introduce two training-time data normalizations
that significantly improve data sample efficiency. First, we
isolate and represent faces in a normalized space that decouples 3D geometry, head pose, and texture. This decomposes the prediction problem into regressions over the 3D
face shape and the corresponding 2D texture atlas. Second,
we leverage facial symmetry and approximate albedo constancy of skin to isolate and remove spatio-temporal lighting variations. Together, these normalizations allow simple networks to generate high fidelity lip-sync videos under
novel ambient illumination while training with just a single
speaker-specific video. Further, to stabilize temporal dynamics, we introduce an auto-regressive approach that conditions the model on its previous visual state. Human ratings and objective metrics demonstrate that our method outperforms contemporary state-of-the-art audio-driven video
reenactment benchmarks in terms of realism, lip-sync and
visual quality scores. We illustrate several applications enabled by our framework.

1. Introduction
“Talking head” videos, consisting of closeups of a talking person, are widely used in newscasting, video blogs,
online courses, etc. Other applications that feature talking
faces prominently are face-to-face live chat, 3D avatars and
animated characters in games and movies. We present a
deep learning approach to synthesize 3D talking faces (both
photorealistic and animated) driven by an audio speech signal. We use speaker-specific videos to train our model in a
data-efficient manner by employing 3D facial tracking. The
resulting system has multiple applications, including video
editing, lip-sync for dubbing of videos in a new language,
personalized 3D talking avatars in gaming, VR and CGI, as
well as compression in multimedia communication.
The importance of talking head synthesis has led to a
variety of methods in the research literature. Many recent
∗ Equal contribution
† Work done while an intern at Google

(a)
Synthesized
Video

Mesh
Generation
from Audio

Input Audio
Source

3D
Rendering

3D Alignment

Target
Face Detection

Blending

Target Face
Warping

Target
Video

(b)
Figure 1: Flow diagram of our approach to (a) generate a dynamically textured 3D
face mesh from audio, and (b) insert the generated face mesh into a target video to
create a synthesized talking head video from new audio input.

techniques [6, 7, 40, 43, 28, 30] use the approach of regressing facial motion from audio, employing it to deform one or
more reference images of the subject. These approaches
can inherit the realism of the reference photos, however, the
results do not accurately reproduce 3D facial articulation
and appearance under general viewpoint and lighting variations. Another body of research predicts 3D facial meshes
from audio [38, 13, 19, 11]. These approaches are directly
suitable for VR and gaming applications. However, visual
realism is often restricted by the quality of texturing. Some
recent approaches [32, 33, 14] attempt to bridge the gap by
combining 3D prediction with high-quality rendering, but
are only able to edit fixed target videos that they train on.
Our work encompasses several of the scenarios mentioned above. We can use 3D information to edit 2D video,
including novel videos of the same speaker not seen during training. We can also drive a 3D mesh from audio or
text-to-speech (TTS), and synthesize animated characters
by predicting face blendshapes. Next, we highlight some
of our key design choices.
Personalized models: We train personalized speakerspecific models, instead of building a single universal model
to be applied across different people. While universal mod-

2755

