Brain Image Synthesis with Unsupervised Multivariate Canonical CSCℓ4 Net
Yawen Huang1 , Feng Zheng2∗, Danyang Wang1 , Weilin Huang1 , Matthew R. Scott1 , Ling Shao3
1

Malong LLC, 2 Southern University of Science and Technology, 3 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence
{yawhuang, danwang, whuang, mscott}@malongtech.com, zhengf@sustech.edu.cn, ling.shao@ieee.org

1. Introduction
Craniocerebral examination can be carried out using
a multitude of imaging techniques with varying degrees
of specificity and invasiveness, each directly or indirectly
quantifying the structure, function and pathology of the
brain. These multi-modal neuroimaging techniques, such as
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positron emission
tomography (PET), offer diverse and complementary information to investigate human cognitive activities, population
∗ Corresponding author

CSC layer

Recent advances in neuroscience have highlighted the
effectiveness of multi-modal medical data for investigating certain pathologies and understanding human cognition. However, obtaining full sets of different modalities is limited by various factors, such as long acquisition
times, high examination costs and artifact suppression. In
addition, the complexity, high dimensionality and heterogeneity of neuroimaging data remains another key challenge in leveraging existing randomized scans effectively,
as data of the same modality is often measured differently
by different machines. There is a clear need to go beyond
the traditional imaging-dependent process and synthesize
anatomically specific target-modality data from a source input. In this paper, we propose to learn dedicated features
that cross both intre- and intra-modal variations using a
novel CSCℓ4 Net. Through an initial unification of intramodal data in the feature maps and multivariate canonical adaptation, CSCℓ4 Net facilitates feature-level mutual
transformation. The positive definite Riemannian manifoldpenalized data fidelity term further enables CSCℓ4 Net to reconstruct missing measurements according to transformed
features. Finally, the maximization ℓ4 -norm boils down to
a computationally efficient optimization problem. Extensive experiments validate the ability and robustness of our
CSCℓ4 Net compared to the state-of-the-art methods on multiple datasets.

softmax
global average pooling
CSC layer

Abstract

Figure 1. Architecture of our CSCℓ4 Net. CSCℓ4 Net is constructed
by repeatedly stacking multivariate canonical CSC layers. The
blue bar denotes the CSC layer, the yellow bar is the global average
pooling, and the orange bar shows the softmax. Ẑx,|l| and Ẑy,|l|
are feature maps of the l-th layer. M represents the manifold on
each tangent space T having T M. P is the associator and H
denotes a Hilbert space.

imaging cohorts, neurodegeneration, and certain pathology.
However, acquiring a full library of multi-modal images is
impractical since the collection faces several constraints, including long acquisition times (e.g. a normal MRI scan can
take as long as an hour), high examination cost, or even
worse, image corruption in the event of artifacts from patient motion. Missing data is a critical problem in neurological studies and clinical diagnosis [11], and thus there is a
clear need to obtain the absent data through beyond simple
scanning.
Recently, there has been a surge of interest in synthesizing target-modality medical images by transferring information across different appearances [12, 28, 30, 37]. One
early and noteworthy model for this was joint sparse representation [11, 24], which allows multi-modal data to be
mapped in a common space rather than in separate ways to
obtain a linear approximation. Based on this, the convolutional sparse coding (CSC) model replaces the local optimization with a global shift-invariant one, achieving significant improvements [8, 10, 26]. Further, deep learning has
15881

