Prototypical Pseudo Label Denoising and Target Structure Learning for
Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Pan Zhang1 *, Bo Zhang2 , Ting Zhang2 , Dong Chen2 , Yong Wang1 , Fang Wen2
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
Self-training is a competitive approach in domain adaptive segmentation, which trains the network with the pseudo
labels on the target domain. However inevitably, the pseudo
labels are noisy and the target features are dispersed due to
the discrepancy between source and target domains. In this
paper, we rely on representative prototypes, the feature centroids of classes, to address the two issues for unsupervised
domain adaptation. In particular, we take one step further
and exploit the feature distances from prototypes that provide richer information than mere prototypes. Specifically,
we use it to estimate the likelihood of pseudo labels to facilitate online correction in the course of training. Meanwhile,
we align the prototypical assignments based on relative feature distances for two different views of the same target,
producing a more compact target feature space. Moreover,
we find that distilling the already learned knowledge to a
self-supervised pretrained model further boosts the performance. Our method shows tremendous performance advantage over state-of-the-art methods. The code is available at
https://github.com/microsoft/ProDA.

1. Introduction
Despite the remarkable success of deep learning in computer vision, attaining high performance requires vast quantities of data. It is usually expensive to obtain labels for
dense prediction tasks, e.g., semantic segmentation. Therefore, people think of leveraging abundant photo-realistic
synthetic images with freely generated labels [44, 45].
However, deep neural networks are notoriously sensitive
to the domain misalignment that any nuanced unrealism
in rendered images will induce poor generalization to real
data. To address this issue, domain adaption techniques aim
to transfer the knowledge learned from the synthetic images
(source domain) to real ones (target domain) with minimal
performance loss. In this work, we focus on the challenging
* This work is done during the first author’s internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

case, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), where there
are no accessible labels in the target domain. Specifically,
we solve the UDA problem for semantic segmentation.
Rather than explicitly aligning the distributions of the
source and target domains as most predominant solutions [6, 27, 48, 54, 58], self-training [34, 69, 75, 76] has
recently emerged as a simple yet competitive approach in
the UDA task. This is achieved by iteratively generating a
set of pseudo labels based on the most confident predictions
on the target data and then relying on these pseudo labels
to retrain the network. In this way, the network gradually
learns the adaptation in the self-paced curriculum learning.
However, the performance still lags far behind the supervised learning or semi-supervised learning using a few labeled samples, making unsupervised domain adaptation impractical in real scenarios.
After dissecting the self-training, we find two key ingredients are lacking in previous works. First, typical practice [75, 76] suggests selecting the pseudo labels according
to a strict confidence threshold, while high scores are not
necessarily correct, making the network fail to learn reliable
knowledge in the target domain. Second, due to the domain
gap, the network is prone to produce dispersed features in
the target domain. It is likely that for target data, the closer
to the source distribution, the higher the confidence score.
As a result, data lying far from the source distribution (i.e.
low scores) will never be considered during the training.
In this paper, we propose to online denoise the pseudo
labels and learn a compact target structure to address the
above two issues respectively. We resort to prototypes,
i.e., the class-wise feature centroids, to accomplish the two
tasks. (1) We rectify the pseudo labels by estimating the
class-wise likelihoods according to its relative feature distances to all class prototypes. This depends on a practical
assumption that the prototype lies closer to the true centroid
of the underlying cluster, implying that false pseudo labels
are in the minority. It is worth noting that the prototypes
are computed on-the-fly, and thus the pseudo labels are progressively corrected throughout the training. (2) We draw
inspiration from the Deepcluster [4] to learn the intrinsic
structure of the target domain. Instead of directly learning

12414

