Thinking Fast and Slow: Efficient Text-to-Visual Retrieval with Transformers
Antoine Miech1 *
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac1 *
Ivan Laptev2
Josef Sivic3
Andrew Zisserman1,4
1

DeepMind

2

ENS/Inria

3

CIIRC CTU

4

VGG Oxford

{jalayrac,miech}@google.com

Abstract
Our objective is language-based search of large-scale
image and video datasets. For this task, the approach
that consists of independently mapping text and vision to
a joint embedding space, a.k.a. dual encoders, is attractive as retrieval scales and is efficient for billions of images using approximate nearest neighbour search. An alternative approach of using vision-text transformers with
cross-attention gives considerable improvements in accuracy over the joint embeddings, but is often inapplicable in
practice for large-scale retrieval given the cost of the crossattention mechanisms required for each sample at test time.
This work combines the best of both worlds. We make the
following three contributions. First, we equip transformerbased models with a new fine-grained cross-attention architecture, providing significant improvements in retrieval
accuracy whilst preserving scalability. Second, we introduce a generic approach for combining a Fast dual encoder
model with our Slow but accurate transformer-based model
via distillation and re-ranking. Finally, we validate our approach on the Flickr30K image dataset where we show an
increase in inference speed by several orders of magnitude
while having results competitive to the state of the art. We
also extend our method to the video domain, improving the
state of the art on the VATEX dataset.

1. Introduction
Imagine yourself looking for an image that best matches
a given textual description among thousands of other images. One effective way would be to first isolate a few
promising candidates by giving a quick glance at all the
images with a fast process, e.g. by eliminating images that
* Equal contribution.
1 Département d’informatique de l’ENS, École normale supérieure,

CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France.
3 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech
Technical University in Prague.
4 VGG, Dept. of Engineering Science, University of Oxford

A man rides a
bike with a cat
wearing
sunglasses.

Text
network

Vision
network

A man rides a
bike with a cat
wearing
sunglasses.

Distillation

Cross-Attention
network

(at training)

Similarity

Reranking

Similarity

(at query time)

Fast

Slow

Dual encoder

Cross-Attention

Figure 1: On the left, the Fast models, a.k.a dual encoders, independently process the input image and text to compute a similarity
score via a single dot product, which can be efficiently indexed
and is thus amenable to large-scale search. On the right, the Slow
models, a.k.a cross-attention models, jointly process the input image and text with cross-modal attention to compute a similarity
score. Fast and indexable models are improved by Slow models via
distillation at training time (offline). Slow models are accelerated
and improved with the distilled Fast approaches using a re-ranking
strategy at query time.

have clearly nothing in common with the description. In the
second phase, you may start paying more attention to image details with a slow process, e.g. by grounding individual words of a query sentence to make sure the scrutinized
image is the best match.
Analogous to the fast process above, fast retrieval systems can be implemented by separately encoding visual and
textual inputs into a joint embedding vector space where
similarities can be computed by dot product. Such methods
are regarded as indexable, i.e. they allow application of fast
approximate nearest neighbour search [11, 32, 53, 65] and
enable efficient billion-scale image retrieval. However, the
accuracy of such methods is limited due to the simplicity of
vision-text interaction model defined by the dot product in
the joint embedding space. We refer to these techniques as
Dual Encoders (DE) or Fast approaches.
Vision-text transformers compare each word to all loca-

9826

