Class-Aware Robust Adversarial Training for Object Detection
Pin-Chun Chen1,2∗

Bo-Han Kung2
Jun-Cheng Chen2
1
Columbia University
2
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica
pc2939@columbia.edu; {bhkung, pullpull}@citi.sinica.edu.tw

Abstract
Object detection is an important computer vision task
with plenty of real-world applications; therefore, how to
enhance its robustness against adversarial attacks has
emerged as a crucial issue. However, most of the previous defense methods focused on the classification task
and had few analysis in the context of the object detection
task. In this work, to address the issue, we present a novel
class-aware robust adversarial training paradigm for the
object detection task. For a given image, the proposed approach generates an universal adversarial perturbation to
simultaneously attack all the occurred objects in the image
through jointly maximizing the respective loss for each object. Meanwhile, instead of normalizing the total loss with
the number of objects, the proposed approach decomposes
the total loss into class-wise losses and normalizes each
class loss using the number of objects for the class. The
adversarial training based on the class weighted loss can
not only balances the influence of each class but also effectively and evenly improves the adversarial robustness of
trained models for all the object classes as compared with
the previous defense methods. Furthermore, with the recent development of fast adversarial training, we provide a
fast version of the proposed algorithm which can be trained
faster than the traditional adversarial training while keeping comparable performance. With extensive experiments
on the challenging PASCAL-VOC and MS-COCO datasets,
the evaluation results demonstrate that the proposed defense methods can effectively enhance the robustness of the
object detection models.

1. Introduction
Due to the recent breakthroughs of deep learning, deep
learning-based approaches have achieved promising performance for many computer vision tasks, such as object
recognition [8], [23], [7] and object detection [6]. However, researchers found there exists potential security issues
∗ Work done during a research assistantship at Academia Sinica.

Figure 1. Detection results after attacked by different adversarial examples to the vanilla SSD model. (a) ground true, (b) we
craft the adversarial example through the 10-step PGD optimization with the budget ǫ = 8 on the multi-task loss as described in
equation (1), (c) the detection result of the proposed class-wise
attack. These detection examples show the adversarial examples
generated by the proposed method can more evenly attack all the
objects occurred in the image than (b).

for deep learning-based approaches. Szegedy et al. [25]
first crafted adversarial examples by adding imperceptible
perturbations to the input images, which can easily fool the
deep learning-based classification models to generate unexpected outputs. From then on, many new attack methods,
including Fast Signed Gradient Method (FGSM) [5], DeepFool [16], Projected Gradient Descent (PGD) [14], Carlini
and Wagner Attack (C&W) [1], have been proposed to produce various adversarial examples that further expose the
vulnerability of the deep learning classification models. On
the other hand, object detection is one of the most important
and active research fields for computer vision with plenty
of real-world applications. Unfortunately, as the classification problem, it also suffers from the threat of these adversarial attacks, such as the physical adversarial patch attack
to affect the steering behavior of self-driving cars [24] or
the detection results of a face detector [21]. However, as
compared with the development of attack methods, the defense algorithms to improve the robustness of object detection models are relatively few.
In order to defend against these attacks, various meth-

10420

