Blur, Noise, and Compression Robust Generative Adversarial Networks
Takuhiro Kaneko1
1

The University of Tokyo

2

RIKEN

Generated (FID: 34.9)

Generated (FID: 24.2)

Blur + Noise + Compression

Real

Tatsuya Harada1,2

(a) Training images
(b) GAN (baseline)
(c) BNCR-GAN (proposed)
Figure 1. Examples of blur, noise, and compression robust image generation. Although recent GANs have shown remarkable results
in image reproduction, they can recreate training images faithfully (b), despite degradation by blur, noise, and compression (a). To address
this limitation, we propose blur, noise, and compression robust GAN (BNCR-GAN), which can learn to generate clean images (c) even
when trained with degraded images (a) and without knowledge of degradation parameters (e.g., blur kernel types, noise amounts, or quality
factor values). The project page is available at https://takuhirok.github.io/BNCR-GAN/.

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have gained
considerable attention owing to their ability to reproduce
images. However, they can recreate training images faithfully despite image degradation in the form of blur, noise,
and compression, generating similarly degraded images.
To solve this problem, the recently proposed noise robust
GAN (NR-GAN) provides a partial solution by demonstrating the ability to learn a clean image generator directly
from noisy images using a two-generator model comprising image and noise generators. However, its application
is limited to noise, which is relatively easy to decompose
owing to its additive and reversible characteristics, and its
application to irreversible image degradation, in the form of
blur, compression, and combination of all, remains a challenge. To address these problems, we propose blur, noise,
and compression robust GAN (BNCR-GAN) that can learn a
clean image generator directly from degraded images without knowledge of degradation parameters (e.g., blur kernel
types, noise amounts, or quality factor values). Inspired
by NR-GAN, BNCR-GAN uses a multiple-generator model
composed of image, blur-kernel, noise, and quality-factor
generators. However, in contrast to NR-GAN, to address
irreversible characteristics, we introduce masking architectures adjusting degradation strength values in a data-driven
manner using bypasses before and after degradation. Furthermore, to suppress uncertainty caused by the combina-

tion of blur, noise, and compression, we introduce adaptive consistency losses imposing consistency between irreversible degradation processes according to the degradation strengths. We demonstrate the effectiveness of BNCRGAN through large-scale comparative studies on CIFAR-10
and a generality analysis on FFHQ. In addition, we demonstrate the applicability of BNCR-GAN in image restoration.

1. Introduction
Constructing generative models to generate images that
are indistinguishable from real images is a fundamental
problem in computer vision and machine learning. Recently, however significant advancements have been made
in this regard, enabled by the emergence of deep generative models. Among them, generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [22], which learn data distributions through adversarial training, have attracted considerable attention owing
to their high image reproduction ability.
However, a persistent problem is that high-capacity
GANs can replicate training images with high fidelity, even
when the images are degraded, and they thus tend to replicate various forms of image degradation in their generated images. As shown in Figure 1, when standard GAN
is trained with images degraded by blur, noise, and compression (i.e., JPEG) (Figure 1(a)), it produces similarly
degraded images (Figure 1(b)) because standard GAN architectures do not consider such image degradation. This

13579

