Learning to Warp for Style Transfer

Figure 1. Our method performs non-parametric warping to match artistic geometric style. Output has comparable quality (or better) than state-of-the
art, but warping is two orders of magnitude faster. The teaser shows content, style (geometry+texture), and output images for a Picasso style
transfer (left) and a Salvaor Dali style transfer (right).

Xiao-Chang Liu

Yong-Liang Yang
University of Bath

Peter Hall

{XL2546,yy753,maspmh}@bath.ac.uk

Abstract
Since its inception in 2015, Style Transfer has focused on
texturing a content image using an art exemplar. Recently, the
geometric changes that artists make have been acknowledged
as an important component of style [42, 55, 62, 63]. Our
contribution is to propose a neural network that, uniquely,
learns a mapping from a 4D array of inter-feature distances
to a non-parametric 2D warp field. The system is generic in
not being limited by semantic class, a single learned model will
suffice; all examples in this paper are output from one model.
Our approach combines the benefits of the high speed of
Liu et al. [42] with the non-parametric warping of Kim et
al. [55]. Furthermore, our system extends the normal NST
paradigm: although it can be used with a single exemplar, we
also allow two style exemplars: one for texture and another for
geometry. This supports far greater flexibility in use cases than
single exemplars can provide.

1. Introduction
Neural style transfer (NST) is a current area of research
in Non-photorealistic rendering (NPR), with applications in
games, artistic design, architecture, and many other fields. By
mimicking a wide gamut of artistic styles from visual examples,
it greatly enriches the expressiveness of digital images. To
reach its fullest extent, NST must be able to mimic not just the
textural elements of style that are related to (e.g., brush strokes),
but geometric warps that artists use. This paper considers
the problem of image stylization using deep neural networks,

specifically focusing on artistic warping.
NST was first proposed by Gatys et al. [15], a paper set
the paradigm for a great deal of work. The algorithm receives
a content image, Ic, and an artistic style exemplar, Is. These
images provide the subject and rendering style for an output image: Io =τ(Ic,Is). The key idea is to construct a loss function
of two parts, for content LC (Io,Ic) and for style LS (Io,Is).
All of NST to date define both loss functions in terms of
kernel responses, typically drawn from the convolutional layers
within a network. The details of how the loss functions are
formed and how the network is trained largely explain the
development and diversification of current NST (see Section 2
for an overview). Such diversity notwithstanding, what is
common among all the techniques is that the kernel responses
depend on spatial color patterns and are spatially fixed. This
means that NST can be regarded as a sophisticated form of
tracing over the content image, which uses texture elicited from
the style image to construct the artwork.
The approach is limiting because artists change the shape
of the objects they render, that is: artists use geometric warping
in their work. Warping is evident across all of art, here we
give just a few examples among countless others. Caricaturists,
such as Ronald Searle, exaggerate semantic features in an
obvious way. English landscape artist George Stubbs painted
bulls to look much larger, stronger, “beefier” than in real life
– a kind of caricature. In his famous “Great Wave”, Hokusai
uses geometry to help emphasize natural power. Across the
world, and in all times, cultures have employed geometrical
distortions for expressive purpose. The art of children bears
little correspondence with geometric reality, yet often remains

3702

