Parser-Free Virtual Try-on via Distilling Appearance Flows
Yuying Ge1

Yibing Song2∗ Ruimao Zhang3,4 Chongjian Ge1 Wei Liu5 Ping Luo1
1
2
The University of Hong Kong
Tencent AI Lab
3
The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
4
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data 5 Tencent Data Platform

{yuyingge, rhettgee}@connect.hku.hk

pluo@cs.hku.hk

ruimao.zhang@ieee.org
Reference
Person

Parsing
Results

Target
Clothes

CP-VTON

ClothFlow

CP-VTON+

yibingsong.cv@gmail.com

wl2223@columbia.edu
ACGPN

Parser-based

Ours

Reference
Person

Target
Clothes

WUTON

Ours

Parser-free

Figure 1. Comparing our method with the recent state-of-the-art parser-based try-on methods (left) and an emerging parser-free method
(right). On the left, we highlight the inaccurate segmentation regions in green boxes, which mislead existing parser-based methods such
as CP-VTON [30], ClothFlow [8], CP-VTON+ [18], and ACGPN [32] to produce wrong results. On the right, the first parser-free method
WUTON [13] was proposed recently, but its image quality is bounded by the fake images produced by the parser-based method, because
[13] simply trained a “student” network to mimic the parser-based method using knowledge distillation. We see that our approach achieves
significantly better image quality than previous state-of-the-art methods, without relying on human segmentation.

Abstract
Image virtual try-on aims to fit a garment image (target clothes) to a person image. Prior methods are heavily
based on human parsing. However, slightly-wrong segmentation results would lead to unrealistic try-on images with
large artifacts. A recent pioneering work employed knowledge distillation to reduce the dependency of human parsing, where the try-on images produced by a parser-based
method are used as supervisions to train a “student” network without relying on segmentation, making the student
mimic the try-on ability of the parser-based model. However, the image quality of the student is bounded by the
* Y. Song is the corresponding author. This work is done when Y. Ge is
an intern in Tencent AI Lab. The code is available at https://github.
com/geyuying/PF-AFN.

parser-based model. To address this problem, we propose
a novel approach, “teacher-tutor-student” knowledge distillation, which is able to produce highly photo-realistic
images without human parsing, possessing several appealing advantages compared to prior arts. (1) Unlike existing
work, our approach treats the fake images produced by the
parser-based method as “tutor knowledge”, where the artifacts can be corrected by real “teacher knowledge”, which
is extracted from the real person images in a self-supervised
way. (2) Other than using real images as supervisions, we
formulate knowledge distillation in the try-on problem as
distilling the appearance flows between the person image
and the garment image, enabling us to find accurate dense
correspondences between them to produce high-quality results. (3) Extensive evaluations show large superiority of
our method (see Fig. 1).

8485

