Graph Attention Tracking
Dongyan Guo† , Yanyan Shao† , Ying Cui†∗ , Zhenhua Wang† , Liyan Zhang‡ , Chunhua Shen⋄
†
Zhejiang University of Technology, China
‡
Nanjing University of Aeronautics & Astronautics, China
⋄
Monash University, Australia
e-mail: cuiying@zjut.edu.cn

Abstract
Siamese network based trackers formulate the visual
tracking task as a similarity matching problem. Almost
all popular Siamese trackers realize the similarity learning
via convolutional feature cross-correlation between a target branch and a search branch. However, since the size
of target feature region needs to be pre-fixed, these crosscorrelation base methods suffer from either reserving much
adverse background information or missing a great deal of
foreground information. Moreover, the global matching between the target and search region also largely neglects the
target structure and part-level information.
In this paper, to solve the above issues, we propose a
simple target-aware Siamese graph attention network for
general object tracking. We propose to establish part-topart correspondence between the target and the search region with a complete bipartite graph, and apply the graph
attention mechanism to propagate target information from
the template feature to the search feature. Further, instead
of using the pre-fixed region cropping for template-featurearea selection, we investigate a target-aware area selection
mechanism to fit the size and aspect ratio variations of different objects. Experiments on challenging benchmarks including GOT-10k, UAV123, OTB-100 and LaSOT demonstrate that the proposed SiamGAT outperforms many stateof-the-art trackers and achieves leading performance. Code
is available at: https: // git. io/ SiamGAT

1. Introduction
General object tracking is a fundamental but challenging task in computer vision. In recent years, mainstream
trackers focus on Siamese network based architectures
[10, 15, 16, 33], which achieve state-of-the-art performance
as well as a good balance between tracking accuracy and
efficiency. These trackers first employ a Siamese network
for feature extraction. Then they develop a tracking-head

#16

#37

#56

#16

#68

#91

#63

#73

#92

SiamGAT

SiamCAR

ATOM

SiamRPN++

Figure 1 – Comparisons of our SiamGAT with state-of-the-art
trackers on three challenging sequences from GOT-10k. Benefiting from the effective target information propagating, our
SiamGAT successsfully handles the challenges such as shape deformation, similar distractors and extreme aspect-ratio changes.
Compared with the baseline SiamCAR (green), our SiamGAT
(red) remarkably improves the tracking accuracy (zoom in for a
better view).

network for object information decoding from one or more
similarity maps (or so-called response maps) obtained by
information embedding between the template-branch and
the search-branch. How to embed the information of the
two branches to obtain informative response maps is a key
issue, since information passed from the template to the
search region is critical to the accurate localization of the
object. Almost all current state-of-the-art Siamese trackers
like SiamRPN [16], SiamRPN++ [15], SiamFC++ [33] and
SiamCAR [10] utilize a cross-correlation based layer for
information embedding, which takes convolution on deep
features as the basic operation. Despite their great success,
some important drawbacks exist with such cross-correlation
based trackers: 1) The size of convolution kernel is prefixed. As shown in Figure 2, a common processing is crop-

9543

