Distilling Audio-Visual Knowledge by Compositional Contrastive Learning
Yanbei Chen1 , Yongqin Xian2 , A. Sophia Koepke1 , Ying Shan3 , Zeynep Akata1,2,4
1

University of Tübingen

2

MPI for Informatics

3

Tencent PCG

4

MPI for Intelligent Systems

{yanbei.chen, a-sophia.koepke, zeynep.akata}@uni-tuebingen.de, yxian@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
"
Image Teacher

Having access to multi-modal cues (e.g. vision and audio) empowers some cognitive tasks to be done faster compared to learning from a single modality. In this work, we
propose to transfer knowledge across heterogeneous modalities, even though these data modalities may not be semantically correlated. Rather than directly aligning the representations of different modalities, we compose audio, image, and video representations across modalities to uncover
richer multi-modal knowledge. Our main idea is to learn a
compositional embedding that closes the cross-modal semantic gap and captures the task-relevant semantics, which
facilitates pulling together representations across modalities by compositional contrastive learning. We establish
a new, comprehensive multi-modal distillation benchmark
on three video datasets: UCF101, ActivityNet, and VGGSound. Moreover, we demonstrate that our model significantly outperforms a variety of existing knowledge distillation methods in transferring audio-visual knowledge to improve video representation learning. Code is released here:
https://github.com/yanbeic/CCL.

1. Introduction
Videos often contain informative multi-modal cues, such
as visual objects, motion, auditory events, and textual information encoded in captions or speech – all of which provide rich, transferrable semantics for representation learning. The majority of existing works in video understanding utilises visual-only content for representation learning
[63, 52, 57, 64, 10, 19]. Our objective, on the other hand,
is to distill the rich multi-modal knowledge available in networks pre-trained on spatial imagery data and temporal auditory data to learn expressive video representations.
In contrast to the standard knowledge distillation techniques [29, 9] which transfer unimodal knowledge learned
from the same modality and dataset, our multi-modal distillation framework uniquely utilises knowledge learned from
multiple data modalities. Although prior works have considered cross-modal distillation [24, 6, 3, 34, 2], they generally assume pairwise semantic correspondence between two

!"
negatives

+
#
Video Student

!#"

!#

positives
!!#

+
$

Audio Teacher

!!

negatives

multi-modal shared latent space

+ : A learnable compositional embedding

Figure 1. Our generic multi-modal distillation framework aligns
audio, image, and video representations in the latent space by compositional contrastive learning, where a compositional embedding
is learned to bridge the cross-modal semantic gap and capture the
task-relevant semantics for more informative knowledge transfer.

modalities. However, in unconstrained scenarios, the crossmodal content may not always be semantically correlated
or temporally aligned, e.g. a video of applying lipstick, may
be accompanied by audio not directly related to the action,
such as music or speech. On the other hand, similar audio
cues, e.g. music, may accompany videos showing distinct
visual content, e.g. applying lipstick and playing cello.
In this work, we tackle a realistic multi-modal distillation paradigm that can distill heterogeneous audio and
visual knowledge for video representation learning. This
requires to bridge the cross-modal semantic gap, domain
gap, as well as dealing with inconsistent network architectures across modalities. To address these challenges in a
unified formulation, we propose compositional contrastive
learning – a novel, generic framework to distill the multimodal knowledge by flexibly plugging in the teacher networks pre-trained on different data modalities. Specifically,
a compositional embedding is learned to close the crossmodal gap between the teacher and student networks and
capture the task-relevant semantics. By jointly pulling together the teacher, student, and their compositional embeddings through compositional contrastive learning, the multimodal knowledge is transferred to the video student network to learn more powerful video representations.

7016

