Neighbor2Neighbor: Self-Supervised Denoising from Single Noisy Images
Tao Huang1,2 ,* Songjiang Li2 , Xu Jia2,3†, Huchuan Lu3 , Jianzhuang Liu2
1

Renmin University of China, 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies, 3 Dalian University of Technology
tao.huang2018@ruc.edu.cn
lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn

jiayushenyang@gmail.com

{songjiang.li, liu.jianzhuang}@huawei.com

Abstract
In the last few years, image denoising has benefited a
lot from the fast development of neural networks. However, the requirement of large amounts of noisy-clean image
pairs for supervision limits the wide use of these models.
Although there have been a few attempts in training an image denoising model with only single noisy images, existing
self-supervised denoising approaches suffer from inefficient
network training, loss of useful information, or dependence
on noise modeling. In this paper, we present a very simple yet effective method named Neighbor2Neighbor to train
an effective image denoising model with only noisy images.
Firstly, a random neighbor sub-sampler is proposed for the
generation of training image pairs. In detail, input and target used to train a network are images sub-sampled from
the same noisy image, satisfying the requirement that paired
pixels of paired images are neighbors and have very similar
appearance with each other. Secondly, a denoising network
is trained on sub-sampled training pairs generated in the
first stage, with a proposed regularizer as additional loss
for better performance. The proposed Neighbor2Neighbor
framework is able to enjoy the progress of state-of-the-art
supervised denoising networks in network architecture design. Moreover, it avoids heavy dependence on the assumption of the noise distribution. We explain our approach from
a theoretical perspective and further validate it through extensive experiments, including synthetic experiments with
different noise distributions in sRGB space and real-world
experiments on a denoising benchmark dataset in raw-RGB
space.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is a low-level vision task that is fundamental in computer vision, since noise contamination degrades the visual quality of collected images and may adversely affect subsequent image analysis and processing
tasks, such as classification and semantic segmentation [18].
* The work was done in Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies.
† Corresponding author

Traditional image denoising methods such as BM3D [7],
NLM [4], and WNNM [11], use local or non-local structures of an input noisy image. These methods are nonlearning-based without the need for ground-truth images.
Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) provide us
with powerful tools for image denoising. Numerous CNNbased image denoisers, e.g., DnCNN [34], U-Net [26], RED
[20], MemNet [28], and SGN [10], have superior performance over traditional denoisers. However, CNN-based denoisers depend heavily on a large number of noisy-clean
image pairs for training. Unfortunately, collecting large
amounts of aligned pairwise noisy-clean training data is
extremely challenging and expensive in real-world photography. Additionally, models trained with synthetic noisyclean image pairs degrade greatly due to the domain gap
between synthetic and real noise.
To mitigate this problem, a series of unsupervised and
self-supervised methods that do not require any clean images for training are proposed. These methods require 1)
training the network with multiple independent noisy observations per scene [17], 2) designing specific blind-spot
network structures to learn self-supervised models on only
single noisy images [13, 15, 30], and making further improvements by using noise models, e.g., Gaussian-Poisson
models [15, 30], or 3) training the network with noisiernoisy pairs, where the noisier image is derived from the
noisy one with synthetic noise added [31, 22]. However,
these requirements are not practical in real-world denoising scenarios. Firstly, capturing multiple noisy observations per scene remains very challenging, especially for
motion scenarios or medical imaging. Secondly, the relatively low accuracy and heavy computational burden of
blind-spot networks greatly limit the application. Moreover,
self-supervised methods with noise model assumptions may
work well in synthetic experiments when the noise distribution is known as a prior. However, these methods degrade
sharply when dealing with real-world noisy images where
the noise distribution remains unknown.
In this work, we propose Neighbor2Neighbor, a novel
self-supervised image denoising framework that overcomes

14781

