VS-Net: Voting with Segmentation for Visual Localization
Zhaoyang Huang1,2 *
Xiaowei Zhou1

Han Zhou1∗
Hujun Bao1

Yijin Li1
Guofeng Zhang1†

Bangbang Yang1
Hongsheng Li2,3

Yan Xu2

State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University‡
2
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
School of CST, Xidian University
1

Abstract
Visual localization is of great importance in robotics
and computer vision. Recently, scene coordinate regression
based methods have shown good performance in visual localization in small static scenes. However, it still estimates
camera poses from many inferior scene coordinates. To address this problem, we propose a novel visual localization
framework that establishes 2D-to-3D correspondences between the query image and the 3D map with a series of
learnable scene-specific landmarks. In the landmark generation stage, the 3D surfaces of the target scene are oversegmented into mosaic patches whose centers are regarded
as the scene-specific landmarks. To robustly and accurately
recover the scene-specific landmarks, we propose the Voting
with Segmentation Network (VS-Net) to segment the pixels
into different landmark patches with a segmentation branch
and estimate the landmark locations within each patch with
a landmark location voting branch. Since the number of
landmarks in a scene may reach up to 5000, training a segmentation network with such a large number of classes is
both computation and memory costly for the commonly used
cross-entropy loss. We propose a novel prototype-based
triplet loss with hard negative mining, which is able to train
semantic segmentation networks with a large number of labels efficiently. Our proposed VS-Net is extensively tested
on multiple public benchmarks and can outperform stateof-the-art visual localization methods. Code and models
are available at https://github.com/zju3dv/VS-Net.

* Zhaoyang Huang and Han Zhou assert equal contributions.
† Corresponding author: Guofeng Zhang.
‡ The authors from Zhejiang University are also affiliated with ZJUSenseTime Joint Lab of 3D Vision. This work was partially supported by
NSF of China(Nos. 61822310 and 61932003), Centre for Perceptual and
Interactive Intelligence Limited, the General Research Fund through the
Research Grants Council of Hong Kong under Grants (Nos. 14208417 and
14207319), and CUHK Strategic Fund.

1. Introduction
Localization [58, 44, 40] is a pivotal technique in many
real-world applications, such as Augmented Reality (AR),
Virtual Reality (VR), robotics, etc. With the popularity and
low cost of visual cameras, visual localization has attracted
widespread attention from the research community.
Recently, scene coordinate regression based methods [8,
7, 25], which learn neural networks to predict dense scene
coordinates of a query image and recover the camera pose
through RANSAC-PnP [18], dominate visual localization
and achieve state-of-the-art localization accuracy in small
static scenes. Compared with classical feature-based visual
localization frameworks [16, 26, 61, 44] relying on identified map points from Structure-from-Motion (SfM) techniques, it only requires to estimate 2D-to-3D correspondences and can be benefited from high-precision sensors.
Although scene coordinates construct dense 2D-3D correspondences, most of them are unable to recover reliable
camera poses. In dynamic environments, there could exist moving objects and varying lighting conditions which
raise the outlier ratio and increase the probability of choosing an erroneous pose with RANSAC algorithms. In addition, even after outlier rejection with RANSAC, there might
exist inferior scene coordinates that lead to inaccurate localization.
In the hope of estimating camera poses more robustly and accurately, we propose Voting with Segmentation Network (VS-Net) to identify and localize a series of
scene-specific landmarks through a Voting-by-Segmentation
framework. In contrast with scene coordinate regression methods that predict pixel-wise dense 3D scene coordinates, the proposed framework only estimates a small
quantity of scene-specific landmarks (or 2D-3D correspondences) that are of much higher accuracy.
Unlike feature-based visual localization methods, where
landmarks are directly extracted from the images according to certain rules, we manually specify a series of scene-

6101

