Coarse-to-Fine Person Re-Identification with Auxiliary-Domain Classification
and Second-Order Information Bottleneck
Anguo Zhang1,2 Yueming Gao1,2 Yuzhen Niu∗,3 Wenxi Liu3 Yongcheng Zhou1
1
College of Physics and Information Engineering, Fuzhou University
2
Key Laboratory of Medical Instrumentation and Pharmaceutical Technology of Fujian Province
3
College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Fuzhou University

Abstract
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is to retrieve a particular person captured by different cameras, which is of great
significance for security surveillance and pedestrian behavior analysis. However, due to the large intra-class variation
of a person across cameras, e.g., occlusions, illuminations,
viewpoints, and poses, Re-ID is still a challenging task in
the field of computer vision. In this paper, to attack the
issues concerning with intra-class variation, we propose
a coarse-to-fine Re-ID framework with the incorporation
of auxiliary-domain classification (ADC) and second-order
information bottleneck (2O-IB). In particular, as an auxiliary task, ADC is introduced to extract the coarse-grained
essential features to distinguish a person from miscellaneous backgrounds, which leads to the effective coarse- and
fine-grained feature representations for Re-ID. On the other
hand, to cope with the redundancy, irrelevance, and noise
contained in the Re-ID features caused by intra-class variations, we integrate 2O-IB into the network to compress and
optimize the features, without increasing additional computation overhead during inference. Experimental results
demonstrate that our proposed method significantly reduces
the neural network output variance of intra-class person images and achieves the superior performance to state-of-theart methods.

1. Introduction
Image-based person re-identification (Re-ID) aims to retrieve a particular person from a high volume of person images captured by different cameras. Considering its crucial
applications in public security surveillance, pedestrian behavior analysis, etc., Re-ID has received increasing attention in recent years.
* Yuzhen Niu is the corresponding author (e-mail:
niu@gmail.com).

yuzhen-

Figure 1. We present a novel coarse-to-fine Re-ID framework. Assisted by the task of auxiliary-domain classification (ADC), our
Re-ID framework is enabling to learn from the coarse-grained to
the fine-grained features for distinguishing persons. Specifically,
an extra-domain dataset and a Re-ID dataset are jointly utilized in
ADC. Second-order information bottleneck (2O-IB) module compresses the redundant information and noise in the features to obtain a more concise and core representation. Last, the computed
embedding vector for person representation is generated for ReID.

Owing to the ability of extracting excellent representative features as well as the outstanding invariance embedding capability, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have become the predominant choices for Re-ID. CNNsbased Re-ID methods can be roughly categorized into 1)
the representation learning methods that use classification
losses as the proxy targets to learn the person embeddings
[12, 43, 15, 26]; 2) the metric learning methods that aim to
learn the similarity between two person images so that images of the same person have greater similarity than those
of different persons [25, 23, 22]; 3) the attribute learning
methods that use the local attributes, such as clothing color,
hair length/color, hat, and backpack, to identify a person
[18, 19, 40, 31]; 4) the local feature learning methods that
use image dividing, skeleton key point positioning, and posture correction to learn the features of each part of the person image, and then obtains the global features of the person
through feature fusion [17, 37, 32, 33]; and 5) the generative adversarial network (GAN) based methods that expand
and augment person images in the training dataset to obtain

598

