Fast end-to-end learning on protein surfaces
Jean Feydy∗
Imperial College London

Freyr Sverrisson∗
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics

jfeydy@ic.ac.uk
∗

freyr.sverrisson@epfl.ch

equal contribution

Bruno E. Correia
École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne
and Swiss Institute of Bioinformatics

Michael M. Bronstein
Imperial College London /
Twitter

bruno.correia@epfl.ch

m.bronstein@ic.ac.uk

A

Abstract

Y
V

Structure prediction

T
R
P
N
G

Protein design

H

Proteins are biomacromolecules central to all living organisms. Their function is a determining factor in health
and disease, and being able to predict functional properties of proteins is of the utmost importance to developing
novel drug therapies. From a chemical perspective, pro-

F

1. Introduction

S

Proteins’ biological functions are defined by the geometric and chemical structure of their 3D molecular surfaces.
Recent works have shown that geometric deep learning can
be used on mesh-based representations of proteins to identify potential functional sites, such as binding targets for
potential drugs. Unfortunately though, the use of meshes as
the underlying representation for protein structure has multiple drawbacks including the need to pre-compute the input
features and mesh connectivities. This becomes a bottleneck
for many important tasks in protein science.
In this paper, we present a new framework for deep
learning on protein structures that addresses these limitations. Among the key advantages of our method are the computation and sampling of the molecular surface on-the-fly
from the underlying atomic point cloud and a novel efficient
geometric convolutional layer. As a result, we are able to
process large collections of proteins in an end-to-end fashion, taking as the sole input the raw 3D coordinates and
chemical types of their atoms, eliminating the need for any
hand-crafted pre-computed features.
To showcase the performance of our approach, we test it
on two tasks in the field of protein structural bioinformatics: the identification of interaction sites and the prediction
of protein-protein interactions. On both tasks, we achieve
state-of-the-art performance with much faster run times and
fewer parameters than previous models. These results will
considerably ease the deployment of deep learning methods
in protein science and open the door for end-to-end differentiable approaches in protein modeling tasks such as function prediction and design.

(a) Folding and design.

(b) Interacting surfaces.

Figure 1: Three major problems in structural biology.
(a) Protein design is the inverse problem of structure prediction. (b) Two interacting proteins represented as an atomic
point cloud (left) and as a molecular surface (right) that
abstracts out the internal fold (shown semi-transparently).
Protein surfaces display a number of geometric (e.g. concave and convex regions) and chemical (e.g. charges) features. Identifying their binding is a complex problem that
can be addressed with geometric deep learning.
teins are polymers composed of a sequence of amino acids
(Fig. 1.a). This sequence determines the structural conformation (fold) of the protein, and the structure in turn
determines its function. In a folded protein, hydrophobic
(water-repelling) residues typically cluster within the core
of the protein, while hydrophilic (water-attracting) residues
are exposed to water solvent on its surface. The properties
of this surface dictate the type and the strength of the interactions that a protein can have with other molecules (Fig.
1.b). Analysing this complex 3D object is therefore a fundamental problem in biology: models for protein structures
can be used to understand the possible interactions between
a protein and its environment, and consequently predict the
functions of these macromolecules in living organisms.
Since proteins are predominant drug targets, the study
of their interactions with other molecules is a key problem
for fundamental biology and the pharmaceutical industry.
Classical drugs are small molecules designed to bind to a
protein of interest, with a binding site that usually has noticeable ‘pocket-like’ structure. Targets with flat surfaces
that exhibit no pockets have long been a challenge for drug
developers and are often deemed ‘undruggable’. The possibility of addressing such targets with specifically designed

15272

