Stereo Radiance Fields (SRF):
Learning View Synthesis for Sparse Views of Novel Scenes
Julian Chibane1,2
1

Aayush Bansal3

Verica Lazova1,2

University of Tübingen, Germany, 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Germany

Gerard Pons-Moll1,2
3

Carnegie Mellon University, USA

{jchibane, vlazova, gpons}@mpi-inf.mpg.de, aayushb@cs.cmu.edu

Figure 1. Our method can synthesize new views with a single network forward pass from 10 sparse and spread-out views of a novel scene.
Here we synthesize a new view with (a) NeRF [34], which requires scene-specific training for 2 days; with our method (b) which produces
the result instantaneously and (c) our improved result after fine-tuning our pre-trained model for 15 minutes on the 10 views.

Abstract
Recent neural view synthesis methods have achieved impressive quality and realism, surpassing classical pipelines
which rely on multi-view reconstruction. State-of-the-Art
methods, such as NeRF [34], are designed to learn a single scene with a neural network and require dense multiview inputs. Testing on a new scene requires re-training
from scratch, which takes 2-3 days. In this work, we introduce Stereo Radiance Fields (SRF), a neural view synthesis approach that is trained end-to-end, generalizes to new
scenes, and requires only sparse views at test time. The core
idea is a neural architecture inspired by classical multi-view
stereo methods, which estimates surface points by finding
similar image regions in stereo images. In SRF, we predict color and density for each 3D point given an encoding of its stereo correspondence in the input images. The
encoding is implicitly learned by an ensemble of pair-wise
similarities – emulating classical stereo. Experiments show
that SRF learns structure instead of over-fitting on a scene.
We train on multiple scenes of the DTU dataset and generalize to new ones without re-training, requiring only 10
sparse and spread-out views as input. We show that 10-15
minutes of fine-tuning further improve the results, achieving significantly sharper, more detailed results than scenespecific models. The code, model, and videos are available
– https://virtualhumans.mpi-inf.mpg.de/
srf/.

1. Introduction
We introduce a neural multi-view view synthesis approach which is trained end-to-end, generalizes to novel
scenes, and requires only sparse views at test time (Fig. 1(b)). This is in stark contrast to State-of-the-Art (SOTA)
view synthesis methods like NeRF [34], which are trained
for a specific scene and require dense multi-views to produce sharp results.
On one end of the view synthesis spectrum of methods, we have pure data-driven methods such as NeRF [34],
which have shown impressive results. NeRF takes a radical
data-driven approach by learning a mapping from a location and direction to the emitted radiance. This mapping
is specifically trained for a scene (Fig. 2-(a)). Generalization to a new scene requires retraining for 2 days and results are blurry when trained on sparse and spread-out views
(Fig. 1-(a)). On the other end of the spectrum, popular
classical image-based rendering techniques [46] use geometry [8, 29, 44, 45]. These approaches warp pixels to the desired target view via correspondences [39, 41, 49] or multiview 3D reconstruction [42, 43]. Consequently, these methods rely on high-quality 3D reconstruction or dense perpixel correspondence, which requires dense multi-views.
Recent work [5, 38] combines classical methods with datadriven approaches by learning to correct the warped views
of classical methods. The sequential pipeline in these methods [5, 38] do not allow end-to-end learning.

7911

