Single-view robot pose and joint angle estimation via render & compare
Yann Labbé 1
1

Justin Carpentier 1 Mathieu Aubry 2 Josef Sivic 1,3
ENS/Inria 2 LIGM, ENPC 3 CIIRC CTU

https://www.di.ens.fr/willow/research/robopose

Abstract
We introduce RoboPose, a method to estimate the joint
angles and the 6D camera-to-robot pose of a known articulated robot from a single RGB image. This is an important
problem to grant mobile and itinerant autonomous systems
the ability to interact with other robots using only visual
information in non-instrumented environments, especially
in the context of collaborative robotics. It is also challenging because robots have many degrees of freedom and an
infinite space of possible configurations that often result in
self-occlusions and depth ambiguities when imaged by a
single camera. The contributions of this work are three-fold.
First, we introduce a new render & compare approach for estimating the 6D pose and joint angles of an articulated robot
that can be trained from synthetic data, generalizes to new
unseen robot configurations at test time, and can be applied
to a variety of robots. Second, we experimentally demonstrate the importance of the robot parametrization for the
iterative pose updates and design a parametrization strategy
that is independent of the robot structure. Finally, we show
experimental results on existing benchmark datasets for four
different robots and demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms the state of the art. Code and pre-trained
models are available on the project webpage [1].

1. Introduction
The goal of this work is to recover the state of a known articulated robot within a 3D scene using a single RGB image.
The robot state is defined by (i) its 6D pose, i.e. a 3D translation and a 3D rotation with respect to the camera frame, and
(ii) the joint angle values of the robot’s articulations. The
problem set-up is illustrated in Figure 1. This is an important
problem to grant mobile and itinerant autonomous systems
the ability to interact with other robots using only visual
information in non-instrumented environments. For instance,
in the context of collaborative tasks between two or more
robots, having knowledge of the pose and the joint angle
1 Inria Paris and Département d’informatique de l’ENS, École normale
supérieure, CNRS, PSL Research University, 75005 Paris, France.
2 LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, Marne-la-vallée,
France.
3 Czech Institute of Informatics, Robotics and Cybernetics at the Czech
Technical University in Prague.

Figure 1: RoboPose. (a) Given a single RGB image of a known
articulated robot in an unknown configuration (left), RoboPose
estimates the joint angles and the 6D camera-to-robot pose (rigid
translation and rotation) providing the complete state of the robot
within the 3D scene, here illustrated by overlaying the articulated
CAD model of the robot over the input image (right). (b) When
the joint angles are known at test-time (e.g. from internal measurements of the robot), RoboPose can use them as an additional input
to estimate the 6D camera-to-robot pose to enable, for example,
visually guided manipulation without fiducial markers.
values of all other robots would allow better distribution of
the load between robots involved in the task [5].
The problem is, however, very challenging because robots
can have many degrees of freedom (DoF) and an infinite
space of admissible configurations that often result in selfocclusions and depth ambiguities when imaged by a single
camera. The current best performing methods for this problem [28, 61] use a deep neural network to localize in the
image a fixed number of pre-defined keypoints (typically
located at the articulations) and then solve a 2D-to-3D optimization problem to recover the robot 6D pose [28] or pose
11654

