Are Labels Always Necessary for Classifier Accuracy Evaluation?
Weijian Deng Liang Zheng
Australian National University
{firstname.lastname}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
To calculate the model accuracy on a computer vision
task, e.g., object recognition, we usually require a test set
composing of test samples and their ground truth labels.
Whilst standard usage cases satisfy this requirement, many
real-world scenarios involve unlabeled test data, rendering common model evaluation methods infeasible. We investigate this important and under-explored problem, Automatic model Evaluation (AutoEval). Specifically, given
a labeled training set and a classifier, we aim to estimate
the classification accuracy on unlabeled test datasets. We
construct a meta-dataset: a dataset comprised of datasets
generated from the original images via various transformations such as rotation, background substitution, foreground
scaling, etc. As the classification accuracy of the model on
each sample (dataset) is known from the original dataset
labels, our task can be solved via regression. Using the
feature statistics to represent the distribution of a sample
dataset, we can train regression models (e.g., a regression
neural network) to predict model performance. Using synthetic meta-dataset and real-world datasets in training and
testing, respectively, we report a reasonable and promising
prediction of the model accuracy. We also provide insights
into the application scope, limitation, and potential future
direction of AutoEval.

1. Introduction
Model evaluation is an indispensable step in almost every computer vision task. Using a test set that is unseen during training, the goal of evaluation is to estimate
a model’s (hopefully) unbiased accuracy when deployed in
real-world scenarios. In most cases, we are provided with
a labeled test set, allowing us to calculate the accuracy of
a model by comparing the predicted labels with the ground
truth labels (e.g., Fig. 1(a)). In the community, there are
many well-established benchmarks (e.g., ImageNet [7] and
COCO [26]) that provide various types of evaluation metrics. For example, top-1 error, commonly used in image
classification, indicates whether the predicted class is the

same as the ground truth. There are some other metrics
such as mean average precision in object detection [26] and
panoptic quality [22] in panoptic segmentation.
Compared with the evaluation on these benchmarks,
evaluating model performance for real-world deployment
is not that straightforward. Often, real-world data follow
distributions that differ from the original training distribution. In this case, a model’s performance on the test sets in
a benchmark may not reflect that achieved during deployment. If we still need to have an estimation of the model’s
accuracy in this scenario, we have to re-evaluate it on the
real-world data. However, we often face scenarios where
annotations of test samples are not provided. Furthermore,
it can be very complex and expensive to manually gather labels. Even if acquired, these samples may only cover a very
limited set of conditions, adding bias to the evaluated performance. For example, it is very expensive to annotate test
samples for license plate recognition systems; even label is
gathered for every car, it still can not capture the diversity of
real-world circumstances such as lighting and weather condition. This raises an interesting question: can we estimate
model performance on a test set without test labels?
To answer this question, this paper introduces the Automatic model Evaluation (AutoEval) problem. Given a classifier trained on a training set, the goal is to estimate its
accuracy on an unlabeled test set. Here, we introduce an
example in Fig. 1(b). Given a digit classifier trained on
MNIST [23], we want to predict the classification accuracy
on a test set without ground truths. This problem is challenging, as a test set contains many images, and each image
has varied and rich visual contents. However, by visually
inspecting the obvious differences between test and training sets, we can infer that the accuracy on the test set is low.
From this observation, we study AutoEval by considering the distribution difference between training and test sets
and how it effects classifier accuracy. Existing literature
gives us important hints. Dataset distributions can be represented by first and second-order statistics of the mean vector
of output image feature representations [36, 32, 15]. For example, distribution difference can be estimated via Fréchet
Distance (FD) [12] or maximum mean discrepancy (MMD)

15069

