Multi-Decoding Deraining Network and Quasi-Sparsity Based Training
Yinglong Wang† Chao Ma§ * Bing Zeng† *
†
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
§
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
ylwanguestc@gmail.com, chaoma@sjtu.edu.cn, eezeng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Existing deep deraining models are mainly learned via
directly minimizing the statistical differences between rainy
images and rain-free ground truths. They emphasize learning a mapping from rainy images to rain-free images with
supervision. Despite the demonstrated success, these methods do not perform well on restoring the fine-grained local
details or removing blurry rainy traces. In this work, we
aim to exploit the intrinsic priors of rainy images and develop intrinsic loss functions to facilitate training deraining networks, which decompose a rainy image into a rainfree background layer and a rainy layer containing intact
rain streaks. To this end, we introduce the quasi-sparsity
prior to train network so as to generate two sparse layers with intact textures of different objects. Then we explore the low-value prior to compensate sparsity, forcing
all rain streaks to enter into one layer while non-rain contents into another layer to restore image details. We introduce a multi-decoding structure to specially supervise
the generation of multi-type deraining features. This helps
to learn the most contributory features to deraining in respective spaces. Moreover, our model stabilizes the feature
values from multi-spaces via information sharing to alleviate potential artifacts, which also accelerates the running
speed. Extensive experiments show that the proposed deraining method outperforms the state-of-the-art approaches
in terms of effectiveness and efficiency.

1. Introduction
The rainy artifacts on images usually include visible rain
streaks and the haze-like veiling effect. This work focuses
on rain streaks removal as it is still an unsolved challenging
task. Conventional methods usually remove rain via learning an over-complete dictionary [26, 1, 10]. The rain-free
image is reconstructed by the non-rain dictionary atoms,
which are identified from all the learned dictionary atoms
* C. Ma and B. Zeng are corresponding authors.

by means of the heuristic appearance characteristics of rain.
These methods do not perform well when the patterns of
rain streaks are complex, e.g., rain streaks overlap and interweave. Without using high-level features, complex rain
streaks cannot be identified, causing heavy performance
bottleneck.
Recently, deep learning based methods explore highlevel features of rainy images through pretrained CNN models. They achieve the state-of-the-art deraining performance
in not only restoration quality but also the running speed
[27, 19, 8, 31, 15, 5, 4, 30, 35, 17, 25]. However, the
limitation appears when rain streaks are wide or blurry.
Fig. 1 shows an example that, when the middle parts of
rain streaks become brighter, while the edges are blurry, existing deep learning based methods only remove the bright
parts, but the blurry edges still remain. The reason lies in
that these CNN models are trained by means of minimizing the statistical differences between deraining results and
ground truth images, as formulated by the MSE [35, 5, 30]
or MAE [14] loss functions. MSE and MAE converge at
the arithmetic mean and median of the observations respectively, which correlate poorly with image details restoration
[12, 37]. Therefore, exploring losses beyond the traditional
formulation is urged for further performance improvement.
In this paper, we introduce the intrinsic priors to construct loss functions. We first study the sparsity of rainy
images to achieve sparse image decomposition, i.e., making each sparse layer contain as intact (not split) textures of
objects as possible [13, 3, 20]. Based on such property, rain
streaks will not be split during deraining, as well as other
image contents. Note that the concept of sparsity here is
an intrinsic property of images, which is different from the
one indicating the majority of elements in a matrix are zero
or close to zero [29]. However, existing sparse stochastic
distributions lead to too complex derivation of maximum
likelihood (ML) to train CNNs [13].
To obtain tractable loss functions via ML, we relax the
sparsity degree and develop quasi-sparsity prior to approximate the sincere sparsity. Quasi-sparsity with simpler formula keeps the property of sparsity and can be used to train

13375

