FixBi: Bridging Domain Spaces for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Jaemin Na1 , Heechul Jung2 , Hyung Jin Chang3 , and Wonjun Hwang1
1
Ajou University, Korea, 2 Kyungpook National University, Korea, 3 University of Birmingham, UK
osial46@ajou.ac.kr, heechul@knu.ac.kr, h.j.chang@bham.ac.uk, wjhwang@ajou.ac.kr

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods for
learning domain invariant representations have achieved
remarkable progress. However, most of the studies were
based on direct adaptation from the source domain to the
target domain and have suffered from large domain discrepancies. In this paper, we propose a UDA method
that effectively handles such large domain discrepancies.
We introduce a fixed ratio-based mixup to augment multiple intermediate domains between the source and target domain. From the augmented-domains, we train the
source-dominant model and the target-dominant model that
have complementary characteristics. Using our confidencebased learning methodologies, e.g., bidirectional matching
with high-confidence predictions and self-penalization using low-confidence predictions, the models can learn from
each other or from its own results. Through our proposed
methods, the models gradually transfer domain knowledge
from the source to the target domain. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of our proposed method
on three public benchmarks: Office-31, Office-Home, and
VisDA-2017. 1

Figure 1. Comparison of previous domain adaptation methods and our proposed method. Top: Previous methods try
to adapt directly without any consideration of large domain
discrepancies. Bottom: Our proposed method utilize augmented domains between the source and target domain for
efficient domain adaptation.

1. Introduction
Recently, we have seen considerable improvements in
several computer vision applications using deep learning;
however, this success has been limited to supervised learning methods with abundant labeled data. Collecting and labeling data from various domains is an expensive and timeconsuming task. To address this problem, semi-supervised
learning [45, 3, 34] and unsupervised learning [9] have been
studied; however, in most cases, it was assumed that learning of the model occurred in a similar domain.
UDA refers to a set of transfer learning methods for
transferring knowledge learned from the source domain to
the target domain under the assumption of domain discrepancy. Moreover, it is useful when the source domain con1 Our code is available at https://github.com/NaJaeMin92/FixBi.

tains enough labeled data to learn, but not much labeled data
are present in the target domain. Domain adaptation (DA)
generally assumes that the two domains have the same conditional distribution, but different marginal distributions.
Under these assumptions, effective knowledge transfer is
difficult when the two domains have large marginal distribution gaps. This becomes much more challenging in a scenario where the target domain has no labeled data at all.
In previous UDA methods, a domain discriminator [8,
37] was introduced to encourage domain confusion through
domain-adversarial objectives and minimize the gap between the source and target distributions. In [21, 24],
domain discrepancy based approaches used metrics such
as maximum mean discrepancy (MMD) and joint MMD
(JMMD) to reduce the difference between two feature

1094

