Activate or Not: Learning Customized Activation
Ningning Ma1
Xiangyu Zhang2
Ming Liu1
Jian Sun2
1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
2
MEGVII Technology
{nmaac,eelium}@ust.hk

{zhangxiangyu,sunjian}@megvii.com

We present a simple, effective, and general activation function we term ACON which learns to activate the
neurons or not. Interestingly, we find Swish, the recent
popular NAS-searched activation, can be interpreted as a
smooth approximation to ReLU. Intuitively, in the same
way, we approximate the more general Maxout family
to our novel ACON family, which remarkably improves
the performance and makes Swish a special case of ACON.
Next, we present meta-ACON, which explicitly learns
to optimize the parameter switching between non-linear
(activate) and linear (inactivate) and provides a new design space. By simply changing the activation function,
we show its effectiveness on both small models and highly
optimized large models (e.g. it improves the ImageNet
top-1 accuracy rate by 6.7% and 1.8% on MobileNet0.25 and ResNet-152, respectively). Moreover, our novel
ACON can be naturally transferred to object detection and
semantic segmentation, showing that ACON is an effective
alternative in a variety of tasks. Code is available at
https: // github. com/ nmaac/ acon .

1. Introduction
The Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) [13, 24, 39] has
become an effective component in neural networks and a
foundation of many state-of-the-art computer vision algorithms. Through a sequence of advances, the Swish activation [41] searched by the Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) technique achieves top accuracy on the challenging ImageNet benchmark [9, 42]. It has been shown
by many practices to ease optimization and achieve
better performance [18, 49]. Our goal is to interpret the
mechanism behind this searched result and investigate
more effective activation functions.
Despite the success of NAS on modern activations, a
1 This work is supported by The National Key Research and
Development Program of China (No. 2017YFA0700800) and
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI).

Accuracy Improvement (%)

Abstract

2.5

Swish
SENet
meta-acon

2
1.5
1
0.5
0
ShuffleNetV2 ResNet50

ResNet101 ResNet152

Figure 1. ImageNet top-1 accuracy relative improvements
compared with the ReLU baselines. As the models go larger,
Swish and SENet gain smaller, but Meta-ACON still improves
very stably and remarkably even on the substantially deep
and highly optimized ResNet152. The relative improvements
of Meta-ACON are about twice as much as SENet.

natural question to ask is: how does the NAS-searched
Swish actually work? Despite its widespread use, this
activation function is still poorly understood. We show
that Swish can be surprisingly represented as a smooth
approximation to ReLU, by a simple and general approximation formula (Equ. 2).
This paper pushes the envelop further: our method,
called ACON, follows the spirit of the ReLU-Swish conversion and approximates the general Maxout [12] family to
our novel ACON family by the general approximation formula. We show the converted functions (ACON-A, ACON-B,
ACON-C) are smooth and differentiable, where Swish is
merely a case of them (ACON-A). ACON is conceptually
simple and does not add any computational overhead,
however, it improves accuracy remarkably. To achieve
this result, we identify the fixed upper/lower bounds
in the gradient as the main obstacle impeding from
improving accuracy and present the ACON with learnable
upper/lower bounds (see Fig. 3).
In principle, ACON is an extension of Swish and has
a dynamic non-linear degree, where a switching factor
decays to zero as the non-linear function becomes linear.

8032

