Regularization Strategy for Point Cloud via Rigidly Mixed Sample
Dogyoon Lee1

Jaeha Lee1 Junhyeop Lee1 Hyeongmin Lee1
Sungmin Woo1 Sangyoun Lee1∗
1

Minhyeok Lee1

Yonsei University

{nemotio,jaeha0725,jun.lee,minimonia,hydragon516,smw3250,syleee}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Data augmentation is an effective regularization strategy
to alleviate the overﬁtting, which is an inherent drawback of
the deep neural networks. However, data augmentation is
rarely considered for point cloud processing despite many
studies proposing various augmentation methods for image
data. Actually, regularization is essential for point clouds
since lack of generality is more likely to occur in point cloud
due to small datasets. This paper proposes a Rigid Subset
Mix (RSMix)1 , a novel data augmentation method for point
clouds that generates a virtual mixed sample by replacing part of the sample with shape-preserved subsets from
another sample. RSMix preserves structural information
of the point cloud sample by extracting subsets from each
sample without deformation using a neighboring function.
The neighboring function was carefully designed considering unique properties of point cloud, unordered structure
and non-grid. Experiments veriﬁed that RSMix successfully
regularized the deep neural networks with remarkable improvement for shape classiﬁcation. We also analyzed various combinations of data augmentations including RSMix
with single and multi-view evaluations, based on abundant
ablation studies.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have achieved outstanding performances in various ﬁelds regardless of the data domains,
such as image, video, speech, and point cloud. In particular, three-dimensional (3D) point cloud processing is attracting considerable interest following the pioneering network PointNet [22] development, since point clouds can
be applied directly to deep learning without preprocessing.
Although various tasks have been successfully addressed
using point clouds, such as 3D object shape classiﬁcation
and part segmentation, inherent drawback of deep learning
is still less considered in the point cloud domain. Due to
1 Project page: https:// github.com/ dogyoonlee/ RSMix

Figure 1: Qualitative results with RSMix. Purple (left) and
yellow (middle) colored points indicate Rigid Subsets to be
extracted from each sample to synthesize red and green colored mixed samples (right).
the typical nature of deep neural networks (DNNs) that approximates the model from the given data distribution, the
trained model tends to be overﬁtted regardless of the data
domain. This lack of generality is a fundamental deep learning problem. One way to alleviate overﬁtting and generalize
the model is data augmentation, which improves diversity
of the training data.
Various data augmentation methods have been recently
proposed in the image domain as network regularization
strategies, but data augmentation for point clouds has only
rarely been considered. Actually, regularization is essential
for point clouds since it is easier to be biased to the distribution of training samples than that of image. That is largely
because point cloud datasets [31, 2, 6] are typically considerably smaller and less diverse than image datasets, such as
ImageNet [7] and MSCOCO [20], which have millions of
training data. For example, ModelNet40 [31], one of the

15900

