Learning to Identify Correct 2D-2D Line Correspondences on Sphere
Haoang Li1 Kai Chen1 Ji Zhao2 Jiangliu Wang1 Pyojin Kim3 Zhe Liu4 Yun-Hui Liu1
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China 2 TuSimple, China
3
Sookmyung Women’s University, South Korea 4 University of Cambridge, United Kingdom

Abstract
Given a set of putative 2D-2D line correspondences,
we aim to identify correct matches. Existing methods exploit the geometric constraints. They are only applicable to structured scenes with orthogonality, parallelism and
coplanarity. In contrast, we propose the first approach suitable for both structured and unstructured scenes. Instead
of geometric constraint, we leverage the spatial regularity
on sphere. Specifically, we propose to map line correspondences into vectors tangent to sphere. We use these vectors
to encode both angular and positional variations of image
lines, which is more reliable and concise than directly using
inclinations, midpoints or endpoints of image lines. Neighboring vectors mapped from correct matches exhibit a spatial regularity called local trend consistency, regardless of
the type of scenes. To encode this regularity, we design a
neural network and also propose a novel loss function that
enforces the smoothness constraint of vector field. In addition, we establish a large real-world dataset for image line
matching. Experiments showed that our approach outperforms state-of-the-art ones in terms of accuracy, efficiency
and robustness, and also leads to high generalization.

1. Introduction
2D-2D correspondences of points and lines1 are the basis of numerous computer vision algorithms [1, 4, 34]. Putative correspondences can be obtained by various methods [26, 41, 15]. In practice, these correspondences consist of correct matches, i.e., inliers and mismatches, i.e.,
outliers. Outliers are caused by viewpoint differences and
repetitive patterns. Since outliers drastically affect the algorithm robustness, it is important to identify inliers. Identifying inlier point correspondences has been widely studied. Most existing methods are based on geometric constraint [31, 38] or spatial regularity [44, 42]. The geometric
constraint-based methods leverage the fact that all the inliers can be fitted by the same parametric model, e.g., essen∗ Pyojin Kim and Yun-Hui Liu are co-corresponding authors.
1 We use “line” to represent “line segment” for writing simplification.

Man-made Object

Natural Object

(a) Putative 2D-2D Line Correspondences
Non-associated Endpoints Image-to-sphere Tangent
Vector
Mapping
Non-associated Midpoints

Inclinations
(b) Zoom View of Fig. 1(a)

Local Trend Consistency

(c) Spatial Regularity of Vectors

Figure 1. (a) A pair of lines with the same number represents a
2D-2D line correspondence. Putative correspondences consist of
inliers (blue) and outliers (red). (b) Baseline methods use the inclinations, midpoints, or endpoints to encode the angular, positional,
or both angular and positional variations of image lines, respectively. (c) We map line correspondences into vectors tangent to
sphere. Neighboring vectors mapped from inliers exhibit a local
trend consistency (analogous to “a school of fish”).

tial matrix [12]. The spatial regularity-based methods generate 2D displacement vectors, i.e., optical flow [27] by connecting point correspondences. They leverage the fact that
vectors generated by inliers are regular. The above methods
are all applicable to both structured (typically man-made)
scenes with orthogonality, parallelism and coplanarity [21],
and unstructured (typical natural) scenes [40].
Compared with the above point problem, identifying inlier line correspondences (see Fig. 1(a)) is more challenging and has not been well studied. Existing geometric
constraint-based methods [9, 43] are only suitable for structured scenes since inliers are only geometrically constrained
in these scenes. A spatial regularity-based method can theoretically handle both structured and unstructured scenes,
but how to design such a method remains an open question.
Specifically, we express the spatial regularity of line correspondences by both angular and positional variations of
image lines. As shown in Fig. 1(b), it is straightforward to
use the inclinations, midpoints, or endpoints to encode the
angular, positional, or both angular and positional variations

11743

