Probabilistic Tracklet Scoring and Inpainting for Multiple Object Tracking
Fatemeh Saleh1,2 , Sadegh Aliakbarian1,2 , Hamid Rezatofighi3 , Mathieu Salzmann4,5 , Stephen Gould1,2
1
Australian National University, 2 ACRV, 3 Monash University, 4 CVLab, EPFL, 5 ClearSpace
fatemehsadat.saleh@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Despite the recent advances in multiple object tracking
(MOT), achieved by joint detection and tracking, dealing
with long occlusions remains a challenge. This is due to the
fact that such techniques tend to ignore the long-term motion information. In this paper, we introduce a probabilistic autoregressive motion model to score tracklet proposals
by directly measuring their likelihood. This is achieved by
training our model to learn the underlying distribution of
natural tracklets. As such, our model allows us not only
to assign new detections to existing tracklets, but also to
inpaint a tracklet when an object has been lost for a long
time, e.g., due to occlusion, by sampling tracklets so as to fill
the gap caused by misdetections. Our experiments demonstrate the superiority of our approach at tracking objects in
challenging sequences; it outperforms the state of the art in
most standard MOT metrics on multiple MOT benchmark
datasets, including MOT16, MOT17, and MOT20.

1. Introduction
Tracking multiple objects in a video is key to the success of many computer vision applications, such as sport
analysis, autonomous driving, robot navigation, and visual
surveillance. With the recent progress in object detection,
tracking-by-detection [2] has become the de facto approach
to multiple object tracking; it consists of first detecting the
objects in the individual frames and then associating these
detections with trajectories, known as tracklets. While these
two steps were originally performed sequentially, recent advances have benefited from treating detection and tracking
jointly [3, 53, 66]. These approaches cast MOT as a local
tracking problem, utilizing either an object detector’s regression head [3] or an additional offset head [53, 66] to perform temporal re-alignment of the object bounding boxes in
consecutive frames. In other words, these approaches treat
tracking as the problem of propagating detection identities
across consecutive frames. While this strategy constitutes
the state of the art on many benchmark datasets in terms
of MOT metrics that highlight the quality of the detections,

e.g., MOTA, it fails to maintain identities throughout occlusions, and thus tends to produce many identity switches. In
this paper, we address this issue by developing a stochastic motion model that helps the tracker to maintain identities, even in the presence of long-term occlusions. In other
words, we show that, while largely ignored in the recent
MOT literature, motion remains a critical cue for tracking,
even with the great progress achieved by detectors. This
is evidenced by our experimental results on multiple MOT
benchmark datasets, in which our approach outperforms the
state of the art by a large margin.
Motion has, of course, been considered in the past,
mostly in the tracking-by-detection literature, via either
model-based filtering techniques [5, 25, 56] or more sophisticated data-driven ones based on RNNs [14, 17, 41, 44, 47,
55, 59, 60]. However, all of these approaches treat human
motion as a deterministic or a uni-modal process. Here, we
argue that human motion is a stochastic multi-modal process, and should thus be modeled stochastically. Note that
a similar concept has also been explored in the context of
trajectory forecasting, where the problem is to often given
perfect (ground-truth) trajectories, predict fixed-length continuations of those trajectories as a single path [1, 23], or
a distribution over different paths [19, 24, 29, 39, 48, 49].
However, to the best of our knowledge, these techniques
have not been incorporated in the context of MOT, where
we deal with noisy observations (detections), frequent occlusions, and assignment uncertainties.
Therefore, we introduce a stochastic autoregressive motion model that explicitly learns the multi-modal distribution of natural trajectories. This allows us to estimate the
likelihood of a tracklet given a sequence of bounding box
locations and the tracklets of the surrounding agents. We
then use this model to compute the likelihood of a tracklet
after assigning it a new detection. Moreover, learning the
multi-modal distribution of tracklets allows us to inpaint a
tracklet in the presence of misdetections caused by occlusion by sampling from the learned distribution. This is also
what the visual cortex of the human brain does when reasoning about dynamically occluded objects [15, 52].
To summarize, our contributions are as follows: (1) We

14329

