Context-aware Biaffine Localizing Network for Temporal Sentence Grounding
Daizong Liu1* Xiaoye Qu2* Jianfeng Dong3 Pan Zhou1† Yu Cheng4 Wei Wei1
Zichuan Xu5 Yulai Xie1
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology 2 Huawei Cloud
3
Zhejiang Gongshang University 4 Microsoft AI
5
Dalian University of Technology
{dzliu, panzhou, weiw, ylxie}@hust.edu.cn
dongjf24@gmail.com

quxiaoye@huawei.com

yu.cheng@microsoft.com

z.xu@dlut.edu.cn

Query: The woman pulls on a rowing machine for a second time.

Global Context

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of temporal sentence grounding (TSG), which aims to identify the temporal boundary of a specific segment from an untrimmed
video by a sentence query. Previous works either compare
pre-defined candidate segments with the query and select
the best one by ranking, or directly regress the boundary
timestamps of the target segment. In this paper, we propose a novel localization framework that scores all pairs of
start and end indices within the video simultaneously with
a biaffine mechanism. In particular, we present a Contextaware Biaffine Localizing Network (CBLN) which incorporates both local and global contexts into features of each
start/end position for biaffine-based localization. The local contexts from the adjacent frames help distinguish the
visually similar appearance, and the global contexts from
the entire video contribute to reasoning the temporal relation. Besides, we also develop a multi-modal self-attention
module to provide fine-grained query-guided video representation for this biaffine strategy. Extensive experiments
show that our CBLN significantly outperforms state-of-thearts on three public datasets (ActivityNet Captions, TACoS,
and Charades-STA), demonstrating the effectiveness of the
proposed localization framework. The code is available at
https://github.com/liudaizong/CBLN.

1. Introduction
Video understanding is a fundamental task in computer
vision and has drawn increasing attention over the last
years due to its various applications in video event detection [8], video summarization [37, 9, 24], video captioning
[18, 6, 20] and temporal action localization [34, 52], etc.
Recently, temporal sentence grounding (TSG) [14, 1, 30]
has been proposed as an important yet challenging task.
This task requires automatically determining the start and
∗ Equal contributions.

† Corresponding author.

Start: 3.7s
Query-guided video representation

End: 6.6s

Context-aware biaffine localization

start

Local

start

Local Context

end
Global

end

Local

Biaffine Multiplication
start

Scoring
Candidate Segment

end

Figure 1. An illustrative example of temporal sentence grounding task. From a new perspective, we propose a biaffine-based
localization method that scores all pairs of start and end frames
simultaneously with both local and global contexts.

end timestamps of a target segment in an untrimmed video
that contains an activity semantically corresponding to a
given sentence description, as shown in Figure 1. It is substantially more challenging as it needs to not only model the
complex multi-modal interactions among vision and language features, but also capture complicated context information for their semantics alignment.
Most previous methods [1, 14, 15, 25, 4, 51, 26, 46]
tackle TSG task following a multi-modal matching architecture, which generates multiple candidate proposals of different time intervals and ranks them according to their similarities with the sentence query. These methods severely
rely on the quality of proposals, and break the intrinsic temporal structure and global context of videos. Recently, several works [32, 47, 5, 42, 16, 28, 48] directly regress the
temporal locations of the target segment. Specifically, they
either regress the start/end timestamps based on the entire
video representation [47, 28], or predict at each frame to
determine whether this frame is a start or end boundary
[32, 48, 5]. However, in these methods, start and end features are never jointly considered. Given a video with two
target segments that have the same starting action (open the

11235

