ANR: Articulated Neural Rendering for Virtual Avatars
Amit Raj 1 Julian Tanke2 James Hays1
Minh Vo3 Carsten Stoll4 Christoph Lassner3
1

Georgia Tech

2

University of Bonn

3

Facebook Reality Labs 4 Epic Games

Figure 1: We present Articulated Neural Rendering (ANR), a rendering framework capable of producing highly realistic
avatars. Similar to Deferred Neural Rendering (DNR) [38], ANR uses neural networks to convert a latent texture on a coarse
mesh (left) into an RGB image (right). Unlike DNR, which is ineffective when the mesh geometry is inaccurate or deforms
during motion, ANR explicitly accounts for such geometric misalignment and pose-dependent deformation.

Abstract
The combination of traditional rendering with neural
networks in Deferred Neural Rendering (DNR) [38] provides a compelling balance between computational complexity and realism of the resulting images. Using skinned
meshes for rendering articulating objects is a natural extension for the DNR framework and would open it up to a
plethora of applications. However, in this case the neural
shading step must account for deformations that are possibly not captured in the mesh, as well as alignment inaccuracies and dynamics—which can confound the DNR
pipeline. We present Articulated Neural Rendering (ANR), a
novel framework based on DNR which explicitly addresses
its limitations for virtual human avatars. We show the superiority of ANR not only with respect to DNR but also
with methods specialized for avatar creation and animation. In two user studies, we observe a clear preference
for our avatar model and we demonstrate state-of-the-art
performance on quantitative evaluation metrics. Perceptually, we observe better temporal stability, level of detail and
plausibility. More results are available at our project page:
https://anr-avatars.github.io.

1. Introduction
Capturing realistic appearance is one of the important
goals of computer vision. Progress in 3D rendering and
neural networks has led to approaches with remarkable fidelity [22, 23, 29, 30]. These methods often use expensive
and intricate capture setups which prevent easy digitization
and transfer of the resulting models [7, 8, 11]. The recent
deferred neural rendering paradigm offers an exciting opportunity to work with inaccurate geometry and relatively
simple neural shaders while capturing complex scenes with
view-dependent effects realistically [1, 27, 38]. In a first
step, the geometry is rasterized using a neural latent texture
which is then translated to an RGB image using a convolutional network. Both, the rendering network as well as the
neural texture, are optimized to produce realistic results.
Deferred neural rendering works particularly well for
rigid objects. Its pipeline could be extended to deformable
objects in a natural way: a skinned mesh could be used for
capturing the geometry. The rasterized neural texture from
the posed mesh could then be translated to an RGB image.
While this idea is conceptually simple, the neural network
has to learn more complex deformation-dependent effects.
Furthermore, the mesh used for rendering is usually not a

3722

