Neural Response Interpretation through the Lens of Critical Pathways
Ashkan Khakzar1 , Soroosh Baselizadeh1 , Saurabh Khanduja1
Christian Rupprecht2 , Seong Tae Kim1 , Nassir Navab1
ashkan.khakzar@tum.de
1

CAMP @ Technical University of Munich
2
VGG @ University of Oxford

Abstract
Is critical input information encoded in specific sparse
pathways within the neural network? In this work, we discuss the problem of identifying these critical pathways and
subsequently leverage them for interpreting the network’s
response to an input. The pruning objective — selecting the
smallest group of neurons for which the response remains
equivalent to the original network — has been previously
proposed for identifying critical pathways. We demonstrate
that sparse pathways derived from pruning do not necessarily encode critical input information. To ensure sparse
pathways include critical fragments of the encoded input information, we propose pathway selection via neurons’ contribution to the response. We proceed to explain how critical
pathways can reveal critical input features. We prove that
pathways selected via neuron contribution are locally linear
(in an ℓ2 -ball), a property that we use for proposing a feature attribution method: “pathway gradient”. We validate
our interpretation method using mainstream evaluation experiments. The validation of pathway gradient interpretation method further confirms that selected pathways using
neuron contributions correspond to critical input features.
The code1 2 is publicly available.

1. Introduction
Understanding the rationale behind the response of a
neural network is of considerable significance. Such transparency is required for adoption and safe deployment in
mission-critical domains. Interpreting the response also
helps in debugging and designing neural networks, and
quenches the intellectual curiosity over how neural networks function [15, 47, 24, 63, 10, 50].
What insights can we acquire about the underpinnings
1 https://github.com/CAMP-eXplain-AI/PathwayGrad
2 https://github.com/CAMP-eXplain-AI/RoarTorch

of a neural network’s response by putting the networks under the microscope and analyzing neurons and pathways?
By ”pathway”, we refer to a union of paths (equivalently a
sub-network) that connect the input to the output. Discovering to what patterns neurons correspond — also known as
neural decoding in computational neuroscience [6] — has
revealed human interpretable concepts encoded in neurons
of artificial neural networks, e.g. curve and circle detectors
[41, 65]. Analyzing the neural pathways has recently revealed human interpretable connections between concepts
encoded within each neuron on the pathway, e.g. circles
being assembled from curves [40]. In this work we discuss pathways responsible for the network’s response given
a specific input, but how can we identify these pathways?
Deep rectified neural networks encode the input information using a sparse set of active neurons [12], and their inference can be deemed as a pursuit algorithm for sparse coding
[43, 59]. Such sparse coding of information is akin to how
biological neurons encode information in the brain [42, 16].
Yu et al. [64] reported that the pathways of active neurons
in artificial neural networks overlap significantly for inputs
of a given class. Recently, [63] proposed using the pruning
objective and knowledge distillation [19] to show that significantly higher levels of sparsity (∼87% for VGG-16 [54]
on ImageNet [7]) can be achieved while keeping the prediction intact. These highly sparse pathways are reported as
the critical paths and are shown to be different for inputs of
different classes and adversarial inputs [45, 63, 64].
We first investigate, whether these highly sparse pathways derived from the pruning objective indeed encode critical input features. We show that the pruning objective has
solutions that are not critical pathways, even though they
have the same response as the original network. To illustrate how the pruning objective can result in such pathways,
we construct a pathological greedy pruning algorithm that
by design searches for irrelevant pathways while satisfying
the pruning objective. Furthermore, we analyze the pathways selected by distillation guided routing [63] and ob-

13528

