Multi-Source Domain Adaptation with Collaborative Learning for Semantic
Segmentation

1

Jianzhong He1,2 Xu Jia3∗ Shuaijun Chen2 Jianzhuang Liu2
Data Storage and Intelligent Vision Technical Research Dept, Huawei Cloud.
2
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies. 3 Dalian University of Technology.

{jianzhong.he, chenshuaijun, liu.jianzhuang}@huawei.com, xjia@dlut.edu.cn

GTA5

Abstract
Multi-source unsupervised domain adaptation (MSDA)
aims at adapting models trained on multiple labeled source
domains to an unlabeled target domain. In this paper, we
propose a novel multi-source domain adaptation framework
based on collaborative learning for semantic segmentation.
Firstly, a simple image translation method is introduced
to align the pixel value distribution to reduce the gap
between source domains and target domain to some extent.
Then, to fully exploit the essential semantic information
across source domains, we propose a collaborative learning
method for domain adaptation without seeing any data
from target domain. In addition, similar to the setting of
unsupervised domain adaptation, unlabeled target domain
data is leveraged to further improve the performance of
domain adaptation. This is achieved by additionally constraining the outputs of multiple adaptation models with
pseudo labels online generated by an ensembled model.
Extensive experiments and ablation studies are conducted
on the widely-used domain adaptation benchmark datasets
in semantic segmentation. Our proposed method achieves
59.0% mIoU on the validation set of Cityscapes by training
on the labeled Synscapes and GTA5 datasets and unlabeled
training set of Cityscapes. It significantly outperforms all
previous state-of-the-arts single-source and multi-source
unsupervised domain adaptation methods.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation as one of the core tasks in computer vision community, aims to assign semantic label to
each pixel of images, e.g., person, car, road and etc.. With
the development of convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
semantic segmentation has made great progress recently. For example, recent deep methods [2, 5, 7, 11, 41],
have achieved superior performance on almost all public
∗ Corresponding author

Synscapes

Cityscapes
Transfer

Synthia

Labeled Sources

Unlabeled Target

Figure 1. Multi-source domain adaptation for semantic segmentation. The left shows synthetic images and corresponding labels
generated from different simulators, which suffer domain shift
between each other but share similar semantic contexts. The right
part shows unlabeled target images sampled from real scenes.

benchmarks. However, their success is based on the large
numbers of densely annotated images which used to train
the networks. Dense pixel-level annotation for semantic
segmentation is very laborious and expensive, e.g., annotating one image in the Cityscapes dataset [4] takes about
90 minutes, which makes it difficult and sometimes even
impossible to collect large amounts of densely annotated
images for semantic segmentation. Thanks to the recent
progress in graphics and simulation infrastructure, simulators can generate lots of images with dense annotation for
semantic segmentation, such as recent proposed large-scale
dense labeled datasets SYNTHIA [28], GTA5 [27] and
Synscapes [36]. Although the huge amounts of annotated
synthesized images are very close to the real scene, there is
still great domain gap between synthetic datasets and real
scene datasets. The domain gap causes another problem
that networks trained on synthetic datasets often perform
poorly on real target scenes. To handle this issue, many un/semi-supervised domain adaptation (UDA) approaches are
proposed, like [13, 21, 29, 31, 32, 35, 37] and etc., with the
purpose of mitigating the gap between synthetic source and

11008

