A Self-boosting Framework for Automated Radiographic Report Generation
Zhanyu Wang
University of Sydney

Luping Zhou
University of Sydney

Lei Wang
University of Wollongong

zhanyu.wang@sydney.edu.au

luping.zhou@sydney.edu.au

leiw@uow.edu.au

Xiu Li
Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School
li.xiu@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Automated radiographic report generation is a challenging task since it requires to generate paragraphs describing
fine-grained visual differences of cases, especially for those
between the diseased and the healthy. Existing image captioning methods commonly target at generic images, and
lack mechanism to meet this requirement. To bridge this
gap, in this paper, we propose a self-boosting framework
that improves radiographic report generation based on the
cooperation of the main task of report generation and an
auxiliary task of image-text matching. The two tasks are
built as the two branches of a network model and influence
each other in a cooperative way. On one hand, the imagetext matching branch helps to learn highly text-correlated
visual features for the report generation branch to output
high quality reports. On the other hand, the improved reports produced by the report generation branch provide additional harder samples for the image-text matching branch
and enforce the latter to improve itself by learning better
visual and text feature representations. This, in turn, helps
improve the report generation branch again. These two
branches are jointly trained to help improve each other iteratively and progressively, so that the whole model is selfboosted without requiring external resources. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on
two public datasets, showing its superior performance over
multiple state-of-the-art image captioning and medical report generation methods.

diagnostic errors as well as accelerate the clinic workflow.
Automated medical report generation is very challenging and it associates with a broader research topic of image
captioning in computer vision. In image captioning, freeform text descriptions are generated to narrate the content
of images. A basic deep learning model for image captioning follows the encoder-decoder structure [30], where
the visual encoder extracts the visual features from images
and the text decoder converts the visual features to text output. Research in this field focuses on advancing encoder
and decoder, respectively, by employing carefully-designed
attention mechanisms [22, 1, 26], relationship among image
regions [40, 38], improved language models [4, 3], or reinforcement learning on language metric [26, 21]. A detailed
review could be found in Section 2.

1. Introduction

Despite recent achievements in image captioning, when
directly applying image captioners for medical report generation, there is often a visible performance decline. This
is because compared with generic images, radiographic images are more similar to each other and fine-grained visual
differences, such as the findings of clinic importance, need
to be narrated. This requires further tightening the visual
and text representations. In addition to linking image and
text by attention mechanism, some medical report generation methods [10, 41] additionally train classifiers to learn
visual representations by predicting tags of medical reports
or disease-class labels. This often requires additional annotations and external medical datasets or knowledge, which
are task-specific and often unavailable, limiting the generalization of these methods. Moreover, either tags or disease
classes only sparsely cover the reports’ information, leading
to relatively loosely correlated visual and text features.

Everyday a large amount of medical imaging data are
acquired, stored and examined in clinics. This has exerted
mounting pressure to radiologists to analyse images and report the findings in time. Automated medical report generation is therefore in demand as it can reduce workload and

To bridge this gap, in this paper, we propose a selfboosting framework to promote radiographic report generation. It utilizes an auxiliary task to predict the match of an
image-report pair (i.e., image-text matching) by explicitly
learning strongly correlated visual and text features. These

2433

