Self-Supervised Learning on 3D Point Clouds by Learning
Discrete Generative Models
Benjamin Eckart1 Wentao Yuan2 Chao Liu1 Jan Kautz1
1
2
NVIDIA
University of Washington

Abstract
While recent pre-training tasks on 2D images have
proven very successful for transfer learning, pre-training
for 3D data remains challenging. In this work, we introduce a general method for 3D self-supervised representation learning that 1) remains agnostic to the underlying
neural network architecture, and 2) specifically leverages
the geometric nature of 3D point cloud data. The proposed task softly segments 3D points into a discrete number
of geometric partitions. A self-supervised loss is formed
under the interpretation that these soft partitions implicitly parameterize a latent Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM),
and that this generative model establishes a data likelihood
function. Our pretext task can therefore be viewed in terms
of an encoder-decoder paradigm that squeezes learned representations through an implicitly defined parametric discrete generative model bottleneck. We show that any existing neural network architecture designed for supervised
point cloud segmentation can be repurposed for the proposed unsupervised pretext task. By maximizing data likelihood with respect to the soft partitions formed by the unsupervised point-wise segmentation network, learned representations are encouraged to contain compositionally rich
geometric information. In tests, we show that our method
naturally induces semantic separation in feature space, resulting in state-of-the-art performance on downstream applications like model classification and semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
There has been a growing emergence of increasingly effective self-supervised learning methods developed in the
form of unsupervised pretext tasks. Instead of humanannotated supervision, the pretext task itself is designed
to create its own supervisory signal. For example, learning to predict or discriminate data augmentations that preserve the semantics of the input have recently been shown to
yield rich latent representations for downstream tasks [18,
6, 34, 33, 14]. One of the longstanding goals of unsu-

pervised learning has been to improve transfer learning to
the point where unsupervised pre-training combined with
downstream supervision outperforms the traditional fully
supervised training pipeline. In recent years, we’ve seen
this come to fruition in several domains, with methods
like BERT [11] for NLP, and BYOL [18], SimCLR [6, 7],
CPC [34, 22], and others claiming top performance on image classification benchmarks.
Compared to deep learning for NLP and 2D computer
vision, deep learning for 3D perception remains a relatively
nascent field and self-supervised 3D learning even more so.
One could argue there are several reasons for this, but the
most salient is perhaps the lack of a common representation: while NLP has word embeddings and 2D computer
vision has 2D images, 3D data enjoys no such universal
and obvious data structure. The basic representation for 3D
data is extremely fractured: for 3D content creation, triangular meshes are the de facto standard, yet most 3D sensors produce raw data in the form of 3D point clouds. Traditional 3D vision algorithms leverage structures like Octrees [23] or Hashed Voxel Lists [32], but deep learning
approaches favor structures more amenable to differentiability and/or efficient neural processing, like sparse voxel
networks [8, 44], implicit functions [30], graphs [27], or
point-based networks [36, 37, 46]. Thus, it is still an active
area of research to find the proper universal “3D backbone”
that can become as ubiquitous as ResNet [21] is for learning
representations of 2D images.
In terms of self-supervised learning on 3D data, the lack
of standardization of basic 3D data processing further magnifies these issues since any technique designed for a particular architecture or data representation might have limited
long-term utility. Furthermore, though it is relatively easy
to obtain large amounts of unlabeled 3D data given the recent proliferation of self-driving cars and cheap commodity
3D sensors [53, 25], it can be difficult and time-consuming
to produce accurate ground truth 3D annotations. Thus, it
could be argued that the relative need for strong performing
self-supervised methods for 3D data is much higher than in
the 2D regime.
In this work, our goal is to try to devise a self-supervised

8248

