SliceNet: deep dense depth estimation from a single indoor panorama
using a slice-based representation
Giovanni Pintore
Visual Computing, CRS4, Italy

Marco Agus
CSE, HBKU, Doha, Qatar

Eva Almansa
Visual Computing, CRS4, Italy

giovanni.pintore@crs4.it

magus@hbku.edu.qa

evaalmansa@crs4.it

Jens Schneider
CSE, HBKU, Doha, Qatar

Enrico Gobbetti
Visual Computing, CRS4, Italy

jeschneider@hbku.edu.qa

enrico.gobbetti@crs4.it

Abstract
We introduce a novel deep neural network to estimate a
depth map from a single monocular indoor panorama. The
network directly works on the equirectangular projection,
exploiting the properties of indoor 360◦ images. Starting
from the fact that gravity plays an important role in the
design and construction of man-made indoor scenes, we
propose a compact representation of the scene into vertical
slices of the sphere, and we exploit long- and short-term
relationships among slices to recover the equirectangular
depth map. Our design makes it possible to maintain highresolution information in the extracted features even with
a deep network. The experimental results demonstrate that
our method outperforms current state-of-the-art solutions in
prediction accuracy, particularly for real-world data.

1. Introduction
Understanding the 3D layout of an indoor scene from
images is a crucial task in many domains [45, 23, 24]. Fast
depth estimation from single images is a fundamental subproblem, as associating metric information to visual data is
paramount for a variety of applications, including mobile
Augmented Reality platforms, indoor mapping, autonomous
navigation, 3D reconstruction, and scene understanding.
Since estimation of depth from single images is inherently
ambiguous, all solutions must rely on prior information to
guide reconstruction towards plausible architectural shapes
that fit the input. In this context, we have recently seen an
extraordinary development of data-driven methods that learn
these priors from example data.
Early approaches were designed for a camera with a conventional limited field-of-view (FoV) (e.g., FCRN[14]). In
recent years, however, 360◦ capture has emerged as a very

appealing solution, since it provides the quickest and most
complete single-image coverage and is supported by a wide
variety of professional and consumer capture devices that
make acquisition fast and cost-effective [37]. Since adapting monocular depth estimation models designed for traditional images to 360◦ depth estimation has been shown to
produce sub-optimal results [44], specific 360◦ solutions
have been recently introduced. In this context, many recent
works [31, 44, 17] have adapted perspective depth estimation methods to omnidirectional imagery by proposing various types of distortion-aware convolution filters. However,
few of them have explored the large-FoV nature provided
by 360◦ images, which can provide, in one shot, the fullgeometric context of an indoor scene [41].
In this work, we introduce a novel deep neural network
solution, called SliceNet, which predicts the depth map of an
indoor 360◦ image leveraging the characteristics of a gravityaligned equirectangular projection of an interior scene. Since
gravity plays an important role in the design and construction
of interior environments, world-space vertical and horizontal features have different characteristics in most, if not all,
man-made environments. Our network design starts from
the assumption that capture of the scene through an equirectangular image is aligned to the gravity vector (i.e., camera is
placed on an horizontal-ground plane), too, and, thus, it is
rational to assume that gravity-aligned processing of images
can directly exploit gravity-aligned world-space features [3].
In our network, an input equirectangular image is partitioned
into vertical slices by performing a contractive encoding to
reduce the input tensor only along the vertical direction, resulting in a compact and flattened sequence of slices made of
a set of features. To preserve global information, we perform
slicing over four different resolution levels, concatenating
the result at the end (Sec. 3). This sequential representation
enables the use of a convolutional long short-term memory
(LSTM) network [26] to recover, with low computational

11536

