MultiLink: Multi-class Structure Recovery
via Agglomerative Clustering and Model Selection
Luca Magri

Filippo Leveni
Politecnico di Milano, DEIB

Giacomo Boracchi

name.surname@polimi.it

Abstract
We address the problem of recovering multiple structures
of different classes in a dataset contaminated by noise and
outliers. In particular, we consider geometric structures defined by a mixture of underlying parametric models (e.g.
planes and cylinders, homographies and fundamental matrices), and we tackle the robust fitting problem by preference analysis and clustering. We present a new algorithm,
termed MultiLink, that simultaneously deals with multiple
classes of models. MultiLink combines on-the-fly model fitting and model selection in a novel linkage scheme that determines whether two clusters are to be merged. The resulting method features many practical advantages with respect to methods based on preference analysis, being faster,
less sensitive to the inlier threshold, and able to compensate limitations deriving from hypotheses sampling. Experiments on several public datasets demonstrate that MultiLink favourably compares with state of the art alternatives,
both in multi-class and single-class problems. Code is publicly made available for download1 .

1. Introduction
Multi-structure recovery (also known as multi-model fitting) aims at organising a set of input data in multiple geometric structures described by a few underlying parametric models. This is a fundamental step in many Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition applications such as motion segmentation [40], template detection [17], primitive
fitting in point clouds [12], and multi-body Structure-FromMotion [10, 22, 26]. The vast majority of fitting methods
identifies multiple structures from a single-class of models (e.g. 3D planes to fit building facades) [7, 13, 18, 32],
and cannot solve multi-class structure recovery problems,
where structures have to be identified from several classes
of models (e.g. cylinders, planes). Multi-class recovery
problems have been much less investigated [3, 4, 21, 42, 43],
1 https://github.com/magrilu/multilink.git

(a) Input point cloud

(b) Recovered structures

Figure 1: An example of multi-class recovery. MultiLink
extracts planes and cylinders from the input point cloud.
Structure membership is color coded.

despite they are frequently met in practical applications and
their solution typically enrich the interpretation of raw data.
Dealing with diverse classes of models enables a higher
level of abstraction and, in a broader perspective, can be
reckoned as an attempt to bridge the semantic gap separating raw visual content from reasoning. For instance, consider the 3D point cloud X in Fig. 1, where the underlying
structures (groups of 3D points) can be identified by solving
a 2-class multi-model fitting problem with respect to Θp and
Θc , the class of planes and cylinders, respectively. Here, the
proposed MultiLink successfully partitions the point cloud
in s structures X = U1 ∪ . . . ∪ Us , and for each structure
it decides whether to fit a plane or a cylinder, providing an
high-level description of the Cathedral.
Structure recovery algorithms have to address multiple
challenges, including being robust to noise and structuredoutliers, and to successfully disentangle a chicken-and-egg
dilemma, since model fitting and the association of points to
structures are strictly intertwined. In fact, structures are defined as set of points satisfying the same model, but models
can be instantiated only once structures have been defined.
Needless to say, all these problems become more difficult
when coping with multiple structures and diverse classes of
models, as we have to consider different data interpretations
in order to automatically choose both the number of structures s and the right class of model for each of them. De-

1853

