ZeroScatter: Domain Transfer for Long Distance Imaging and Vision
through Scattering Media
Zheng Shi1 *

Ethan Tseng1 *
1

Princeton University

Mario Bijelic2 *
2

Mercedes-Benz AG

Abstract
Adverse weather conditions, including snow, rain, and
fog, pose a major challenge for both human and computer
vision. Handling these environmental conditions is essential for safe decision making, especially in autonomous vehicles, robotics, and drones. Most of today’s supervised
imaging and vision approaches, however, rely on training data collected in the real world that is biased towards
good weather conditions, with dense fog, snow, and heavy
rain as outliers in these datasets. Without training data,
let alone paired data, existing autonomous vehicles often
limit themselves to good conditions and stop when dense
fog or snow is detected. In this work, we tackle the lack of
supervised training data by combining synthetic and indirect supervision. We present ZeroScatter, a domain transfer method for converting RGB-only captures taken in adverse weather into clear daytime scenes. ZeroScatter exploits model-based, temporal, multi-view, multi-modal, and
adversarial cues in a joint fashion, allowing us to train
on unpaired, biased data. We assess the proposed method
on in-the-wild captures, and the proposed method outperforms existing monocular descattering approaches by 2.8
dB PSNR on controlled fog chamber measurements.

1. Introduction
In the presence of a scattering medium, such as fog or
snow, photons no longer propagate along a straight path but
instead are redirected by particles, potentially many times,
until arriving at the camera. This includes forward scattered
light emitted from sources in the scene, e.g., an oncoming
vehicle headlight, captured as a passive component by an
RGB camera or human eye, and backward scattering observed when actively illuminating the scene, e.g., in automotive lidar or with the ego-vehicle headlights. While adverse weather conditions that include severe scattering are
heavily underrepresented in existing training and evaluation
datasets [45, 13, 9], these rare scenarios are a significant
contributing factor for fatal automotive accidents [4], as a
direct result of vision impairment for human drivers.
Supervised imaging and vision approaches are also fundamentally limited in adverse weather conditions. Adverse
* indicates equal contribution.

Werner Ritter2
3

Felix Heide1,3

Algolux

weather conditions follow a long-tail distribution where
such environments are rarely encountered during day-today driving, making data collection, training, and evaluation challenging [37]. As a result, critical computer vision
tasks such as object detection and tracking are often trained
on clear day inputs and fail to generalize when the input
scene is perturbed by adverse effects from scattering media. Even if adverse weather data is available, the scattering media would still affect the quality of human annotations used for supervision. Furthermore, supervised dehazing and defogging methods are restricted by the difficulty
of acquiring paired perturbed and clear data, which is infeasible due to the dynamic nature of real-world automotive scenes. As such, supervised training on real-world data
has been a fundamental challenge for imaging and vision in
harsh weather conditions. To tackle this problem, existing
approaches attempt to solve a domain transfer problem using simulated scattering media [35, 36, 42, 18]. However,
these simulation models do not adequately simulate the effects that are observed in the wild. Unsupervised learning
approaches have demonstrated impressive ability for image
domain transfer but remain restricted to a single domain,
e.g. faces, and small image resolutions [57, 24].
Researchers have also adopted alternative sensing
modalities beyond conventional intensity imaging, e.g. lidar
and radar, in robotic and automotive applications. However,
they do not offer a solution in backscatter-limited weather
scenarios. Specifically, pulsed lidar sensors that record the
round-trip time of the first response fail to extract meaningful scene surfaces in severe snow and fog, fundamentally
limited by backscatter [5], and indeed trail the performance
of RGB stereo depth methods [16] in dense fog. While the
mm-wavelengths of radar systems penetrate dense fog, existing radar systems are limited to low angular resolution,
and hence do not allow for scene understanding tasks beyond the detection and tracking of objects with a large radar
cross-section [27]. At the same time, RGB intensity cameras have become a ubiquitous sensor technology because
of their low-cost and high spatial resolutions up to 250 MPix
in modern commodity sensors [38], deployed across application domains from miniature smartphone cameras to automotive imaging systems. As such, in this work, we address the task of imaging through scattering media using
conventional RGB cameras.

3476

