Fusing the Old with the New:
Learning Relative Camera Pose with Geometry-Guided Uncertainty

1

Bingbing Zhuang1
NEC Labs America

2

Manmohan Chandraker1,2
University of California, San Diego

Abstract
5-pt Solver & BA

Learning methods for relative camera pose estimation
have been developed largely in isolation from classical geometric approaches. The question of how to integrate predictions from deep neural networks (DNNs) and solutions from
geometric solvers, such as the 5-point algorithm [37], has
as yet remained under-explored. In this paper, we present a
novel framework that involves probabilistic fusion between
the two families of predictions during network training, with
a view to leveraging their complementary benefits in a learnable way. The fusion is achieved by learning the DNN uncertainty under explicit guidance by the geometric uncertainty, thereby learning to take into account the geometric
solution in relation to the DNN prediction. Our network
features a self-attention graph neural network, which drives
the learning by enforcing strong interactions between different correspondences and potentially modeling complex
relationships between points. We propose motion parmeterizations suitable for learning and show that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on the challenging
DeMoN [61] and ScanNet [8] datasets. While we focus
on relative pose, we envision that our pipeline is broadly
applicable for fusing classical geometry and deep learning.

1. Introduction
Estimating the relative pose between two cameras is a
fundamental problem in computer vision, which forms the
backbone of structure from motion (SFM) methods. Geometric approaches based on the 5-point method [37] and bundle
adjustment (BA) [59] are well-studied, while recent methods based on deep neural networks (DNNs) also achieve
promising results [61, 7, 56, 65]. But the question of how
the two families of methods may be combined to trade-off
their relative benefits has as yet remained under-explored,
which is the subject of our study in this paper.
The behavior of geometric methods [18] is theoretically
characterizable under a wide range of camera motions. But

generalization
interpretability
training-free
textures
degeneracy
ambiguity

Uncertaintybased Fusion
data prior
no degeneracy
global context

Image pair with
correspondences

Neural Network

Loss

Ground Truth
Camera Pose

generalization
interpretability
data-hungry

Figure 1. Geometric-DNN relative pose fusion framework. The
DNN pose prediction is fused with the geometric prediction during
training, based on their respective prediction uncertainty.

such understanding does not always guarantee good performance. While high accuracy is obtained in situations
with strong perspective effects, performance may degrade
due to lack of correspondences, planar degeneracy and basrelief ambiguity [9], to name a few. On the other hand,
learning-based methods may avoid the above issues by learning sophisticated priors that relate images to camera motion,
but can suffer from poor generalization outside the training
domain and not be amenable to interpretation.
This paper proposes an uncertainty based probabilistic
framework to fuse geometric and DNN predictions, as illustrated in Fig. 1, with the aim of overcoming the limitations of
either approach. The underlying intuition is that the geometric solution may be trusted more due to its well-understood
rationale if it is highly confident, but the network should play
a role in driving the solution closer to the true one in geometrically ill-conditioned scenarios. We obtain geometric
uncertainty using the Jacobian of the error functions, serving
as an indicator of the quality of the solution, while we design
a network to additionally predict the uncertainty associated
with camera pose estimation. The uncertainty so obtained
may be interpreted as (co)variance of a Gaussian distribution, which allows us to fuse the two predictions using Bayes’

32

