Adaptive Cross-Modal Prototypes for Cross-Domain Visual-Language Retrieval
Yang Liu1,3∗
Qingchao Chen2,4 *
Samuel Albanie3
1
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University
2
National Institute of Health Data Science, Peking University
3
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford
4
Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford
qingchao.chen@eng.ox.ac.uk, {yangl,albanie}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
In this paper, we study the task of visual-text retrieval
in the highly practical setting in which labelled visual data
with paired text descriptions are available in one domain
(the “source”), but only unlabelled visual data (without
text descriptions) are available in the domain of interest
(the “target”). We propose the A DAPTIVE C ROSS -M ODAL
P ROTOTYPES framework which seeks to enable target domain retrieval by learning cross-modal visual-text representations while minimising both uni-modal and cross-modal
distribution shift across the source and target domains.
Our approach is built upon two key ideas: first, we encode the inductive bias that the learned cross-modal representations should be compositional with respect to concepts in each modality—this is achieved through clustering
pretrained uni-modal features across each domain and designing a careful regularisation scheme to preserve the resulting structure. Second, we employ mutual information
maximisation between cross-modal representations in the
source and target domains during learning—this provides
a mechanism that preserves commonalities between the domains while discarding signal in each that cannot be inferred from the other. We showcase our approach for the
task of cross-domain visual-text retrieval, outperforming existing approaches for both images and videos.

1. Introduction
Large-scale datasets of visual content paired with corresponding text descriptions have driven recent advances
in cross-modal retrieval tasks such as image-text retrieval
and video-text retrieval. In the last few years, approaches
trained with such data have achieved a steady and significant improvement under retrieval tasks within the singledomain setting (in which training and inference take place
* Equally contributed first and corresponding authors.

Visual Content
(Composition of objects)

Cross-Modal Embedding
Space for retrieval

Text Description
(Composition of words)

Here we can see a person
wearing ski boards on his
legs and skating in the
snow and he is also
wearing gloves, helmet,
goggles and we can see
trees present

(a) Compositions of multiple unimodal concepts
Source Domain (MSRVTT)
Amazon Mechanical Turk

A dog is holding binoculars.

Target Domain (LSMDC)
Description Video Services

At Clinic, SOMEONE reads through
paperwork on a clipboard, then brings
it to a reception desk where a dark
haired nurse takes it.

(b) Cross domain shift

Figure 1: Three challenges of cross-domain visual language retrieval. Top (a): Retrieval systems must be capable of generalising to novel compositions of multiple concepts, represented in both the visual and text domains; Bottom (b): Retrieval systems must be robust to significant
cross-domain shifts in both the visual and text distributions;
Top and bottom ((a) and (b)): Retrieval systems must account for “reporting bias” (across both images and videos)
in which only a subset of visual concepts are described in
the corresponding text.
on the same domain). However, in real-world applications,
manual collection of paired visual content and text descriptions is a labour-intensive and time-consuming process, creating a significant barrier for the application of cross-modal
retrieval methods to new domains.
In this paper, we investigate the pragmatic question of
how we can best learn knowledge on the “source” domain
with paired data to generalize to other “target” domains
114954

