Dual Attention Suppression Attack: Generate Adversarial
Camouflage in Physical World
Jiakai Wang , Aishan Liu, Zixin Yin, Shunchang Liu ,
Shiyu Tang, and Xianglong Liu*
State Key Lab of Software Development Environment,

Beihang University, Beijing, China
{jk buaa scse, liuaishan, yzx835, liusc, sytang, xlliu}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep learning models are vulnerable to adversarial examples. As a more threatening type for practical deep
learning systems, physical adversarial examples have received extensive research attention in recent years. However, without exploiting the intrinsic characteristics such as
model-agnostic and human-specific patterns, existing works
generate weak adversarial perturbations in the physical
world, which fall short of attacking across different models
and show visually suspicious appearance. Motivated by the
viewpoint that attention reflects the intrinsic characteristics
of the recognition process, this paper proposes the Dual
Attention Suppression (DAS) attack to generate visuallynatural physical adversarial camouflages with strong transferability by suppressing both model and human attention.
As for attacking, we generate transferable adversarial camouflages by distracting the model-shared similar attention
patterns from the target to non-target regions. Meanwhile,
based on the fact that human visual attention always focuses
on salient items (e.g., suspicious distortions), we evade the
human-specific bottom-up attention to generate visuallynatural camouflages which are correlated to the scenario
context. We conduct extensive experiments in both the digital and physical world for classification and detection tasks
on up-to-date models (e.g., Yolo-V5) and demonstrate that
our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods.1

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved remarkable
performance across a wide areas of applications, e.g., computer vision [24, 35], natural language [42], and acoustics
[34], etc, but they are vulnerable to adversarial examples
* Corresponding author
1 Our code can be found in https://github.com/nlsde-

safety-team/DualAttentionAttack.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. (a) shows the suspicious appearance of camouflages generated by previous work (i.e., UPC [19]). (b) is the painted car that
commonly exists in the physical world. (c) shows the adversarial example (classified as pop bottle) generated by existing
work (i.e., CAMOU [52]) and its corresponding attention map.
(d) shows the adversarial example (classified as Shih-Tzu) generated by our DAS and its distracted attention map.

[44, 36]. These elaborately designed perturbations are imperceptible to humans but can easily lead DNNs to wrong
predictions, which pose a strong security challenge to deep
learning applications in both the digital and physical world
[22, 13, 31, 37, 51].
In the past years, a long line of work has been proposed to perform adversarial attacks in different scenarios
under different settings [26, 7, 2]. Though challenging deep
learning, adversarial examples are also valuable for understanding the behaviors of DNNs, which could provide insights into the blind-spots and help to build robust models [20, 45, 28, 50]. Generally, adversarial attacks can be
divided into two categories: digital attacks, which attack
DNNs by perturbing the input data in the digital space; and
physical attacks, which attack DNNs by modifying the vi-

8565

