On Semantic Similarity in Video Retrieval
Michael Wray
Hazel Doughty*
Dima Damen
Department of Computer Science, University of Bristol, UK

Abstract
Current video retrieval efforts all found their evaluation
on an instance-based assumption, that only a single caption
is relevant to a query video and vice versa. We demonstrate
that this assumption results in performance comparisons often not indicative of models’ retrieval capabilities. We propose a move to semantic similarity video retrieval, where
(i) multiple videos/captions can be deemed equally relevant,
and their relative ranking does not affect a method’s reported performance and (ii) retrieved videos/captions are
ranked by their similarity to a query. We propose several
proxies to estimate semantic similarities in large-scale retrieval datasets, without additional annotations. Our analysis is performed on three commonly used video retrieval
datasets (MSR-VTT, YouCook2 and EPIC-KITCHENS).

1. Introduction
Video understanding approaches which incorporate language have demonstrated success in multiple tasks including captioning [61, 66], video question answering [68, 72]
and navigation [5, 28]. Using language to search for videos
has also become a popular research problem, known as
video retrieval. Methods learn an underlying multi-modal
embedding space to relate videos and captions. Along with
large-scale datasets [18, 41, 57, 64, 71], several video retrieval benchmarks and challenges [2, 70] compare stateof-the-art, as methods inch to improve evaluation metrics
such as Recall@K and Median Rank.
In this paper, we question the base assumption in all
these datasets and benchmarks—that the only relevant
video to a caption is the one collected with that video. We
offer the first critical analysis of this assumption, proposing semantic similarity relevance, for both evaluation and
training. Our effort is inspired by works that question assumptions and biases in other research problems such as
VQA [27, 69], metric learning [46], moment retrieval [50],
action localisation [4] and action recognition [16, 34, 45].
As shown in Fig. 1, current approaches target instancebased retrieval—that is, given a query caption such as “A
man doing an origami tutorial”, only one origami video is
* Now at University of Amsterdam.

Figure 1: All current video retrieval works treat caption
collected for a certain video as relevant, even when other
videos are equally relevant to a query text. This makes the
evaluation of popular datasets ad hoc at times. We propose
to use continuous similarity, allowing multiple videos to be
treated as equally relevant. Ex. from MSR-VTT [64].
considered as the correct video to retrieve. In fact, many
videos within the dataset can be similar to the point of being identical. The order in which such videos are retrieved
should not affect the evaluation of a method. Instead, we
propose utilising semantic similarity between videos and
captions, where we assign a similarity score between items
of differing modalities. This allows multiple videos to be
considered relevant to a caption and provides a way of ranking videos from most to least similar.
Our contributions can be summarised: (i) We expose the
shortcoming of instance retrieval in current video retrieval
benchmarks and evaluation protocols. (ii) We propose video
retrieval with semantic similarity, both for evaluation and
training, where videos are ranked by their similarity to a
caption, allowing multiple videos to be considered relevant and vice-versa. (iii) Avoiding large annotation effort,
we propose several proxies to predict semantic similarities,
using caption-to-caption matching. (iv) We analyse three
benchmark datasets, using our semantic similarity proxies,
noting their impact on current baselines and evaluations.

2. Related Work
We review image retrieval works that use semantic knowledge then discuss current approaches to video retrieval.

2.1. Semantic Image Retrieval
While most works focus on instance-based retrieval, a
few works have explored semantic-based image retrieval.
Early works attempted to manually annotate small-scale
datasets with semantic knowledge. Oliva et al. [48] defined

3650

