Polygonal Point Set Tracking
Gunhee Nam1∗

Miran Heo2
1

Lunit Inc.

Seoung Wug Oh3
2

Yonsei University

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel learning-based polygonal point set tracking method. Compared to existing video
object segmentation (VOS) methods that propagate pixelwise object mask information, we propagate a polygonal
point set over frames. Specifically, the set is defined as a
subset of points in the target contour, and our goal is to
track corresponding points on the target contour. Those
outputs enable us to apply various visual effects such as
motion tracking, part deformation, and texture mapping. To
this end, we propose a new method to track the corresponding points between frames by the global-local alignment
with delicately designed losses and regularization terms.
We also introduce a novel learning strategy using synthetic
and VOS datasets that makes it possible to tackle the problem without developing the point correspondence dataset.
Since the existing datasets are not suitable to validate our
method, we build a new polygonal point set tracking dataset
and demonstrate the superior performance of our method
over the baselines and existing contour-based VOS methods. In addition, we present visual-effects applications of
our method on part distortion and text mapping.

1. Introduction
Object mask tracking in a video is one of the most frequently required tasks in visual effects (VFX). However, the
task (i.e. rotoscoping) is so painstaking and time-consuming
that even a highly-skilled designer processes only a dozen
frames on average per day [28]. Therefore, propagating object mask information through subsequent frames becomes
a critical problem to reduce human labor for rotoscoping.
Propagation methods are categorized into four groups based
on object representations: point, region, contour, and polygonal point set (Figure 2). Each representation carries different amount of information.
Patch tracking [14, 33, 13, 7] denotes a target object as
point representation and tracks a target point over frames
by matching the patch around the point. The tracking enables visual effects that require positional information such
∗ Work mostly done during a M.S. student at Yonsei University

Joon-Young Lee3
3

Seon Joo Kim2

Adobe Research

Before

After

Figure 1: Our method tracks a set of points in a polygon
over frames. The output represents mask contour with point
correspondences across frames. It allows multiple applications, e.g., a non-rigid transformation of a specific part of
an object over time as shown here.
as motion tracking and texture mapping. These applications
often require multiple patch tracking to compute point-topoint information. However, conducting each patch tracking independently ignores strong correlations between target points, thus multiple patch tracking are susceptible to a
drift problem and are not suitable for mask propagation.
Meanwhile, video object segmentation (VOS) [44, 8, 22,
47, 35, 34] and contour tracking [20, 49, 11, 39] propagate
target object information over subsequent frames by representing the target as a region (i.e. mask) and a contour respectively. These representations can describe only the target area without any pixel correspondences, therefore they
are not applicable to complex VFX scenarios that require
point-to-point relation information (e.g., Figure 1).
On the other hand, polygonal point set tracking combines the positional information with the target region. The
polygonal point set is defined as a subset of contour points
that represent an object in a polygonal shape. By tracking the point set, we can get both the object contour and
the point-to-point matching information. Previous works in
this category [2, 28, 32, 37] focus on making the user inter-

5569

