Double low-rank representation with projection distance penalty for clustering
Zhiqiang Fu1,2 , Yao Zhao1,2∗, Dongxia Chang1,2 , Xingxing Zhang3 , Yiming Wang1,2
1
2

Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University

Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network Technology
3

Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University

{zhiqiangfu, yzhao, dxchang}@bjtu.edu.cn, xxzhang2020@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, wangym@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents a novel, simple yet robust selfrepresentation method, i.e., Double Low-Rank Representation with Projection Distance penalty (DLRRPD) for clustering. With the learned optimal projected representations,
DLRRPD is capable of obtaining an effective similarity
graph to capture the multi-subspace structure. Besides the
global low-rank constraint, the local geometrical structure
is additionally exploited via a projection distance penalty
in our DLRRPD, thus facilitating a more favorable graph.
Moreover, to improve the robustness of DLRRPD to noises,
we introduce a Laplacian rank constraint, which can further encourage the learned graph to be more discriminative
for clustering tasks. Meanwhile, Frobenius norm (instead
of the popularly used nuclear norm) is employed to enforce
the graph to be more block-diagonal with lower complexity.
Extensive experiments have been conducted on synthetic,
real, and noisy data to show that the proposed method outperforms currently available alternatives by a margin of
1.0%∼10.1%.

1. Introduction
Clustering is one of the most fundamental unsupervised
problems, aiming to group samples into categories such that
samples in the same category are similar in some sense
and differentiate from those of other categories in the same
sense. It has been widely used in many areas (e.g., image
processing [31], image segmentation [31], camera source
identification [15], and data mining [29, 30, 34, 35]). Many
clustering methods (e.g., kmeans based methods [1, 24],
density based methods [4, 3], and graph based methods [2])
have been proposed. Among these methods, graph based
clustering methods (e.g., Ncut [22]), which classify the
samples according to a similarity graph, have attracted lots
of attention because of their good performance and solid
mathematical foundation. Therefore, constructing a good
∗ Corresponding author

similarity graph is important for clustering algorithm to obtain good clustering results.
Self-representation models are effective to construct the
similarity graph because they are proposed to exploit the
subspace structure of data. These methods base on the assumption that a database with k clusters is drawn from a
union of k independent low-dimensional subspaces. Furthermore, self-representation theory shows that a sample in
a subspace can be linearly represented by the other points
in the same subspace [5]. Hence, self-representation methods use the database as the dictionary and learn a similarity
graph by capturing the subspace structure.
Sparse subspace clustering (SSC) [6] is the first selfrepresentation method proposed to represent each data point
with a few neighbors, hence it can capture the local neighbor relationship. In fact, SSC can’t learn the global structure, and the learned graph may be too sparse for clustering
[14]. In order to capture the global structure, low-rank representation [17] was proposed to learn the low-dimensional
subspace structure with a global low-rank constraint. Compared with SSC, LRR can learn a more denser similarity
graph and capture more global information [28]. However, some elements of the graphs obtained by SSC and
LRR are negative, while the similarity should be nonnegative. To overcome this problem, Zhuang et al. proposed a
non-negative low-rank learning method which adopted both
low-rank and sparse constraint and could show the similarity among samples directly [37]. Recently, some evidence
showed that using nuclear norm to capture the subspace
structure could lose the local intrinsic structure [10, 12].
Motivated by this, some Laplacian regularized LRR methods [11, 19, 33] were proposed to preserve the local information by learning the manifold structure embedded in
the data space. Futhermore, these LRR methods use the
original features which may contain some redundancy and
noise. To address this issue, Wen et al. proposed an adaptive
weighted nonnegative low-rank representation that used a
sparse weighted matrix to reduce the bad influence of noise
and redundancy information [28].

5320

