Black-box Explanation of Object Detectors via Saliency Maps
Vitali Petsiuk*
Boston University

Rajiv Jain
Adobe Research

Varun Manjunatha
Adobe Research

Vlad I. Morariu
Adobe Research

vpetsiuk@bu.edu

rajijain@adobe.com

vmanjuna@adobe.com

morariu@adobe.com

Ashutosh Mehra
Adobe Document Cloud

Vicente Ordonez
University of Virginia

amehra@adobe.com

vicente@virginia.edu

Kate Saenko
Boston University,
MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab
saenko@bu.edu

Abstract
We propose D-RISE, a method for generating visual explanations for the predictions of object detectors. Utilizing the proposed similarity metric that accounts for both
localization and categorization aspects of object detection
allows our method to produce saliency maps that show image areas that most affect the prediction. D-RISE can be
considered “black-box” in the software testing sense, as it
only needs access to the inputs and outputs of an object
detector. Compared to gradient-based methods, D-RISE is
more general and agnostic to the particular type of object
detector being tested, and does not need knowledge of the
inner workings of the model. We show that D-RISE can be
easily applied to different object detectors including onestage detectors such as YOLOv3 and two-stage detectors
such as Faster-RCNN. We present a detailed analysis of the
generated visual explanations to highlight the utilization of
context and possible biases learned by object detectors.

1. Introduction
The field of object detection has experienced significant
gains in performance since the adoption of deep neural networks (DNNs) [9]. However, DNNs remain opaque tools
with a complex and unintuitive process of decision-making,
resulting in them being hard to understand, debug and improve. A number of different explanation techniques offer potential solutions to these issues. They have already
been shown to find biases in trained models [39], help debug
them [13] and increase user’s trust [34]. A popular approach
to explanation involves the use of attribution techniques
which produce saliency maps [20, 35], i.e., heatmaps representing the influence different pixels have on the model’s
* Work completed while an intern at Adobe Research.
This work was partially supported by the DARPA XAI program.

Figure 1: D-RISE can highlight which regions of an image were
used by an object detector. Here we show outputs for a few corresponding images where importance increases from blue to red.
In these examples, D-RISE reveals things such as detectors often
looking outside bounding boxes to detect objects e.g., looking at
the ski poles to predict skis, or looking to a subset of regions within
the object e.g., looking at the Apple logo to predict laptop.

decision. Hitherto, these techniques have primarily focused
on the image classification task [27, ?, 34, 40, 44, 2, 42],
with few addressing other problems such as visual question
answering [25], video captioning [28, 3] and video activity
recognition [3]. In this work, we address the relatively underexplored direction of generating saliency maps for object
detectors.
Unlike methods that explain the emerging patterns in the
learned weights or activations [4, 42, 22], attribution techniques are usually tightly connected to the model’s design
and they rely on a number of assumptions about the model’s
architecture. For example, Grad-CAM [34] assumes that
each feature map correlates with some concept, and therefore, feature maps can be weighted with respect to the importance of their concept for the output category. We show
that these assumptions might not hold for object detection models, resulting in failure to produce quality saliency
maps. Additionally, object detectors require explanations

11443

