NewtonianVAE: Proportional Control and Goal Identification from
Pixels via Physical Latent Spaces
Miguel Jaques
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK

Michael Burke
Monash University
Melbourne, AU

Timothy Hospedales
University of Edinburgh
Edinburgh, UK

m.a.m.jaques@sms.ed.ac.uk

michael.burke1@monash.edu

t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning low-dimensional latent state space dynamics models has proven powerful for enabling vision-based
planning and learning for control. We introduce a latent
dynamics learning framework that is uniquely designed
to induce proportional controlability in the latent space,
thus enabling the use of simple and well-known PID
controllers. We show that our learned dynamics model
enables proportional control from pixels, dramatically
simplifies and accelerates behavioural cloning of visionbased controllers, and provides interpretable goal discovery when applied to imitation learning of switching
controllers from demonstration. Notably, such proportional controlability also allows for robust path following
from visual demonstrations using Dynamic Movement
Primitives in the learned latent space.

1. Introduction
Vision-based control is highly desirable across numerous industrial applications, both in robotics and process
control. At present, much practical vision-based control
relies on supervised learning to build bespoke perception modules, prior to downstream dynamics modelling
and controller design. This can be expensive and time
consuming, and as a result there is growing interest in
developing model-based approaches for direct visionbased control.
Model-based approaches for visual control tend to
learn latent dynamics models that are subsequently
used within suitable planning or model predictive control (MPC) frameworks, or to train policies for later use.
We argue that this decoupling of dynamics and control
is computationally expensive and often unnecessary. Instead we learn a structured latent dynamical model that
directly allows for simple proportional control to be applied. Proportional-Integral-Derivative (PID) feedback
control produces commands that are proportional to an

error or cost term between current system state x and
a (potentially dynamic) target state xgoal :
X goal
(xt′ − xt′ ) +
ut = Kp (xgoal
− x t ) + Ki
t
t′

Kd

xt − xt−1
∆t

(1)

Gain terms (Kp , Ki , Kd ) shape the controller response
to errors. PID control is ubiquitous in industry, and
broadly applicable across numerous domains, providing
a simple and reliable off-the-shelf mechanism for stabilising systems. PID control is also the basis of a wide
range of more powerful control strategies, including
the more flexible dynamic movement primitives [24, 43]
that augment PD control laws with a forcing function
for trajectory following. Essentially we learn the state
encoding x(I) from images I for which robots can be
trivially controlled from pixels according to Eq 1.
We structure latent dynamics so that that PID control can be applied to move between latent states, to
remove the requirement for complex planning or reinforcement learning strategies. Moreover, we show that
imitation learning from demonstrations becomes a simple goal inference problem under a proportional control
model in this latent space, and can even be extended
to sequential tasks comprising multiple sub-goals.
Imitation learning from high dimensional visual data
is particularly challenging [2]. Behaviour cloning, which
seeks to reproduce demonstrations, is particularly vulnerable to generalisation failures for high dimensional
visual inputs, while inverse reinforcement learning (IRL)
[38] strategies are hard to train and extremely sample
inefficient. By learning a structured dynamics model,
we allow for more robust control in the presence of noise
and simplify the inverse reward inference process. In
summary, the primary contributions of this work are:
Embedding for proportional controllability We
induce a latent space where taking an action in the
direction between the current position and some target

4454

