Diverse Semantic Image Synthesis via Probability Distribution Modeling
Zhentao Tan1 , Menglei Chai2 , Dongdong Chen3 , Jing Liao4 , Qi Chu1 ,*
Bin Liu1 , Gang Hua5 , Nenghai Yu1∗
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Snap Inc. 3 Microsoft Cloud AI
4
City University of Hong Kong 5 Wormpex AI Research LLC
{tzt@mail., qchu@, flowice@, ynh@}ustc.edu.cn
mchai@snap.com, {cddlyf,ganghua}@gmail.com, jingliao@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Semantic image synthesis, translating semantic layouts to photo-realistic images, is a one-to-many mapping
problem. Though impressive progress has been recently
made, diverse semantic synthesis that can efficiently produce semantic-level multimodal results, still remains a challenge. In this paper, we propose a novel diverse semantic image synthesis framework from the perspective of semantic class distributions, which naturally supports diverse
generation at semantic or even instance level. We achieve
this by modeling class-level conditional modulation parameters as continuous probability distributions instead of discrete values, and sampling per-instance modulation parameters through instance-adaptive stochastic sampling that
is consistent across the network. Moreover, we propose
prior noise remapping, through linear perturbation parameters encoded from paired references, to facilitate supervised training and exemplar-based instance style control at
test time. Extensive experiments on multiple datasets show
that our method can achieve superior diversity and comparable quality compared to state-of-the-art methods. Code
will be available at https://github.com/tzt101/
INADE.git

1. Introduction
Image synthesis has recently seen impressive progress,
particularly with the help of generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [8]. Besides stochastic approaches that generate
high-quality images from random latent variables [18, 19],
conditional image synthesis is attracting equal or even more
attention due to the practical advantages of its controllability. The conditional input, to guide the synthesis, can be of
various forms, including RGB images, edge/gradient maps,
semantic labels, etc. In this work, semantic image synthesis
* Corresponding author.

is one particular task that aims to generate a photo-realistic
image from a semantic label mask. In particular, we further explore its diversity and controllability without loss of
generation quality. Some samples are shown in Figure 1.
Previous works [15, 41] propose solutions within the
general image-to-image translation framework, which directly feeds the semantic mask into the encoder-decoder
network. For higher quality, some recent methods [30,
50, 36] adopt spatially-varying conditional normalization to
avoid the loss of semantic information due to conventional
normalization layers [40]. Although proven successful in
synthesizing certain types of content, these methods lack
controllability over the generation diversity, which is particularly important for such a one-to-many problem. Some
methods [49, 43] attempt to yield multimodal results by incorporating variational auto-encoder (VAE) or introducing
noises. However, these methods only support global imagelevel diversity. To obtain finer-grained controllability, a recent work [51] proposes to use group convolution for different semantics to achieve semantic-level diversity. However,
it is computationally expensive and difficult to be extended
to support diversity at the instance level.
In this paper, we attempt to achieve controllable diversity
in semantic image synthesis from the perspective of semantic probability distributions. The intuition is to treat each
semantic class as one distribution, so that each instance of
this class could be drawn from this distribution as a discrete
sample. Following this idea, we propose a novel semantic
image synthesis framework, which is naturally capable of
producing diverse results at semantic or even instance level.
Specifically, our method contains three key ingredients.
Firstly, we propose variational modulation models (§ 3.2)
that extend discrete modulation parameters to class-wise
continuous probability distributions, which embed diverse
styles of each semantic category in a class-adaptive manner.
Secondly, based on the variational models built per normalization layer, we further develop an instance-adaptive sampling method (§ 3.3) that achieves instance-level diversity

7962

