D2 IM-Net: Learning Detail Disentangled Implicit Fields from Single Images
Manyi Li
Hao Zhang
Simon Fraser University

Abstract
We present the first single-view 3D reconstruction network aimed at recovering geometric details from an input
image which encompass both topological shape structures
and surface features. Our key idea is to train the network
to learn a detail disentangled reconstruction consisting of
two functions, one implicit field representing the coarse 3D
shape and the other capturing the details. Given an input image, our network, coined D2 IM-Net, encodes it into
global and local features which are respectively fed into two
decoders. The base decoder uses the global features to reconstruct a coarse implicit field, while the detail decoder reconstructs, from the local features, two displacement maps,
defined over the front and back sides of the captured object. The final 3D reconstruction is a fusion between the
base shape and the displacement maps, with three losses
enforcing the recovery of coarse shape, overall structure,
and surface details via a novel Laplacian term.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 3D shapes from single-view RGB images is the prototypical ill-posed problem in computer vision. Recently, rapid advances in deep learning have propelled the development of data-driven single-view 3D reconstruction methods. In particular, the emergence of neural implicit models [5, 27, 22] for 3D shape representation
learning has led to much improved reconstruction quality
compared to methods designed for voxel grids, meshes, and
point clouds. However, while technically the implicit fields
could be sampled to an arbitrarily high spatial resolution,
state-of-the-art reconstruction methods still are unable to
adequately recover fine-level geometric details.
Implicit reconstruction networks such as IM-Net [5] and
Occupancy Network [22] learn to predict an implicit function, given a feature encoding of the input image, by minimizing a reconstruction loss. These networks generalize
well to new images, but only in terms of the coarse shapes;
they are not designed to recover geometric details which are
often of small scale and do not incur a sufficient penalty on
the loss terms. In a more recent work, DISN, Xu et al. [44]

Figure 1. Our network learns to reconstruct a detail disentangled
3D representation from single-view images. The disentangled details enable detail transfer and 3D reconstruction (shown in two
views) with the transferred details from image to another.

account for both global and local image features to predict
a combined signed distance field (SDF) so as to minimize
a single reconstruction loss like prior works. Their network
can better resolve structural details, such as the slats in the
back of a chair, that are well captured by local image features. However, the rest of the details, in particular surface
details, which are just as important for visual perception
(e.g., of depth and material), are still not well recovered.
In this paper, we wish to develop an implicit single-view
3D reconstruction network which can recover both topological structures and surface details from an input image. Our
key idea is that to best reconstruct the details, we ought to
train the network to learn a detail disentangled reconstruction consisting of two functions, one representing the coarse
3D shape and one capturing the details. However, the main
ensuing challenge is that geometric details are so varied that
there is no general and reliable way to define what the details are or what a coarse shape should be. The network
must learn the disentangled representations without direct
supervision using ground-truth training data.
Figure 2 illustrates the pipeline of our detail disentangled
implicit reconstruction network, coined D2 IM-Net. Given a
single RGB input image, the network encodes it into global
and local features which are respectively fed into two decoders. The base decoder uses the global features to reconstruct a coarse (i.e., base) implicit field, while the detail
decoder reconstructs, from the local features, a pair of 2D

10246

