CausalVAE: Disentangled Representation Learning
via Neural Structural Causal Models
Mengyue Yang1,2 , Furui Liu1, *, Zhitang Chen1 , Xinwei Shen3 , Jianye Hao1 , Jun Wang2
1
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, Shenzhen, China
2
University College London, London, United Kingdom
3
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong, China
{yangmengyue2,liufurui2,chenzhitang2,haojianye}@huawei.com
xshenal@connect.ust.hk
jun.wang@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Learning disentanglement aims at finding a low dimensional representation which consists of multiple explanatory and generative factors of the observational data. The
framework of variational autoencoder (VAE) is commonly
used to disentangle independent factors from observations.
However, in real scenarios, factors with semantics are not
necessarily independent. Instead, there might be an underlying causal structure which renders these factors dependent. We thus propose a new VAE based framework named
CausalVAE, which includes a Causal Layer to transform
independent exogenous factors into causal endogenous ones
that correspond to causally related concepts in data. We
further analyze the model identifiabitily, showing that the
proposed model learned from observations recovers the true
one up to a certain degree. Experiments are conducted on
various datasets, including synthetic and real word benchmark CelebA. Results show that the causal representations
learned by CausalVAE are semantically interpretable, and
their causal relationship as a Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG)
is identified with good accuracy. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the proposed CausalVAE model is able to generate
counterfactual data through “do-operation” to the causal
factors.

1. Introduction
Disentangled representation learning is of great importance in various applications such as computer vision, speech
and natural language processing, and recommender systems
[9, 20, 8]. The reason is that it might help enhance the
performance of models, i.e. improving the generalizability,
* Corresponding author.

robustness against adversarial attacks as well as the explanability, by learning data’s latent disentangled representation.
One of the most common frameworks for disentangled representation learning is Variational Autoencoders (VAE), a
deep generative model trained to disentangle the underlying explanatory factors. Disentanglement via VAE can be
achieved by a regularization term of the Kullback-Leibler
(KL) divergence between the posterior of the latent factors
and a standard Multivariate Gaussian prior, which enforces
the learned latent factors to be as independent as possible. It
is expected to recover the latent variables if the observation
in real world is generated by countable independent factors.
To further enhance the independence, various extensions of
VAE consider minimizing the mutual information among
latent factors. For example, Higgins et al. [6] and Burgess et
al. [3] increased the weight of the KL divergence term to enforce independence. Kim et al. [12, 4] further encourage the
independence by reducing total correlation among factors.
Most existing works of disentangled representation learning make a common assumption that the real world observations are generated by countable independent factors. Nevertheless we argue that in many real world applications, latent
factors with semantics of interest are causally related and
thus we need a new framework that supports causal disentanglement.
Consider a toy example of a swinging pendulum in Fig. 1.
The position of the illumination source and the angle of
the pendulum are causes of the position and the length of
the shadow. Through causal disentangled representation
learning, we aim at learning representations that correspond
to the above four concepts. Obviously, these concepts are not
independent and existing methods may fail to extract those
factors. Furthermore, causal disentanglement allow us to
manipulate the causal system to generate counterfactual data.
For example, we can manipulate the latent code of shadow to

9593

