Affect2MM: Affective Analysis of Multimedia Content Using Emotion Causality
Trisha Mittal1 , Puneet Mathur1 , Aniket Bera1 , Dinesh Manocha1,2
Department of Computer Science, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Maryland, College Park, USA
{trisha, puneetm, bera, dmanocha}@umd.edu
Project URL: https://gamma.umd.edu/affect2mm
1

Abstract
We present Affect2MM, a learning method for timeseries emotion prediction for multimedia content. Our goal
is to automatically capture the varying emotions depicted by
characters in real-life human-centric situations and behaviors. We use the ideas from emotion causation theories to
computationally model and determine the emotional state
evoked in clips of movies. Affect2MM explicitly models
the temporal causality using attention-based methods and
Granger causality. We use a variety of components like facial features of actors involved, scene understanding, visual
aesthetics, action/situation description, and movie script to
obtain an affective-rich representation to understand and
perceive the scene. We use an LSTM-based learning model
for emotion perception. To evaluate our method, we analyze
and compare our performance on three datasets, SENDv1,
MovieGraphs, and the LIRIS-ACCEDE dataset, and observe an average of 10 − 15% increase in the performance
over SOTA methods for all three datasets.

1. Introduction
In affective computing, perceiving the emotions conveyed in images and videos has found applications in digital content management [30, 73], digital marketing [42, 25,
80], education [17, 2], and healthcare [14]. Such applications have resulted in automated ranking systems, indexing
systems [72, 75, 32], and more personalized movie recommendation systems [49]. Affective analysis of movies has
been a problem of interest in the community [58, 29], along
similar lines. In our work, we explore the problem of affective analysis of movies with the goal of understanding the
emotions that the movies invoke in the audience.
There has been a growing interest [51] in dynamically modeling the emotions over time (‘time series emotion recognition’ among the affective computing community. This underlying problem uses temporally continuous
data (facial features, speech feature, or other modality features) from multimedia content as input and predicts the
emotion labels at multiple timestamps (clips) of the input.

Figure 1: Time-Series Emotion Perception Model: We present
Affect2MM, a learning model for time-series emotion perception
for movies. We input a multimedia content in the form of multiple clips and predict emotion labels for each clip. Affect2MM is
based on the theory of emotion causation and also borrows idea
for temporal causality. We show some example clip-frames from
the movie ‘Titanic’, a part of the MovieGraphs Dataset and corresponding emotion labels.
To aid in solving this time-series problem, several timeseries emotion datasets have been proposed [44, 25, 69, 35,
6, 51]. While these datasets focus more on single-person
emotional narratives recorded in controlled settings, multimedia datasets (movie databases) like LIRIS-ACCEDE [8]
and MovieGraphs [71] (annotated for per-clip emotion labels) are also being explored for time-series emotion perception tasks.
There have been various efforts to understand how humans reason and interpret emotions resulting in various theories of emotion causation based on physiological, neurological, and cognitive frameworks. One such theory is the
“emotional causality” [15] that has been developed from the
Causal Theory of Perception [27] and Conceptual Metaphor
Theory [4, 48, 37]. “Emotional Causality” refers to the understanding that an experience of emotion is embedded in a
chain of events comprising of an (a) outer event; (b) an emotional state; and (c) a physiological response. Few works
have explored such emotional causality for emotion perception in multimedia tasks.
Movies, as a time-series multimedia content, model mul15661

