DISCO: Dynamic and Invariant Sensitive Channel Obfuscation for deep neural
networks
Abhishek Singh1 , Ayush Chopra1 , Ethan Garza1 , Emily Zhang1 , Praneeth Vepakomma1 ,
Vivek Sharma1,2 , Ramesh Raskar1
1

Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2 Harvard Medical School

Abstract
Recent deep learning models have shown remarkable
performance in image classification. While these deep
learning systems are getting closer to practical deployment, the common assumption made about data is that it
does not carry any sensitive information. This assumption may not hold for many practical cases, especially in
the domain where an individual’s personal information is
involved, like healthcare and facial recognition systems.
We posit that selectively removing features in this latent
space can protect the sensitive information and provide
better privacy-utility trade-off. Consequently, we propose
DISCO which learns a dynamic and data driven pruning
filter to selectively obfuscate sensitive information in the
feature space. We propose diverse attack schemes for sensitive inputs & attributes and demonstrate the effectiveness of
DISCO against state-of-the-art methods through quantitative and qualitative evaluation. Finally, we also release an
evaluation benchmark dataset of 1 million sensitive representations to encourage rigorous exploration of novel attack and defense schemes at https://github.com/
splitlearning/InferenceBenchmark.

1. Introduction
Large deep neural network have resulted in breakthroughs across computer vision [1], speech recognition [2]
and reinforcement learning [3] with their success largely
attributed to their ability to efficiently learn complex patterns from data. The deployment of these algorithms in
critical application domains such as healthcare and facerecognition has motivated a research focus on learning censored, unbiased and fair data representations to mitigate
misuse by adversarial agents. Alternately, there can also
be sensitive information in data which the user would like
to keep private but the learned representations may inadver-

tently encode. This sensitive information may manifest as
sensitive inputs or attributes. Consider a setup where citizens consent to usage of face recognition in public spaces
for identifying criminals. During inference, feature representations are extracted for faces and identification is performed by matching in the feature space over an indexed
database. While this may be a well-intended initiative, a
malicious adversary may seek to intercept the feature representations to i) reconstruct the input face image or ii) extract
personal attributes such as race, age, gender etc. The citizens did not consent to sharing this sensitive information
which could be used to compromise their privacy and in a
way that is biased or unfair to them. Exploring methods
of improving privacy of the sensitive information (image,
race, age, gender etc.) while preserving utility (identifying
criminals) is the focus of this work.
Conventionally, research in privacy-aware machine
learning has primarily focused on protecting training data
from membership inference [4] and model inversion attacks [5], when i) training data is distributed over clients and
ii) computation of training the model is out-sourced. For
the former, distributed learning techniques such as federated learning [6, 7] and split learning [8, 9] are used, where
clients communicate with a centralized server using weights
and activations and the latter relies on homomorphic encryption [10, 11] and secure enclaves [12, 13]. Additionally,
techniques such as multi-party computation [14, 15] and
differential privacy [16, 17, 18, 19] have been employed to
improve the privacy in federated-learning. While effective
for training, scaling these methods for deployment at inference is a challenge for a variety of reasons. First, in several
cases computational limitations and intellectual property
considerations limit keeping the entire model on a client
device. Secondly, cryptographic methods for training deep
networks [20, 21, 22] are computationally very expensive
operations which makes deploying models on the server infeasible when working with sensitive data. We posit that
collaborative inference, where the inference network is

12125

