Pulsar: Efficient Sphere-based Neural Rendering
Christoph Lassner1 Michael Zollhöfer1
1
Facebook Reality Labs

Figure 1: Pulsar is an efficient sphere-based differentiable renderering module that is orders of magnitude faster than competing techniques, modular, and easy-to-use. It can be employed to solve a large variety of applications, since it is tightly
integrated with PyTorch. Using a sphere-based representation, it is possible to not only optimize for color and opacity, but
also for positions and radii (a, b, c). Due to the modular design, lighting cues can also be easily integrated (d).

Abstract
We propose Pulsar, an efficient sphere-based differentiable rendering module that is orders of magnitude faster
than competing techniques, modular, and easy-to-use due to
its tight integration with PyTorch. Differentiable rendering
is the foundation for modern neural rendering approaches,
since it enables end-to-end training of 3D scene representations from image observations. However, gradient-based
optimization of neural mesh, voxel, or function representations suffers from multiple challenges, i.e., topological inconsistencies, high memory footprints, or slow rendering
speeds. To alleviate these problems, Pulsar employs: 1) a
sphere-based scene representation, 2) a modular, efficient
differentiable projection operation, and 3) (optional) neural shading. Pulsar executes orders of magnitude faster
than existing techniques and allows real-time rendering and
optimization of representations with millions of spheres.
Using spheres for the scene representation, unprecedented
speed is obtained while avoiding topology problems. Pulsar
is fully differentiable and thus enables a plethora of applications, ranging from 3D reconstruction to neural rendering.

1. Introduction
A differentiable rendering pipeline is the foundation for
all modern neural rendering approaches that learn 3D scene
representations based on image observations. Recently,
neural rendering has empowered a large variety of applications, such as novel-view synthesis [22], facial reenactment [36], and 3D reconstruction [17]. Modern neural rendering can be broken up into three components: 1) a 3D
neural scene representation, 2) a projection from 3D data to
a consistent 2D representation (the projection step) and 3)
processing the projected data using a statistical model, usually a neural network, to produce the final image (the neural
shading step). This strategy combines the strengths of classical rendering and neural networks. Through the projection step, a consistent geometric representation of the scene
is generated, while the neural shading step can produce realistic images through the use of the latest generative neural networks that can approximate complex natural image
formation phenomena without having to explicitly model
them.
Ideally, such a neural rendering approach can be jointly
trained in an end-to-end fashion: a 3D representation of the

1440

