Beyond Bounding-Box: Convex-hull Feature Adaptation for Oriented and
Densely Packed Object Detection

1

Zonghao Guo1 , Chang Liu1 , Xiaosong Zhang1 , Jianbin Jiao1 , Xiangyang Ji2 , and Qixiang Ye1∗
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. 2 Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{guozonghao19,liuchang615,zhangxiaosong18}@mails.ucas.ac.cn
xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn, {jiaojb,qxye}@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Detecting oriented and densely packed objects remains
challenging for spatial feature aliasing caused by the intersection of reception fields between objects. In this paper, we propose a convex-hull feature adaptation (CFA)
approach for configuring convolutional features in accordance with oriented and densely packed object layouts.
CFA is rooted in convex-hull feature representation, which
defines a set of dynamically predicted feature points guided
by the convex intersection over union (CIoU) to bound
the extent of objects. CFA pursues optimal feature assignment by constructing convex-hull sets and dynamically
splitting positive or negative convex-hulls. By simultaneously considering overlapping convex-hulls and objects
and penalizing convex-hulls shared by multiple objects,
CFA alleviates spatial feature aliasing towards optimal feature adaptation. Experiments on DOTA and SKU110KR datasets show that CFA significantly outperforms the
baseline approach, achieving new state-of-the-art detection performance. Code is available at github.com/SDLGuoZonghao/BeyondBoundingBox.

1. Introduction
Over the past decade, we witnessed substantial progress
in visual object detection. This is attributed to the availability of deep networks incorporating rich feature representation [16, 15] and large-scale databases [3, 17, 28] for pretraining representative models. However, most detectors
encounter problems when objects, such as those in aerial
images, are in arbitrary orientations [24], or have dissimilar
layouts to the objects utilized during training. The problems
become more serious when oriented objects are densely distributed, because this causes spatial feature aliasing at the
intersection of reception fields, Fig. 1(above).
∗ Corresponding Author.

RepPoint
Initilization

RepPoint
Bounding Box

Reception Field
with Aliasing

Feature Point
Offset Prediction

Convex-hull
Generation

Reception Field
w/o Aliasing

Figure 1. Problem illustration. (Upper) When using box representation, oriented and densely packed objects cause feature aliasing
for the intersection of reception fields between objects. (Lower)
With convex-hull representation, our CFA approach adapts features located on regular convolutional maps to oriented and
densely packed objects, solving the feature aliasing issue in a systematic way.

One solution for oriented object detection is feature/anchor augmentation [19, 21, 20, 31], which produces
features in multiple orientations for detector training. This
intuitive solution, however, suffers a significant increase in
computational complexity and false detection. The other
solution is defining RoI transformers, which apply spatial
transformations on RoIs while learning the parameters under the supervision of oriented bounding boxes [4]. Transformers have been promoted as being dynamic [24], attentive [37], and smoothed [36], enabling adaptive receptive
fields to adapt to object orientations. However, the problem
about how to adapt feature grids to objects of arbitrary layouts remains unsolved, which causes feature aliasing, particularly when objects are densely packed.
In this paper, we propose a convex-hull feature adapta-

8792

