2D or not 2D? Adaptive 3D Convolution Selection for
Efficient Video Recognition
Hengduo Li1
1

Zuxuan Wu2 *
Abhinav Shrivastava1
Larry S. Davis1
2
University of Maryland
Fudan University

{hdli,abhinav,lsd}@cs.umd.edu

zxwu@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
3D convolutional networks are prevalent for video
recognition. While achieving excellent recognition performance on standard benchmarks, they operate on a sequence
of frames with 3D convolutions and thus are computationally demanding. Exploiting large variations among different videos, we introduce Ada3D, a conditional computation framework that learns instance-specific 3D usage policies to determine frames and convolution layers to be used
in a 3D network. These policies are derived with a twohead lightweight selection network conditioned on each input video clip. Then, only frames and convolutions that
are selected by the selection network are used in the 3D
model to generate predictions. The selection network is
optimized with policy gradient methods to maximize a reward that encourages making correct predictions with limited computation. We conduct experiments on three video
recognition benchmarks and demonstrate that our method
achieves similar accuracies to state-of-the-art 3D models
while requiring 20% − 50% less computation across different datasets. We also show that learned policies are transferable and Ada3D is compatible to different backbones and
modern clip selection approaches. Our qualitative analysis
indicates that our method allocates fewer 3D convolutions
and frames for “static” inputs, yet uses more for motionintensive clips.

1. Introduction
Videos are expected to make up a staggering 82% of Internet traffic by 2022 [1], which demands approaches that
can understand video content like actions and events accurately and efficiently. Key to video recognition is temporal
modeling to capture relationships among different frames.
Towards this goal, extensive studies have been conducted
with 3D convolutional networks by extending 2D convolutions over time [33, 4, 35, 34, 9, 8, 45]. While of* Corresponding author.

Barbequing

Golf driving

Breakdancing

Figure 1: A conceptual overview of our approach.
Ada3D learns to adaptively keep/discard 3D convolutional
layers and frames conditioned on input clips for efficient
video recognition. Fewer 3D convolutions and frames are
kept for clips that contain discriminative static cues and
contextual information, while more are used for motionintensive clips, in pursuit of a reduced overall computational
cost without sacrificing recognition accuracy. Black mask
indicates the frame is discarded.

fering excellent recognition accuracy on standard benchmarks [4, 13, 16], 3D models are often computationally expensive due to the costly convolution operations along the
temporal axis on a large number of stacked frames. For example, at the clip-level 1 , a standard ResNet50 [14] model
only requires 4.1 GFLOPs (giga floating-point operations)
to compute predictions for a single image, while a SlowFast
network [9] with the same ResNet50 backbone needs 16
times more computation (65.7 GFLOPs). Furthermore, the
computational cost linearly grows with the number of clips
uniformly sampled through the entire sequence for videolevel prediction aggregation.
But are 3D convolutions really important for recognizing
different types of videos? Do we really need them through1 Here, we use “clip” in a broad sense; for 2D models, a clip is a single
RGB frame while for 3D models it is a stack of frames.

6155

