Indoor Lighting Estimation using an Event Camera
Zehao Chen1,2# Qian Zheng3 #
1

Peisong Niu1

Gang Pan1,2 ∗

Huajin Tang1

College of Computer Science and Technology, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China 2 Zhejiang Lab, Hangzhou, China
3
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
zehao@zju.edu.cn, zhengqian@ntu.edu.sg, {psacfc, htang, gpan}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
Image-based methods for indoor lighting estimation suffer from the problem of intensity-distance ambiguity. This
paper introduces a novel setup to help alleviate the ambiguity based on the event camera. We further demonstrate
that estimating the distance of a light source becomes a
well-posed problem under this setup, based on which an
optimization-based method and a learning-based method
are proposed. Our experimental results validate that our
approaches not only achieve superior performance for indoor lighting estimation (especially for the close light) but
also significantly alleviate the intensity-distance ambiguity.

1. Introduction
Obtaining lighting information is a classic problem in
computer vision and graphics. It contributes to solving a
variety of vision tasks, such as photometric stereo [29, 78],
virtual object compositing [31], and scene understanding
[55]. A field of researches study to estimate or calibrate
lighting by taking a single image of an illuminated object
(e.g., [9, 34]) or scene (e.g., [59, 35]) as the input.
Early work assumes the light source to be distant and focuses on the estimation of light direction (e.g., [15]). This
assumption is often violated for indoor scenes due to the localized light sources. Recent advances tackle this problem
by either estimating a spatially-varying lighting at different
scene points (e.g., [16]) or predicting the light source positions in 3D space (e.g., [14]). However, as these approaches
take a single image as the input, this inherently ill-posed
problem is likely to suffer from the problem of intensitydistance ambiguity. Because the light distance inferred
from a given intensity (recorded by an image) is not guaranteed to be unique if the light source intensity changes [36].
Recently, the event camera (e.g., [37]) has attracted the
attention of many academics due to its advantages of high
# Equal contribution. ∗ Corresponding author.

Light source
exp(𝛷 𝑡 )
𝒏𝒍

Event streams
𝑑

𝒏𝒍

Sphere

𝒏𝐱

𝑰(𝐱, 𝑡)
BRDF
Diffuse reflection

Event camera
𝑒 = {𝐱, 𝑡, 𝑝}

Figure 1. The setup of our method: using an event camera to capture the intensity changes on a purely diffuse sphere, which is
placed in a dark room, for the split second of turning light on.

temporal resolution, high dynamic range, and sensitivity to
small intensity changes. And it has been used to solve various vision tasks such as 3D reconstruction [64], optical flow
estimation [13], and segmentation [62].
In this paper, we leverage the event camera to alleviate
the intensity-distance ambiguity for indoor lighting estimation. Our basic idea is to use more information to better
constrain the estimation of light source parameters, because
the event camera can capture signals in a split second. To be
specific, we introduce a novel setup as shown in Figure 1.
With such a setup, we observe that the intensity-distance
ambiguity can hardly be found for the event streams (Figure 2). We detail the analysis about the ambiguity in Section 3.2, which is based on our analytic formulation of event
streams (Section 3.1). We further show that estimating the
distance of light source becomes a well-posed problem with
the input of event streams, based on which an optimizationbased method is proposed (Section 4.1). We also propose a
learning-based method for robust lighting estimation (Section 4.2). To evaluate our methods, we collect two testing
datasets with paired data captured by a traditional camera
and an event camera (Section 4.2). Experimental results

14760

