StickyPillars: Robust and Efficient Feature Matching on Point Clouds
using Graph Neural Networks
Kai Fischer1 , Martin Simon1 , Florian Ölsner2 , Stefan Milz2,4 , Horst-Michael Groß3 , Patrick Mäder4
1

Valeo Schalter und Sensoren GmbH, Kronach, Germany
2
Spleenlab GmbH, Saalburg-Ebersdorf, Germany
3
Neuroinformatics and Cognitive Robotics Lab, Ilmenau University of Technology, Germany
4
Software Engineering for Safety-Critical Systems, Ilmenau University of Technology, Germany
{kai.fischer, martin.simon}@valeo.com

Abstract
Robust point cloud registration in real-time is an important prerequisite for many mapping and localization algorithms. Traditional methods like ICP tend to fail without
good initialization, insufficient overlap or in the presence of
dynamic objects. Modern deep learning based registration
approaches present much better results, but suffer from a
heavy runtime. We overcome these drawbacks by introducing StickyPillars, a fast, accurate and extremely robust deep
middle-end 3D feature matching method on point clouds.
It uses graph neural networks and performs context aggregation on sparse 3D key-points with the aid of transformer
based multi-head self and cross-attention. The network output is used as the cost for an optimal transport problem
whose solution yields the final matching probabilities. The
system does not rely on hand crafted feature descriptors or
heuristic matching strategies. We present state-of-art art accuracy results on the registration problem demonstrated on
the KITTI dataset while being four times faster then leading
deep methods. Furthermore, we integrate our matching system into a LiDAR odometry pipeline yielding most accurate
results on the KITTI odometry dataset. Finally, we demonstrate robustness on KITTI odometry. Our method remains
stable in accuracy where state-of-the-art procedures fail on
frame drops and higher speeds.

1. Introduction
Point cloud registration, the process of finding a spatial
transformation aligning two point clouds, is an essential computer vision problem and a precondition for a wide range
of tasks in the domain of real-time scene understanding or
applied robotics, such as odometry, mapping, re-localization
or SLAM. New generations of 3D sensors, like depth cam-

eras or LiDARs (light detection and ranging), as well as
multi-sensor setups provide substantially more fine-grained
and reliable data enabling dense range perception at a large
field of view. These sensors substantially increase the expectations on point cloud registration and an exact matching of
feature correspondences.
State-of-the-art 3D point cloud registration employs locally describable features in a global optimization step
[43, 57, 21]. Most methods do not rely on modern machine
learning algorithms, although they are part of the best performing approaches on odometry challenges like KITTI [14].
In contrast, recent research for point cloud processing, e.g.
classification and segmentation [34, 35, 18, 60], relies on
neural networks and promises substantial improvements for
registration, mapping and odometry [12, 20]. The limitation
of all none neural network-based odometry and mapping
methods is that they perform odometry estimation using a
global rigid body operation. Those approaches assume many
static objects within the environment and proper viewpoints.
However, real world measurements are generally unstable
under challenging situations, e.g. many dynamic objects
or widely varying viewpoints and small overlapping areas.
Hence, the mapping quality itself is suffering from artifacts
(blurring) and is often not evaluated qualitatively. To overcome these limitations, we propose StickyPillars a novel
registration approach for point clouds utilizing graph neural
networks based on pillar shaped point descriptors. Inspired
by [9, 52], our approach computes feature correspondence
rather than end-to-end odometry estimations. By reducing
the registration problem to an inter-cloud correspondence
search on a sparse subset of selected key-points and utilizing a ground truth match matrix in the training process, we
are able to predict poses with a very low computation time
while being robust against the influence of dynamic objects.
We demonstrate StickyPillars’s robust real-time registration
capabilities (see Fig. 1) and its confidence under challeng-

313

