Linguistic Structures as Weak Supervision for Visual Scene Graph Generation
Keren Ye
Adriana Kovashka
Department of Computer Science, University of Pittsburgh
{yekeren, kovashka}@cs.pitt.edu
https://github.com/yekeren/WSSGG

Abstract
Prior work in scene graph generation requires categorical supervision at the level of triplets—subjects and objects, and predicates that relate them, either with or without
bounding box information. However, scene graph generation is a holistic task: thus holistic, contextual supervision should intuitively improve performance. In this work,
we explore how linguistic structures in captions can benefit
scene graph generation. Our method captures the information provided in captions about relations between individual triplets, and context for subjects and objects (e.g. visual
properties are mentioned). Captions are a weaker type of
supervision than triplets since the alignment between the
exhaustive list of human-annotated subjects and objects in
triplets, and the nouns in captions, is weak. However, given
the large and diverse sources of multimodal data on the
web (e.g. blog posts with images and captions), linguistic supervision is more scalable than crowdsourced triplets.
We show extensive experimental comparisons against prior
methods which leverage instance- and image-level supervision, and ablate our method to show the impact of leveraging phrasal and sequential context, and techniques to improve localization of subjects and objects.

1. Introduction
Recognizing visual entities and understanding the relations among them are two fundamental problems in computer vision. The former task is known as object detection
(OD) and the latter as visual relation detection (VRD). In
turn, scene graph generation (SGGen) requires to jointly detect the entities and classify their relations.
While scene graphs are a holistic, contextual representation of an image, the types of supervision that have been
used capture context in an impoverished way. In particular,
prior methods use supervision in the form of either subjectpredicate-object triplets with bounding boxes for the subject
and object [27, 34, 49] or subject-predicate-object triplets at
the image level only [54, 57]. Thus, information in the supervision is local (separate triplets) while the scene graph

Standard crowdsourced
supervision:
(man, standing on, rails)
(man, in, shirt)

Our supervision:
“Man in checkered shirt is
standing on the rails.”
man

standing on

Output: Scene graph (part shown)
man?

shirt? rails?

man

shirt

rails

rails
checkered

is

shirt

Figure 1. We tackle the problem of generating scene graphs with
supervision in the form of captions at training time. Parsing from
captions enables utilization of the huge amount of image-text data
available on the internet. The linguistic structure extracted maintains the relational information described in the caption without
the loss of cross-triplet references, and facilitates disambiguation.

to be output captures the entire image. This discrepancy
between the properties of the desired output (global) and
training data (local) becomes problematic due to potential
ambiguity in the visual input. For example, in Fig. 1, multiple persons are standing on the rails. Thus, standard supervision (top) which breaks down a scene graph into triplets,
may create confusion.
In contrast, captions capture global context that allows
us to link multiple triplets, and localize a man who is both
standing on the rails, and wearing a (checkered) shirt. Captions are linguistic constructs, and language could be argued to capture common sense (e.g., BERT [11] models
are good at question-answering and commonsense tasks).
Captions are also advantageous in terms of cost: humans
naturally provide language descriptions of visual content
they upload, thus caption-like supervision can be seen as
“free”. However, caption supervision contains noise, which
presents some challenges. First, captions provide supervision at the image level, similar to prior work in weaklysupervised scene graph generation [54]. Second, prior work
[32, 51] shows that captions do not cover all relevant objects: not all content is mentioned, and some of the mentioned content is not referring to the image explicitly or is
not easily localizable. Because captions are noisy, the supervision we use is even weaker than prior work [54].

8289

