Panoptic-PolarNet: Proposal-free LiDAR Point Cloud Panoptic Segmentation
Zixiang Zhou∗ , Yang Zhang∗† , Hassan Foroosh
Department of Computer Science, University of Central Florida
{zhouzixiang, yangzhang}@knights.ucf.edu, Hassan.Foroosh@ucf.edu

Panoptic segmentation presents a new challenge in exploiting the merits of both detection and segmentation, with
the aim of unifying instance segmentation and semantic segmentation in a single framework. However, an efficient solution for panoptic segmentation in the emerging domain of
LiDAR point cloud is still an open research problem and
is very much under-explored. In this paper, we present a
fast and robust LiDAR point cloud panoptic segmentation
framework, referred to as Panoptic-PolarNet. We learn
both semantic segmentation and class-agnostic instance
clustering in a single inference network using a polar Bird’s
Eye View (BEV) representation, enabling us to circumvent the issue of occlusion among instances in urban street
scenes. To improve our network’s learnability, we also propose an adapted instance augmentation technique and a
novel adversarial point cloud pruning method. Our experiments show that Panoptic-PolarNet outperforms the baseline methods on SemanticKITTI and nuScenes datasets with
an almost real-time inference speed. Panoptic-PolarNet
achieved 54.1% PQ in the public SemanticKITTI panoptic
segmentation leaderboard and leading performance for the
validation set of nuScenes.

1. Introduction
As a crucial step in applications such as autonomous
driving and robotics, processing and analyzing 3D scanning
data have received increasing attention in recent years in
computer vision and deep learning. Panoptic segmentation
is a recently introduced problem in the image domain [20]
that presents a new challenge in unifying instance segmentation and semantic segmentation in a single training architecture. With the recent introduction of new LiDAR point
cloud datasets [2, 5, 13] that include both pixel-wise semantic label annotation and object annotation, this problem can
now be also explored for 3D scanning data as we propose
∗ Contributed equally.
† Now at Waymo LLC.
Code at: https://github.com/edwardzhou130/Panoptic-PolarNet.

Panoptic Quality (%)

Abstract

54
52
50
48
46
44
42
40
38
36

SalsaNext + PV-RCNN
KPConv + PointPillar
Milioto et al.
Rangenet++ + PointPillar
Panoptic-PolarNet

0

2

4

6

8 10 12 14
Frames-per-second

16

18

20

Figure 1: SemanticKITTI [1] panoptic quality vs. single
frame inference latency. The green line marks the sampling
rate of the LiDAR scanner, which spins at 10 frames-persecond. Our proposed Panoptic-PolarNet outperforms other
baselines in both speed and PQ.
in this paper.
By definition, Panoptic segmentation requires that we
identify both class labels and instance id’s for points in the
“thing” classes, and only the class labels for points in the
“stuff” classes. To solve this problem, the first question to
answer is: What information is needed in order to obtain
a panoptic segmentation of data? It can be either the semantic label of all points and the instance clustering of the
“thing” classes, or the instance segmentation of the “thing”
classes and the class labels of remaining “stuff” classes. As
a consequence, these two alternative designs would lead to
two different categories of panoptic segmentation, known as
proposal-free and proposal-based, the former being adapted
from a semantic segmentation network [27] and the latter
adapted from an object detection network [16].
2D image panoptic segmentation faces two main problems. First, proposal-based ones segment instances independently within each individual object proposal. Such approaches require extra architectural modifications [25, 50]
to compensate for the impact of heavy object collision in
the proposals. Second, semantic segmentation and instance
segmentation are usually handled in two separate prediction

13194

