Semantic Relation Reasoning for Shot-Stable Few-Shot Object Detection
Chenchen Zhu

Fangyi Chen Uzair Ahmed Zhiqiang Shen
Carnegie Mellon University

Marios Savvides

{chenchez, fangyic, uzaira, zhiqians, marioss}@andrew.cmu.edu

Few-shot object detection is an imperative and longlasting problem due to the inherent long-tail distribution
of real-world data. Its performance is largely affected by
the data scarcity of novel classes. But the semantic relation between the novel classes and the base classes is constant regardless of the data availability. In this work, we
investigate utilizing this semantic relation together with the
visual information and introduce explicit relation reasoning into the learning of novel object detection. Specifically,
we represent each class concept by a semantic embedding
learned from a large corpus of text. The detector is trained
to project the image representations of objects into this embedding space. We also identify the problems of trivially using the raw embeddings with a heuristic knowledge graph
and propose to augment the embeddings with a dynamic
relation graph. As a result, our few-shot detector, termed
SRR-FSD, is robust and stable to the variation of shots of
novel objects. Experiments show that SRR-FSD can achieve
competitive results at higher shots, and more importantly, a
significantly better performance given both lower explicit
and implicit shots. The benchmark protocol with implicit
shots removed from the pretrained classification dataset can
serve as a more realistic setting for future research.

1. Introduction
Deep learning algorithms usually require a large amount
of annotated data to achieve superior performance. To acquire enough annotated data, one common way is by collecting abundant samples from the real world and paying
annotators to generate ground-truth labels. However, even
if all the data samples are well annotated based on our requirements, we still face the problem of few-shot learning.
Because long-tail distribution is an inherent characteristic
of the real world, there always exist some rare cases that
have just a few samples available, such as rare animals, uncommon road conditions. In other words, we are unable
to alleviate the situation of scarce cases by simply spending more money on annotation even big data is accessible.

mAP50 (%) on VOC Novel Set 1

Abstract
50
40
30
20
10

Pretrained
original
rm-nov
1-shot

2-shot

3-shot

Methods
SRR-FSD (Ours)
TFA
Meta R-CNN
MetaDet
FSRW
5-shot

10-shot

Figure 1. FSOD performance (mAP50) on VOC [13] Novel Set
1 at different shot numbers. Solid line (original) means the pretrained model used for initializing the detector backbone is trained
on the original ImageNet [10]. Dashed line (rm-nov) means
classes in Novel Set 1 are removed from the ImageNet for the
pretrained backbone model. Our SRR-FSD is more stable to the
variation of explicit shots (x-axis) and implicit shots (original vs.
rm-nov).

Therefore, the study of few-shot learning is an imperative
and long-lasting task.
Recently, efforts have been put into the study of few-shot
object detection (FSOD) [5, 20, 11, 19, 44, 41, 14, 46, 39,
42, 43]. In FSOD, there are base classes in which sufficient objects are annotated with bounding boxes and novel
classes in which very few labeled objects are available. The
novel class set does not share common classes with the base
class set. The few-shot detectors are expected to learn from
limited data in novel classes with the aid of abundant data
in base classes and to be able to detect all novel objects
in a held-out testing set. To achieve this, most recent fewshot detection methods adopt the ideas from meta-learning
and metric learning for few-shot recognition and apply them
to conventional detection frameworks, e.g. Faster R-CNN
[35], YOLO [34].
Although recent FSOD methods have improved the base-

8782

