Multi-Target Domain Adaptation with Collaborative Consistency Learning
Takashi Isobe1,3†, Xu Jia2∗ , Shuaijun Chen3 , Jianzhong He3 , Yongjie Shi4 ,
Jianzhuang Liu3 , Huchuan Lu2 , Shengjin Wang1∗
1
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
2
Dalian University of Technology
3
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), Peking University
jbj18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
shiyongjie@pku.edu.cn

wgsg@tsinghua.edu.cn

{xjia, lhchuana}@dlut.edu.cn

{chenshuaijun, jianzhong.he, liu.jianzhuang}@huawei.com

Abstract
Recently unsupervised domain adaptation for the semantic segmentation task has become more and more popular
due to high-cost of pixel-level annotation on real-world images. However, most domain adaptation methods are only
restricted to single-source-single-target pair, and can not be
directly extended to multiple target domains. In this work,
we propose a collaborative learning framework to achieve
unsupervised multi-target domain adaptation. An unsupervised domain adaptation expert model is first trained for
each source-target pair and is further encouraged to collaborate with each other through a bridge built between
different target domains. These expert models are further
improved by adding the regularization of making the consistent pixel-wise prediction for each sample with the same
structured context. To obtain a single model that works
across multiple target domains, we propose to simultaneously learn a student model which is trained to not only
imitate the output of each expert on the corresponding target domain, but also to pull different expert close to each
other with regularization on their weights. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method can effectively exploit rich structured information contained in
both labeled source domain and multiple unlabeled target
domains. Not only does it perform well across multiple
target domains but also performs favorably against state-ofthe-art unsupervised domain adaptation methods specially
trained on a single source-target pair. Code is available at
https://github.com/junpan19/MTDA.

† The work was done in Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies.
∗ Corresponding author

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims at interpreting an image by
assigning each pixel to a semantic class [33, 6, 7, 55, 63].
Recently, semantic segmentation has achieved remarkable
progress and is widely applied to intelligent systems such as
autonomous driving, human-computer interaction and other
low-level vision tasks [22, 21, 23]. Its success is mainly
attributed to the supervised learning over large amounts
of annotated data. However, human efforts on pixel-level
annotations are expensive, which substantially limits the
scalability of segmentation models. With large amounts of
low-cost and diverse synthetic data simulated with game
engines available, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
draws much attention to adapt the model learned on synthetic
data to real-world data. Unsupervised domain adaptation
methods [28, 51, 59, 34, 4, 61, 36, 37] alleviate the issue
of domain mismatch by training a model on both labeled
source domain and unlabeled target domain.
However, the setting of traditional unsupervised domain
adaptation in semantic segmentation is usually restricted to
single-source-single-target pair, as shown in Figure 1 (a).
The learned model only works for a single target domain
and can not be easily extended to multiple target domains,
that is, multi-target domain adaptation (MTDA). With this
setting, it is expected to learn a single model that is able to
make full use of data from a single labeled source domain
and multiple unlabeled target domains and performs well
on multiple target domains simultaneously. This setting
has great value in real-world applications. For example, in
autonomous driving it is expected to have a model work in
various environments with different lighting, weather and
cityscapes. It is difficult to collect annotated data for such
different environments but is easy to have large amounts of
unlabeled data.

8187

