Cyclic Co-Learning of Sounding Object Visual Grounding and Sound Separation
Yapeng Tian1 , Di Hu2,3∗ , Chenliang Xu1∗
1
University of Rochester, 2 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
{yapengtian,chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu, dihu@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
There are rich synchronized audio and visual events in
our daily life. Inside the events, audio scenes are associated
with the corresponding visual objects; meanwhile, sounding
objects can indicate and help to separate their individual
sounds in the audio track. Based on this observation, in this
paper, we propose a cyclic co-learning (CCoL) paradigm
that can jointly learn sounding object visual grounding and
audio-visual sound separation in a unified framework. Concretely, we can leverage grounded object-sound relations
to improve the results of sound separation. Meanwhile,
benefiting from discriminative information from separated
sounds, we improve training example sampling for sounding object grounding, which builds a co-learning cycle for
the two tasks and makes them mutually beneficial. Extensive experiments show that the proposed framework outperforms the compared recent approaches on both tasks, and
they can benefit from each other with our cyclic co-learning.
The source code and pre-trained models are released in
https://github.com/YapengTian/CCOL-CVPR21.

1. Introduction
Seeing and hearing are two of the most important senses
for human perception. Even though the auditory and visual
information may be discrepant, the percept is unified with
multisensory integration [5]. Such phenomenon is considered to be derived from the characteristics of specific neural cell, as the researchers in cognitive neuroscience found
the superior temporal sulcus in the temporal cortex of the
brain can simultaneously response to visual, auditory, and
tactile signal [18, 40]. Accordingly, we tend to perform as
unconsciously correlating different sounds and their visual
producers, even in a noisy environment. For example, for
a cocktail-party scenario contains multiple sounding and
silent instruments as shown in Fig. 1, we can effortlessly
filter out the silent ones and identify different sounding ob∗ Corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Our model can perform audio-visual joint perception to
simultaneously identify silent and sounding objects and separate
sounds for individual audible objects.

jects, and simultaneously separate the sound for each playing instrument, even faced with a static visual image.
For computational models, the multi-modal sound separation and sounding object alignment capacities reflect in
audio-visual sound separation (AVSS) and sound source visual grounding (SSVG), respectively. AVSS aims to separate sounds for individual sound sources with help from
visual information, and SSVG tries to identify objects that
make sounds in visual scenes. These two tasks are primarily explored isolatedly in the literature. Such a disparity
to human perception motivates us to address them in a colearning manner, where we leverage the joint modeling of
the two tasks to discover objects that make sounds and separate their corresponding sounds without using annotations.
Although existing works on AVSS [8, 32, 11, 49, 13, 46,
9] and SSVG [27, 38, 43, 3, 33] are abundant, it is nontrivial to jointly learn the two tasks. Previous AVSS methods implicitly assume that all objects in video frames make
sounds. They learn to directly separate sounds guided by
encoded features from either entire video frames [8, 32, 49]
or detected objects [13] without parsing which are sounding
or not in unlabelled videos. At the same time, the SSVG
methods mostly focus on the simple scenario with single
sound source, barely exploring the realistic cocktail-party
environment [38, 3]. Therefore, these methods blindly use
information from silent objects to guide separation learn-

2745

