LEAP: Learning Articulated Occupancy of People
Marko Mihajlovic1 , Yan Zhang1 , Michael J. Black2 , Siyu Tang1
1
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany
neuralbodies.github.io/LEAP

Abstract
Substantial progress has been made on modeling rigid
3D objects using deep implicit representations. Yet, extending these methods to learn neural models of human shape
is still in its infancy. Human bodies are complex and the
key challenge is to learn a representation that generalizes
such that it can express body shape deformations for unseen subjects in unseen, highly-articulated, poses. To address this challenge, we introduce LEAP (LEarning Articulated occupancy of People), a novel neural occupancy representation of the human body. Given a set of bone transformations (i.e. joint locations and rotations) and a query
point in space, LEAP first maps the query point to a canonical space via learned linear blend skinning (LBS) functions
and then efficiently queries the occupancy value via an occupancy network that models accurate identity- and posedependent deformations in the canonical space. Experiments show that our canonicalized occupancy estimation
with the learned LBS functions greatly improves the generalization capability of the learned occupancy representation across various human shapes and poses, outperforming
existing solutions in all settings.

1. Introduction
Parametric 3D human body models [37, 61] are often
represented by polygonal meshes and have been widely
used to estimate human pose and shape from images and
videos [17, 28, 33], create training data for machine learning algorithms [22, 49] and synthesize realistic human bodies in 3D digital environments [68, 69]. However, the meshbased representation often requires a fixed topology and
lacks flexibility when combined with deep neural networks
where back-propagation through the 3D geometry representation is desired.
Neural implicit representations [39, 45, 46] have been
proposed recently to model rigid 3D objects. Such representations have several advantages. For instance, they

Figure 1. LEAP successfully represents unseen people in various
challenging poses by learning the occupancy of people in a canonical space. Shape- and pose-dependent deformations are modeled through carefully designed neural network encoders. Posedependent deformations are best observed around the elbows in
the canonical pose.

are continuous and do not require a fixed topology. The
3D geometry representation is differentiable, making interpenetration tests with the environment efficient. However, these methods perform well only on static scenes and
objects, their generalization to deformable objects is limited, making them unsuitable for representing articulated
3D human bodies. One special case is NASA [14] which
takes a set of bone transformations of a human body as in-

10461

