Hierarchical and Partially Observable Goal-driven Policy Learning
with Goals Relational Graph
Xin Ye and Yezhou Yang
Active Perception Group, School of Computing, Informatics, and Decision Systems Engineering,
Arizona State University, Tempe, USA
{xinye1, yz.yang}@asu.edu

Abstract
We present a novel two-layer hierarchical reinforcement
learning approach equipped with a Goals Relational Graph
(GRG) for tackling the partially observable goal-driven task,
such as goal-driven visual navigation. Our GRG captures
the underlying relations of all goals in the goal space through
a Dirichlet-categorical process that facilitates: 1) the highlevel network raising a sub-goal towards achieving a designated final goal; 2) the low-level network towards an optimal policy; and 3) the overall system generalizing unseen
environments and goals. We evaluate our approach with
two settings of partially observable goal-driven tasks — a
grid-world domain and a robotic object search task. Our experimental results show that our approach exhibits superior
generalization performance on both unseen environments
and new goals 1 .

1. Introduction
Goal-driven visual navigation defines a task where an
intelligent agent (with an on-board camera) is expected to
take reasonable steps to navigate to a user-specified goal in
an unknown environment (see Figure 1 left). It is a fundamental yet essential capability for an agent and could serve
as an enabling step for other tasks, such as Embodied Question Answering [8] and Vision-and-Language Navigation [3].
Goal-driven visual navigation could be formulated as a partially observable goal-driven task. In this paper, we present
a novel Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning approach with
a Goals Relational Graph formulation (HRL-GRG) tackling
it. Formally, a partially observable goal-driven task yields a
10-tuple < S, A, T, G, R, Ω, O, Gd , Φ, γ >, in which S is a
set of states, A is a set of actions, T : S × A × S → [0, 1]
is a state transition probability function, G ⊆ S is a set of
goal states, R : S × A × S × G → R is a reward function,
1 Codes and models are available at https://github.com/XinYe-1/HRL-GRG.

Ω is a set of observations that are determined by conditional
observation probability O : S × Ω → [0, 1]. Similarly,
Gd is a set of goal descriptions that describe observations
with goal recognition probability Φ : Ω × Gd → [0, 1].
In particular, g is the goal state of the corresponding goal
description gd iff Φ(argmaxω O(g, ω), gd ) is larger than
a pre-defined threshold. γ ∈ (0, 1] is a discount factor.
The objective of a partially observable goal-driven task is
to P
maximize the expected discounted cumulative rewards
∞
E[ t γ t rt+1 (st , at , st+1 , g)|st , g] by learning an optimal
action policy to select an action at at the state st given the
observation ot and the goal description gd .
Classic RL methodology optimizes an agent’s decisionmaking action policy in a given environment [30]. To make
RL towards real-world applicable, equipped with deep neural
networks, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) [22] algorithms are able to directly take the high dimensional sensory
inputs as states S and learn the optimal action policy that
generalizes across various states. However, the applicability
of most advanced RL algorithms is still limited to domains
with fully observed state space S and/or fixed goal states G,
which is not the case in reality [22, 21, 20, 29, 11].
For real-world applications like visual navigation, an
agent’s sensory inputs capture the local information of its surrounding environments (a partially observable state space).
Additionally, the real-world applications could be subject to
goal changes, requiring a system to be goal-adaptive. Therefore, a real-world application can be formulated as a partially observable goal-driven task, that is different from a
fully observable goal-driven task [22, 21, 11, 25] or a partially observable task [13, 18, 12]. It requires the agent to
be capable of inferring its state in the augmented state space
S × G. Namely, the agent should take actions based on its
current relative states with respect to the goal states, which
can only be estimated from its sensory observations Ω and
the goal descriptions Gd . This is challenging due to 1) the
large augmented state space, 2) the different modalities that
the observations Ω and the goal descriptions Gd could have.
For example, while RGB images are usually taken as the

14101

