Transformation Invariant Few-Shot Object Detection
Aoxue Li Zhenguo Li
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, China
lax@pku.edu.cn, Li.Zhenguo@huawei.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
While the availability of large number of labeled data
has enabled deep neural networks to dominate the computer
vision community. they struggle in addressing problems
with scarce labeled data [6, 15]. In contrast, humans can
rapidly learn new concepts with only a few examples available. This big gap between humans and deep neural networks provides fertile ground for developing deep learning
techniques. Due to this fact, few-shot learning, which learns
algorithms that allow for better generalization on tasks with
a few labeled training samples, has become topical. Different from most previous works designed for few-shot classification, we focus on a more challenging and more practical
case – few-shot object detection (FSOD) [5, 9, 2]. Specifically, given a set of base classes with rich labeled data per
class and a set of novel class with a few labeled data per
class, FSOD aims to learn a model to detect objects from
both base and novel classes.

Baseline+AugQ

Baseline+AugS

10

Number of Shot

Few-shot object detection (FSOD) aims to learn detectors that can be generalized to novel classes with only a
few instances. Unlike previous attempts that exploit metalearning techniques to facilitate FSOD, this work tackles
the problem from the perspective of sample expansion. To
this end, we propose a simple yet effective Transformation Invariant Principle (TIP) that can be flexibly applied
to various meta-learning models for boosting the detection
performance on novel class objects. Specifically, by introducing consistency regularization on predictions from various transformed images, we augment vanilla FSOD models with the generalization ability to objects perturbed by
various transformation, such as occlusion and noise. Importantly, our approach can extend supervised FSOD models to naturally cope with unlabeled data, thus addressing
a more practical and challenging semi-supervised FSOD
problem. Extensive experiments on PASCAL VOC and
MSCOCO datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our TIP
under both of the two FSOD settings.

Baseline

5

3

2

1
20

25

30

35

40

45

50

55

60

Mean Average Precision (%)

Figure 1. Results with naive data augmentation. The evaluation
metrics are the 1, 2, 3, 5, 10-shot detection performance (i.e., mean
Average Precision, mAP) on the first novel class set of PASCAL
VOC dataset. Notations: ‘Baseline’ – A meta-learning-based approach [23] that has achieved the state-of-the-art results; ‘Baseline
+ AugS’ – Augmenting support images when training the baseline model. ‘Baseline + AugQ’ – Augmenting query images when
training the baseline model.

Recent progress of FSOD has featured meta-learning
strategy [10, 24, 23]. It uses a pool of auxiliary detection tasks generated from base class training set to perform
transfer learning to novel class tasks with only a few examples available. Here, each auxiliary task is constructed to
simulate the few-shot scenario: given a small training set
(called support set) with a labeled instance per class, and a
small test set (called query set), a meta learner trains the target detector in a guided manner: For each class, its support
sample is used to extract class-wise representative features
and embedded into a guidance vector. Then the guidance
vector is incorporated into query feature learning to facilitate the query sample features suitable for detecting objects
of the target class.
Orthogonal to the design of meta-learning strategy, we
tackle this challenging FSOD problem from the perspective of sample expansion and further improve its performance. A naive solution is to involve transformed images
13094

