CapsuleRRT: Relationships-aware Regression Tracking via Capsules
Ding Ma, Xiangqian Wu
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
madingcs@hit.edu.cn, xqwu@hit.edu.cnB

Abstract
Regression tracking has gained more and more attention
thanks to its easy-to-implement characteristics, while existing regression trackers rarely consider the relationships between the object parts and the complete object. This would
ultimately result in drift from the target object when missing
some parts of the target object. Recently, Capsule Network
(CapsNet) has shown promising results for image classification benefits from its part-object relationships mechanism,
while CapsNet is known for its high computational demand
even when carrying out simple tasks. Therefore, a primitive
adaptation of CapsNet to regression tracking does not make
sense, since this will seriously affect speed of a tracker. To
solve these problems, we first explore the spatial-temporal
relationships endowed by the CapsNet for regression tracking. The entire regression framework, dubbed CapsuleRRT,
consists of three parts. One is S-Caps, which captures
the spatial relationships between the parts and the object.
Meanwhile, a T-Caps module is designed to exploit the temporal relationships within the target. The response of the
target is obtained by STCaps Learning. Further, a priorguided capsule routing algorithm is proposed to generate
more accurate capsule assignments for subsequent frames.
Apart from this, the heavy computation burden in CapsNet
is addressed with a knowledge distillation pose matrix compression strategy that exploits more tight and discriminative
representation with few samples. Extensive experimental
results show that CapsuleRRT performs favorably against
state-of-the-art methods in terms of accuracy and speed.

1. Introduction
Regression tracking can be broadly divided into two
categories: discriminative correlation filters (DCFs) based
trackers [22, 42, 8] and deep regression networks (DRNs)
based trackers [7, 2, 9, 33, 27]. DCFs trackers exploit the
property of the circulant matrix and optimize the correlation filters with a system of linear functions. Not only that,
DCFs trackers achieve fast speed by taking advantage of
the correlation computed through the Fourier domain, but

Figure 1: Visual comparisons of the response map in existing deep regression networks on the Human2 sequence.
As our CapsuleRRT takes the relationships of part-object
into account, a relatively correct response can be obtained
even in the case of heavy occlusion.
also perform favorably on several popular tracking benchmarks [41, 24, 11]. Unfortunately, the main drawback of
DCFs trackers is that the DCFs trackers take few advantages of end-to-end learning. On the contrary, DRNs trackers [7, 2, 9, 33, 27] have paid more attention due to it has
the potential to take full advantage of end-to-end learning.
Most DRNs trackers share a similar mechanism: learn a
mapping from a sampling area of the target objects to soft
labels derived from a Gaussian function. Nevertheless, such
a mechanism does not take into account the relationships
between the object parts and the complete object, thus giving rise to drift. As shown in Figure 1, low response values
are assigned to some parts of the object, thus resulting in
drift. Further, some DRNs trackers update with such noisy
samples, which will result in tracking failure.
Recently, Hinton et al. [14] proposed the idea of CapsNet, which models the spatial relationships with capsule
architecture. However, it seems that directly apply the original CapsNet to deep regression tracking may not work,
which can be explained from three aspects. Firstly, the communication between two-level capsules is heavily relied on
the pose matrices of two-level capsules. Specifically, the
vote matrix of low-level capsules for the adjacently highlevel capsules is computed by multiplying the pose matrix
and transformation matrix. A large dimensional pose matrix
will introduce much unnecessary noise. This is well verified by noisy capsules produced by CapsNet within the solid
boxes of Figure 2, which will cause the weak discriminant

10948

