CoLA: Weakly-Supervised Temporal Action Localization with
Snippet Contrastive Learning

1

Can Zhang1 , Meng Cao1 , Dongming Yang1 , Jie Chen1,2 , Yuexian Zou∗1,2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{zhangcan, mengcao, yangdongming, zouyx}@pku.edu.cn; chenj@pcl.ac.cn

Abstract
Weakly-supervised temporal action localization (WSTAL) aims to localize actions in untrimmed videos with
only video-level labels. Most existing models follow the
“localization by classification” procedure: locate temporal
regions contributing most to the video-level classification.
Generally, they process each snippet (or frame) individually and thus overlook the fruitful temporal context relation.
Here arises the single snippet cheating issue: “hard” snippets are too vague to be classified. In this paper, we argue
that learning by comparing helps identify these hard snippets and we propose to utilize snippet Contrastive learning to Localize Actions, CoLA for short. Specifically, we
propose a Snippet Contrast (SniCo) Loss to refine the hard
snippet representation in feature space, which guides the
network to perceive precise temporal boundaries and avoid
the temporal interval interruption. Besides, since it is infeasible to access frame-level annotations, we introduce a
Hard Snippet Mining algorithm to locate the potential hard
snippets. Substantial analyses verify that this mining strategy efficaciously captures the hard snippets and SniCo Loss
leads to more informative feature representation. Extensive
experiments show that CoLA achieves state-of-the-art results on THUMOS’14 and ActivityNet v1.2 datasets.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization (TAL) aims at finding and
classifying action intervals in untrimmed videos. It has been
extensively studied in both industry and academia, due to
its wide applications in surveillance analysis, video summarization and retrieval [38, 15, 23], etc. Traditionally, fullysupervised TAL is labor-demanding in its manual labeling
procedure, thus weakly-supervised TAL (WS-TAL) which
only needs video-level labels has gain popularity.
Most existing WS-TAL methods [39, 27, 30, 26, 14] employ the common attention mechanism or multiple instance
learning formulation. Specifically, each input video is di-

Compare
#1. Easy Action

GT

Compare
#2. ?

#3. ?

#4. Easy Bkg.

Time

Baseline
Ours

Figure 1. Which category do the two selected snippets (#2, #3)
belong to? It is difficult to tell when evaluating independently
and they are actually misclassified in baseline (We plot the onedimensional T-CAS for CliffDiving and the thresholded results).
By contrast, learning by comparing helps identify them: #2 snippet
(person falling down) is inferred to be the action snippet by making a comparison with #1 “easy action” (different camera views of
the CliffDiving action); The inference of #3 snippet is also rectified
after the comparison with #4 “easy background” snippet.

vided into multiple fixed-size non-overlapping snippets and
the snippet-wise classifications are performed over time to
generate the Temporal Class Activation Map/Sequence (TCAM/T-CAS)[27, 34]. The final localization results are
generated by thresholding and merging the class activations.
For illustration, we consider the naı̈ve case where the whole
process is optimized with a single video-level classification
loss and we treat this pipeline as baseline in our paper.
In absence of frame-wise labels, WS-TAL suffers from
the single snippet cheating issue: indistinguishable snippets are easily misclassified and hurt the localization performance. To illustrate it, we take CliffDiving in Figure 1
as an example. When evaluated individually, two selected
snippets (#2, #3) seem ambiguous and are misclassified: 1)
the #2 snippet is incorrectly categorized, thus breaking the
time intervals; 2) the #3 snippet is misidentified as an action
in baseline, resulting in inaccurately extended action interval boundaries. How to address the single snippet cheating
issue? Let’s revisit the case in Figure 1. By comparing

16010

