Beyond Short Clips: End-to-End Video-Level Learning
with Collaborative Memories
Xitong Yang1 *, Haoqi Fan2 , Lorenzo Torresani2,3 , Larry Davis1 , Heng Wang2
1
University of Maryland, College Park 2 Facebook AI 3 Dartmouth
{haoqifan,torresani,hengwang}@fb.com

Abstract
The standard way of training video models entails sampling at each iteration a single clip from a video and optimizing the clip prediction with respect to the video-level
label. We argue that a single clip may not have enough
temporal coverage to exhibit the label to recognize, since
video datasets are often weakly labeled with categorical
information but without dense temporal annotations. Furthermore, optimizing the model over brief clips impedes its
ability to learn long-term temporal dependencies. To overcome these limitations, we introduce a collaborative memory mechanism that encodes information across multiple
sampled clips of a video at each training iteration. This
enables the learning of long-range dependencies beyond
a single clip. We explore different design choices for the
collaborative memory to ease the optimization difficulties.
Our proposed framework is end-to-end trainable and significantly improves the accuracy of video classification at a
negligible computational overhead. Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that our framework generalizes
to different video architectures and tasks, outperforming the
state of the art on both action recognition (e.g., Kinetics400 & 700, Charades, Something-Something-V1) and action detection (e.g., AVA v2.1 & v2.2).

1. Introduction
In recent years, end-to-end learning of 3D convolutional networks (3D CNNs) has emerged as the prominent
paradigm for video classification [2,5,7,9,10,22,33,39,41–
43,45,47,53]. Steady improvements in accuracy have come
with the introduction of increasingly deeper and larger networks. However, due to their high computational cost and
large memory requirements, most video models are optimized at each iteration over short, fixed-length clips rather
than the entire video.
Although widely used in modern video models, the cliplevel learning framework is sub-optimal for video-level
* Work done during an internship at Facebook AI.

Clip-level Learning

Backbone

sampled clip
Backbone

iteration j
sampled clip

…

{xyang35,lsd}@cs.umd.edu

iteration i

(a) Standard: clip-level learning on individual clips at each iteration.
Video-level Learning
Collaborative Memory
Backbone

Backbone

Backbone

sampled clip

sampled clip

sampled clip

(b) Our framework: video-level learning with collaborative memory.

Figure 1: Clip-level learning vs. our proposed end-to-end
video-level learning framework. (Action label: something
being deflected from something.)
classification. First, capturing long-range temporal structure beyond short clips is not possible as the models are
only exposed to individual clips during training. Second,
the video-level label may not be well represented in a brief
clip, which may be an uninformative segment of the video
or include only a portion of the action, as shown in Figure 1(a). Thus, optimizing a model over individual clips
using video-level labels is akin to training with noisy labels. Recent attempts to overcome these limitations include
methods that build a separate network on top of the clipbased backbone [20, 50, 56]. However, these approaches
either cannot be trained end-to-end with the backbone (i.e.,
the video model is optimized over pre-extracted clip-level
features) or require ad-hoc backbones which hinder their
application in the current landscape of evolving architectures.
In this paper, we propose an end-to-end learning framework that optimizes the classification model using videolevel information collected from multiple temporal locations of the video, shown in Figure 1(b). Our approach

7567

