Deep Occlusion-Aware Instance Segmentation with Overlapping BiLayers
Lei Ke1
Yu-Wing Tai2
Chi-Keung Tang1
1
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Kuaishou Technology
{lkeab,cktang}@cse.ust.hk, yuwing@gmail.com

Abstract
Input Image

Segmenting highly-overlapping objects is challenging,
because typically no distinction is made between real object
contours and occlusion boundaries. Unlike previous twostage instance segmentation methods, we model image formation as composition of two overlapping layers, and propose Bilayer Convolutional Network (BCNet), where the
top GCN layer detects the occluding objects (occluder) and
the bottom GCN layer infers partially occluded instance
(occludee). The explicit modeling of occlusion relationship
with bilayer structure naturally decouples the boundaries
of both the occluding and occluded instances, and considers the interaction between them during mask regression.
We validate the efficacy of bilayer decoupling on both onestage and two-stage object detectors with different backbones and network layer choices. Despite its simplicity,
extensive experiments on COCO and KINS show that our
occlusion-aware BCNet achieves large and consistent performance gain especially for heavy occlusion cases. Code is
available at https://github.com/lkeab/BCNet.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art approaches in instance segmentation often follow the Mask R-CNN [21] paradigm with the first
stage detecting bounding boxes, followed by the second
stage to segment instance masks. Mask R-CNN and its
variants [42, 5, 8, 25, 7] have demonstrated notable performance, and most of the leading approaches in the COCO
instance segmentation challenge [40] have adopted this
pipeline. However, we note that most incremental improvement comes from better backbone architecture designs, with
little attention paid in the instance mask regression after
obtaining the ROI (Region-of-Interest) features from object detection. We observe that a lot of segmentation errors
are caused by overlapping objects, especially for object instances belonging to the same class. This is because each
instance mask is individually regressed, and the regression
process implicitly assumes the object in an ROI has almost
complete contour, since most objects in the training data in
1 This research is supported in part by the Research Grant Council of
the Hong Kong SAR under grant no. 16201420 and Kuaishou Technology.

Top Layer

Occluder
Bilayer Decoupling

Bottom Layer

Occludee

Inferred Result

Invisible Occluded Region

Figure 1. Simplified illustration. Unlike previous segmentation
approaches operating on a single image layer (i.e., directly on
the input image), we decouple overlapping objects into two image layers, where the top layer deals with the occluding objects
(occluder) and the bottom layer for occludee (which is also referred to as target object in other methods as they do not explicitly
consider the occluder). The overlapping parts of the two image
layers indicate the invisible region of the occludee, which is explicitly modeled by our occlusion-aware BCNet framework.

COCO do not exhibit significant occlusions.
We propose the Bilayer Convolutional Network (BCNet). As illustrated in Figure 1, BCNet simultaneously regresses both occluding region (occluder) and partially occluded object (occludee) after ROI extraction, which groups
the pixels belonging to the occluding region and treat them
equally as the pixels of the occluded object but in two separate image layers, and thus naturally decouples the boundaries for both objects and considers the interaction between
them during the mask regression stage.
Previous approaches resolve the mask conflict between
neighboring objects through non-maximum suppression or
additional post-processing [43, 14, 34, 30, 20]. Consequently, their results are over-smooth along boundaries or
exhibit small gaps between neighboring objects. Furthermore, since the receptive field in the ROI observes multiple objects that belong to the same class, when the occluding regions were included as part of the occluded object, traditional mask head design falls short of resolving
such conflict, leaving a large portion of error as shown in
Figure 2. We compare BCNet with recent amodal segmentation methods [46, 16], which predict complete ob-

4019

