Checkerboard Context Model for Efficient Learned Image Compression
Dailan He

Yaoyan Zheng Baocheng Sun Yan Wang* Hongwei Qin
SenseTime Research

{hedailan, zhengyaoyan, sunbaocheng, wangyan1, qinhongwei}@sensetime.com

Abstract
For learned image compression, the autoregressive context model is proved effective in improving the ratedistortion (RD) performance. Because it helps remove spatial redundancies among latent representations. However,
the decoding process must be done in a strict scan order,
which breaks the parallelization. We propose a parallelizable checkerboard context model (CCM) to solve the problem. Our two-pass checkerboard context calculation eliminates such limitations on spatial locations by re-organizing
the decoding order. Speeding up the decoding process more
than 40 times in our experiments, it achieves significantly
improved computational efficiency with almost the same
rate-distortion performance. To the best of our knowledge,
this is the first exploration on parallelization-friendly spatial context model for learned image compression.

1. Introduction
Image compression is a vital and long-standing research
topic in multimedia signal processing. Various algorithms
are designed to reduce spatial, visual, and statistical redundancies to produce more compact image representations.
Common image compression algorithms like JPEG [15],
JPEG2000 [30] and BPG [8] all follow a general pipeline,
where lossless entropy coders [23] are used after image
transformations and quantization. In those non-learned image compression methods, content loss only occurs in the
quantization process. The transformations involved mainly
include Discrete Cosine Transformation and Wavelet Transformation, which are lossless.
In recent years, many state-of-the-art (SOTA) deep learning and computer vision techniques have been introduced to
build powerful learned image compression methods. Many
studies aim to establish novel image compression pipelines
based on recurrent neural networks [35], convolutional autoencoders [5, 34, 31, 3, 6], or generative adversarial networks [1]. Some of them [26, 18, 11] have attained a better
* Corresponding author. This work is done when Dailan He, Yaoyan
Zheng and Baocheng Sun are interns at SenseTime Research.

× ×

(a) serial 3 × 3

(b) serial 5 × 5

(c) ours 3 × 3

× ×

(d) ours 5 × 5

Figure 1. Masked convolutions modeling spatial causal context.
The red blocks denote elements to en/de-code. Latents in yellow
and blue locations are currently visible (all of them are visible during encoding, and those who have been decoded are visible during
decoding). A context modeling can be conducted using a masked
convolution which is centered at the red location and only convolves with the yellow latents. (a)(b) 3 × 3 and 5 × 5 instances of
the widely used serial context model. This context model requires
strict Z-ordered serial decoding, which limits the computational
efficiency. (c)(d) Our proposed checkerboard context model with
a kernel size of 3 × 3 and 5 × 5. After decoding all anchors, which
are latents in blue and yellow locations, the context calculating for
all non-anchors can be run in parallel.

performance than those currently SOTA conventional compression techniques such as JPEG2000 [30] and BPG [8] on
both the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) and multi-scale
structural similarity (MS-SSIM) [36] distortion metrics. Of
particular note is, even the intra coding of Versatile Video
Coding (VVC) [9], an upcoming video coding standard, has
been approached by a recent learning-based method [10].
The common key of those currently most successful approaches is the entropy modeling and optimizing method,
with autoencoder based structure to perform a nonlinear
transform coding [14, 5]. By estimating the probability distribution of latent representations, such models can minimize the entropy of these representations to be compressed,
which directly correlates to the final code length using
arithmetic encoding [32] or range encoding [24], and enable a differentiable form of rate-distortion (RD) optimization. Another important aspect is the introduction of hyperprior [6]. Hyper latent is the further extracted representation, which provides side-information implicitly describing
the spatial correlations in latent. Adopting hyperprior modeling allows entropy models to approximate latent distributions more precisely and benefits the overall coding perfor-

14771

