Single Image Depth Prediction with Wavelet Decomposition
Michaël Ramamonjisoa1,∗ Michael Firman2 Jamie Watson2
Vincent Lepetit1 Daniyar Turmukhambetov2
1
LIGM, IMAGINE, Ecole des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS 2 Niantic
www.github.com/nianticlabs/wavelet-monodepth

Abstract
We present a novel method for predicting accurate
depths from monocular images with high efficiency. This
optimal efficiency is achieved by exploiting wavelet decomposition, which is integrated in a fully differentiable
encoder-decoder architecture. We demonstrate that we can
reconstruct high-fidelity depth maps by predicting sparse
wavelet coefficients.
In contrast with previous works, we show that wavelet
coefficients can be learned without direct supervision on
coefficients. Instead we supervise only the final depth image that is reconstructed through the inverse wavelet transform. We additionally show that wavelet coefficients can be
learned in fully self-supervised scenarios, without access to
ground-truth depth. Finally, we apply our method to different state-of-the-art monocular depth estimation models, in
each case giving similar or better results compared to the
original model, while requiring less than half the multiplyadds in the decoder network.

(a) Input color image – (320×1024)

(b) Sparse estimation using wavelets. Our network up-samples and refines a 1/16-resolution depth map (bottom-right), by estimating wavelet
coefficients only in sparse regions.

1. Introduction
Single-image depth estimation methods are useful in
many real-time applications, for example robotics, autonomous driving and augmented reality. These areas are
typically resource-constrained, so efficiency at prediction
time is important.
Neural networks which estimate depth from a single image overwhelmingly use U-Net architectures, with skip connections between encoder and decoder layers [45]. Most
work on single-image depth prediction has focused on
improved depth accuracy, without focusing on efficiency.
Those that have cared about efficiency have typically borrowed tricks from the “efficient network” world [24, 46] to
make faster depth estimation, with the network using standard convolutions all the way through [54, 41]. All these
∗ Work done during an internship at Niantic.

(c) Reconstruction of the output depth map using the inverse wavelet
transform.

Figure 1: We can represent depth maps more efficiently with
wavelets. Here the network takes image (a) as input and outputs
a low resolution depth map, together with sparse wavelet coefficients (b). We can reconstruct a high-resolution depth map (c) using the inverse wavelet transform. In our model we predict multiscale wavelet coefficients with an image-to-image network, and
we exploit sparseness of the output to save computation.

approaches still use standard neural network components:
convolutions, additions, summations and multiplications.
Inspired by sparse representations that can be achieved
with wavelet decomposition, we propose an alternative network representation for more efficient depth estimation, us-

11089

