Limitations of Post-Hoc Feature Alignment for Robustness
Collin Burns
UC Berkeley

Abstract
Feature alignment is an approach to improving robustness to distribution shift that matches the distribution of
feature activations between the training distribution and test
distribution. A particularly simple but effective approach to
feature alignment involves aligning the batch normalization
statistics between the two distributions in a trained neural
network. This technique has received renewed interest lately
because of its impressive performance on robustness benchmarks. However, when and why this method works is not
well understood. We investigate the approach in more detail and identify several limitations. We show that it only
significantly helps with a narrow set of distribution shifts
and we identify several settings in which it even degrades
performance. We also explain why these limitations arise by
pinpointing why this approach can be so effective in the first
place. Our findings call into question the utility of this approach and Unsupervised Domain Adaptation more broadly
for improving robustness in practice.

1. Introduction
A foundational assumption made in most of machine
learning is that the training distribution is identical to the test
distribution. However, this assumption is commonly violated
in practice, which can substantially decrease the performance
of models [10, 24]. This can be especially problematic in
high-stakes applications such as autonomous vehicles. One
way of improving robustness is to exploit unlabeled test data
to adapt the model to the new distribution. This process is
called Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) [32].
A common approach in UDA, known as feature alignment or domain alignment, is to align the feature activations between the source and target distributions [5–
8, 13, 17, 20, 26, 29, 30, 32]. Feature alignment has also
been applied beyond UDA in domains such as causal inference [15, 28]. Simple forms of feature alignment normalize
the features of a trained model so that the training set and
test set have the same first and second order statistics in
some feature space [19, 30], while other approaches match
distributions in more complicated ways, such as by being

Jacob Steinhardt
UC Berkeley

indistinguishable to an adversarial discriminator [8, 20].
We focus on one simple feature alignment method: Adaptive Batch Normalization (AdaBN) [19]. Like many other
popular and effective feature alignment methods (e.g. Cariucci et al. [5], Roy et al. [26], Sun and Saenko [31], Sunet
al. [30], Wang et al. [33]), AdaBN is normalization-based,
meaning it matches first and second order statistics between
the two feature distributions. It is also a post-hoc method,
meaning it aligns features for a model that has already been
trained, making it particularly simple and applicable even for
unforseen distribution shifts. Given a neural network trained
on source data with Batch Normalization (BN) [14], AdaBN
re-estimates the BN statistics of that model using the target
data. In other words, AdaBN aligns the mean and variance
of each channel in the network across the two distributions.
Despite its simplicity, in recent work Nado et al. [21],
Schneider et al. [27] showed that aligning batch norm statistics between the train and test distributions can be used to
achieve state-of-the-art accuracy on the robustness benchmark ImageNet-C [10]. Schneider et al. [27] argue that
we should therefore start using normalization-based feature
alignment methods whenever we evaluate robustness. Nado
et al. [21] additionally find that aligning BN statistics does
not help as much for some other types of distribution shift.
However, neither paper describes why this method works
well on ImageNet-C or why it does not help as much with
other types of distribution shift.
We build on this work by investigating when and why
methods like AdaBN help. Our findings include:
• Showing that aligning BN statistics can actually degrade accuracy on several types of distribution shift,
both conceptually and in practice.
• Identifying implicit symmetry assumptions made by
these methods and showing how violations of these
assumptions can cause performance degradation.
• Demonstrating and explaining how aligning BN statistics primarily helps with distribution shifts that involve
changes in local image statistics.
Our findings have several implications. While aligning
BN statistics is an effective method for improving robustness
12525

