Taskology: Utilizing Task Relations at Scale
Yao Lu1 2 , Sören Pirk1,2 , Jan Dlabal2 , Anthony Brohan1,2 , Ankita Pasad3∗,
Zhao Chen4 , Vincent Casser4 , Anelia Angelova1,2 , Ariel Gordon1,2
1
Robotics at Google, 2 Google Research, 3 Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, 4 Waymo LLC
{yaolug, pirk, dlabal, brohan}@google.com, ankitap@ttic.edu,
{zhaoch, casser}@waymo.com, {anelia, gariel}@google.com

Abstract
Many computer vision tasks address the problem of
scene understanding and are naturally interrelated e.g. object classification, detection, scene segmentation, depth estimation, etc. We show that we can leverage the inherent relationships among collections of tasks, as they are
trained jointly, supervising each other through their known
relationships via consistency losses. Furthermore, explicitly utilizing the relationships between tasks allows improving their performance while dramatically reducing the need
for labeled data, and allows training with additional unsupervised or simulated data. We demonstrate a distributed
joint training algorithm with task-level parallelism, which
affords a high degree of asynchronicity and robustness. This
allows learning across multiple tasks, or with large amounts
of input data, at scale. We demonstrate our framework on
subsets of the following collection of tasks: depth and normal prediction, semantic segmentation, 3D motion and egomotion estimation, and object tracking and 3D detection
in point clouds. We observe improved performance across
these tasks, especially in the low-label regime.

1. Introduction
Many tasks in computer vision, such as depth and surface
normal estimation, flow prediction, pose estimation, semantic segmentation, or classification, are inherently related as
they describe the surrounding scene along with its dynamics. While solving for each of these tasks may require specialized methods, most tasks are connected by the underlying physics observed in the real world. A considerable
amount of research aims to reveal the relationships between
tasks [60, 5, 15, 56, 13, 54, 55], but only a few methods
exploit these fundamental relationships. Some approaches
rely on the unparalleled performance of deep networks to
learn explicit mappings between tasks [55, 54]. However,
while training tasks pairs leverages their relationships, it
∗ Work done while at Robotics at Google

Supervision∇
Loss 1

∇

∇

Consistency
Loss

Task 1

Supervision
Loss 2

∇

∇
Task 2

Images
Labels

Labels
Images

Dataset 1

Mediator dataset
(unlabeled)

Images

Dataset 2

Figure 1. Illustration of our framework for the collective training of
multiple tasks with a consistency loss (two tasks are shown). Each
task is performed by a separate network, and trained on a its own
dataset and a shared unlabeled mediator dataset. The consistency
loss is imposed for samples from the mediator dataset.

may lead to inconsistencies across multiple tasks, e.g. [55],
and points to the alternative of training tasks jointly.
Multi-task learning targets the problem of training multiple tasks jointly. Common to many approaches is a shared
feature-extractor component with multiple “heads” that perform separate tasks [15, 56, 13]. Training multiple tasks together increases the coherency between them and – in some
setups – also enables their self-supervision [60, 5]. However, the joint training also has a few disadvantages. For
one, a single model for multiple tasks is difficult to design,
maintain and improve, as any changes in the training data,
losses, or hyperparameters associated with one of the tasks,
also affects all others. Secondly, different modalities come
with different architectures, which are difficult to merge into
a single model. For example, point clouds require sparse
processing [43], while tensored images use CNNs. Thirdly,
it can become intractable to process a single model – built
to perform multiple tasks – on a single compute node.
In this paper we introduce a novel approach for distributed collective training that explicitly leverages the inherent connections between multiple tasks (Fig. 1). Con-

8700

