Geo-FARM: Geodesic Factor Regression Model for Misaligned Pre-shape
Responses in Statistical Shape Analysis
Chao Huang, Anuj Srivastava, Rongjie Liu
Department of Statistics, Florida State University
Tallahassee, FL 32306, USA
chaohuang@stat.fsu.edu,anuj@stat.fsu.edu,rliu3@fsu.edu

Abstract
The problem of using covariates to predict shapes of objects in a regression setting is important in many fields.
A formal statistical approach, termed Geodesic regression
model, is commonly used for modeling and analyzing relationships between Euclidean predictors and shape responses. Despite its popularity, this model faces several
key challenges, including (i) misalignment of shapes due
to pre-processing steps, (ii) difficulties in shape alignment
due to imaging heterogeneity, and (iii) lack of spatial correlation in shape structures. This paper proposes a comprehensive geodesic factor regression model that addresses
all these challenges. Instead of using shapes as extracted
from pre-registered data, it takes a more fundamental approach, incorporating alignment step within the proposed
regression model and learns them using both pre-shape and
covariate data. Additionally, it specifies spatial correlation structures using low-dimensional representations, including latent factors on the tangent space and isotropic
error terms. The proposed framework results in substantial
improvements in regression performance, as demonstrated
through simulation studies and a real data analysis on Corpus Callosum contour data obtained from the ADNI study.

1. Introduction
The field of statistical analysis and modeling of shapes
has seen tremendous research and progress. This research is
driven by strong applications in computer vision, bioinformatics, computational anatomy, forensics, computer graphics, and so on. Numerous important scientific endeavors
have sought to analyze the shapes of objects and investigate their correlations with objects’ functionality in largescale datasets [10, 36, 40, 29]. Shape is broadly defined
to be a characteristic that is left after certain nuisance or
shape-preserving transformations, such as rotations, trans-

lations and scale, have been removed [6, 34, 21], with the
result that shape representation spaces are nonlinear, highdimensional, and have quotient space geometry. The last
property stems from the need to be invariant to certain
shape-preserving transformations as rotations, translations
and scale. Consequently, shapes are represented by orbits
under transformation groups, rather than as points in a preshape space. Together, these properties make shape spaces
as non-traditional domains for statistical formulations, including definitions of shape statistics (e.g. mean and variability) [15], clustering analysis [35], classification [8], testing differences in populations [2] and some others.
In recent years, shape regression analysis – the use of
shape variables in statistical regression models – has attracted considerable attention. Consequently several approaches have been developed to model the relationships
between shape responses and some Euclidean covariates of
interest [25, 24, 32, 14, 17, 22, 7, 42, 33, 43]. The past approaches can be classified in two broad categories: extrinsic
regression and intrinsic regression. In the extrinsic regression framework, the shape responses are usually embedded
onto a higher dimensional Euclidean space, where classical regression models in that space are applied, and then
the estimated models and predictions are projected back
onto the original shape space [25, 24]. However, these approaches face some drawbacks including (i) lack in preservation the local shape geometry and (ii) non-guaranteed existence of an inverse and continuous embedding map to the
shape space [37].
In contrast, the intrinsic approaches are natural generalizations of regression models from Euclidean spaces to
non-Euclidean shape geometries, typically using exponential maps and tangent space representations [32, 14, 17,
22, 7, 42, 33, 43]. To understand this approach better, let
{fiy , xi }ni=1 be the observed data, where fiy is an element
of Kendall’s shape space S, and xi ∈ Rp is a Euclidean
variable. Ideally fiy , representing a shape, should be an
orbit [fiy ] of a pre-shape space under the rotation group.
However, the use of quotient space geometry in specifiy-

11496

