Removing Raindrops and Rain Streaks in One Go
Ruijie Quan1,2 , Xin Yu2 , Yuanzhi Liang1 , Yi Yang2
1
Baidu Research* 2 ReLER Lab, University of Technology Sydney
ruijie.quan@student.uts.edu.au v liangyuanzhi@baidu.com {xin.yu,yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

(a) Input

(b) AttentGAN→PReNet

(c) PReNet → AttentGAN

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Joint removal of raindrops and rain streaks. Combining a raindrop removal method AttentGAN [30] and a rain
streak removal method PReNet [35] cannot remove rain thoroughly. Our method achieves promising derained results.

Abstract
Existing rain-removal algorithms often tackle either rain
streak removal or raindrop removal, and thus may fail to
handle real-world rainy scenes. Besides, the lack of realworld deraining datasets comprising different types of rain
and their corresponding rain-free ground-truth also impedes deraining algorithm development. In this paper, we
aim to address real-world deraining problems from two aspects. First, we propose a complementary cascaded network architecture, namely CCN, to remove rain streaks and
raindrops in a unified framework. Specifically, our CCN removes raindrops and rain streaks in a complementary fashion, i.e., raindrop removal followed by rain streak removal
and vice versa, and then fuses the results via an attention
based fusion module. Considering significant shape and
structure differences between rain streaks and raindrops, it
is difficult to manually design a sophisticated network to remove them effectively. Thus, we employ neural architecture
search to adaptively find optimal architectures within our
specified deraining search space. Second, we present a new
real-world rain dataset, namely RainDS, to prosper the development of deraining algorithms in practical scenarios.
RainDS consists of rain images in different types and their
corresponding rain-free ground-truth, including rain streak
only, raindrop only, and both of them. Extensive experimental results on both existing benchmarks and RainDS demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art.

* This work was done when Ruijie Quan, Yuanzhi Liang interned at
Baidu Research. Yi Yang is the corresponding author.

1. Introduction
Rainy weather would severely degrade the performance
of outdoor vision systems. Rain streaks in the air severely
impair the visibility of captured scenes. Concurrently, raindrops falling on camera lenses or windshields further reduce the image quality as images are captured through raindrenched glasses. Hence, removing rain from images plays
an important role in outdoor vision applications, such as autonomous driving.
Existing deraining works have achieved promising progresses and they can be divided into two major categories:
rain streak removal and raindrop removal. Rain streak removal methods [29, 42, 41, 53, 54, 44, 11, 5, 9] remove rain
streaks mainly based on their sparse line-shape nature. Existing raindrop removal methods [48, 12, 6, 30, 33] remove
raindrops by identifying their various shapes, positions and
sizes. Previous deraining methods usually assume only one
type of rain exhibits in images. However, in real-world
rainy weather, rain streaks and raindrops often co-occur during image capture. Therefore, this phenomenon poses a critical challenge to the existing deraining algorithms.
In this paper, we develop a novel complementary cascaded network, dubbed CCN, to remove raindrops and rain
streaks jointly in a unified framework. Our CCN consists
of two branches to remove rain in different orders, i.e.,
raindrop removal followed by rain streak removal and rain
streak removal followed by raindrop removal. In this complementary fashion, our network removes both types of rain
more thoroughly, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Moreover, we
present an attention based fusion to merge the outputs from
the two branches to achieve satisfactory deraining results.
Considering different shapes, sizes and optical effects of

9147

