Iso-Points: Optimizing Neural Implicit Surfaces with Hybrid Representations
Wang Yifan1

Shihao Wu1
1

ETH Zurich

Cengiz Öztireli2
2

Olga Sorkine-Hornung1

University of Cambridge

Abstract
Neural implicit functions have emerged as a powerful
representation for surfaces in 3D. Such a function can encode a high quality surface with intricate details into the
parameters of a deep neural network. However, optimizing for the parameters for accurate and robust reconstructions remains a challenge, especially when the input data
is noisy or incomplete. In this work, we develop a hybrid neural surface representation that allows us to impose
geometry-aware sampling and regularization, which significantly improves the fidelity of reconstructions. We propose
to use iso-points as an explicit representation for a neural
implicit function. These points are computed and updated
on-the-fly during training to capture important geometric
features and impose geometric constraints on the optimization. We demonstrate that our method can be adopted to improve state-of-the-art techniques for reconstructing neural
implicit surfaces from multi-view images or point clouds.
Quantitative and qualitative evaluations show that, compared with existing sampling and optimization methods, our
approach allows faster convergence, better generalization,
and accurate recovery of details and topology.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing surfaces from real-world observations is
a long-standing task in computer vision. Recently, representing 3D geometry as a neural implicit function has received much attention [40, 36, 7]. Compared with other
3D shape representations, such as point clouds [29, 20, 54],
polygons [24, 31, 39, 32], and voxels [8, 47, 35, 22], it provides a versatile representation with infinite resolution and
unrestricted topology.
Fitting a neural implicit surface to input observations is
an optimization problem. Some common application examples include surface reconstruction from point clouds and
multi-view reconstruction from images. For most cases, the
observations are noisy and incomplete. This leads to fundamental geometric and topological problems in the final
reconstructed surface, as the network overfits to the imperfect data. We observe that this problem remains, and can
become more prominent with the recent powerful architec-

input

vanilla
optimization

optimization with
iso-points

Figure 1: We propose a hybrid neural surface representation with implicit
functions and iso-points, wich leads to accurate and robust surface reconstruction from imperfect data. The iso-points allows us to augment existing optimization pipelines in a variety of ways: geometry-aware regularizers are incorporated to reconstruct a surface from a noisy point cloud
(first row); geometric details are preserved in multi-view reconstruction
via feature-aware sampling (second row); iso-points can serve as a 3D
prior to improve the topological accuracy of the reconstructed surface
(third row). The input data are respectively: reconstructed point cloud [12]
of model 122 of DTU-MVS dataset [21], multi-view rendered images of
DOG - WINGED model from Sketchfab dataset [55] and multi-view images
of model 55 of DTU-MVS dataset

tures, e.g. sine activations [45] and Fourier features [41].
We show examples of problems in fitting neural implicit
functions in Figure 1. When fitting a neural surface to
a noisy point cloud, “droplets” and bumps emerge where
there are outlier points and holes (first row); when fitting a
surface to image observations, fine-grained geometric features are not captured due to under-sampling (second row);
topological noise is introduced when inadequate views are
available for reconstruction (third row).
In this work, we propose to alleviate these problems by
introducing a hybrid neural surface representation using
iso-points. The technique converts from an implicit neural
surface to an explicit one via sampling iso-points, and goes
back to the implicit representation via optimization. The

374

