LED2 -Net: Monocular 360◦ Layout Estimation via Differentiable Depth
Rendering
Fu-En Wang∗1

Yu-Hsuan Yeh∗2

Min Sun1,4

fulton84717@gapp.nthu.edu.tw

yuhsuan.eic08g@nctu.edu.tw

sunmin@ee.nthu.edu.tw

Wei-Chen Chiu2

Yi-Hsuan Tsai3

walon@cs.nctu.edu.tw

ytsai@nec-labs.com

Abstract
Although significant progress has been made in room
layout estimation, most methods aim to reduce the loss in
the 2D pixel coordinate rather than exploiting the room
structure in the 3D space. Towards reconstructing the room
layout in 3D, we formulate the task of 360◦ layout estimation as a problem of predicting depth on the horizon line
of a panorama. Specifically, we propose the Differentiable
Depth Rendering procedure to make the conversion from
layout to depth prediction differentiable, thus making our
proposed model end-to-end trainable while leveraging the
3D geometric information, without the need of providing the
ground truth depth. Our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance on numerous 360◦ layout benchmark datasets.
Moreover, our formulation enables a pre-training step on
the depth dataset, which further improves the generalizability of our layout estimation model.

1. Introduction
Inferring the geometric structure such as depth, layout,
etc. from a single image has been studied for years. With
the advance of deep learning, convolutional neural networks
are widely used in these tasks. In addition, with the increasing popularity of consumer-level 360◦ cameras, approaches
dealing with 360◦ panoramas start to play a crucial role in
virtual and augmented reality (VR/AR) and robotic vision.
In order to support the indoor use case of these applications, the task of room layout estimation from a single 360◦
panorama becomes important.
Generally, the room layout can be constructed by connecting the adjacent room corners or directly finding the
1 National Tsing Hua University
2 National Chiao Tung University
3 NEC Labs America
4 MOST Joint Research Center for AI Technology and All Vista Healthcare
∗ The authors contribute equally to this paper.

Figure 1. Our LED2 -Net takes the (a) single panorama as input and
infers the (c) 3D room layout. We propose the (b) Differentiable
Depth Rendering technique to incorporate the geometry-aware information into our model.

boundary between walls, floor, and ceiling. Hence, most
methods directly estimate the layout boundary and corners
from the input panorama, e.g., HorizonNet [18]. Despite
significant progress being achieved, the 3D reconstruction
of the room layout is often not as good as expected from
observing the results overlaid on the 2D panorama. The
main issue is that these methods are trained with the loss in
the pixel coordinates of the 2D panorama rather than in the
coordinate of the 3D reconstruction. In particular, 2D pixel
loss disregards the fact that pixels with different depths from
the camera should contribute differently to the loss in the
3D coordinate (see Figure 2). Additional losses such as
binary segmentation loss in the ceiling and floor perspective views have been introduced [24]. However, segmentation loss tends to focus on the correctness of the majority of the segment rather than the boundary of the segment.
On the other hand, although several progresses have been
made for monocular 360◦ depth estimation given a single
2D panorama [11, 25, 20, 28] where the loss is defined to
reduce errors in 3D, none of the existing works aims at applying depth-based constraints to layout estimation frame-

12956

