Robust Bayesian Neural Networks by Spectral Expectation Bound
Regularization
Jiaru Zhang1

Yang Hua2 Zhengui Xue1 Tao Song1 * Chengyu Zheng1 Ruhui Ma1
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Queen’s University Belfast

Haibing Guan1†

{jiaruzhang, zhenguixue, songt333, zhengcy, ruhuima, hbguan}@sjtu.edu.cn, Y.Hua@qub.ac.uk

Abstract
Bayesian neural networks have been widely used in
many applications because of the distinctive probabilistic
representation framework. Even though Bayesian neural
networks have been found more robust to adversarial attacks compared with vanilla neural networks, their ability
to deal with adversarial noises in practice is still limited.
In this paper, we propose Spectral Expectation Bound Regularization (SEBR) to enhance the robustness of Bayesian
neural networks. Our theoretical analysis reveals that
training with SEBR improves the robustness to adversarial noises. We also prove that training with SEBR can reduce the epistemic uncertainty of the model and hence it can
make the model more confident with the predictions, which
verifies the robustness of the model from another point of
view. Experiments on multiple Bayesian neural network
structures and different adversarial attacks validate the correctness of the theoretical findings and the effectiveness of
the proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Bayesian neural networks [8, 29] provide a probabilistic view of deep learning frameworks by treating the model
weights as random variables. One of the profound advantages of a Bayesian neural network is that it can provide
both the aleatoric uncertainty and the epistemic uncertainty
estimations because of the probabilistic representation of
the model. In contrast, a vanilla deep neural network only
models the aleatoric uncertainty by a certain probability distribution. Thus, Bayesian neural networks are successfully
applied in many tasks to model uncertainties and build a
more reliable and robust system, including but not limited
to computer vision tasks [17, 20, 30] and natural language
processing tasks [39].
* Tao Song is the corresponding author.
† This work was supported in part by National NSF of China (NO.

61872234, 61732010, 61525204) and Shanghai Key Laboratory of Scalable Computing and Systems.

Neural network models without particular settings [2,
14] are sensitive and vulnerable to adversarial attacks in
testing. Defenses against adversarial attacks are difficult.
The Lipschitz constant serves as an evaluation metric of
the adversarial robustness of a model by providing a worstcase bound [18, 37]. Many previous methods enhance
the model robustness by constricting the Lipschitz constant
[10, 23, 31]. These methods have made a significant improvement in both theoretical analysis and practical applications. However, they cannot be used in Bayesian neural
networks directly because of the probabilistic representations of model parameters.
Bayesian neural networks, on the other hand, are useful for defending adversarial noises compared with vanilla
neural networks. Because of the probabilistic representations of model parameters and predictions, Bayesian neural networks can be applied to detect adversarial samples
from normal samples [5, 24, 34]. Moreover, Bayesian neural networks have been found to have adversarial robustness
naturally. Y. Gal et al. [13] and Carbone et al. [9] reveal
that any gradient-based adversarial attacks are invalid on
Bayesian neural networks under some extremely idealized
conditions, e.g., idealized architecture [13], sufficient data
and sampling times [9]. Nonetheless, these studies all have
certain limitations. In many practical scenarios, predictions
on adversarial samples are still necessary even though they
have been detected. Additionally, the idealized conditions
are almost impossible in practice. Therefore, there is still
a vast space for further improvement of the robustness of
Bayesian neural networks.
This paper presents a method, Spectral Expectation
Bound Regularization (SEBR), to enhance the robustness
of Bayesian neural networks. The model trained with SEBR
has a smaller expectation of the spectral norm of the training
parameter matrices. As a result, the improvement on the adversarial robustness of Bayesian neural networks is guaranteed based on theoretical derivation in this paper. Moreover,
the impact of SEBR on the epistemic uncertainty of the output of Bayesian models is also studied theoretically and it
further verifies the robustness of the proposed method. Ex-

3815

