Information Bottleneck Disentanglement for Identity Swapping
Gege Gao

Huaibo Huang
Chaoyou Fu
Zhaoyang Li
Ran He*
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{gege.gao,huaibo.huang}@cripac.ia.ac.cn {chaoyou.fu,rhe}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn zhaoyang0427@gmail.com

Abstract
Improving the performance of face forgery detectors
often requires more identity-swapped images of higherquality. One core objective of identity swapping is to generate identity-discriminative faces that are distinct from the
target while identical to the source. To this end, properly disentangling identity and identity-irrelevant information is critical and remains a challenging endeavor. In this
work, we propose a novel information disentangling and
swapping network, called InfoSwap, to extract the most
expressive information for identity representation from a
pre-trained face recognition model. The key insight of our
method is to formulate the learning of disentangled representations as optimizing an information bottleneck tradeoff, in terms of finding an optimal compression of the pretrained latent features. Moreover, a novel identity contrastive loss is proposed for further disentanglement by requiring a proper distance between the generated identity
and the target. While the most prior works have focused on
using various loss functions to implicitly guide the learning of representations, we demonstrate that our model can
provide explicit supervision for learning disentangled representations, achieving impressive performance in generating more identity-discriminative swapped faces.

1. Introduction
Face forgery detection aims to identify whether a given
facial image has been modified, and is currently dominated
by data-driven approaches [35, 31, 28, 27]. This means that
it is difficult to improve the performance of forgery detectors in the absence of high-quality Deepfake data. Therefore, better face-swapping methods are in dire need to help
develop powerful forgery algorithms.
Recent works have made significant contributions in this
regard. FaceSwap [25] enables face swapping in real-time.
RSGAN [30] and FSNet [36] introduce GAN-based methods in synthesizing swapped face. FSGAN [32] proposes a
subject-agnostic approach for both face swapping and reen* Corresponding Author

actment. More recently, FaceShifter [26] puts its focus on
the occlusion problem and achieves high fidelity.
The core objective of identity swap (i.e. face swap) is
to keep the identity of the swapped face the same as the
source face while sharing the identity-irrelevant perceptual
information (e.g. pose, expression, and illumination) with
the target face. Therefore, proper disentanglement is an essential premise for well representing the identity and the
perceptual information. Otherwise, entangled target perception will inevitably bring the target identity into the synthesis process, leading to an identity-mixed result. Despite such importance, it is yet to see a breakthrough for
disentangled representation on face swapping. Previous
works [25, 30, 4, 19, 32, 26] attempt to constrain the identity and perception of the generated faces by adding multiple loss terms to the objective function. However, due to the
lack of explicit supervision, it is still challenging for these
works to learn well-disentangled representations.
In this paper, we focus on improving disentangled representation learning in subject-agnostic face swap. The main
idea is to learn the minimal sufficient statistics, namely the
optimal representations, for both the identity and identityirrelevant perceptual information from the latent features of
a pre-trained model [10]. By introducing the informationtheoretic principles [44, 40, 2], we model this learning process as a problem of optimizing the Information Bottleneck
(IB) trade-off, performed by a novel information disentanglement network InfoSwap. Based on the IB principle, we
can provide explicit supervision for disentangled representation learning. Moreover, we improve the IB objectives to
further facilitate the representation disentangling. Driven
by the intuition that proper swapped faces should be not
only close to the source in identity but also distinct from
the target, we provide a clear definition for discriminative
identities and extent the original IB objectives with a novel
Identity Contrastive Loss (ICL) as an additional regularization on the generated identities.
Extensive experiments show that our method can better disentangle information and generate more identitydiscriminative swapped faces with higher fidelity. A com-

3404

