Multi-Perspective LSTM for Joint Visual Representation Learning
Alireza Sepas-Moghaddam1
Fernando Pereira2
Paulo Lobato Correia2
Ali Etemad1
1
Dept. ECE and Ingenuity Labs Research Institute, Queen’s University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada
2
Instituto de Telecomunicações, Instituto Superior Técnico - Universidade de Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal
alireza.sepasmoghaddam@queensu.ca, {fp, plc}@lx.it.pt, ali.etemad@queensu.ca

Abstract

1. Introduction
Today, images and videos captured from multiple visual perspectives (multi-perspective) or view-points are extensively available thanks to the wide-spread adoption of
consumer-level cameras, notably in smartphones, able to
capture visual scenes simultaneously from multiple angles [30]. Multi-perspective sequences can be recorded by
i) several video cameras positioned at different angles, simultaneously acquiring the sequences, each of which including multiple samples/instances along time; and/or ii)
multi-view cameras such as Light Field (LF) cameras [17],
from which all samples/instances of all sequences are acquired at a single time instant, e.g., with changing horizontal and vertical perspectives. We call these two types
of multi-perspective sequences multi-perspective sequences
over time and multi-perspective sequences over space, respectively. When either of these sequences are used for visual recognition tasks, it is possible to exploit both the intra-

…
Cam 5

Cam 1

Seq. 2
Seq. 3
Seq. 4

Cam 2

Cam 3

Cam 4

Inter-perspective
relationships

We present a novel LSTM cell architecture capable
of learning both intra- and inter-perspective relationships
available in visual sequences captured from multiple perspectives. Our architecture adopts a novel recurrent joint
learning strategy that uses additional gates and memories
at the cell level. We demonstrate that by using the proposed cell to create a network, more effective and richer
visual representations are learned for recognition tasks.
We validate the performance of our proposed architecture
in the context of two multi-perspective visual recognition
tasks namely lip reading and face recognition. Three relevant datasets are considered and the results are compared
against fusion strategies, other existing multi-input LSTM
architectures, and alternative recognition solutions. The experiments show the superior performance of our solution
over the considered benchmarks, both in terms of recognition accuracy and complexity. We make our code publicly
available at https://github.com/arsm/MPLSTM.

Seq. 1

Seq. 5
Intra-perspective
relationships

Figure 1. Sequences captured from multiple perspectives include
intra- and inter-perspective relationships that need to be effectively
learned for robust visual recognition. We propose a novel LSTM
cell capable of jointly learning incoming visual representations
from various perspectives.

perspective relationships (within each input/view sequence)
and the inter-perspective relationships (between the different input/view sequences), as illustrated in Figure 1.
Recurrent neural networks (RNN) [18] such as long
short-term memory (LSTM) [13], have been widely used
for learning sequential data. Nonetheless, conventional or
vanilla LSTM networks, hereafter referred to only as LSTM
networks [13, 7], learn from a single sequence, as each
cell only accepts an instance of one particular sequence.
In this context, in order to learn from multiple sequences
(e.g., multi-perspective sequences), a separate LSTM network needs to be learned for each input sequence. As a result, inter-sequence relationships such as inter-perspective
information are typically not learned. To aggregate the information learned by individual LSTM networks, fusion
strategies have often been adopted [8, 32, 6, 29]. Scorelevel fusion, also known as late fusion, can be employed to
combine the classification scores using different strategies
such as a [weighted] sum rule or voting. This approach implies that the overall learning strategy is unable to learn the
inter-sequence relationships and only relies on the aggregation of the class probabilities for the final decision. To avoid
this problem, feature-level fusion, also known as early fusion, can be used by concatenating the input sequences and
feeding them consecutively to a single network. Nonethe-

16540

