Removing the Background by Adding the Background: Towards Background
Robust Self-supervised Video Representation Learning
Jinpeng Wang1,2 * Yuting Gao2 * Ke Li2
Hao Cheng 2 Pai Peng 2 Feiyue Huang 2
1

Sun Yat-sen University

2

Tencent Youtu Lab

3

Yiqi Lin1 Andy J. Ma 1 †
Rongrong Ji3,4 Xing Sun2

Xiamen University

4

Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract
Self-supervised learning has shown great potentials in
improving the video representation ability of deep neural
networks by getting supervision from the data itself. However, some of the current methods tend to cheat from the
background, i.e., the prediction is highly dependent on the
video background instead of the motion, making the model
vulnerable to background changes. To mitigate the model
reliance towards the background, we propose to remove
the background impact by adding the background. That is,
given a video, we randomly select a static frame and add it
to every other frames to construct a distracting video sample. Then we force the model to pull the feature of the distracting video and the feature of the original video closer,
so that the model is explicitly restricted to resist the background influence, focusing more on the motion changes. We
term our method as Background Erasing (BE). It is worth
noting that the implementation of our method is so simple and neat and can be added to most of the SOTA methods without much efforts. Specifically, BE brings 16.4%
and 19.1% improvements with MoCo on the severely biased
datasets UCF101 and HMDB51, and 14.5% improvement
on the less biased dataset Diving48.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved
competitive accuracy on a variety of video understanding tasks, including action recognition [20], temporal action detection [63] and spatio-temporal action localization
[55]. Such success relies heavily on manually annotated
datasets, which are time-consuming and expensive to obtain. Meanwhile, there are numerous unlabeled data that
are instantly available on the Internet, drawing more and
* The first two authors contributed equally. This work was done when
Jinpeng was in Tencent Youtu Lab.
† Corresponding Author. Email: majh8@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Figure 1: Illustration of the background cheating. In the
real open world, an action can happen at various locations.
Current models trained on the mainstream datasets tend to
give predictions simply because it sees some background
cues, neglecting the fact that motion pattern is what actually
defines an “action”.

more researchers’ attention from the community to utilize
off-the-shelf unlabeled data to improve the performance of
CNNs by self-supervised learning.
Recently, self-supervised learning methods have been
developed from the image field to the video field. However,
there are big differences between the mainstream video
dataset and the mainstream image dataset. Li et al.[29] and
Girdhar et al.[14] point out that the current commonly used
video datasets usually exist large implicit biases over scene
and object structure , making the temporal structure become
less important and the prediction tends to have a high dependence on the video background. We name this phenomenon
as background cheating, as is shown in Figure 1. For example, a trained model may classify an action as playing soccer
simply because it sees the field, without really understanding the cartwheel motion. As a result, the model is easily to
overfit the training set, and the learned feature representation is likely to be scene-biased. Li et al.[29] reduce the bias
by resampling the training set, and Wang et al.[53] propose
to pull actions out of the context by training a binary classifier to explicitly distinguish action samples and conjugate
samples that are contextually similar to action samples but
contains different action.
In this work, to hinder the model from background cheating and make the model generalize better, we present to
111804

