Multi-person Implicit Reconstruction from a Single Image
Armin Mustafa1
Akin Caliskan1
Lourdes Agapito2
Adrian Hilton1
1
2
CVSSP, University of Surrey
Department of Computer Science, University College London

Abstract
We present a new end-to-end learning framework to obtain detailed and spatially coherent reconstructions of multiple people from a single image. Existing multi-person
methods suffer from two main drawbacks: they are often model-based and therefore cannot capture accurate 3D
models of people with loose clothing and hair; or they require manual intervention to resolve occlusions or interactions. Our method addresses both limitations by introducing
the first end-to-end learning approach to perform modelfree implicit reconstruction for realistic 3D capture of multiple clothed people in arbitrary poses (with occlusions) from
a single image. Our network simultaneously estimates the
3D geometry of each person and their 6DOF spatial locations, to obtain a coherent multi-human reconstruction. In
addition, we introduce a new synthetic dataset that depicts
images with a varying number of inter-occluded humans
and a variety of clothing and hair styles. We demonstrate
robust, high-resolution reconstructions on images of multiple humans with complex occlusions, loose clothing and a
large variety of poses and scenes. Our quantitative evaluation on both synthetic and real world datasets demonstrates
state-of-the-art performance with significant improvements
in the accuracy and completeness of the reconstructions
over competing approaches.

1. Introduction
Multi-person human reconstruction from a single image
finds application in surveillance; film and entertainment including movie production; generating AR/VR content for
complex scenes; and sports broadcast. Reconstruction from
a single camera is more practical and lower-cost compared
to multi-view, as it does not require a complex setup. Immense progress has been made in estimating 3D human
pose and shape from a single image or monocular video in
the last five years [3, 46, 35, 11, 13]. Methods can be classified as model-based or model-free. Model-based methods
use a parametric human body shape model such as SMPL
to reconstruct people from a single image [7, 22, 18] including methods that estimate SMPL with clothing top[25].

Figure 1. Proposed model-free multi-person spatially coherent implicit reconstruction from a single image with 4 and 2 people on
synthetic MPSD and real CVSSP3D dataset.

Model-free methods give a more realistic reconstruction of
people with loose clothing and hair details [3, 46, 35, 11].
However all existing methods require an image of a single fully visible person without occlusions to allow reconstruction. Recently, model-based approaches have been introduced that can reconstruct multiple humans in a scene
[13, 17, 45] using SMPL, so cannot capture clothing details.
In addition, [45] requires manual intervention to mark interaction regions on 3D surfaces to handle inter-person/object
occlusions. This paper introduces the first model-free endto-end approach that reconstructs multiple clothed people
from a single image of a crowded scene with inter-person
occlusions (see Table 1). Our proposed approach produces
a spatially coherent implicit reconstruction of each person
together with their 6DOF spatial locations and orientations
in the observed scene without any manual intervention, and
can handle complex poses, clothing and partial occlusion
from a single image, as shown in Fig. 1.
We introduce the first multiple people synthetic dataset
and benchmark (MPSD) with realistic image-3D model
pairs. MPSD ranges from 2−10 people per image in a wide
variety of clothing, hairstyles and poses with detailed surface geometry and appearance rendered with diverse indoor
and outdoor natural backgrounds and realistic scene illumination. This dataset provides the first quantitative benchmark for multi-person single image reconstruction. We pro-

14474

