Neural Camera Simulators
Hao Ouyang*
HKUST

Zifan Shi*
HKUST

Chenyang Lei
HKUST

Ka Lung Law
SenseTime

Qifeng Chen
HKUST

Abstract
We present a controllable camera simulator based on
deep neural networks to synthesize raw image data under
different camera settings, including exposure time, ISO, and
aperture. The proposed simulator includes an exposure
module that utilizes the principle of modern lens designs
for correcting the luminance level. It also contains a noise
module using the noise level function and an aperture module with adaptive attention to simulate the side effects on
noise and defocus blur. To facilitate the learning of a simulator model, we collect a dataset of the 10,000 raw images
of 450 scenes with different exposure settings. Quantitative
experiments and qualitative comparisons show that our approach outperforms relevant baselines in raw data synthesize on multiple cameras. Furthermore, the camera simulator enables various applications, including large-aperture
enhancement, HDR, auto exposure, and data augmentation
for training local feature detectors. Our work represents
the first attempt to simulate a camera sensor’s behavior
leveraging both the advantage of traditional raw sensor features and the power of data-driven deep learning. The code
and the dataset are available at https://github.com/kenouyang/neural image simulator.

1. Introduction
Controllable photo-realistic image generation is a new
trending research topic [38]. Most recent works focus on
learning a certain scene representation conditioned on different viewpoints [27, 26] or lighting [34, 45]. However, in
the physical image formulation pipeline, apart from scene,
light, and view angle, the camera settings are also important components, which are yet to be investigated. Modern
cameras introduce various settings for capturing sceneries,
among which the exposure settings (i.e., exposure time or
shutter speed, ISO, and aperture size) are most commonly
adjusted. As in Fig. 1, cameras capture the scene radiometric characteristics and record them as raw image data.
Capturing with different exposure settings not only leads
to luminance changes but also results in different side ef-

Camera

Raw Image 1

Settings 1

Scene
Radiometry

Simulator 𝑓

𝑓

Settings 2

Camera

Raw Image 2

Figure 1. The problem formulation of simulating images with different camera settings. Given the same scene, a camera can capture different images with different camera settings, where the degrees of luminance, noise, and blur vary a lot. Our simulator aims
to model the mappings between raw images with different camera
settings.

fects: ISO affects the noise presented, and aperture size decides the defocus blur. This paper studies a challenging new
task of controllable exposure synthesis with different camera settings. Given the original image, we learn a simulator
f that maps from the old settings to new settings. To capture
the essence of changing exposure settings, we directly explore our simulation on raw data rather than monitor-ready
images so that any camera signal processing pipeline can be
applied [20].
Several features presented in raw data are beneficial for
the exposure simulation:
• Raw sensor data directly captures the physical information, such as the light intensity of a scene. To
simulate a new illuminance level, we can analyze the
change of captured light intensity under new settings
based on the physical prior and the design of the modern lens [32].
• The noise distribution model on raw sensor data
is relatively robust because of the physical imaging
model [14].
• In a close shot scene, the original divisions of blurry
and sharp regions provide additional supervision in-

*Joint first authors

7700

