Architectural Adversarial Robustness: The Case for Deep Pursuit
George Cazenavette1 Calvin Murdock1 Simon Lucey1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University 2 University of Adelaide
{gcazenav,cmurdock,slucey}@cs.cmu.edu

Abstract
Despite their unmatched performance, deep neural networks remain susceptible to targeted attacks by nearly imperceptible levels of adversarial noise. While the underlying cause of this sensitivity is not well understood, theoretical analyses can be simplified by reframing each layer
of a feed-forward network as an approximate solution to a
sparse coding problem. Iterative solutions using basis pursuit are theoretically more stable and have improved adversarial robustness. However, cascading layer-wise pursuit
implementations suffer from error accumulation in deeper
networks. In contrast, our new method of deep pursuit approximates the activations of all layers as a single global
optimization problem, allowing us to consider deeper, realworld architectures with skip connections such as residual
networks. Experimentally, our approach demonstrates improved robustness to adversarial noise.

1. Introduction
Multilayer sparse approximation has been proposed as
a robust alternative to feed-forward neural networks [17].
While provably less sensitive to noise, recurrent networks
that implement layered basis pursuit accumulate independent errors and cannot be applied to modern large-scale
architectures. We propose a new method of deep pursuit,
wherein all activations of the network are synchronously
optimized through a global basis pursuit, circumventing error accumulation and accounting for the skip connections
commonly found in state-of-the-art network architectures.
We apply this technique to address a major weakness of
deep neural networks: despite unrivaled performance on supervised tasks, they can be highly sensitive to certain types
of data noise. Specifically, adversarial attacks use imperceptible targeted input perturbations to completely change
a network’s predictions [8]. Robustness to such attacks is
mission-critical to many domains, such as security systems
and autonomous vehicles.
Because the generalization properties of deep neural networks are not yet thoroughly understood, combating such

Figure 1. (a) Recurrent deep networks that implement layered basis pursuit have been shown to be provably more robust to adversarial noise than feed-forward alternatives. However, this method
is incompatible with modern architectures. (b) We instead propose deep pursuit, which jointly infers all network activations as a
single structured sparse coding problem.

adversarial attacks remains an open problem. Current stateof-the-art methods rely on specialized loss functions or
training techniques. However, these methods do not explain why some models are more susceptible to attacks than
others or how to create naturally robust architectures. In
this work, we apply techniques from sparse approximation
theory to design deep neural networks that are intrinsically
more robust to adversarial noise.
Previous works have suggested reframing each layer of
a neural network as a sparse coding problem to make their
outputs more robust [17] (Figure 1a). However, as noted by
the authors, this method accumulates error throughout the
layers of the network, potentially leading to poor performance in deeper models. Additionally, this method offers
no provisions for handling skip connections between layers, preventing its use for real-world network architectures.
In order to exploit the natural robustness offered by
deeper networks [19] and skip connections [9], we propose adapting the layer-wise pursuit algorithm introduced
in [17] to the global view that reframes a neural network
as an approximate solution to a single sparse coding problem with block-structured parameters (Figure 1 B) [14]. We

7150

