ViP-DeepLab: Learning Visual Perception with Depth-aware Video Panoptic
Segmentation
Siyuan Qiao1 * Yukun Zhu2 Hartwig Adam2 Alan Yuille1 Liang-Chieh Chen2
1
Johns Hopkins University 2 Google Research

Abstract
In this paper, we present ViP-DeepLab, a unified model
attempting to tackle the long-standing and challenging inverse projection problem in vision, which we model as
restoring the point clouds from perspective image sequences while providing each point with instance-level semantic interpretations. Solving this problem requires the vision models to predict the spatial location, semantic class,
and temporally consistent instance label for each 3D point.
ViP-DeepLab approaches it by jointly performing monocular depth estimation and video panoptic segmentation. We
name this joint task as Depth-aware Video Panoptic Segmentation, and propose a new evaluation metric along with
two derived datasets for it, which will be made available
to the public. On the individual sub-tasks, ViP-DeepLab
also achieves state-of-the-art results, outperforming previous methods by 5.1% VPQ on Cityscapes-VPS, ranking 1st
on the KITTI monocular depth estimation benchmark, and
1st on KITTI MOTS pedestrian. The datasets and the evaluation codes are made publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
The inverse projection problem, one of the most fundamental problems in vision, refers to the ambiguous mapping
from the retinal images to the sources of retinal stimulation. Such a mapping requires retrieving all the visual information about the 3D environment using the limited signals
contained in the 2D images [60, 62]. Humans are able to
easily establish this mapping by identifying objects, determining their sizes, and reconstructing the 3D scene layout,
etc. To endow machines with similar abilities to visually
perceive the 3D world, we aim to develop a model to tackle
the inverse projection problem.
As a step towards solving the inverse projection, the
problem is simplified as restoring the 3D point clouds with
semantic understandings from the perspective image se* Work done while an intern at Google.
1 https://github.com/joe-siyuan-qiao/ViP-DeepLab

Inverse of
Projection

Projection

Video Sequence

Figure 1: Projecting 3D points to the image plane results in
2D images. We study the inverse projection problem: how
to restore the 3D points from 2D image sequences while
providing temporally consistent instance-level semantic interpretations for the 3D points.
quences, which calls for vision models to predict the spatial
location, semantic class, and temporally consistent instance
label for each 3D point. Fig. 1 shows an example of the inverse projection problem we study in this paper. This simplified problem can be formulated as Depth-aware Video
Panoptic Segmentation (DVPS) that contains two sub-tasks:
(i) monocular depth estimation [68], which is used to estimate the spatial position of each 3D point that is projected to
the image plane, and (ii) video panoptic segmentation [42],
which associates the 3D points with temporally consistent
instance-level semantic predictions.
For the new task DVPS, we present two derived datasets
accompanied by a new evaluation metric named Depthaware Video Panoptic Quality (DVPQ). DVPS datasets are
hard to collect, as they need special depth sensors and a
huge amount of labeling efforts. Existing datasets usually
lack some annotations or are not in the format for DVPS.
Our solution is to augment and convert existing datasets
for DVPS, producing two new datasets, Cityscapes-DVPS
and SemKITTI-DVPS. Cityscapes-DVPS is derived from
Cityscapes-VPS [42] by adding depth annotations from
Cityscapes dataset [18], while SemKITTI-DVPS is derived
from SemanticKITTI [6] by projecting its annotated 3D
point clouds to the image plane. Additionally, the proposed
metric DVPQ includes the metrics for depth estimation and

3997

