Improved Image Matting via Real-time User Clicks and Uncertainty Estimation
Tianyi Wei1 , Dongdong Chen2,† , Wenbo Zhou1,† , Jing Liao3 ,
Hanqing Zhao1 , Weiming Zhang1 , Nenghai Yu1
1

University of Science and Technology of China 2 Microsoft Cloud AI
3
City University of Hong Kong

{bestwty@mail., welbeckz@, zhq2015@mail., zhangwm@, ynh@ }.ustc.edu.cn
cddlyf@gmail.com, jingliao@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Image matting is a fundamental and challenging problem in computer vision and graphics. Most existing matting
methods leverage a user-supplied trimap as an auxiliary input to produce good alpha matte. However, obtaining highquality trimap itself is arduous, thus restricting the application of these methods. Recently, some trimap-free methods
have emerged, however, the matting quality is still far behind the trimap-based methods. The main reason is that,
without the trimap guidance in some cases, the target network is ambiguous about which is the foreground target.
In fact, choosing the foreground is a subjective procedure
and depends on the user’s intention. To this end, this paper proposes an improved deep image matting framework
which is trimap-free and only needs several user click interactions to eliminate the ambiguity. Moreover, we introduce
a new uncertainty estimation module that can predict which
parts need polishing and a following local refinement module. Based on the computation budget, users can choose
how many local parts to improve with the uncertainty guidance. Quantitative and qualitative results show that our
method performs better than existing trimap-free methods
and comparably to state-of-the-art trimap-based methods
with minimal user effort.

1. Introduction
Image matting refers to the task of precisely separating
the foreground object from the background and accurately
estimating the per-pixel opacity near the boundary. It has
been studied by academic and industrial communities for
many years. Typical applications include image editing,
† Corresponding Author.

The demo of our real-time user interactive matting system can be find at
https://youtu.be/pAXydeN-LpQ.

film production and virtual background for video conferencing. Given an input image I, it can be formulated as a
mathematical optimization problem as follows:
Ii = αi Fi + (1 − αi )Bi ,

(1)

where αi ∈ [0, 1] denotes the opacity of the foreground
object at pixel i. It can be observed that, for each pixel,
this problem needs to solve 7 unknown values from only 3
known values. Therefore, it is a highly ill-posed problem.
To address this problem, many classical algorithms [2,
21, 8, 35, 37, 5] have been proposed by leveraging a welldefined trimap to constrain the solution space. The trimap
divides the image into three types of areas: foreground,
background, and transition regions. Then the matting task
is then simplified as the problem of estimating the unknown
values only in the transition region. Based on this simplification, such trimap-based methods [23, 16, 4] can usually
achieve very good performance. However, drawing a suitable trimap itself is very tedious and time-consuming. For
some complex cases, it will even cost more than 10 minutes. Therefore, it is not that friendly, especially to nonprofessional users.
With the development of deep learning, some studies[6,
41, 30] that do not require the trimap input emerge recently.
However, their performance is still far behind the trimapbased methods. The main reason is that, without the trimap
guidance in some cases, deep networks become ambiguous
about which is the foreground target to process. To alleviate the ambiguity, a large-scale matting dataset of a certain
target category (e.g., portrait) is often required for training.
But this solution is not scalable and expensive. More importantly, it will totally fail if the users want to choose some
new categories that do not appear in the training set. In our
understanding, choosing the foreground is subjective and
thus some user hint is unavoidable. And the key challenge
is how to minimize the user effort in the interactions.
To overcome the aforementioned limitations, we propose

15374

