EDNet: Efficient Disparity Estimation with Cost Volume Combination and
Attention-based Spatial Residual
Songyan Zhang1 , Zhicheng Wang1 *, Qiang Wang2 , Jinshuo Zhang1 , Gang Wei1 , Xiaowen Chu2
1
CAD Research Center, Tongji University
2
Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
{spyder, zhichengwang, zhangjinshuo, weigang}@tongji.edu.cn
{qiangwang, chxw}@comp.hkbu.edu.hk

Abstract
Existing state-of-the-art disparity estimation works
mostly leverage the 4D concatenation volume and construct
a very deep 3D convolution neural network (CNN) for disparity regression, which is inefficient due to the high memory consumption and slow inference speed. In this paper,
we propose a network named EDNet for efficient disparity
estimation. Firstly, we construct a combined volume which
incorporates contextual information from the squeezed concatenation volume and feature similarity measurement from
the correlation volume. The combined volume can be next
aggregated by 2D convolutions which are faster and require less memory than 3D convolutions. Secondly, we propose an attention-based spatial residual module to generate
attention-aware residual features. The attention mechanism
is applied to provide intuitive spatial evidence about inaccurate regions with the help of error maps at multiple scales
and thus improve the residual learning efficiency. Extensive
experiments on the Scene Flow and KITTI datasets show
that EDNet outperforms the previous 3D CNN based works
and achieves state-of-the-art performance with significantly
faster speed and less memory consumption.

1. Introduction
Accurate and fast depth estimation is of great significance to many applications like robot navigation, 3D reconstruction and autonomous driving. Instead of depth regression from a single-view RGB image, stereo matching is to
conduct correspondence analysis between pixels of stereo
images and compute the disparity d for each pixel. Depth
can be then calculated by ( fdB ), where f is the camera’s
focal length and B is the distance between two camera centers, also called baseline in stereo vision.
* Corresponding author.

While traditional methods based on hand-crafted feature extraction and matching cost aggregation tend to fail
on those textureless and repetitive regions in the images,
convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have been widely
adopted to conquer those difficulties in stereo matching.
Several recent methods [19, 3, 13, 42] have achieved stateof-the-art performance by constructing a 4D concatenation
volume which follows 3D convolution blocks for aggregation. Although the 4D concatenation cost volume can preserve the rich contextual information in conjunction with
the strong regularization ability of 3D convolutions, it significantly increases the computation cost and usually cannot
perform real-time disparity inference. Moreover, the concatenation volume incorporates no feature similarity measurement, which means that the model has to learn correspondence from scratch. Besides, DispNetC [22] formed a
low-cost correlation layer with 2D convolutions to conduct
correspondence analysis between the left and right feature
maps. The following works [21, 38, 26] adopted the similar
method as it keeps a good balance between speed and accuracy. However, as the correlation map is produced with only
one single feature channel for each disparity level, the performance is less competitive. Thus, this raises the question
of how to make full use of the complementary advantages
of the concatenation volume and correlation volume.
Since ResNet [15] has revealed that the residual convolution block can improve the training efficiency by learning
a residual mapping instead of the desired underlying one,
it has been adopted as a popular approach to refine the disparity estimation [34, 31, 21, 37]. To be specific in stereo
matching, learning an additive correction to the coarse disparity map is easier and more efficient than directly learning
the fine-grained one. However, some works failed to provide the residual learning module with the fitting error information [33, 40], or computed the estimated error at only
one scale [34, 26, 17] but adopted it to learn the disparity
maps at multiple scales. The error map from one single

5433

