Graph-based High-order Relation Modeling for Long-term Action Recognition
Jiaming Zhou1,5 , Kun-Yu Lin1 , Haoxin Li3 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,4 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518005, China
3
School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, China
4
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
5
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
jia ming zhou@outlook.com, kunyulin14@outlook.com, lihaoxin05@gmail.com, wszheng@ieee.org

T

Abstract
Long-term actions involve many important visual concepts, e.g., objects, motions, and sub-actions, and there are
various relations among these concepts, which we call basic relations. These basic relations will jointly affect each
other during the temporal evolution of long-term actions,
which forms the high-order relations that are essential for
long-term action recognition. In this paper, we propose a
Graph-based High-order Relation Modeling (GHRM) module to exploit the high-order relations in the long-term actions for long-term action recognition. In GHRM, each basic relation in the long-term actions will be modeled by a
graph, where each node represents a segment in a long
video. Moreover, when modeling each basic relation, the
information from all the other basic relations will be incorporated by GHRM, and thus the high-order relations
in the long-term actions can be well exploited. To better exploit the high-order relations along the time dimension, we design a GHRM-layer consisting of a TemporalGHRM branch and a Semantic-GHRM branch, which aims
to model the local temporal high-order relations and global
semantic high-order relations. The experimental results on
three long-term action recognition datasets, namely, Breakfast, Charades, and MultiThumos, demonstrate the effectiveness of our model.

1. Introduction
In the computer vision community, there have been many
studies on action recognition. Approaches such as twostream networks [24], Inflated-3D networks (I3D) [2], and
temporal segment networks (TSN) [28] have shown their
effectiveness for action recognition. The actions these studies mainly focus on are from pre-trimmed clips of videos
* Corresponding author

open the book
grab a book

close the book

find a picture
connections
stare at
the picture

put the book back

hold
the picture

T

T

Figure 1. 10 frames selected from the long video Q948H in Charades [23] show “A person sits on a bed, grabs a book off of a
table, finds a picture in the book, puts the book back, and stares
at the picture”. The purple and cyan cues show two basic relation
instances, and there are some connections between them. As the
woman opens the book but then closes it quickly without reading
it, we can infer that the picture is found from this book. Additionally, the woman does not put the book and picture back together,
so she may going to look at the picture. Therefore, the information
in these two basic relation instances can affect each other.

and last only a few seconds, which we call short-term actions. However, the videos we are usually exposed to in
daily life are more complex long videos, so trimming shortterm actions from those long videos is very time-consuming
and labor-intensive. More importantly, trimming short-term
actions from long videos without considering the possible
internal relations between them will prevent action recognition research from achieving the goal of understanding
complex human behaviors.
In contrast to short-term actions, long-term actions [10,
11, 32] are actions in untrimmed videos that have a very
long execution time. A long-term action generally contains
multiple sub-actions, among which some complicated relations may exist. The goal of long-term action recognition
is to identify the long-term action or to identify all subactions that occur during the execution of the long-term ac-

8984

