Diffusion Probabilistic Models for 3D Point Cloud Generation
Shitong Luo, Wei Hu *
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology
Peking University
{luost, forhuwei}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a probabilistic model for point cloud generation, which is fundamental for various 3D vision tasks
such as shape completion, upsampling, synthesis and data
augmentation. Inspired by the diffusion process in nonequilibrium thermodynamics, we view points in point clouds
as particles in a thermodynamic system in contact with
a heat bath, which diffuse from the original distribution to a noise distribution. Point cloud generation thus
amounts to learning the reverse diffusion process that transforms the noise distribution to the distribution of a desired
shape. Specifically, we propose to model the reverse diffusion process for point clouds as a Markov chain conditioned on certain shape latent. We derive the variational
bound in closed form for training and provide implementations of the model. Experimental results demonstrate
that our model achieves competitive performance in point
cloud generation and auto-encoding. The code is available
at https://github.com/luost26/diffusionpoint-cloud.

1. Introduction
With recent advances in depth sensing and laser scanning, point clouds have attracted increasing attention as a
popular representation for modeling 3D shapes. Significant progress has been made in developing methods for
point cloud analysis, such as classification and segmentation [16, 17, 23]. On the other hand, learning generative
models for point clouds is powerful in unsupervised representation learning to characterize the data distribution,
which lays the foundation for various tasks such as shape
completion, upsampling, synthesis, etc.
Generative models such as variational auto-encoders
(VAEs), generative adversarial networks (GANs), normal* Corresponding author: Wei Hu (forhuwei@pku.edu.cn). This work
was supported by the National Key R&D project of China under contract
No. 2019YFF0302903 and National Natural Science Foundation of China
under contract No. 61972009.

Figure 1. Top: The diffusion process that converts noise to some
shape (left to right). Middle: Generated point clouds from the
proposed model. Bottom: Latent space interpolation between the
two point clouds at both ends.

izing flows, etc., have shown great success in image generation [13, 8, 5, 6]. However, these powerful tools cannot be directly generalized to point clouds, due to the irregular sampling patterns of points in the 3D space in contrast to regular grid structures underlying images. Hence,
learning generative models for point clouds is quite challenging. Prior research has explored point cloud generation
via GANs [1, 22, 19], auto-regressive models [21], flowbased models [25] and so on. While remarkable progress
has been made, these methods have some inherent limitations for modeling point clouds. For instance, the training
procedure could be unstable for GANs due to the adversarial losses. Auto-regressive models assume a generation
ordering which is unnatural and might restrict the model’s
flexibility.
In this paper, we propose a probabilistic generative
model for point clouds inspired by non-equilibrium thermodynamics, exploiting the reverse diffusion process to learn
the point distribution. As a point cloud is composed of discrete points in the 3D space, we regard these points as particles in a non-equilibrium thermodynamic system in contact
with a heat bath. Under the effect of the heat bath, the position of particles evolves stochastically in the way that they

2837

