Exploiting & Refining Depth Distributions with Triangulation Light Curtains
Yaadhav Raaj Siddharth Ancha Robert Tamburo David Held Srinivasa G. Narasimhan
The Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
{ryaadhav, sancha, rtamburo, dheld, srinivas}@cs.cmu.edu

RMSE:
0.4m

RMSE:
1.2m

40m

40m

5m

5m

NIR

(a)

Laser

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: (a) We show how errors in Monocular Depth Estimation are corrected when used in tandem with an Adaptive Sensor such as a Triangulating Light
Curtain (Yellow Points and Red lines are Ground Truth). (b) We predict a per-pixel Depth Probability Volume from Monocular RGB and we observe large
per-pixel uncertainties (σ = 3m) as seen in the Bird’s Eye View / Top-Down Uncertainty Field slice. (c) We actively drive the Light Curtain sensor’s Laser
to exploit and sense multiple regions along a curve that maximize information gained. (d) We feed these measurements back recursively to get a refined
depth estimate, along with a reduction in uncertainty (σ = 1m).

Abstract
Active sensing through the use of Adaptive Depth Sensors is a nascent field, with potential in areas such as Advanced driver-assistance systems (ADAS). They do however
require dynamically driving a laser / light-source to a specific location to capture information, with one such class
of sensor being the Triangulation Light Curtains (LC). In
this work, we introduce a novel approach that exploits prior
depth distributions from RGB cameras to drive a Light Curtain’s laser line to regions of uncertainty to get new measurements. These measurements are utilized such that depth
uncertainty is reduced and errors get corrected recursively.
We show real-world experiments that validate our approach
in outdoor and driving settings, and demonstrate qualitative
and quantitative improvements in depth RMSE when RGB
cameras are used in tandem with a Light Curtain.

1. Introduction
Spinning fixed scan LIDARs have been the de-facto sensor of choice in safety critical systems such as Advanced
driver-assistance systems (ADAS), due to their reliability in
depth estimation. However, their reduced spatial-resolution,
multi-path interference and their prohibitive cost has made
en-masse adoption in personal vehicles hard. To counter
these issues, depth estimation from RGB cameras has been
heavily researched. However, issues such as oversaturation,

feature correspondence errors and scale ambiguity has made
relying on these sensors unsafe.
To capture the error and uncertainty in RGB-only depth
estimation, previous work had formulated that task as a
probabilistic regression problem, by predicting per-pixel
depth distributions via a Depth Probability Volume (DPV)
[16] [7] [28]. The DPV provides both a Maximum
Likelihood-Estimate (MLE) of the depth map, as well as
the corresponding per-pixel uncertainty measure. However,
these works do not adaptively or physically correct for this
uncertainty, instead relying purely on multi-view camera
constraints for passive correction.
In this work, we have devised the first known framework that adaptively exploits the depth uncertainty in a perpixel DPV from RGB images and refined it via an Adaptive
Depth Sensor called a Triangulating Light Curtain [15]. It
has a steerable Laser Line that can be driven by a Galvomirror in tandem with a Rolling Shutter camera to generate a
3D ruled surface to sample the world. We have chosen this
sensor due to its low cost ($1k vs lidar ∼$25k), high spatial
angular resolution (0.02◦ vs lidar 0.4◦ ), and high frame-rate
( 60fps vs lidar 20fps).
We begin by formulating an iterative Bayesian inference
approach to adaptive depth sensing using only the Light
Curtain (LC). This is done by building and adapting the 3D
DPV representation as a collapsible 2D Uncertainty Field
(UF), formulating a probabilistic depth representation of the
sensor model and building planning and sensing policies
17434

