Coarse-to-Fine Domain Adaptive Semantic Segmentation with Photometric
Alignment and Category-Center Regularization
Haoyu Ma1 *

Xiangru Lin1 *

Zifeng Wu2

Yizhou Yu1†

1

2
The University of Hong Kong
Deepwise AI Lab
mahaoyu@connect.hku.hk,xrlin2@cs.hku.hk, wuzifeng@deepwise.com, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) in semantic
segmentation is a fundamental yet promising task relieving the need for laborious annotation works. However, the
domain shifts/discrepancies problem in this task compromise the final segmentation performance. Based on our
observation, the main causes of the domain shifts are differences in imaging conditions, called image-level domain
shifts, and differences in object category configurations
called category-level domain shifts. In this paper, we propose a novel UDA pipeline that unifies image-level alignment and category-level feature distribution regularization
in a coarse-to-fine manner. Specifically, on the coarse side,
we propose a photometric alignment module that aligns an
image in the source domain with a reference image from
the target domain using a set of image-level operators; on
the fine side, we propose a category-oriented triplet loss
that imposes a soft constraint to regularize category centers in the source domain and a self-supervised consistency
regularization method in the target domain. Experimental
results show that our proposed pipeline improves the generalization capability of the final segmentation model and
significantly outperforms all previous state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vision task that aims to assign a semantic category label
to every pixel in an image. It has been widely used
in many important downstream tasks such as autonomous
driving [25, 5] and medical image analysis [4, 28, 10]. Recent state-of-the-art methods on semantic segmentation are
primarily deep learning based [1, 15, 36] and require a
large number of high quality annotated ground-truth data
which are difficult to obtain especially in practical applications. Unsupervised domain adaptation semantic segmenta* These authors have equal contribution.
† Corresponding author

tion is an alternative method to solve the data scarcity problem where it generalizes models trained on the source domain composed of synthetic images and labels to perform
well on the target domain composed of real world images
only [21, 13, 30, 11, 20]. However, the problem is that
semantic segmentation models trained merely on synthetic
data exhibit poor performance on real world images due
to the differences in multiple aspects (also called domain
shifts/discrepancies), including exposure, contrast, lighting,
object shape and surface textures, between the source domain and the target domain. Therefore, matching the distributions between the source and target domains to learn
domain-invariant representations is crucial to solve the domain shifts.
Although the domain shifts could be caused by multiple
factors, based on our observation, the primary causes can
be summarized into two groups, namely image-level domain shifts and category-level domain shifts. For the imagelevel domain shifts, these refer to the differences in imaging conditions, such as lighting and settings in the camera
imaging pipeline. Existing works on solving image-level
domain shifts through image style transfer generally utilize
deep models such as generative models and image-to-image
translation models [17, 37] while another line of research
focuses on using Fourier transformation [33]. These methods have proven that transferring image style of one domain to another domain can bring the two domains closer.
However, the downside of these methods is that they either require to carry out a computationally expensive training process for the deep models or generate inferior styletransferred output images as shown in Figure 5.
Despite the fact that the domain gap can be minimized
by global alignment methods such as the above, there is
no guarantee that samples from different object categories
in the target domain can be well separated. This is because some categories are naturally close to others in terms
of body shape, pose and textures. To solve this problem,
existing methods adopt category anchors computed on the
source domain to guide the alignment between the two do-

4051

