Towards Long-Form Video Understanding
Chao-Yuan Wu

Philipp Krähenbühl

The University of Texas at Austin

Abstract
Our world offers a never-ending stream of visual stimuli,
yet today’s vision systems only accurately recognize patterns within a few seconds. These systems understand the
present, but fail to contextualize it in past or future events.
In this paper, we study long-form video understanding.
We introduce a framework for modeling long-form videos
and develop evaluation protocols on large-scale datasets.
We show that existing state-of-the-art short-term models
are limited for long-form tasks. A novel object-centric
transformer-based video recognition architecture performs
significantly better on 7 diverse tasks. It also outperforms
comparable state-of-the-art on the AVA dataset.

1. Introduction
Our world tells an endless story of people, objects, and
their interactions, each person with its own goals, desires,
and intentions. Video recognition aims to understand this
story from a stream of moving pictures. Yet, top-performing
recognition models focus exclusively on short video clips,
and learn primarily about the present — objects, places,
shapes, etc. They fail to capture how this present connects
to the past or future, and only snapshot a very limited version of our world’s story. They reason about the ‘what’,
‘who’, and ‘where’ but struggle to connect these elements to
form a full picture. The reasons for this are two fold: First,
short-term models derived from powerful image-based architectures benefit from years of progress in static image
recognition [8,72]. Second, many current video recognition
tasks require little long-term temporal reasoning [36,39,61].
In this paper, we take a step towards leveling the playing
field between short-term and long-term models, and study
long-form video understanding problems (Fig. 1). First,
we design a novel object-centric long-term video recognition model. Our model takes full advantage of current
image-based recognition architectures to detect and track
all objects, including people, throughout a video, but additionally captures the complex synergies among objects
across time in a transformer-based architecture [74], called
Object Transformers. Tracked instances of arbitrary length

Figure 1. Long-Form Video Understanding aims at understanding the “full picture” of a long-form video. Examples include understanding the storyline of a movie, the relationships among the
characters, the message conveyed by their creators, the aesthetic
styles, etc. It is in contrast to ‘short-form video understanding’,
which models short-term patterns to infer local properties.

along with their visual features form basic semantic elements. A transformer architecture then models arbitrary
interactions between these elements. This object-centric
design takes inspiration from early work that builds spacetime instance representations [5,14,22,87], but further considers more complex inter-instance interactions over a long
span of time. The model can be trained directly for a specific end-task or pre-trained in a self-supervised fashion
similar to models in image recognition [10, 26, 53, 55, 70]
and language understanding [13, 40, 45, 86].
Second, we introduce a large-scale benchmark, which
comprises of 9 diverse tasks on more than 1,000 hours of
video. Tasks range from content analysis to predicting user
engagement and higher-level movie metadata. On these
long-form tasks, current short-term approaches fail to perform well, even with strong (Kinetics-600 [6], AVA [25])
pre-training and various aggregation methods.
Our experiments show that Object Transformers outperform existing state-of-the-art methods on most of the longform tasks, and significantly outperform the current stateof-the-art on existing datasets, such as AVA 2.2. The videos
we use are publicly available and free.

1884

