Physics-based Iterative Projection Complex Neural Network for Phase Retrieval
in Lensless Microscopy Imaging
Feilong Zhang
Harbin institute of technology

Xianming Liu*
Harbin institute of technology

Cheng Guo
Harbin institute of technology

flzhang.hit@gmail.com

csxm@hit.edu.cn

guocheng 27@163.com

shiyi lin
Harbin institute of technology

Junjun Jiang
Harbin institute of technology

Xiangyang Ji
Tsinghua University

shiyi.lin.hit@outlook.com

jiangjunjun@hit.edu.cn

xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Phase retrieval from intensity-only measurements plays
a central role in many real-world imaging tasks. In recent years, deep neural networks based methods emerge
and show promising performance for phase retrieval. However, their interpretability and generalization still remain
a major challenge. In this paper, we propose to combine
the advantages of both model-based alternative projection
method and deep neural network for phase retrieval, so as
to achieve network interpretability and inference effectiveness simultaneously. Specifically, we unfold the iterative
process of the alternative projection phase retrieval into a
feed-forward neural network, whose layers mimic the processing flow. The physical model of the imaging process is
then naturally embedded into the neural network structure.
Moreover, a complex-valued U-Net is proposed for defining image priori for forward and backward projection in
dual planes. Finally, we designate physics-based formulation as an untrained deep neural network, whose weights
are enforced to fit to the given intensity measurements. In
summary, our scheme for phase retrieval is effective, interpretable, physics-based and unsupervised. Experimental
results demonstrate that our method achieves superior performance compared with the state-of-the-arts in a practical
phase retrieval application—lensless microscopy imaging.

1. Introduction
Optical detectors in practical imaging systems, such as
CCD and CMOS, can measure only the magnitude (brightness or intensity) of an electromagnetic wave. Phase retrieval (PR), also referred to as phase imaging, is to recover
* Corresponding author

the lost phase information at the detection process from
intensity-only measurements. It plays a crucial role in many
applications in science and engineering, including computational microscopy [8, 27, 10], quantitative phase imaging [11], X-ray crystallography [16], computer-generated
holography [20, 3] and many more.
Since the optical phase cannot be directly measured by
an electronic detector, algorithmic phase retrieval comes
into play. Over the years, many approaches have been suggested for solving the phase retrieval problem [22]. The
most popular kind of phase retrieval methods are based on
alternative projection, which was originated by Gerchberg
and Saxton [6] and extended by Fienup [4, 5]. The alternative projection algorithm aims to recover a complex image
from magnitude measurements at two different planes—the
sample object plane and the camera sensor plane. It starts
from a random initial estimate and proceeds by iteratively
applying dual-plane projections: at each iteration, the current estimate is projected to the image plane so that the magnitude of its frequency spectrum matches the observations;
the signal is then projected to the object plane to conform to
some priori knowledge about its structure.
An alternative class of approaches are to develop algorithms of phase retrieval by using the tools of modern
optimization theory. Phase retrieval is a NP-hard problem. From the perspective of combinatorial optimization,
semidefinite programming (SDP) is a powerful tool to solve
this problem. Candes et al. [2] formulate phase retrieval as
a matrix completion problem, which is addressed by combining multiple structured illuminations together with ideas
from convex programming. Waldspurger et al. [25] cast the
phase retrieval problem as a non-convex quadratic program
over a complex phase vector, and formulate a tractable relaxation similar to the classical MaxCut semidefinite program. However, the computational complexity of SDP
based algorithms increases sharply with the signal dimen-

10523

