Divergence Optimization for Noisy Universal Domain Adaptation
Qing Yu1,2 Atsushi Hashimoto2 Yoshitaka Ushiku2
1
The University of Tokyo 2 OMRON SINIC X Corporation
yu@hal.t.u-tokyo.ac.jp

{atsushi.hashimoto,yoshitaka.ushiku}@sinicx.com

Abstract
Universal domain adaptation (UniDA) has been proposed to transfer knowledge learned from a label-rich
source domain to a label-scarce target domain without any
constraints on the label sets. In practice, however, it is difficult to obtain a large amount of perfectly clean labeled
data in a source domain with limited resources. Existing
UniDA methods rely on source samples with correct annotations, which greatly limits their application in the real
world. Hence, we consider a new realistic setting called
Noisy UniDA, in which classifiers are trained with noisy
labeled data from the source domain and unlabeled data
with an unknown class distribution from the target domain.
This paper introduces a two-head convolutional neural network framework to solve all problems simultaneously. Our
network consists of one common feature generator and two
classifiers with different decision boundaries. By optimizing the divergence between the two classifiers’ outputs, we
can detect noisy source samples, find “unknown” classes in
the target domain, and align the distribution of the source
and target domains. In an extensive evaluation of different
domain adaptation settings, the proposed method outperformed existing methods by a large margin in most settings.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved impressive
results with large-scale annotated training samples, but the
performance declines when the domain of the test data differs from the training data. To address this type of distribution shift between domains with no extra annotations, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has been proposed to
learn a discriminative classifier while there is a shift between training data in the source domain and test data in
the target domain [1, 8, 9, 11, 25, 27, 27, 29, 33, 36].
Most existing domain adaptation methods assume that
the source and target domains completely share the classes,
but we do not know the class distribution of samples in the
target domain in real-world UDA. Universal domain adap-

Figure 1: Problem setting of Noisy UniDA. Our proposed
setting assumes that some source samples have corrupted
labels, some classes of the source domain do not appear in
the target domain, and the classes of some target samples
are not shared by the source domain.
tation (UniDA) [41] is proposed to remove the constraints
on the label sets, where target samples may contain unknown samples belonging to classes that do not appear in
the source domain and some source classes may not appear
in the target samples. However, UniDA is still an ideal scenario, where existing UniDA methods require source samples with correct annotations to train the model. This requirement limits the application of existing UniDA methods in real domain adaptation problems, where clean and
high-quality datasets are time consuming and expensive to
collect. Data can more easily be collected from a crowdsourcing platform or crawled from the Internet or social media, but such data are inevitably corrupted with noise (e.g.
YFCC100M [35], Clothing1M [40], and ImageNet [3]).
Hence, we consider a new realistic setting called “Noisy
Universal Domain Adaptation” (Noisy UniDA), as shown
in Fig. 1, which has the following properties:
• Labeled data of the source domain contains noisy labels. 1
• Some classes of the source domain do not appear in
the target domain, and these classes are named source
1 The labels of target samples are not considered because they are not
available in the setting of UDA.

12515

