Variational Transformer Networks for Layout Generation
Federico Tombari1,3

Diego Martin Arroyo1

Janis Postels2

martinarroyo@google.com

jpostels@vision.ee.ethz.ch

1

Google, Inc

2

tombari@google.com
3

ETH Zürich

Technische Universität München

Abstract
Generative models able to synthesize layouts of different
kinds (e.g. documents, user interfaces or furniture arrangements) are a useful tool to aid design processes and as a first
step in the generation of synthetic data, among other tasks.
We exploit the properties of self-attention layers to capture
high level relationships between elements in a layout, and
use these as the building blocks of the well-known Variational Autoencoder (VAE) formulation. Our proposed Variational Transformer Network (VTN) is capable of learning
margins, alignments and other global design rules without
explicit supervision. Layouts sampled from our model have
a high degree of resemblance to the training data, while
demonstrating appealing diversity. In an extensive evaluation on publicly available benchmarks for different layout
types VTNs achieve state-of-the-art diversity and perceptual quality. Additionally, we show the capabilities of this
method as part of a document layout detection pipeline.

1. Introduction
Layouts, i.e. the abstract positioning of elements in a
scene or document, constitute an essential tool for various
downstream tasks. Consequently, the ability to flexibly render novel, realistic layouts has the potential to yield significant improvements in many tasks, such as neural scene
synthesis [36], graphic design or in data synthesis pipelines.
Even though the task of synthesizing novel layouts has recently started to gain the attention of the deep learning community [23, 16, 22, 28], it is still a sparsely explored area
and provides unique challenges to generative models based
on neural networks, namely a non-sequential data structure
consisting of varying length samples with discrete (classes)
and continuous (coordinates) elements simultaneously.
Generative models based on neural networks have received a significant share of attention in recent years, as
they proved capable of learning complex, high-dimensional
distributions. Common formulations such as Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8] and Variational Autoen-

Figure

Text

Toolbar
Text
List Item
List Item

Text

List Item

Text

Text

box

Text

List

box
shelf

List Item
chair
papers

Title

Text

List Item

monitor

desktop
desk

desk

Text

Document

UI design Natural Scene Room layout

Figure 1: Given a random vector z, our novel transformer
VAE model produces layouts that follow the design constraints of the training data. It can generate various layouts
types, from documents to objects and scenes.
coders (VAEs) [21] have shown impressive results in tasks
such as image translation [43], image synthesis [17], and
text generation [2]. A GAN is comprised of an arrangement
of generator-discriminator neural networks in a zero-sum
configuration, while a VAE learns a lower bound of the data
distribution using an encoder-decoder neural network with a
regularized bottleneck. Since these are general frameworks,
they leave room for adapting the underlying neural architectures to exploit the properties of the data. For example, the
weight sharing strategy of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) renders them the most common building block for
image processing, while for sequential data (e.g., text), Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs) or attention modules are
often the architecture of choice. In particular, the attention
mechanism has recently demonstrated strong performance
on a variety of tasks, such as language translation [35] and
object detection [3], proving its superiority over RNNs regarding modeling long-term relationships.
Prior work has built the foundation by proving the ef-

13642

