EnD: Entangling and Disentangling deep representations for bias correction
Enzo Tartaglione⋆ ,

Carlo Alberto Barbano⋆ ,

Marco Grangetto⋆

enzo.tartaglione@unito.it, carlo.barbano@unito.it, marco.grangetto@unito.it
⋆

University of Turin, Computer Science Department

Abstract
Artificial neural networks perform state-of-the-art in an
ever-growing number of tasks, and nowadays they are used
to solve an incredibly large variety of tasks. There are problems, like the presence of biases in the training data, which
question the generalization capability of these models. In
this work we propose EnD, a regularization strategy whose
aim is to prevent deep models from learning unwanted biases. In particular, we insert an “information bottleneck”
at a certain point of the deep neural network, where we disentangle the information about the bias, still letting the useful information for the training task forward-propagating in
the rest of the model. One big advantage of EnD is that
it does not require additional training complexity (like decoders or extra layers in the model), since it is a regularizer directly applied on the trained model. Our experiments
show that EnD effectively improves the generalization on
unbiased test sets, and it can be effectively applied on realcase scenarios, like removing hidden biases in the COVID19 detection from radiographic images.

1. Introduction
In the last two decades artificial neural network models
(ANNs) received huge interest from the research community. Nowadays, complex and even ill-posed problems can
be tackled provided that one can train a deep enough ANN
model with a large enough dataset. Furthermore, they aim
to become a powerful tool helping us take a variety of decisions: for example, AI is currently used for scouting and
hiring people [18]. These ANNs are trained to process a desired output from some inputs. We have no clear idea how
the information is effectively processed inside. Recently,
AI trustworthiness has been recognized as major prerequisite for people and societies to use and accept such systems [14, 43]. In April 2019, the High-Level Expert Group
on AI of the European Commission defined the three main
aspects of trustworthy AI [14]: it should be lawful, ethical
and robust. Providing a warranty on this topic is currently a
matter of study and discussion [26, 30, 34, 38].

Focusing on the concept of robustness for AI, Attenberg et al. discussed the problem of finding the so-called
“unknown unknowns” [3] in data. These unknown unknowns relate to the case when the deep model elaborates
information in an unintended way, but shows high confidence on its predictions. Such behavior affected many recent works proposing AI-based solutions on the COVID detection from radiographic images. Unfortunately, the available datasets at the beginning of the pandemic were heavily
biased. This often resulted in models predicting COVID diagnosis with a high confidence, thanks to the presence of
unwanted biases, for example by detecting the presence of
catheters or medical devices for positive patients, their age
(at the beginning of the pandemic, most ill patients were elderly people), or even by recognizing the origin of the data
itself (when negative cases were augmented borrowing samples from other datasets) [2, 29, 31].
In this work we propose a regularization strategy which
Entangles the deep features extracted by patterns belonging to the same target class and Disentangles the biased features: we name it EnD, and with it we wish to put an end
to the bias propagation in any deep model. We assume we
know data might have some bias (like in the case of COVID,
the origin of data) but we ignore what it translates into (we
do not have a prior knowledge on whether the bias is the
presence of some color, a specific feature in the image or
anything else). EnD regularizes the output of some layer
Γ within the deep model in order to create an “information
bottleneck” where the regularizer:
• entangles the feature vectors extracted from data belonging to the same target class;
• disentangles the features extracted from data having
the same “bias label”.
Since the deep model is trained minimizing both the loss
and EnD, all the biased features are discouraged to be extracted in favor of the unbiased ones. Compared to other
de-biasing techniques, we have no training overhead: we
do not train extra models to perform gradient inversion on
the biased information or involve the use of GaNs, or even
de-bias the input data. EnD works directly on the target
model, and is minimized via standard back-propagation.

13508

