Learning to Recommend Frame for
Interactive Video Object Segmentation in the Wild
Zhaoyuan Yin1 , Jia Zheng2 , Weixin Luo3 , Shenhan Qian4 , Hanling Zhang5∗, Shenghua Gao4,6
1
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University
2
KooLab, Manycore 3 Meituan Group
4
ShanghaiTech University 5 School of Design, Hunan University
6
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
{zyyin, jh hlzhang}@hnu.edu.cn

jiajia@qunhemail.com

luoweixin@meituan.com

{qianshh, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper proposes a framework for the interactive
video object segmentation (VOS) in the wild where users
can choose some frames for annotations iteratively. Then,
based on the user annotations, a segmentation algorithm
refines the masks. The previous interactive VOS paradigm
selects the frame with some worst evaluation metric, and the
ground truth is required for calculating the evaluation metric, which is impractical in the testing phase. In contrast, in
this paper, we advocate that the frame with the worst evaluation metric may not be exactly the most valuable frame
that leads to the most performance improvement across the
video. Thus, we formulate the frame selection problem in
the interactive VOS as a Markov Decision Process, where
an agent is learned to recommend the frame under a deep
reinforcement learning framework. The learned agent can
automatically determine the most valuable frame, making
the interactive setting more practical in the wild. Experimental results on the public datasets show the effectiveness
of our learned agent without any changes to the underlying
VOS algorithms. Our data, code, and models are available
at https://github.com/svip-lab/IVOS-W .

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation aims to segment the objects
of interest in a video sequence. It has been widely applied
to many downstream applications such as video editing
and object tracking. Recently, DAVIS dataset [24, 25] and
YouTube-VOS dataset [36] are introduced and significantly
drive forward this task. However, collecting such denselyannotated datasets is expensive and time-consuming. For
∗ Corresponding author.

VOS
The worst frame
(!&ℱ = 37.56%)
Video frames with
segmentation masks

↑ !&ℱ = 18.31%

VOS
The most valuable frame
(!&ℱ = 47.14%)

↑ !&ℱ = 20.57%

Figure 1. The frame with the worst segmentation quality vs. the
most valuable frame in a single round. The frame with the worst
segmentation quality only improves the performance of VOS by
18.31 %, while the most valuable one improves the performance
by 20.57 %.

example, labeling a single object in one frame of DAVIS
dataset requires more than 100 seconds [2], finally resulting
in either limited sizes [24, 25] or coarse annotations [36] in
the existing VOS datasets.
To minimize the human efforts, Caelles et al. [2] introduces a human-in-the-loop VOS setting, i.e., the interactive
VOS with scribble supervision. Specifically, the interactive
VOS algorithm will predict an initial segmentation mask for
each frame based on the initial scribbles provided by a user.
It will then gradually refine the segmentation masks with
additional scribbles of some frames selected by the user,
who may evaluate the result by the segmentation quality between the predictions and the ground truths. Whereas, the
ground-truth segmentation masks are not available in practice, so the user cannot select a potential frame based on
the segmentation quality. Further, the frame with the worst
segmentation quality may not be exactly the most valuable
one contributing the most to the refinement performance,
as shown in Figure 1. In this paper, we claim that the most
valuable frame is not necessarily the one with the worst segmentation quality for the interactive VOS task.

15445

