Rich features for perceptual quality assessment of UGC videos
Yilin Wang, Junjie Ke, Hossein Talebi, Joong Gon Yim, Neil Birkbeck,
Balu Adsumilli, Peyman Milanfar, Feng Yang
Google Inc.
[yilin, junjiek, htalebi, joonggonyim, birkbeck, badsumilli, milanfar, fengyang]@google.com

Abstract
Video quality assessment for User Generated Content
(UGC) is an important topic in both industry and academia.
Most existing methods only focus on one aspect of the perceptual quality assessment, such as technical quality or
compression artifacts. In this paper, we create a large scale
dataset to comprehensively investigate characteristics of
generic UGC video quality. Besides the subjective ratings
and content labels of the dataset, we also propose a DNNbased framework to thoroughly analyze importance of content, technical quality, and compression level in perceptual
quality. Our model is able to provide quality scores as well
as human-friendly quality indicators, to bridge the gap between low level video signals to human perceptual quality.
Experimental results show that our model achieves state-ofthe-art correlation with Mean Opinion Scores (MOS).

1. Introduction
Video streaming services currently consume the majority
of today’s internet traffic [23]. Service providers typically
optimize and stream transcoded versions of the content that
may have come from a professional (e.g., Netflix) or casual creator (e.g., social media). In the former case, the
service provider has a pristine original and can rely on fullreference video quality assessment methods to optimize the
quality / bitrate of transcodes sent to viewers. Instead, social media platforms often serve User Generated Content
(UGC), where the non-pristine version shared by a user often has pre-existing distortions or compression artifacts.
Given the prevalence of UGC on social media sharing
platforms, understanding the perceptual subjective video
quality of such content (and compressed versions of it) are
important to make informed quality of service trade-offs.
Unlike early approaches at blind video and image quality
assessment, where a set of pre-existing distortions is applied to pristine content [36, 16], the biggest challenge of
UGC is its diversity due to several factors. First, the content could be a popular live show watched by millions of

people, or a bunch of meaningless frames with no views.
Second, the original quality could be created by a 4K HDR
camera with professional post-processing, or captured by a
low-end shaky camera. Finally, it is unclear how many additional operations have been applied on the video: some
videos have been cropped, rescaled, or heavily compressed
before being uploaded. The UGC video quality discussed in
this paper is a generic concept, encompassing a mixture of
content attractiveness, aesthetic quality [21, 29], and compression artifacts [39]. Each of these factors affects a viewers’ expectation of the video quality, and may significantly
influence their watching experience.
While an uploader may not be able to alter the subject
matter of the video, feedback that quantifies the contributing
perceptual quality factors may benefit the uploader. Also,
understanding the quality of the original can be used by the
service provider to optimize recommendation systems (if
multiple videos are present at a single event) or to further
compress low quality originals with little or no perceptual
impact on the final result [35]. Taking advantage of such
optimizations allows for better user experience at lower cost
for the provider. Perceptual quality metrics are also becoming an integral part of image and video enhancement frameworks [13, 28, 40], and have shown promising results.
In this paper, we propose a framework to analyze video
quality in a comprehensive way to allow for all the above
applications. Unlike traditional video quality assessment
metrics that work as black boxes outputting a single quality
score, our model also provides human-friendly descriptors
(as illustrated in Table 1) that decomposes the perceptual
quality of the content into its constituent parts. Our contributions are as follows1 :
• An enhanced dataset to explore distinct characteristics of
UGC video quality, which contains subjective data for
both original videos and corresponding transcoded versions. The collected ground truth data makes to it possible to understand the relationship between video content
and perceptual quality, and improve content-aware video
compression (Sec. 3).
1 All data are available at https://media.withyoutube.com/ugc-dataset

113435

