GLAVNet: Global-Local Audio-Visual Cues for Fine-Grained Material
Recognition

1

Fengmin Shi1 , Jie Guo1,† , Haonan Zhang1 , Shan Yang1 , Xiying Wang2 , Yanwen Guo1,†
State Key Lab for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University 2 IQIYI Intelligence

Abstract
In this paper, we aim to recognize materials with combined use of auditory and visual perception. To this end,
we construct a new dataset named GLAudio that consists
of both the geometry of the object being struck and the
sound captured from either modal sound synthesis (for virtual objects) or real measurements (for real objects). Besides global geometries, our dataset also takes local geometries around different hitpoints into consideration. This
local information is less explored in existing datasets. We
demonstrate that local geometry has a greater impact on the
sound than the global geometry and offers more cues in material recognition. To extract features from different modalities and perform proper fusion, we propose a new deep
neural network GLAVNet that comprises multiple branches
and a well-designed fusion module. Once trained on GLAudio, our GLAVNet provides state-of-the-art performance on
material identification and supports fine-grained material
categorization.

1. Introduction
A fundamental problem in computer vision is that of
identifying material categories, e.g., metal, glass or wood,
from RGB images. In many applications, such as 3D scene
understanding [18] and robot control [17], materials of objects provide useful hints for substantially improving the
performance [16].
As an active area of research, there have been quite
a few works on material recognition, ranging from traditional solutions relying on hand-designed image features
[29, 23, 40] to convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [55,
53] combined with large-scale datasets, e.g., Flickr Material
Database (FMD) [44] and Materials in Context Database
(MINC) [7]. Since these methods and most others in literature use solely the visual modality, rich surface textures or
geometrical variations are required to make the recognition
† Corresponding Authors.

(a) Global geometry (b) Local geometry

(c) Spectrogram

Figure 1. Impact of the hitpoint on the generation of sound. Despite the same global geometry (a), different local geometries
around the hitpoints (b) may lead to distinct auditory features (c).

process robust.
However, there are many scenarios in which strong visual ambiguities exist, especially for smooth and textureless surfaces, as a given material can take on many different appearances depending on the viewpoint, illumination
and shape [4]. Worse still, the visual appearance may be
significantly altered by painting or coating (e.g., a wooden
sculpture covered with gold lacquer), making the visual perception unreliable. One way of tackling this problem is to
involve additional sensory modalities to complement the visual perception. Recent research confirms that sound augments visual inputs and is an important modality for identifying materials [2, 36, 57, 48].
In this paper, we aim to identify materials of rigid objects that appear in our daily life. To this end, we construct
a new dataset, called GLAudio, containing both auditory
and visual perception of each object. In this dataset, every
object (virtual or real) is encoded in a voxelized representation while every impact sound is generated either by modal
sound synthesis or by striking a real object. Compared with
some existing sound datasets such as Sound-20K [57] and
RSAudio [48], the proposed GLAudio dataset offers two

14433

