Spatially-invariant Style-codes Controlled Makeup Transfer
Han Deng1 , Chu Han2∗, Hongmin cai1 , Guoqiang Han1 , Shengfeng He1†
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Guangdong Provincial People’s Hospital, Guangdong Academy of Medical Sciences

1

(a) Shade-controllable Makeup Transfer

Source

Reference

Source

Ref.1 (lip)

(c) Part-specific Makeup Transfer

Ref.2 (skin)

Ref.3 (eyes)

(b) Makeup Removal

Heavy

Source

Reference

Result

Source

Ref.1

(d) Large spatial misalignment

Result

Ref.2

Light

Result

Figure 1. We propose a style-codes controlled makeup transfer method that allows flexible makeup editing without the need for well-aligned
source-reference pair. (a) We control the shade of makeup by linear interpolation of two style-codes from the source and the reference
images. (b) Makeup removal can be achieved by simply swapping the source and the reference images. (c) We produce partial-transferred
results by integrating the style-codes of three reference images. (d) Robust results can be generated with large spatial misalignment.

Abstract
Transferring makeup from the misaligned reference image is challenging. Previous methods overcome this barrier
by computing pixel-wise correspondences between two images, which is inaccurate and computational-expensive. In
this paper, we take a different perspective to break down
the makeup transfer problem into a two-step extractionassignment process. To this end, we propose a Style-based
Controllable GAN model that consists of three components,
each of which corresponds to target style-code encoding,
face identity features extraction, and makeup fusion, respectively. In particular, a Part-specific Style Encoder encodes
the component-wise makeup style of the reference image
into a style-code in an intermediate latent space W . The
style-code discards spatial information and therefore is invariant to spatial misalignment. On the other hand, the
style-code embeds component-wise information, enabling
flexible partial makeup editing from multiple references.
This style-code, together with source identity features, is integrated into a Makeup Fusion Decoder equipped with multiple AdaIN layers to generate the final result. Our proposed
method demonstrates great flexibility on makeup transfer
by supporting makeup removal, shade-controllable makeup
transfer, and part-specific makeup transfer, even with large
spatial misalignment. Extensive experiments demonstrate
∗ The first two authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author (hesfe@scut.edu.cn).

the superiority of our approach over state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at https://github.com/
makeuptransfer/SCGAN .

1. Introduction
Makeup is one of the best ways to make people attractive. However, applying makeup is time-consuming and
it even takes a much longer time to seek suitable makeup
for each individual. Thus, it is practical to automatically
transfer the makeup from reference images onto our own
faces. Deep learning approaches, especially GAN-based
models, have been widely exploited in makeup transfer
task [19, 1, 6, 2]. They mainly model the makeup transfer and recovery processes as a closed-loop to combat the
problem of lacking paired data.
Notwithstanding the demonstrated success, these methods are constrained by the input condition, i.e., both the
source and reference images must be well-aligned frontal
faces. This is because enforcing cycle-consistency [29]
cannot guarantee correct spatial transformation. On the
other hand, their CycleGAN-based solutions [1, 19] lack
flexibility and controllability of makeup styles. A recent
work, PSGAN [13], is proposed to address these problems.
It computes the dense correspondence attention between
two images to consolidate component-to-component transfer. However, apart from the large computational overhead
of pixel-wise correspondence, PSGAN suffers from two
main issues. First, the predicted pixel-to-region attention is

6549

