Semantic-aware Knowledge Distillation for Few-Shot
Class-Incremental Learning
Ali Cheraghian*,1,2 , Shafin Rahman* ,3 , Pengfei Fang1,2 , Soumava Kumar Roy1,2
Lars Petersson1,2 , Mehrtash Harandi2,4
1
Australian National University, 2 Data61-CSIRO, Australia
3
North South University, Bangladesh, 4 Monash University, Australia
{Ali.Cheraghian,Pengfei.Fang, Soumava.KumarRoy}@anu.edu.au,
shafin.rahman@northsouth.edu, Lars.Petersson@data61.csiro.au, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu

Abstract
Few-shot class incremental learning (FSCIL) portrays
the problem of learning new concepts gradually, where only
a few examples per concept are available to the learner.
Due to the limited number of examples for training, the techniques developed for standard incremental learning cannot
be applied verbatim to FSCIL. In this work, we introduce
a distillation algorithm to address the problem of FSCIL
and propose to make use of semantic information during
training. To this end, we make use of word embeddings as
semantic information which is cheap to obtain and which
facilitate the distillation process. Furthermore, we propose
a method based on an attention mechanism on multiple parallel embeddings of visual data to align visual and semantic
vectors, which reduces issues related to catastrophic forgetting. Via experiments on MiniImageNet, CUB200, and CIFAR100 dataset, we establish new state-of-the-art results by
outperforming existing approaches.

1. Introduction
In a real world scenario, we may not get access to information about all possible classes when the system is first
trained. It is more realistic to assume that we will obtain
class-specific data incrementally as time goes by. Therefore, in such a scenario, we require that our model can be
adapted with new information made available without hampering the performance on what has been learnt so far. Although a natural task for human beings, it is a difficult task
for an intelligent machine due to the possibility of catastrophic forgetting [17]. A trained model tends to forget old
tasks when learning new information. There are three different streams of work in the literature addressing such an
* denotes equal contribution.

output

output

(a)

(b)
output

output

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: (a) Knowledge distillation as described in [16] does
not work on few-shot class-incremental learning [32] since adding
new tasks appends new trainable weights (Wn ) to the network in
addition to base weights (Wb ). (b) The impact of using only a
few instances of novel classes. As few samples are not sufficient
to learn new parameters, the network gets biased towards base
classes, overfitted on few examples of novel classes, and not wellseparated from base classes. (c) Our semantically guided network
does not add new parameters while adding new classes incrementally. We only include word vectors of new tasks (sn ) in addition
to the base classes (sb ) and keep fine-tuning the base network (F )
(d) As a result, the knowledge distillation process can help the network, remembering base training, generalizing to novel classes,
and finding well-separated representation of classes.
incremental or continual learning paradigm [33]. Firstly,
task-incremental learning divides all classes into different
tasks, where each task contains a few classes, and then
learns each task individually. The task labels of the test instances are made available during testing which means the
model does not need to predict the correct label between
all classes but only between classes that are defined for a
specific task. Secondly, domain-incremental learning does

2534

