Learning Deep Latent Variable Models
by Short-Run MCMC Inference with Optimal Transport Correction
Dongsheng An, Jianwen Xie, Ping Li
Cognitive Computing Lab
Baidu Research
10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA
{dongshengan15, jianwen.kenny, pingli98}@gmail.com

Abstract
Learning latent variable models with deep top-down architectures typically requires inferring the latent variables
for each training example based on the posterior distribution
of these latent variables. The inference step typically relies
on either time-consuming long-run Markov chain Monte
Carlo (MCMC) sampling or a separate inference model for
variational learning. In this paper, we propose to use a shortrun MCMC, such as a short-run Langevin dynamics, as an
approximate flow-based inference engine. The bias existing
in the output distribution of the non-convergent short-run
Langevin dynamics is corrected by the optimal transport
(OT), which aims at transforming the biased distribution
produced by the finite-step MCMC to the prior distribution
with a minimum transport cost. Our experiments not only
verify the effectiveness of the OT correction for the short-run
MCMC, but also demonstrate that the latent variable model
trained by the proposed strategy performs better than the
variational auto-encoder (VAE) in terms of image reconstruction/generation and anomaly detection.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen a great success of deep generative
models in numerous computer vision applications, such as
image generation [10, 16, 13], image recovery [21, 12, 23],
image representation [33, 29], image disentanglement [35, 4,
25], anomaly detection [34, 31], etc. Such models typically
include simple and expressive generator networks, which
are latent variable models assuming that each observed example is generated by a low-dimensional vector of latent
variables, and the latent vector follows a non-informative
prior distribution, such as Gaussian distribution. Since high
dimensional visual data (e.g., images) usually lie on lowdimensional manifolds embedded in the high-dimensional
space, learning latent variable models of visual data is of fundamental importance in the field of computer vision for the

sake of unsupervised representation learning. The challenge
mainly comes from the inference of the latent variables for
each observation, which typically relies on Markov chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) [24, 6] methods to draw fair samples
from the analytically intractable posterior distribution (i.e.,
the conditional distribution of the latent variables given the
observed example). Since the posterior distribution of the
latent variables is parameterized by a highly non-linear deep
neural network, the MCMC-based inference can suffer from
non-convergence and inefficiency problems, thus affecting
the accuracy of the model parameter estimation.
To avoid inefficient MCMC sampling from the posterior,
variational inference [16] becomes an attractive alternative
by approximating the intractable posterior via a tractable
network. Despite the growing prevalence and popularity of
the variational auto-encoder (VAE) [16], its drawbacks are
increasingly obvious. (i) It parameterizes the intrinsic iterative inference process by an extrinsic feedforward inference
model. These extra parameters due to the reparameterization
have to be estimated together with those of the generator network. (ii) Such a joint training is to be accomplished by maximizing the variational lower bound. Thus, the accuracy of
VAE heavily depends on the accuracy of the inference model
as an approximation of the true posterior distribution. Only
when the Kullback-Leibler (KL)-divergence between the inference and the posterior distribution is equal to zero, the
variational inference is equivalent to the desired maximum
likelihood estimation. This goal is usually infeasible in practice. (iii) An extra effort is required to made in designing
the inference model of VAE, especially for the generators
that have complicated dependency structures with the latent
variables, e.g., [30] proposed a top-down generator with multiple layers of latent variables, [39, 40] proposed dynamic
generators with time sequences of latent variables. It is not
a simple task to design inference models that infer latent
variables for models mentioned above. An arbitrary design
of the inference model cannot guarantee the performance.

115415

