SLADE: A Self-Training Framework For Distance Metric Learning
Jiali Duan1 *

Yen-Liang Lin2
Son Tran2
Larry S. Davis2
1
University of Southern California 2 Amazon

{jialidua,jckuo}@usc.edu

C.-C. Jay Kuo1

{yenliang,sontran,lrrydav}@amazon.com

Abstract
Most existing distance metric learning approaches use
fully labeled data to learn the sample similarities in an
embedding space. We present a self-training framework,
SLADE, to improve retrieval performance by leveraging additional unlabeled data. We first train a teacher model on
the labeled data and use it to generate pseudo labels for
the unlabeled data. We then train a student model on both
labels and pseudo labels to generate final feature embeddings. We use self-supervised representation learning to initialize the teacher model. To better deal with noisy pseudo
labels generated by the teacher network, we design a new
feature basis learning component for the student network,
which learns basis functions of feature representations for
unlabeled data. The learned basis vectors better measure
the pairwise similarity and are used to select high-confident
samples for training the student network. We evaluate our
method on standard retrieval benchmarks: CUB-200, Cars196 and In-shop. Experimental results demonstrate that
with additional unlabeled data, our approach significantly
improves the performance over the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Existing distance metric learning methods mainly learn
sample similarities and image embeddings using labeled
data [22, 17, 2, 29], which often require a large amount
of data to perform well. A recent study [21] shows that
most methods perform similarly when hyper-parameters are
properly tuned despite employing various forms of losses.
The performance gains likely come from the choice of network architecture. In this work, we explore another direction that uses unlabeled data to improve retrieval performance.
Recent methods in self-supervised learning [14, 6, 5]
and self-training [32, 7] have shown promising results using unlabeled data. Self-supervised learning leverages un*

Work done during an internship at Amazon.

Figure 1. A self-training framework for retrieval. In the training
phase, we train the teacher and student networks using both labeled and unlabeled data. In the testing phase, we use the learned
student network to extract embeddings of query images for retrieval.

labeled data to learn general features in a task-agnostic
manner. These features can be transferred to downstream
tasks by fine-tuning. Recent models show that the features
produced by self-supervised learning achieve comparable
performance to those produced by supervised learning for
downstream tasks such as detection or classification [5].
Self-training methods [32, 7] improve the performance of
fully-supervised approaches by utilizing a teacher/student
paradigm. However, existing methods for self-supervised
learning or self-training mainly focus on classification but
not retrieval.
We present a SeLf-trAining framework for Distance
mEtric learning (SLADE) by leveraging unlabeled data.
Figure 1 illustrates our method. We first train a teacher
model on the labeled dataset and use it to generate pseudo
labels for the unlabeled data. We then train a student model
on both labels and pseudo labels to generate a final feature

9644

