SCANimate: Weakly Supervised Learning of Skinned Clothed Avatar Networks
Shunsuke Saito1*
Jinlong Yang1
Qianli Ma1,2
Michael J. Black1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 ETH Zürich
{ssaito,jyang,qma,black}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Figure 1: SCANimate. Given a set of raw scans with multiple poses containing self-intersections, holes, and noise (left),
SCANimate automatically aligns all scans to a canonical pose (middle) and learns a Scanimat, a fully animatable avatar that
produces pose-dependent deformations and texture without garment-specific templates or mesh registration (right).

Abstract
We present SCANimate, an end-to-end trainable framework that takes raw 3D scans of a clothed human and turns
them into an animatable avatar. These avatars are driven by
pose parameters and have realistic clothing that moves and
deforms naturally. SCANimate does not rely on a customized
mesh template or surface mesh registration. We observe that
fitting a parametric 3D body model, like SMPL, to a clothed
human scan is tractable while surface registration of the
body topology to the scan is often not, because clothing can
deviate significantly from the body shape. We also observe
that articulated transformations are invertible, resulting
in geometric cycle-consistency in the posed and unposed
shapes. These observations lead us to a weakly supervised
learning method that aligns scans into a canonical pose by
disentangling articulated deformations without templatebased surface registration. Furthermore, to complete
missing regions in the aligned scans while modeling posedependent deformations, we introduce a locally pose-aware
implicit function that learns to complete and model geometry
with learned pose correctives. In contrast to commonly
used global pose embeddings, our local pose conditioning
significantly reduces long-range spurious correlations and
improves generalization to unseen poses, especially when
training data is limited. Our method can be applied to poseaware appearance modeling to generate a fully textured
avatar. We demonstrate our approach on various clothing
∗ Currently at Facebook Reality Labs.

types with different amounts of training data, outperforming
existing solutions and other variants in terms of fidelity
and generality in every setting. The code is available at
https://scanimate.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Parametric models of 3D human bodies are widely used
for the analysis and synthesis of human shape, pose, and
motion. While existing models typically represent “minimally clothed” bodies [4, 26, 43, 52, 66], many applications
require realistically clothed bodies. Our goal is to make it
easy to produce a realistic 3D avatar of a clothed person that
can be reposed and animated as easily as existing models like
SMPL [43]. In particular, the model must support clothing
that moves and deforms naturally, with detailed 3D wrinkles,
and the rendering of realistically textured images.
To that end, we introduce SCANimate (Skinned Clothed
Avatar Networks for animation), which creates high-quality
animatable clothed humans, called Scanimats, from raw 3D
scans. SCANimate has the following properties: (1) we learn
an articulated clothed human model directly from raw scans,
completely eliminating the need for surface registration of
a custom template or synthetic clothing simulation data,
(2) our parametric model retains the complex and detailed
deformations of clothing present in the original scans such
as wrinkles and sliding effects of garments with arbitrary
topology, (3) a Scanimat can be animated directly using
SMPL pose parameters, and (4) our approach predicts

2886

