Exploiting Spatial Dimensions of Latent in GAN for Real-time Image Editing
Hyunsu Kim12
1

Yunjey Choi1

NAVER AI Lab

2

Junho Kim1

Sungjoo Yoo2

Seoul National University

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) synthesize realistic images from random latent vectors. Although manipulating the latent vectors controls the synthesized outputs, editing real images with GANs suffers from i) timeconsuming optimization for projecting real images to the
latent vectors, ii) or inaccurate embedding through an encoder. We propose StyleMapGAN: the intermediate latent
space has spatial dimensions, and a spatially variant modulation replaces AdaIN. It makes the embedding through
an encoder more accurate than existing optimization-based
methods while maintaining the properties of GANs. Experimental results demonstrate that our method significantly
outperforms state-of-the-art models in various image manipulation tasks such as local editing and image interpolation. Last but not least, conventional editing methods on
GANs are still valid on our StyleMapGAN. Source code
is available at https://github.com/naver-ai/
StyleMapGAN .

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [16] have
evolved dramatically in recent years, enabling high-ﬁdelity
image synthesis with models that are learned directly from
data [6, 24, 25]. Recent studies have shown that GANs
naturally learn to encode rich semantics within the latent space, thus changing the latent code leads to manipulating the corresponding attributes of the output images [22, 42, 17, 15, 43, 3, 50, 5]. However, it is still challenging to apply these manipulations to real images since
the GAN lacks an inverse mapping from an image back to
its corresponding latent code.
One promising approach for manipulating real images is
image-to-image translation [21, 57, 9, 26, 28], where the
model learns to synthesize an output image given a user’s
input directly. However, these methods require pre-deﬁned
tasks and heavy supervision (e.g., input-output pairs, class
labels) for training and limit the user controllability at inference time. Another approach is to utilize pretrained GAN

3

Youngjung Uh3

Yonsei University

models by directly optimizing the latent code for an individual image [1, 2, 56, 34, 36]. However, even on high-end
GPUs, it requires minutes of computation for each target
image, and it does not guarantee that the optimized code
would be placed in the original latent space of GAN.
A more practical approach is to train an extra encoder,
which learns to project an image into its corresponding latent code [31, 55, 39, 33, 40]. Although this approach enables real-time projection in a single feed-forward manner,
it suffers from the low ﬁdelity of the projected image (i.e.,
losing details of the target image). We attribute this limitation to the absence of spatial dimensions in the latent space.
Without the spatial dimensions, an encoder compresses an
image’s local semantics into a vector in an entangled manner, making it difﬁcult to reconstruct the image (e.g., vectorbased or low-resolution bottleneck layer is not capable of
producing high-frequency details [30, 8]).
As a solution to such problems, we propose StyleMapGAN which exploits stylemap, a novel representation of
the latent space. Our key idea is simple. Instead of learning a vector-based latent representation, we utilize a tensor
with explicit spatial dimensions. Our proposed representation beneﬁts from its spatial dimensions, enabling GANs to
easily encode the local semantics of images into the latent
space. This property allows an encoder to effectively project
an image into the latent space, thus providing high-ﬁdelity
and real-time projection. Our method also offers a new capability to edit speciﬁc regions of an image by manipulating
the matching positions of the stylemap.
On multiple datasets, our stylemap indeed substantially
enhances the projection quality compared to the traditional
vector-based latent representation (§4.3). Furthermore, we
show the advantage of our method over state-of-the-art
methods on image projection, interpolation, and local editing (§4.4 & §4.5). Finally, we show that our method can
transplant regions even when the regions are not aligned between one image and another (§4.6).

2. Related work
Optimization-based editing methods iteratively update
the latent vector of pre-trained GANs to project a real image
1852

