Learning Camera Localization via Dense Scene Matching
Shitao Tang1

Chengzhou Tang1 Rui Huang2 Siyu Zhu2
1
Simon Fraser University 2 Alibaba A.I Labs

{shitao tang, chengzhou tang, pingtan}@sfu.ca

Abstract
Camera localization aims to estimate 6 DoF camera
poses from RGB images. Traditional methods detect and
match interest points between a query image and a prebuilt 3D model. Recent learning-based approaches encode
scene structures into a specific convolutional neural network (CNN) and thus are able to predict dense coordinates from RGB images. However, most of them require
re-training or re-adaption for a new scene and have difficulties in handling large-scale scenes due to limited network capacity. We present a new method for scene agnostic camera localization using dense scene matching (DSM),
where a cost volume is constructed between a query image
and a scene. The cost volume and the corresponding coordinates are processed by a CNN to predict dense coordinates. Camera poses can then be solved by PnP algorithms.
In addition, our method can be extended to temporal domain, which leads to extra performance boost during testing
time. Our scene-agnostic approach achieves comparable
accuracy as the existing scene-specific approaches, such as
KFNet, on the 7scenes and Cambridge benchmark. This approach also remarkably outperforms state-of-the-art sceneagnostic dense coordinate regression network SANet. The
Code is available at https://github.com/Tangshitao/DenseScene-Matching.

1. Introduction
Camera Localization aims to estimate a 6-DoF camera
pose of an image in a known environment. It is an important
module in applications such as mobile navigation, simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) and augmented
reality (AR). Camera localization methods can be broadly
categorized as regression-based and structure-based. Earlier methods [23, 21, 22, 47] directly regress the camera
poses from images, which are limited by the nature of image retrieval and generally less accurate [41]. In comparison, structure-based methods [3, 43, 4, 36, 53, 39, 46] gradually become the trend and solve the problem in two stages:
first, establishing the correspondences between 2D query

Ping Tan1

{rui.hr, siting.zsy}@alibaba-inc.com

image pixels and 3D scene points; second, estimating the
desired camera pose by PnP [18] combined with different
RANSAC [13] algorithms.
According to how they establish the 2D-3D correspondences, the structure-based methods can be further categorized into two classes: 1) sparse feature matching [36, 38,
39, 46]; 2) scene coordinate map regression [3, 43, 4, 53,
24]. The sparse feature matching methods detect and match
handcrafted [27] or CNN-based [10, 38] feature points between a query image and scene images, which is able to
handle arbitrary scenes. On the other hand, coordinate map
regression methods predict dense 3D coordinates at all image pixels from a random forest [44] or a convolutional neural network (CNN) [3, 43]. The estimated dense coordinate
maps can be effectively applied to augmented reality and
robotics applications such as virtual object insertion or obstacle avoidance. But these methods are often limited to the
scene where the random forests or CNN is trained.
In this paper, we focus on the coordinate map regression
approach. Recently, instead of encoding specific scene information in network parameters [44, 3, 43], Yang et.al, propose the first dense coordinate regression network SANet
for arbitrary scenes [48]. SANet extracts a scene representation from some scene images and corresponding 3D
coordinates by 2D-3D matching. In this way, it can be applied to different scenes without re-training or re-adaption.
However, due to the irregular nature of a scene, SANet randomly selects coordinates within a region using ball query
and leverages PointNet [32] to regress per-pixel 3D coordinates. This operation undermines the pose accuracy and
is computationally-heavy because a shared PointNet is required to make prediction on each pixel individually.
In order to address this problem, we present a new sceneagnostic camera localization network exploiting dense
scene matching (DSM), which matches each query image
pixel with the scene via a cost volume. With end-to-end
training, the cost volume explicitly enforces more accurate scene points to have a higher correlation with the input
query pixel. Since the scene structure is irregular, which
makes the number of query-scene correlations different for
each image pixel, we propose a simple yet effective solu-

1831

