Visualizing Adapted Knowledge in Domain Transfer
Yunzhong Hou
Liang Zheng
Australian National University
{firstname.lastname}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
A source model trained on source data and a target
model learned through unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) usually encode different knowledge. To understand
the adaptation process, we portray their knowledge difference with image translation. Specifically, we feed a
translated image and its original version to the two models respectively, formulating two branches. Through updating the translated image, we force similar outputs from
the two branches. When such requirements are met, differences between the two images can compensate for and
hence represent the knowledge difference between models.
To enforce similar outputs from the two branches and depict the adapted knowledge, we propose a source-free image translation method that generates source-style images
using only target images and the two models. We visualize the adapted knowledge on several datasets with different UDA methods and find that generated images successfully capture the style difference between the two domains.
For application, we show that generated images enable further tuning of the target model without accessing source
data. Code available at https://github.com/houyz/DA_visualization.

1. Introduction
Domain transfer or domain adaptation aims to bridge
the distribution gap between source and target domains.
Many existing works study the unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) problem, where the target domain is unlabeled [27, 6, 46, 1, 11]. In this process, we are interested
in what knowledge neural networks learn and adapt.
Essentially, we should visualize the knowledge difference between models: a source model trained on the source
domain, and a target model learned through UDA for the
target domain. We aim to portray the knowledge difference
with image generation. Given a translated image and its
original version, we feed the two images to the source and
the target model, respectively. It is desired that differences
between image pairs can compensate for the knowledge dif-

(a) Target images (real-world)

(b) Generated source-style images

(c) Unseen source images (synthetic)

Figure 1: Visualization of adapted knowledge in unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) on the VisDA dataset [38].
To depict the knowledge difference, in our source-free image translation (SFIT) approach, we generate source-style
images (b) from target images (a). Instead of accessing
source images (c), the training process is guided entirely
by the source and target models, so as to faithfully portray
the knowledge difference between them.

ference between models, leading to similar outputs from
the two branches (two images fed to two different models).
Achieving this, we could also say that the image pair represent the knowledge difference.
This visualization problem is very challenging and
heretofore yet to be studied in the literature. It focuses on a
relatively understudied field in transfer learning, where we
distill knowledge differences from models and embed it in
generated images. A related line of works, traditional image
translation, generates images in the desired style utilizing
content images and style images [7, 13, 48], and is applied

13824

