AdaStereo: A Simple and Efficient Approach for Adaptive Stereo Matching
Xiao Song1⋆

Guorun Yang1,3⋆ Xinge Zhu2 Hui Zhou1 Zhe Wang1,4 Jianping Shi1,5
1
SenseTime Research 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory 5 Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

{songxiao,yangguorun,zhouhui,wangzhe,shijianping}@sensetime.com

zx018@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Recently, records on stereo matching benchmarks are constantly broken by end-to-end disparity networks. However,
the domain adaptation ability of these deep models is quite
poor. Addressing such problem, we present a novel domainadaptive pipeline called AdaStereo that aims to align multilevel representations for deep stereo matching networks.
Compared to previous methods for adaptive stereo matching, our AdaStereo realizes a more standard, complete and
effective domain adaptation pipeline. Firstly, we propose
a non-adversarial progressive color transfer algorithm for
input image-level alignment. Secondly, we design an efficient
parameter-free cost normalization layer for internal featurelevel alignment. Lastly, a highly related auxiliary task, selfsupervised occlusion-aware reconstruction is presented to
narrow down the gaps in output space. Our AdaStereo models achieve state-of-the-art cross-domain performance on
multiple stereo benchmarks, including KITTI, Middlebury,
ETH3D, and DrivingStereo, even outperforming disparity
networks finetuned with target-domain ground-truths.

1. Introduction
The stereo matching task aims to find all corresponding
pixels in a stereo pair, and the distance between corresponding pixels is known as disparity [12]. Based on the epipolar
geometry, stereo matching enables stable depth perception,
hence it supports further applications such as scene understanding, object detection, odometry, and SLAM.
Recent stereo matching methods typically adopt fully convolutional networks [21] to regress disparity maps directly
and have achieved state-of-the-art performance on stereo
benchmarks [7, 25, 30]. However, the performance of these
methods adapted from synthetic data to real-world scenes is
limited. As shown in Fig. 1, the PSMNet [4] pretrained on
⋆ indicates equal contribution.

Figure 1. Overview examples. Left-right: KITTI [25] and Middlebury [30]. Top-down: left image, disparity maps predicted by the
SceneFlow-pretrained PSMNet [4], and by our Ada-PSMNet.

the SceneFlow dataset [24] fails to produce good results on
the Middlebury [30] and KITTI [25] datasets. Therefore, instead of designing complicated networks for higher accuracy
on specific datasets, how to obtain effective domain-adaptive
stereo matching models is more desirable now.
In this work, we aim at the important but less explored
problem of domain adaptation in stereo matching. Considering the fact that there are a great number of synthetic data
but only a small number of realistic data with ground-truths,
we focus on domain gaps between synthetic and realistic
domains. We first analyse main differences between these
two domains, as shown in Fig. 2. At the input image level,
color and brightness are the obvious gaps. By making statistics on the internal cost volumes, we also find significant
differences in distributions. Moreover, geometries of the
output disparity maps are inconsistent as well. In order to
bridge the domain gaps at these levels (input image, internal
cost volume, and output disparity), we propose AdaStereo, a
standard and complete domain adaptation pipeline for stereo

10328

