Goal-Oriented Gaze Estimation for Zero-Shot Learning
Yang Liu∗ 1 , Lei Zhou∗ 1 , Xiao Bai†,1 , Yifei Huang2 , Lin Gu3,2 , Jun Zhou4 , Tatsuya Harada2,3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Software Development
Environment, Jiangxi Research Institute, Beihang University, Beijing, China,
2
The University of Tokyo, 3 RIKEN AIP, Tokyo, Japan, 4 Griffith University, Australia

Abstract
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) aims to recognize novel classes
by transferring semantic knowledge from seen classes to
unseen classes. Since semantic knowledge is built on attributes shared between different classes, which are highly
local, strong prior for localization of object attribute is beneficial for visual-semantic embedding. Interestingly, when
recognizing unseen images, human would also automatically gaze at regions with certain semantic clue. Therefore, we introduce a novel goal-oriented gaze estimation
module (GEM) to improve the discriminative attribute localization based on the class-level attributes for ZSL. We
aim to predict the actual human gaze location to get the visual attention regions for recognizing a novel object guided
by attribute description. Specifically, the task-dependent
attention is learned with the goal-oriented GEM, and the
global image features are simultaneously optimized with
the regression of local attribute features. Experiments on
three ZSL benchmarks, i.e., CUB, SUN and AWA2, show
the superiority or competitiveness of our proposed method
against the state-of-the-art ZSL methods. The ablation
analysis on real gaze data CUB-VWSW also validates the
benefits and accuracy of our gaze estimation module. This
work implies the promising benefits of collecting human
gaze dataset and automatic gaze estimation algorithms on
high-level computer vision tasks. The code is available at
https://github.com/osierboy/GEM-ZSL.

1. Introduction
With prior knowledge on seen classes, humans have a remarkable ability to recognize novel classes using shared and
distinct attributes of both seen and unseen classes. Inspired
by this cognitive competence, zero-shot learning (ZSL) was
proposed as a challenging image classification setting to
mimic the human cognitive process [32]. Given the seman* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author: Xiao Bai (baixiao@buaa.edu.cn).

tic descriptions of both seen and unseen classes but only the
training images of seen classes, ZSL aims to classify test
images of unseen classes.
Based on the classes that a model sees in the test phase,
ZSL can be categorized into conventional or generalized
setting. In conventional ZSL, the test images belong only
to unseen classes. For the more practical and challenging
generalized ZSL (GZSL) setting, the test images may belong to both seen and unseen classes. The semantic descriptions (attributes) are shared information between seen
and unseen classes, which ensure the knowledge transferring. Early works [3, 4, 14, 40, 45] on ZSL build embedding between seen classes and their attributes. Then unseen classes are classified by the nearest neighbor search
in the embedding space. These embedding based methods usually have a large bias towards seen classes under
the GZSL setting, since the embedding is learned only by
seen classes samples. To solve this problem, by leveraging
the generative models [17, 30, 29], many feature generation
approaches [31, 57, 62, 46, 47, 37] have been proposed to
generate unseen classes, than convert ZSL into a conventional classification problem.
Most of the existing embedding or feature generation
based methods extract global features from pre-trained or
end-to-end trainable models. However, only the global image features cannot effectively represent the fine-grained information between seen and unseen images, which is important for ZSL. More recently, attention based end-to-end
models [59, 68, 67, 60] have tried to exploit the semantic
vector as guidance to learn more discriminative part features. However, they simply learn regions embedding of
different attribute features but neglect the importance of discriminative attribute localization [50, 61].
Very interestingly, when facing an unseen object with the
guidance of an attribute description, humans are capable of
paying attention to parts of the object with discriminative
attributes, which is the gaze behavior. Karessli et al. [27]
proved that gaze data is useful in ZSL since they provide
an effective prior that can naturally capture the localized
discriminative attribute. Inspired by the human gaze mech-

3794

