Picasso: A CUDA-based Library for Deep Learning over 3D Meshes
Huan Lei Naveed Akhtar Ajmal Mian
The University of Western Australia
huan.lei@research.uwa.edu.au, {naveed.akhtar,ajmal.mian}@uwa.edu.au
Code: https://github.com/hlei-ziyan/Picasso

Abstract
We present Picasso, a CUDA-based library comprising
novel modules for deep learning over complex real-world
3D meshes. Hierarchical neural architectures have proved
effective in multi-scale feature extraction which signifies the
need for fast mesh decimation. However, existing methods rely on CPU-based implementations to obtain multiresolution meshes. We design GPU-accelerated mesh decimation to facilitate network resolution reduction efficiently
on-the-fly. Pooling and unpooling modules are defined on
the vertex clusters gathered during decimation. For feature learning over meshes, Picasso contains three types of
novel convolutions namely, facet2vertex, vertex2facet, and
facet2facet convolution. Hence, it treats a mesh as a geometric structure comprising vertices and facets, rather than
a spatial graph with edges as previous methods do. Picasso
also incorporates a fuzzy mechanism in its filters for robustness to mesh sampling (vertex density). It exploits Gaussian
mixtures to define fuzzy coefficients for the facet2vertex convolution, and barycentric interpolation to define the coefficients for the remaining two convolutions. In this release,
we demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed modules
with competitive segmentation results on S3DIS. The library
will be made public through github.

1. Introduction
Data in computer vision vary commonly from homogeneous format in 2D projective space (e.g. images, videos)
to heterogeneous format in 3D Euclidean space (e.g. point
clouds, meshes). The success of convolutional feature
learning on homogeneous data [21, 28, 37, 38, 46, 47, 50,
55] has sparked research interest in geometric deep learning [6, 7, 14, 26, 54], which aims for equally effective feature learning on heterogeneous data. Due to the rise of autonomous driving and robotics, 3D deep learning has now
become an important branch of the geometric research direction. Compared to 3D point clouds, 3D meshes convey
richer geometric information about the object surface and
topology. Yet, the heterogeneous facet shapes and sizes
combined with unstructured vertex locations make its adaption to deep learning more difficult as compared to point
clouds. This is why most approaches address real-world

3D scene understanding via convolutions on point clouds
[31, 32, 33, 35, 43, 44]. However, point clouds still lack in
preserving the structural details that are easily represented
by meshes.
There are a few works that learn features from meshes,
but they are largely constrained to shape analysis on small
synthetic models [5, 20, 39, 41, 45, 68]. These methods
either apply convolutions throughout the network to a single mesh resolution (the input), or exploit inefficient CPUbased algorithms to decimate the mesh [16, 17, 51, 71].
However, non-hierarchical network configurations and slow
network coarsening are both problematic while dealing with
real-world meshes because of their large-scale nature. This
calls for mesh simplification methods that are fast and
amenable to deep learning for the real-world applications.
We present a GPU-accelerated mesh simplification algorithm to facilitate the exploration of hierarchical architectures on meshes. The proposed method is not only fast in
decimating small-scale watertight meshes from CAD modelling [4, 9, 11, 36], but is also efficient in simplifying largescale unstructured real-wold meshes [2, 8, 12, 22]. We perform all computations in parallel on GPU, except for the
grouping of vertex pairs to be contracted. Meanwhile, to increase its compatibility with modern deep learning modules
such as normalization [3, 24, 60, 66], we contract vertex
clusters by controlling the desired vertex size of the decimated mesh. This also advances mesh-based modules to be
exploited in conjunction with the various point cloud based
modules [52]. Our algorithm is able to reduce the number
of mesh vertices by half in each iteration. Figure 1 compares the runtime of our method with two well-founded decimation methods, VC [51] and QEM [17]. Notice that our
method is 30× faster than QEM. During the simplification,
we record all vertex clustering information into a 1-D tensor. Based on this tensor, we also define max, average and
weighted poolings, as well as unpooling.
Earlier attempts for convolution on meshes [5, 39, 41]
explored local patch operators in hand-crafted coordinate
systems. The development of spatial graph convolutions has
led recent methods [20, 45, 52] to predominantly consider
(triangular) mesh as a special graph and convolve features
of each vertex from their geodesic k-ring neighborhood.

13854

