XProtoNet: Diagnosis in Chest Radiography with Global and Local Explanations
Eunji Kim1
Siwon Kim1
Minji Seo1
Sungroh Yoon1,2,∗
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
2
ASRI, INMC, ISRC, and Institute of Engineering Research, Seoul National University
{kce407, tuslkkk, minjiseo, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract

Local Explanation
Input image

Diagnosis:
Cardiomegaly

Automated diagnosis using deep neural networks in
chest radiography can help radiologists detect lifethreatening diseases. However, existing methods only provide predictions without accurate explanations, undermining the trustworthiness of the diagnostic methods. Here, we
present XProtoNet, a globally and locally interpretable diagnosis framework for chest radiography. XProtoNet learns
representative patterns of each disease from X-ray images,
which are prototypes, and makes a diagnosis on a given Xray image based on the patterns. It predicts the area where
a sign of the disease is likely to appear and compares the
features in the predicted area with the prototypes. It can
provide a global explanation, the prototype, and a local
explanation, how the prototype contributes to the prediction
of a single image. Despite the constraint for interpretability,
XProtoNet achieves state-of-the-art classification performance on the public NIH chest X-ray dataset.

1. Introduction
Chest radiography is the most widely used imaging
examination for diagnosing heart and other chest diseases [13]. Detecting a disease through chest radiography is
a challenging task that requires professional knowledge and
careful observation. Various automated diagnostic methods
have been proposed to reduce the burden placed on radiologists and the likelihood of mistakes; methods using deep
neural networks (DNNs) have achieved especially high levels of performance in recent decades [10, 12, 17, 23, 32].
However, the black-box characteristics of DNNs discourage
users from trusting DNN predictions [4, 22]. Since medical
decisions may have life-or-death consequences, medicaldiagnosis applications require not only high performance
but also a strong rationale for judgment. Although many
automated diagnostic methods have presented localization
as an explanation for prediction [12, 20, 23, 31, 32], this
∗ Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.

Global Explanation

Occurence area
for Cardiomegaly

Similar

Prototype of
Cardiomegaly

Dissimilar

Diagnosis:
No Cardiomegaly
Prototype of
Nodule

Occurence area
for Nodule

Similar

Diagnosis:
Nodule

Figure 1. Our proposed framework, XProtoNet, learns prototypes
that are used to identify each disease. Given an input image,
XProtoNet compares the feature in the occurrence area of the input
image with the prototypes and thereby diagnoses diseases. Yellow
contours denote the learned prototypes.

provides only the region on which the network is focusing
within a given image, not the manner by which the network
makes a decision [26].
Interpretable models, unlike conventional neural networks, are designed to operate in a human-understandable
manner [26]. Case-based models learn discriminative features of each class, which are referred to as prototypes,
and classify an input image by comparing its features with
the prototypes [3, 8, 16]. Such models provide two types
of interpretation: global and local explanations. A global
explanation is a class-representative feature that is shared
by multiple data points belonging to the same class [14,25].
A local explanation, by contrast, shows how the prediction
of a single input image is made. In other words, the global

15719

