Learning Normal Dynamics in Videos with Meta Prototype Network
Hui Lv1 , Chen Chen2 , Zhen Cui1 ,* Chunyan Xu1 , Yong Li1 , Jian Yang1
2

PCALab, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, 2 University of North Carolina at Charlotte

{hubrthui, zhen.cui, cyx, yong.li, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, chen.chen@uncc.edu

Abstract
Frame reconstruction (current or future frame) based on
Auto-Encoder (AE) is a popular method for video anomaly
detection. With models trained on the normal data, the reconstruction errors of anomalous scenes are usually much
larger than those of normal ones. Previous methods introduced the memory bank into AE, for encoding diverse
normal patterns across the training videos. However, they
are memory-consuming and cannot cope with unseen new
scenarios in the testing data. In this work, we propose a dynamic prototype unit (DPU) to encode the normal dynamics
as prototypes in real time, free from extra memory cost. In
addition, we introduce meta-learning to our DPU to form
a novel few-shot normalcy learner, namely Meta-Prototype
Unit (MPU). It enables the fast adaption capability on new
scenes by only consuming a few iterations of update. Extensive experiments are conducted on various benchmarks.
The superior performance over the state-of-the-art demonstrates the effectiveness of our method. Our code is available at https://github.com/ktr-hubrt/MPN/.

1. Introduction
Video anomaly detection (VAD) refers to the identification of behaviors or appearance patterns that do not conform
to the expectation [2, 3, 5, 28]. Recently, there is a growing
interest in this research topic because its key role in surveillance for public safety, e.g. the task of monitoring video
in airports, at border crossings, or at government facilities
becomes increasingly critical. However, the ‘anomaly’ is
conceptually unbounded and often ambiguous, making it
infeasible to gather data of all kinds of possible anomalies.
Anomaly detection is thus typically formulated as an unsupervised learning problem, aiming at learning a model to
exploit the regular patterns only with the normal data. During inference, patterns that do not agree with the encoded
regular ones are considered as anomalies.
* Corresponding authors

Figure 1: An overview of our approach. (1) We design
a Dynamic Prototype Unit (DPU) to learn a pool of prototypes for encoding normal dynamics; (2) Meta-learning
methodology is introduced to formulate the DPU as a fewshot normalcy learner – Meta Prototype Unit (MPU). It improves the scene adaption capacity by learning an initialization of the target model and adjusting it to new scenes with
parameters update during inference. Better viewed in color.

Deep Auto-Encoder (AE) [38] is a popular approach for
video anomaly detection. Researchers usually adopt AEs to
model the normal patterns with historical frames and to reconstruct the current frame [11, 31, 39, 4, 40, 1] or predict
the upcoming frame [22, 34, 24, 26, 10]. For simplicity, we
refer to the two cases as frame prediction. Since the models are trained with only normal data, higher prediction errors are expected for abnormal (unseen patterns) inputs than
those of the normal counterparts. Previously, many methods
are based on this assumption for anomaly detection. However, this assumption does not always hold true.
On the one hand, the existing methods rely on large
volumes of normal training data to model the shared normal patterns. These models are prone to face the ‘overgeneralizing’ dilemma, where all video frames can be predicted well, no matter they are normal or abnormal, owing to the powerful representation capacity of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [37, 10]. Previous approaches
[37, 10] proposed to explicitly model the shared normal patterns across normal training videos with a memory bank, for

15425

