Convolutional Hough Matching Networks
Juhong Min

Minsu Cho

POSTECH CSE & GSAI
http://cvlab.postech.ac.kr/research/CHM/

Abstract
Despite advances in feature representation, leveraging
geometric relations is crucial for establishing reliable visual correspondences under large variations of images. In
this work we introduce a Hough transform perspective on
convolutional matching and propose an effective geometric
matching algorithm, dubbed Convolutional Hough Matching (CHM). The method distributes similarities of candidate
matches over a geometric transformation space and evaluate them in a convolutional manner. We cast it into a trainable neural layer with a semi-isotropic high-dimensional
kernel, which learns non-rigid matching with a small number of interpretable parameters. To validate the effect, we
develop the neural network with CHM layers that perform
convolutional matching in the space of translation and scaling. Our method sets a new state of the art on standard
benchmarks for semantic visual correspondence, proving its
strong robustness to challenging intra-class variations.

1. Introduction
Visual correspondence lies at the heart of image understanding, being used as a core component for numerous
tasks such as object recognition, image retrieval, motion estimation, object tracking, and reconstruction [16]. With recent advances in deep neural networks [21, 23, 25, 36, 57],
there has been substantial progress in learning robust feature representation for establishing correspondences. Despite the effectiveness of deep convolutional features, however, spatial matching with a geometric constraint is still
essential to handle image pairs with large variations, e.g.,
viewpoint and illumination changes, blur, occlusion, lack
of texture, etc. In particular, the presence of intra-class
variations, i.e., scenes depicting different instances of the
same categories, remains a critical challenge for correspondence [18, 20, 26, 32, 38, 42, 45, 47, 51, 52, 54]. The
process of geometric matching is the de facto solution of
choice, which most recent methods adopt in their models.
Geometric matching commonly relies on exploiting a
geometric consensus of candidate matches to verify rela-

Regions with different centers and scales

Hough voting
kernel

Matches of object regions with
different centers and scales

convolution

CHM input: all possible candidate matches

CHM output: filtered matches

Figure 1: Convolutional Hough matching (CHM) establishes reliable correspondences across images by performing position-aware Hough voting in a high-dimensional geometric transformation space, e.g., translation and scaling.
tive transformations. In computer vision, RANSAC [15]
and Hough transform [22] have long been used as geometric verification for wide-baseline correspondence problems
with rigid motion models, while graph matching [5, 7, 14,
55] has played a main role in matching deformable objects
with non-rigid motion. Recent work [6, 20, 45, 47] has advanced the idea of Hough transform to perform non-rigid
image matching, showing that the Hough voting process incorporated in neural networks is effective for challenging
correspondence problems with intra-class variations. However, their matching modules are neither fully differentiable
nor learnable, and weak to background clutter due to the
position-invariant global Hough space.
In this work we introduce Convolutional Hough Matching (CHM) that distributes similarities of candidate matches
over a geometric transformation space and evaluates them in
a convolutional manner. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the convolutional nature makes the output equivariant to translation
in the transformation space and also attentive to each position with its surrounding contexts, thus bringing robustness
to background clutter. We design CHM as a learnable layer
with an semi-isotropic high-dimensional kernel that acts on
top of a correlation tensor. The CHM layer is compatible with any neural networks that use correlation computation, allowing flexible non-rigid matching and even multiple

2940

