Tree-like Decision Distillation
Jie Song1, ,* Haofei Zhang1, ,* Xinchao Wang2,4 , Mengqi Xue1 , Ying Chen1 , Li Sun1,†, Dacheng Tao3 ,
and Mingli Song1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 National University of Singapore,
3
The University of Sydney, 4 Stevens Institute of Technology
{sjie,haofeizhang,mqxue,lynesychen,lsun,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn,
xinchao@nus.edu.sg, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

ResNet56

Decision Space

Decision Process

CONV

2-way: 80.1%
10-way: 34.0%

2-way

1. Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD), whose ultimate goal is to
craft a lightweight student model with the aid of a capable yet cumbersome teacher model, has become one of the
most flourishing research topic in deep learning since the pioneering work of [8]. Its success is largely attributed to the
dark knowledge learned by the over-parameterized teacher
model, which is exploited to regularize the learning of a
low-capacity student model without sacrificing too much
performance.
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

classification
GROUP 1

GROUP 2

4-way: 73.0%
10-way: 50.2%

4-way
classification

10-way: 94.9%
GROUP 3

10-way
Deer

Cat

Horse

Bird

Dog

Frog

Ship

Truck

output

Car

classification
Airplane

Knowledge distillation pursues a diminutive yet wellbehaved student network by harnessing the knowledge
learned by a cumbersome teacher model. Prior methods
achieve this by making the student imitate shallow behaviors, such as soft targets, features, or attention, of the
teacher. In this paper, we argue that what really matters
for distillation is the intrinsic problem-solving process captured by the teacher. By dissecting the decision process in a
layer-wise manner, we found that the decision-making procedure in the teacher model is conducted in a coarse-to-fine
manner, where coarse-grained discrimination (e.g., animal
vs vehicle) is attained in early layers, and fine-grained discrimination (e.g., dog vs cat, car vs truck) in latter layers.
Motivated by this observation, we propose a new distillation
method, dubbed as Tree-like Decision Distillation (TDD),
to endow the student with the same problem-solving mechanism as that of the teacher. Extensive experiments demonstrated that TDD yields competitive performance compared
to state of the arts. More importantly, it enjoys better interpretability due to its interpretable decision distillation instead of dark knowledge distillation.

Figure 1. An illustrative diagram of the coarse-to-fine decision
process on CIFAR10. After the first group of ResNet56, vehicles
and animals can be distinguished with accuracy of 80%, while the
10-way classification here reaches only 34%.

Although remarkable progress has been made in the last
several years, most existing KD methods are still stuck in
the stage of mimicking shallow behaviors, such as soft targets [8], features [21], or attentions [41], of the teacher. Few
of them attempt to figure out the problem-solving process
underlying the pre-trained teacher model, which leaves the
student produced by KD entirely a black box. Moreover, as
some behaviors are partially dependent on the network architecture, directly copying these behaviors yields inferior
performance especially when the architecture gap between
the teacher and the student is significant [16, 31, 19].
In this paper, we argue that what really matters for distillation is the intrinsic problem-solving process captured
by the teacher. By dissecting the decision process in the
teacher model in a layer-wise manner, we found that although most multi-layered neural networks are designed to
make the classification predictions in the last classification
layer, the decision-making procedure is in fact learned to
be conducted in a coarse-to-fine way and distributed over
many layers, as shown in Figure 1. The early layers tend
to capture the salient visual cues, and thus be capable of
distinguishing between categories that are visually diverse
enough, e.g., the human-made categories (vehicles) versus

13488

