Fashion IQ: A New Dataset Towards
Retrieving Images by Natural Language Feedback
Hui Wu*1,2 Yupeng Gao∗2 Xiaoxiao Guo∗1,2 Ziad Al-Halah3
Steven Rennie4 Kristen Grauman3 Rogerio Feris1,2
1

MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

2

IBM Research

Abstract
Conversational interfaces for the detail-oriented retail
fashion domain are more natural, expressive, and user
friendly than classical keyword-based search interfaces. In
this paper, we introduce the Fashion IQ dataset to support and advance research on interactive fashion image retrieval. Fashion IQ is the first fashion dataset to provide
human-generated captions that distinguish similar pairs of
garment images together with side-information consisting
of real-world product descriptions and derived visual attribute labels for these images. We provide a detailed analysis of the characteristics of the Fashion IQ data, and present
a transformer-based user simulator and interactive image
retriever that can seamlessly integrate visual attributes with
image features, user feedback, and dialog history, leading
to improved performance over the state of the art in dialogbased image retrieval. We believe that our dataset will encourage further work on developing more natural and realworld applicable conversational shopping assistants.1

1. Introduction
Fashion is a multi-billion-dollar industry, with direct social, cultural, and economic implications in the world. Recently, computer vision has demonstrated remarkable success in many applications in this domain, including trend
forecasting [2], modeling influence relations [1], creation
of capsule wardrobes [23], interactive product retrieval
[18, 68], recommendation [41], and fashion design [46]. In
this work, we address the problem of interactive image retrieval for fashion product search. High fidelity interactive
image retrieval, despite decades of research and many great
strides, remains a research challenge. At the crux of the
challenge are two entangled elements: empowering the user
with ways to express what they want, and empowering the
* Equal contribution.
1 Fashion IQ is available at: https://github.com/XiaoxiaoGuo/fashion-iq

3

UT Austin

Classical Fashion Search
Length
Short
Midi
Long

Product Filtered by:
Mini

White

4

Pryon

Dialog-based Fashion Search
I want a mini sleeveless dress

Red

Sleeveless

…
Color
Blue
White
Orange

I prefer stripes and more
covered around the neck

…
Sleeves

I want a little more red accent

long
3/4
Sleeveless

…

Figure 1: A classical fashion search interface relies on the
user selecting filters based on a pre-defined fashion ontology. This process can be cumbersome and the search results
still need manual refinement. The Fashion IQ dataset supports building dialog-based fashion search systems, which
are more natural to use and allow the user to precisely describe what they want to search for.
retrieval machine with the information, capacity, and learning objective to realize high performance.
To tackle these challenges, traditional systems have relied on relevance feedback [47, 68], allowing users to indicate which images are “similar” or “dissimilar” to the desired image. Relative attribute feedback (e.g., “more formal
than these”, “shinier than these”) [33, 32] allows the comparison of the desired image with candidate images based
on a fixed set of attributes. While effective, this specific
form of user feedback constrains what the user can convey.
More recent work utilizes natural language to address this
problem [65, 18, 55], with relative captions describing the
differences between a reference image and what the user
has in mind, and dialog-based interactive retrieval as a principled and general methodology for interactively engaging
the user in a multimodal conversation to resolve their intent

11307

