Hierarchical Video Prediction using
Relational Layouts for Human-Object Interactions
Navaneeth Bodla1
Gaurav Shrivastava1
Rama Chellappa2
Abhinav Shrivastava1
1
2
University of Maryland, College Park
Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Learning to model and predict how humans interact
with objects while performing an action is challenging,
and most of the existing video prediction models are ineffective in modeling complicated human-object interactions. Our work builds on hierarchical video prediction
models, which disentangle the video generation process into
two stages: predicting a high-level representation, such as
pose sequence, and then learning a pose-to-pixels translation model for pixel generation. An action sequence for a
human-object interaction task is typically very complicated,
involving the evolution of pose, person’s appearance, object
locations, and object appearances over time. To this end,
we propose a Hierarchical Video Prediction model using
Relational Layouts. In the first stage, we learn to predict a
sequence of layouts. A layout is a high-level representation
of the video containing both pose and objects’ information
for every frame. The layout sequence is learned by modeling the relationships between the pose and objects using
relational reasoning and recurrent neural networks. The
layout sequence acts as a strong structure prior to the second stage that learns to map the layouts into pixel space.
Experimental evaluation of our method on two datasets,
UMD-HOI and Bimanual, shows significant improvements
in standard video evaluation metrics such as LPIPS, PSNR,
and SSIM. We also perform a detailed qualitative analysis
of our model to demonstrate various generalizations.

1. Introduction
Video prediction is a challenging task of predicting future frames conditioned on one or more past frames. Videos
in the real world are extremely complex. An everyday action, such as drinking a coffee, results from complicated
interactions among various objects. For example, first, the
person might reach the coffee pot and pour coffee into their
cup. Next, they might start drinking from the cup while
browsing their cell phone. Observe that this particular action involves interactions among various objects such as a

coffee pot, cup, and cell phone. Each of the objects has its
relative motion with respect to other objects and the person
performing the action. While it is effortless for human beings to imagine such events, existing computer vision models often fail at these tasks.
Existing video prediction methods broadly fall into two
categories: 1) models that directly predict the video in the
pixel space, and 2) models that use hierarchical prediction.
Hierarchical prediction methods are a preferred over directly predicting the video in pixel space as they learn a
good intermediate representation which is then mapped to
pixel space. Disentangling the prediction into simpler steps
helps the models focus on smaller tasks and, hence, learn
an improved frame prediction model. A natural choice of
intermediate representation for videos is optical flow [1].
Similarly, for videos involving human actions, human-pose
is typically used as an intermediate representation. Villegas
et al. [2] and Walker et al. [3] have disentangled the video
prediction by first predicting the pose sequence and then
mapping the pose sequence to pixel space.
While pose is a great choice for videos involving human
actions, pose alone is not sufficient to capture various dynamics in a Human-Object interaction sequence. For complex actions, such as human-object interactions where multiple objects evolve over time, pose alone does not fully capture the complex scene dynamics. Since the pose does not
contain any information about the objects, the models fail
to capture the object’s motion and appearance faithfully. To
mitigate this issue, we propose to learn a layout sequence
as an intermediate representation. A layout sequence is a
combination of pose and object sequences that not only captures the person’s pose while performing an action, but also
explicitly learns the locations of various objects at different times while the action is being performed. The naive
way of learning these pose and object sequences independently is also not sufficient since the spatio-temporal evolution of an object is dependent on how the pose is evolving
and vice versa. Hence, we propose a Human-Object Relational Network (HORN) to model these complex interactions among objects and poses.
Our key contributions for video prediction for human-

12146

