Generalizing Face Forgery Detection with High-frequency Features
Yuchen Luo∗†1,2
Yong Zhang∗3
Junchi Yan‡1,2
Wei Liu‡4
1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
3
4
Tencent AI Lab
Tencent Data Platform
{592mcavoy,yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn

zhangyong201303@gmail.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
As face manipulation techniques [4, 24, 59] spring up
along with the breakthrough of deep generators [27, 20],
face forgery detection becomes an arousing research topic.
Most existing methods focus on within-database detection [7, 29, 9], where forged images in the training set and
testing set are manipulated by the same algorithm. However, the biggest challenge hampering face forgery detec∗ Equal contribution
† Work done during an internship at Tencent AI Lab
‡ Corresponding Author

Training

Cross-Database Detection

Pristine

Face2Face

Generalizing face
forgery detection
Deepfakes

Within-Database Detection

Deepfakes

FaceSwap

……

Current face forgery detection methods achieve high accuracy under the within-database scenario where training
and testing forgeries are synthesized by the same algorithm.
However, few of them gain satisfying performance under the
cross-database scenario where training and testing forgeries are synthesized by different algorithms. In this paper,
we find that current CNN-based detectors tend to overfit
to method-specific color textures and thus fail to generalize. Observing that image noises remove color textures and
expose discrepancies between authentic and tampered regions, we propose to utilize the high-frequency noises for
face forgery detection. We carefully devise three functional
modules to take full advantage of the high-frequency features. The first is the multi-scale high-frequency feature extraction module that extracts high-frequency noises at multiple scales and composes a novel modality. The second
is the residual-guided spatial attention module that guides
the low-level RGB feature extractor to concentrate more on
forgery traces from a new perspective. The last is the crossmodality attention module that leverages the correlation between the two complementary modalities to promote feature
learning for each other. Comprehensive evaluations on several benchmark databases corroborate the superior generalization performance of our proposed method.

wl2223@columbia.edu

Other Unseen Forgeries

Figure 1: Training and testing forgeries of within-database
detection are synthesized by the same algorithm while those
of cross-database detection are synthesized by different algorithms. We focus on the latter which is more challenging.
tion is the generalization problem. Due to the diversified
data distributions generated by different manipulation techniques, methods with high within-database detection accuracy always experience a severe performance drop in the
cross-database scenario, thus limiting broader applications.
Recently, several works are devoted to addressing the
generalizing problem. [30, 28] assume that some artifacts
are shared in forged faces and customize databases specialized on those artifacts. However, these assumptions do not
always hold. Besides, transfer learning [13], domain adaptation [54], and multi-task learning [14, 35, 45] are utilized
to improve model’s performance in unseen domains. Nevertheless, the acquisition of target samples and annotations
is expensive. Meanwhile, some attempt to obtain information from frequency domains, such as Fourier transformation [11], DCT [38], and steganalysis features [52, 57]. But
they rarely consider the relation and interaction between the
additional information and regular color textures.
In this paper, we aim at learning a more generalizable
face forgery detector (See Fig. 1). To facilitate understanding why current CNN-based works fail on unseen forgeries,
we analyze CNN-based classifiers’ behaviors and find that

16317

