Progressive Domain Expansion Network for Single Domain Generalization
Lei Li12 , Ke Gao1∗ , Juan Cao1∗ , Ziyao Huang12 , Yepeng Weng12 ,
Xiaoyue Mi12 , Zhengze Yu12 , Xiaoya Li12 , Boyang xia12
1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{lilei17b,caojuan,huangziyao19f,wengyepeng19s,mixiaoyue19s}@ict.ac.cn
kegao512@gmail.com, {yuzhengze,lixiaoya18s,xiaboyang20s}@ict.ac.cn

Abstract
Single domain generalization is a challenging case of
model generalization, where the models are trained on a
single domain and tested on other unseen domains. A
promising solution is to learn cross-domain invariant representations by expanding the coverage of the training domain. These methods have limited generalization performance gains in practical applications due to the lack of appropriate safety and effectiveness constraints. In this paper, we propose a novel learning framework called progressive domain expansion network (PDEN) for single domain generalization. The domain expansion subnetwork
and representation learning subnetwork in PDEN mutually benefit from each other by joint learning. For the
domain expansion subnetwork, multiple domains are progressively generated in order to simulate various photometric and geometric transforms in unseen domains. A
series of strategies are introduced to guarantee the safety
and effectiveness of the expanded domains. For the domain invariant representation learning subnetwork, contrastive learning is introduced to learn the domain invariant representation in which each class is well clustered so
that a better decision boundary can be learned to improve
it’s generalization. Extensive experiments on classification
and segmentation have shown that PDEN can achieve up
to 15.28% improvement compared with the state-of-the-art
single-domain generalization methods. Codes will be released soon at https://github.com/lileicv/PDEN

1. Introduction
In this paper, we define domains as various distributions
of objects appearance caused by different external conditions(such as weather, background, illumination etc.) or in*Corresponding author

𝑆

𝑆1

𝑆2

𝑠𝑠Ƹ2Ƹ3
𝑆𝑠Ƹ1

𝑆3

(a) The traditional decision bound- (b) The new decision boundary
ary learned with the original train- learned with our progressively exing domain.
panded domains.
Train/Source domain

Test/Unseen target domains

Model
MNIST[22]

MNIST-M[10]

SVHN[31]

Task1: Object Recognition

Model
SYNTHIA[35]-DAWN

SYNTHIA-NIGHT

SYNTHIA-WINTER

Task2: Semantic segmentation

(c) Domain generalization scenario

Figure 1. The illustration of our PDEN for single domain generalization. The tiny images in (a) and (b) with red border denote the
source domain and the one with green border denote the expanded
domains with our PDEN.

trinsic attributes(such as color, texture, pose etc.), as shown
in Fig.1. The performance of a deep model usually drops
when applied to unseen domains. For example, The accuracy of the CNN model(trained on MNIST) on MNIST test
set is 99%, while that on SVHN test set is only 30%. Model
generalization is important to machine learning.
Two solutions have been proposed to deal with the above
issue, namely, domain adaptation [10, 30, 36, 9] and domain generalization [29, 11, 12, 16]. Domain adaptation
aims to generalize to a known target domain whose labels
are unknown. Distribution alignment(e.g., MMD) and style

224

