Navigating the GAN Parameter Space for Semantic Image Editing
Anton Cherepkov
Yandex, Russia
Moscow Institute of Physics and Technology

Andrey Voynov
Yandex, Russia
an.voynov@yandex.ru

cherepkov.ayu@phystech.edu

Artem Babenko
Yandex, Russia
HSE University
artem.babenko@phystech.edu

- Nose length +

- Wheels size +

- Thickness +

- Windows +

Abstract

are an excellent source of non-trivial semantic manipulations. The discovered manipulations cannot be achieved by
transforming the latent codes and can be used to edit both
synthetic and real images. We release our code and models
and hope they will serve as a handy tool for further efforts
on GAN-based image editing.

Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are currently
an indispensable tool for visual editing, being a standard component of image-to-image translation and image
restoration pipelines. Furthermore, GANs are especially
advantageous for controllable generation since their latent
spaces contain a wide range of interpretable directions,
well suited for semantic editing operations. By gradually
changing latent codes along these directions, one can produce impressive visual effects, unattainable without GANs.
In this paper, we significantly expand the range of visual effects achievable with the state-of-the-art models, like
StyleGAN2. In contrast to existing works, which mostly operate by latent codes, we discover interpretable directions
in the space of the generator parameters. By several simple methods, we explore this space and demonstrate that it
also contains a plethora of interpretable directions, which

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [8] have revolutionized image processing research, significantly pushing
the boundaries of machine learning for image enhancement
and visual editing. Different research lines currently exploit
GANs in several principled ways, e.g. using them as an
implicit learnable objective [20, 17, 13, 5, 18, 36, 37], employing them as high-quality image priors [35, 2, 9, 22, 23],
manipulating their internal representations for visual editing
purposes [3, 6]. Furthermore, the GAN latent spaces often

Contact author: Andrey Voynov, an.voynov@yandex.ru

https://github.com/yandex-research/navigan

3671

