Rethinking and Improving the Robustness of Image Style Transfer
Pei Wang
UC, San Diego

Yijun Li
Adobe Research

Nuno Vasconcelos
UC, San Diego

pew062@ucsd.edu

yijli@adobe.com

nuno@ucsd.edu

On pre-trained models

On random models

Content

p-VGG

r-VGG

Style

p-ResNet

r-ResNet

Abstract
Extensive research in neural style transfer methods has
shown that the correlation between features extracted by a
pre-trained VGG network has a remarkable ability to capture the visual style of an image. Surprisingly, however, this
stylization quality is not robust and often degrades significantly when applied to features from more advanced and
lightweight networks, such as those in the ResNet family.
By performing extensive experiments with different network
architectures, we find that residual connections, which represent the main architectural difference between VGG and
ResNet, produce feature maps of small entropy, which are not
suitable for style transfer. To improve the robustness of the
ResNet architecture, we then propose a simple yet effective
solution based on a softmax transformation of the feature
activations that enhances their entropy. Experimental results
demonstrate that this small magic can greatly improve the
quality of stylization results, even for networks with random
weights. This suggests that the architecture used for feature
extraction is more important than the use of learned weights
for the task of style transfer.

1. Introduction
Image style transfer aims to map a content image into
the style of a different reference image. It has received
substantial attention, particularly with the introduction of
neural style transfer algorithms based on deep networks. A
consistent observation from this work [43, 24, 30, 23, 25,
19, 9, 2, 8] is that the correlation between the activations
of a pre-trained VGG [33] network has remarkable ability
to capture the visual style of an image. It is, however, puzzling that when the VGG is replaced by architectures of
better performance in other tasks, e.g. classification, such
as the ResNet [14, 44, 42], InceptionNet [35, 34, 36] or
DenseNet [16], stylization performance degrades significantly. This is even more puzzling because, when implemented with the VGG, style transfer is very robust. For
example, a VGG model with random weights performs comparably to a pre-trained model [14, 3].

Figure 1: Neural style transfer by different architectures,
using the methods of [7, 27] (‘p-’, ‘r-’ denotes pre-trained
and randomly initialization. Please zoom in the picture for a
detailed comparison).
Figure 1 shows an example of style transfer using different models. The VGG transfers style (color, texture, strokes)
more faithfully than the ResNet, for both pre-trained and
random weights. While these observations have spurred discussion in the literature, about why style transfer is much
more effective for the VGG [27, 12, 4], there are still no
clear answers. In particular, there has not been a comprehensive study of (i) what architectural differences between
the VGG and other networks cause this striking performance
difference, and (ii) what remedies could make non-VGG
networks perform as well as the VGG. One explanation is
that VGG features are more robust than others. To validate
this conjecture, [27, 4] trained a ResNet with adversarial
examples [10] to improve feature robustness. They found
this can significantly improve stylization quality. However,
the fact that the VGG with random weights can generate
comparable results [13, 3] suggests that robustness is not a
property of the training data, but inherent to the architecture.
In this work, we investigate this hypothesis by comparing
stylizations produced with activations from different architectures. We seek the architectural properties that explain the
differences between these activations, and how these could

124

