Towards Fast and Accurate Real-World Depth Super-Resolution: Benchmark
Dataset and Baseline
Lingzhi He, Hongguang Zhu, Feng Li, Huihui Bai, Runmin Cong,
Chunjie Zhang, Chunyu Lin, Meiqin Liu, Yao Zhao*
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University
Beijing Key Laboratory of Advanced Information Science and Network, Beijing, 100044, China
{lingzhihe, hongguang, l1feng, hhbai, rmcong, cjzhang, cylin, mqliu, yzhao}@bjtu.edu.cn

Time cost: 0.140s Time cost: 0.007s

Abstract
Depth maps obtained by commercial depth sensors are
always in low-resolution, making it difficult to be used in
various computer vision tasks. Thus, depth map superresolution (SR) is a practical and valuable task, which upscales the depth map into high-resolution (HR) space. However, limited by the lack of real-world paired low-resolution
(LR) and HR depth maps, most existing methods use downsampling to obtain paired training samples. To this end,
we first construct a large-scale dataset named “RGB-D-D”,
which can greatly promote the study of depth map SR and
even more depth-related real-world tasks. The “D-D” in
our dataset represents the paired LR and HR depth maps
captured from mobile phone and Lucid Helios respectively
ranging from indoor scenes to challenging outdoor scenes.
Besides, we provide a fast depth map super-resolution
(FDSR) baseline, in which the high-frequency component
adaptively decomposed from RGB image to guide the depth
map SR. Extensive experiments on existing public datasets
demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our network
compared with the state-of-the-art methods. Moreover, for
the real-world LR depth maps, our algorithm can produce
more accurate HR depth maps with clearer boundaries and
to some extent correct the depth value errors.

1. Introduction
As a supplement of the RGB modality, the depth map can
provide useful depth information, which has been applied
in bokeh rendering [25], AR modeling [26], face recognition [3], gesture recognition [27], etc. Meanwhile, the lowpower depth sensors equipped on mobile consumer electronics, such as Huawei and Samsung, have been popular
in our daily life. However, the resolution of depth maps
* Corresponding author: yzhao@bjtu.edu.cn

Input

RGB

GT

RMSE: 15.98

RMSE: 9.09

RMSE: 14.00
DKN

RMSE:11.38
FDSR

Figure 1. RGB-D-D dataset display and depth map SR results
comparison. Depth map SR results given by DKN [16] and FDSR
is shown in the last two columns. The quantitive results in terms
of RMSE is shown blow each row (lower is better). The runing
time of DKN [16] and FDSR is shown on the top of the figure.

cannot match the resolution of RGB images, limiting practical applications to some extent. Therefore, investigating
the depth map SR is an effective solution for this issue.
Furthermore, downsampling as a straightforward strategy
has been widely used in the existing depth map SR algorithms [16, 23] to construct paired training samples. But
the downsampling manner fails to comprehensively simulate the real-world complex correspondences between the
LR and HR depth maps. To bridge this gap, we construct
the first benchmark dataset towards the real-world depth
map SR. Furthermore, to meet the actual application requirements, we provide a fast and accurate depth map SR
baseline model.
The existing “RGB-D” depth map SR datasets [37, 5, 13]
mainly focus on using a single HR depth map to generate
paired LR and HR depth map correspondences through the
downsampling strategy. In the real applications, the depth
map SR task is more challenging and complicated because
the real LR depth maps captured by depth sensors generally
contain some noise even depth holes. Therefore, for the real
scenes and real correspondences, we construct a large-scale

9229

