Understanding Object Dynamics for Interactive Image-to-Video Synthesis
Andreas Blattmann
Timo Milbich
Michael Dorkenwald
Björn Ommer
Interdisciplinary Center for Scientific Computing, HCI
Heidelberg University, Germany

Abstract
What would be the effect of locally poking a static
scene? We present an approach that learns naturallylooking global articulations caused by a local manipulation
at a pixel level. Training requires only videos of moving objects but no information of the underlying manipulation of
the physical scene. Our generative model learns to infer
natural object dynamics as a response to user interaction
and learns about the interrelations between different object
body regions. Given a static image of an object and a local
poking of a pixel, the approach then predicts how the object would deform over time. In contrast to existing work
on video prediction, we do not synthesize arbitrary realistic
videos but enable local interactive control of the deformation. Our model is not restricted to particular object categories and can transfer dynamics onto novel unseen object
instances. Extensive experiments on diverse objects demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach compared to common video prediction frameworks. Project page is available
at https://bit.ly/3cxfA2L.

1. Introduction
From infancy on we learn about the world by manipulating our immediate environment and subsequently observing
the resulting diverse reactions to our interaction. Particularly in early years, poking, pulling, and pushing the objects
around us is our main source for learning about their integral parts, their interplay, articulation and dynamics. Consider children playing with a plant. They eventually comprehend how subtle touches only affect individual leaves,
while increasingly forceful interactions may affect larger
and larger constituents, thus finally learning about the entirety of the dynamics related to various kinds of interactions. Moreover, they learn to generalize these dynamics
across similar objects, thus becoming able to predict the reaction of a novel object to their manipulation.
Training artificial visual systems to gain a similar understanding of the distinct characteristics of object articulation
and its distinct dynamics is a major line of computer vision

Figure 1. Our approach for interactive image-to-video synthesis
learns to understand the relations between the distinct body parts
of articulated objects from unlabeled video data, thus enabling
synthesis of videos showing natural object dynamics as responses
to local interactions.

research. In the realm of still images the interplay between
object shape and appearance has been extensively studied,
even allowing for controlled, global [43, 41, 21, 16, 15] and
local [39, 73] manipulation. Existing work on object dynamics, however, so far is addressed by either extrapolations of observed object motion [67, 27, 11, 33, 67, 45, 5,
61] or only coarse control of predefined attributes such as
explicit action labels [71] and imitation of previously observed holistic motion [1, 14]. Directly controlling and,
even further, interacting with objects on a local level however, so far, is a novel enterprise. Teaching visual systems
to understand the complex dynamics of objects both arising by explicit manipulations of individual parts and to predict and analyze the behavior [12, 3, 4] of the remainder of
the object is an exceptionally challenging task. Similarly to
a child in the example above, such systems need to know
about the natural interrelations of different parts of an object [72]. Moreover, they have to learn how these parts are
related by their dynamics to plausibly synthesize temporal

5171

