PhD Learning: Learning with Pompeiu-hausdorff Distances for Video-based
Vehicle Re-Identification

1

Jianan Zhao1 , Fengliang Qi1 , Guangyu Ren2∗, Lin Xu1†
Shanghai Em-Data Technology Co., Ltd. 2 Imperial College London

Abstract
Vehicle re-identification (re-ID) is of great significance
to urban operation, management, security and has gained
more attention in recent years. However, two critical challenges in vehicle re-ID have primarily been underestimated,
i.e., 1): how to make full use of raw data, and 2): how to
learn a robust re-ID model with noisy data. In this paper,
we first create a video vehicle re-ID evaluation benchmark
called VVeRI-901 and verify the performance of videobased re-ID is far better than static image-based one. Then
we propose a new Pompeiu-hausdorff distance (PhD) learning method for video-to-video matching. It can alleviate
the data noise problem caused by the occlusion in videos
and thus improve re-ID performance significantly. Extensive empirical results on video-based vehicle and person reID datasets, i.e., VVeRI-901, MARS and PRID2011, demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method. The source
code of our proposed method is available at https://
github.com/emdata-ailab/PhD-Learning.

1. Introduction
Vehicle re-identification (re-ID) aims to locate and recognize a vehicle of interest across multiple non-overlapping
cameras in various traffic intersections. It is of great significance to urban operation, management, security [31,
72, 38], and has gained more attention in recent years
[33, 65, 50, 57, 46]. The challenges are exponentially
increasing for the visual appearance based vehicle re-ID
tasks, such as tiny intra-class variations, multiple camera
viewpoints, various illumination conditions, severe occlusions, and complex traffic conditions [51, 46, 64], e.g., a
car might glow different colors at varying viewing angles
and light beams, while the vehicles of same model usually
exhibit limited visual differences. Vehicle re-ID can be conducted on either images or videos. The existing vehicle reID has been extensively studied for still images via match∗ Work done while an intern at Shanghai Em-Data Technology Co., Ltd.
† Contact Author (Email: lin.xu5470@gmail.com)

Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the advantage of video-based
vehicle re-ID and the proposed Pompeiu-hausdorff distance (PhD)
Learning method. (a): We create a video-based vehicle re-ID
benchmark from complex traffic intersections. The rich spatialtemporal information in video can resist visual ambiguities. (b):
Severe partial and full occlusions frequently occur in a traffic intersection surveillance video. It would introduce a large number
of occlusion samples for recognition. (c): The proposed set-toset PhD Learning method for video-to-video matching. The noisy
sample (e.g., x1 ) can be eliminated automatically during the optimization process. Colors (i.e., yellow and red) indicate the semantical visual appearance, while shapes (i.e., squares and circles)
represent the annotated label (i.e., ground truth).

ing spatial appearance features [50, 38, 57, 46, 65]. However, static image-based approaches are intrinsically limited
due to the visual ambiguities (e.g., occlusions, viewpoints,
and resolutions) and the lack of spatio-temporal information. Video sequences contain richer spatial and temporal clues and are beneficial for identifying a vehicle under
complex surveillance conditions. Currently, making use of
videos brings new challenges to vehicle re-ID. The diffi-

2225

