Uncertainty-Aware Camera Pose Estimation from Points and Lines
Alexander Vakhitov1

Luis Ferraz Colomina2
Antonio Agudo3
Francesc Moreno-Noguer3
1
SLAMCore Ltd., UK
2
Kognia Sports Intelligence, Spain
3
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Spain

Abstract
Perspective-n-Point-and-Line (PnPL) algorithms aim at
fast, accurate, and robust camera localization with respect
to a 3D model from 2D-3D feature correspondences, being
a major part of modern robotic and AR/VR systems. Current
point-based pose estimation methods use only 2D feature
detection uncertainties, and the line-based methods do not
take uncertainties into account. In our setup, both 3D coordinates and 2D projections of the features are considered
uncertain. We propose PnP(L) solvers based on EPnP [20]
and DLS [14] for the uncertainty-aware pose estimation.
We also modify motion-only bundle adjustment to take 3D
uncertainties into account. We perform exhaustive synthetic and real experiments on two different visual odometry
datasets. The new PnP(L) methods outperform the stateof-the-art on real data in isolation, showing an increase in
mean translation accuracy by 18% on a representative subset of KITTI, while the new uncertain refinement improves
pose accuracy for most of the solvers, e.g. decreasing mean
translation error for the EPnP by 16% compared to the
standard refinement on the same dataset. The code is available at https://alexandervakhitov.github.io/uncertain-pnp/.

1. Introduction
Camera localization using sparse feature correspondences is a major part of augmented or virtual reality and
robotic systems. The Perspective-n-Point(-and-Line), or
PnP(L), methods can be successfully used to estimate the
pose of a calibrated camera from sparse feature correspondences. Line features can increase localization accuracy
in man-made self-similar environments which lack surfaces
with distinctive textures [36, 43, 15, 29], motivating the use
of PnP(L) methods [41].
While vision-based localization with respect to an auThis work has been partially funded by the Spanish government under
projects HuMoUR TIN2017-90086-R, ERA-Net Chistera project IPALM
PCI2019-103386 and Marı́a de Maeztu Seal of Excellence MDM-20160656.

Figure 1. We propose globally convergent PnP(L) solvers leveraging a complete set of 2D and 3D uncertainties for camera pose estimation. A 3D scene model with sparse features is reconstructed
from images with known poses (right cameras), and we need to
find a pose of a camera on the left. The point has 2D detection uncertainty (blue ellipsoid), and 3D model uncertainty (red ellipsoid
in the scene).

tomatically reconstructed map of sparse features is an important part of current robotic and AR/VR systems, commonly used PnP methods treat the features as absolutely
accurate [47, 14, 20, 16]. The more recent 2D covarianceaware methods relax this assumption [40, 6], but only for
the feature detections, still assuming perfect accuracy of the
3D feature coordinates.
In maps reconstructed with structure-from-motion, 3D
feature coordinate accuracy can vary. Stereo triangulation errors grow quadratically with respect to the object-tosensor distance, so the accuracy in estimating point depth
can vary in several orders of magnitude, while the line
stereo triangulation accuracy depends on the angle between
the line direction and the baseline. Nevertheless, to the best
of our knowledge, no prior method for PnP(L) was designed
to take both 3D and 2D uncertainties into account.
We propose to integrate the feature uncertainty into the
PnP(L) methods, see Fig. 1, which is our main contribution. We build on the classical DLS [14] and EPnP [20]
14659

