Contrastive Neural Architecture Search with Neural Architecture Comparators
Yaofo Chen1,2 *, Yong Guo1∗ , Qi Chen1 , Minli Li1 , Wei Zeng3 , Yaowei Wang2† , Mingkui Tan1,4†
1
South China University of Technology, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 3 Peking University,
4
Key Laboratory of Big Data and Intelligent Robot, Ministry of Education
{sechenyaofo, guo.yong, sechenqi, seminli li}@mail.scut.edu.cn,
weizeng@pku.edu.cn, wangyw@pcl.ac.cn, mingkuitan@scut.edu.cn

Abstract
One of the key steps in Neural Architecture Search (NAS)
is to estimate the performance of candidate architectures.
Existing methods either directly use the validation performance or learn a predictor to estimate the performance.
However, these methods can be either computationally expensive or very inaccurate, which may severely affect the
search efficiency and performance. Moreover, as it is very
difficult to annotate architectures with accurate performance
on specific tasks, learning a promising performance predictor is often non-trivial due to the lack of labeled data. In
this paper, we argue that it may not be necessary to estimate the absolute performance for NAS. On the contrary,
we may need only to understand whether an architecture
is better than a baseline one. However, how to exploit this
comparison information as the reward and how to well use
the limited labeled data remains two great challenges. In this
paper, we propose a novel Contrastive Neural Architecture
Search (CTNAS) method which performs architecture search
by taking the comparison results between architectures as
the reward. Specifically, we design and learn a Neural Architecture Comparator (NAC) to compute the probability
of candidate architectures being better than a baseline one.
Moreover, we present a baseline updating scheme to improve
the baseline iteratively in a curriculum learning manner.
More critically, we theoretically show that learning NAC
is equivalent to optimizing the ranking over architectures.
Extensive experiments in three search spaces demonstrate
the superiority of our CTNAS over existing methods.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have made significant
progress in various challenging tasks, including image classification [11, 34, 37], face recognition [25, 40], and many
* Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

Sampled Architecture

Sampled Architecture

Standard Performance
Estimator

Architecture
Performance

Neural Architecture
Comparator

Comparison
Probability

Baseline Architecture

Figure 1. Comparison between the standard performance estimator
(top) and our NAC (bottom). Unlike the standard estimator that
predicts the absolute performance, our NAC takes two architectures
as inputs and outputs the comparison probability of the sampled
architectures being better than the baseline architecture.

other areas [5, 6, 48, 49]. One of the key factors behind the
progress lies in the innovation of effective neural architectures, such as ResNet [17] and MobileNet [19]. However,
designing effective architectures is often labor-intensive and
relies heavily on human expertise. Besides designing architectures manually, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) seeks
to design architectures automatically and outperforms the
hand-crafted architectures in various tasks [1, 31].
Existing NAS methods seek to find the optimal architecture by maximizing the expectation of the performance of
the sampled architectures. Thus, how to estimate the performance of architectures is a key step in NAS. In practice,
the searched architectures can be evaluated by the absolute
performance provided by a supernet [3, 8, 31] or a predictor [22, 27]. However, using the absolute performance as the
training signal may suffer from two limitations.
First, it is non-trivial to obtain stable and accurate absolute performance for all the candidate architectures. In
practice, the performance of architectures may fluctuate a
lot under the training with different random seeds [21, 24].
Thus, there would be a large performance deviation if we
evaluate the architecture only with a single value w.r.t. ab-

9502

