Pareidolia Face Reenactment
Linsen Song1,2* Wayne Wu3,4 * Chaoyou Fu1,2 Chen Qian3 Chen Change Loy4 Ran He1,2†
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
NLPR & CRIPAC, CASIA 3 SenseTime Research 4 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
songlinsen2018@ia.ac.cn, {wuwenyan,qianchen}@sensetime.com,
{chaoyou.fu,rhe}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Figure 1: Pareidolia Face Reenactment. We propose an unsupervised method for static illusory faces to become animated by reenacting
the human face in a video. The eyes and mouth of the illusory faces, as defined by users, move in tandem with those of the human in the
video, simultaneously.

Abstract
We present a new application direction named Pareidolia Face Reenactment, which is defined as animating a
static illusory face to move in tandem with a human face
in the video. For the large differences between pareidolia face reenactment and traditional human face reenactment, two main challenges are introduced, i.e., shape variance and texture variance. In this work, we propose a novel
Parametric Unsupervised Reenactment Algorithm to tackle
these two challenges. Specifically, we propose to decompose the reenactment into three catenate processes: shape
modeling, motion transfer and texture synthesis. With the
decomposition, we introduce three crucial components, i.e.,
Parametric Shape Modeling, Expansionary Motion Transfer and Unsupervised Texture Synthesizer, to overcome the
problems brought by the remarkably variances on pareidolia faces. Extensive experiments show the superior performance of our method both qualitatively and quantitatively.
Code, model and data are available on our project page1 .
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.
1 https://wywu.github.io/projects/ETT/ETT.html

1. Introduction
It’s not often that you look at your meal to find it staring
back at you. But when Diane Duyser picked up her cheese
toastie, she was in for a shock. “I went to take a bite out of
it, and then I saw this lady looking back at me,” she told the
Chicago Tribune. “It scared me at first.” [1].
The phenomenon described in this BBC news is called
face pareidolia, a natural inclination of the human brain to
perceive illusory faces that do not actually exist [19, 50]. In
this work, we attempt to bring this interesting imagination
into reality by animating. As shown in Fig. 1 (b), we propose a new application direction named “Pareidolia Face”
Reenactment, which is defined as animating illusory faces
by the motion extracted from human faces automatically.
Pareidolia face reenactment, has large potential usages
in filmmaking [46, 24], cartoon production [53, 56] and
mixed reality [47, 55], which always requires a massive labor of professional animators. Mostly related, face reenactment [13, 46, 25, 52] is becoming an emerging topic in
recent years. However, all of these methods are designed
specifically for human faces, of which rich priors like facial

2236

