Exploring Data-Efficient 3D Scene Understanding
with Contrastive Scene Contexts
Ji Hou1
1

Benjamin Graham2

Matthias Nießner1

Technical University of Munich

Training Data
with Limited Annotations

2

Saining Xie2

Facebook AI Research

Instance Segmentation
Predictions

Figure 1: How many point labels are necessary to train a 3D instance segmentation model on point clouds? It turns out not
too many! With the help of unsupervised pre-training, only 20 labelled points per scene (less than 0.1% of the total points)
are used to fine-tune an instance segmentation model on ScanNet. Left: Train samples; only colored points (enlarged for
better visibility) are labeled. Right: Predictions in validation set and different colors represent different instances.

Abstract
The rapid progress in 3D scene understanding has come
with growing demand for data; however, collecting and annotating 3D scenes (e.g. point clouds) are notoriously hard.
For example, the number of scenes (e.g. indoor rooms)
that can be accessed and scanned might be limited; even
given sufficient data, acquiring 3D labels (e.g. instance
masks) requires intensive human labor. In this paper, we
explore data-efficient learning for 3D point cloud. As a
first step towards this direction, we propose Contrastive
Scene Contexts, a 3D pre-training method that makes use
of both point-level correspondences and spatial contexts in
a scene. Our method achieves state-of-the-art results on
a suite of benchmarks where training data or labels are
scarce. Our study reveals that exhaustive labelling of 3D
point clouds might be unnecessary; and remarkably, on
ScanNet, even using 0.1% of point labels, we still achieve
89% (instance segmentation) and 96% (semantic segmentation) of the baseline performance that uses full annotations.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning on point clouds, such
as those obtained from LiDAR or depth sensors, together
with a proliferation of public, annotated datasets [9, 13, 53,
32, 64, 2, 40, 55], have led to swift progress in 3D scene
understanding. However, compared to large-scale 2D scene
understanding on images [14, 38, 23], the scale of 3D scene
understanding—in terms of the amount and diversity of data
and annotations, the model size, the number of semantic
categories, and so on—still falls behind. We argue that one
major bottleneck is the fact that collecting and annotating
diverse 3D scenes are significantly more expensive. Unlike
2D images that comfortably exists on the Internet, collecting real world 3D scene datasets usually involves traversing the environment in real life and scanning with 3D sensors. Therefore, the number of indoor scenes that can be
scanned might be limited. What is more concerning is that,
even given sufficient data acquisition, 3D semantic labelling
(e.g. bounding boxes and instance masks) requires complex
pipelines [13] and labor-intensive human effort.
In this work, we explore a new learning task in 3D, i.e.

15587

