Found a Reason for me? Weakly-supervised Grounded Visual Question
Answering using Capsules
Aisha Urooj Khan1,2 , Hilde Kuehne2 , Kevin Duarte1 , Chuang Gan2 , Niels Lobo1 , Mubarak Shah1
1
CRCV, University of Central Florida , 2 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab

Abstract
The problem of grounding VQA tasks has seen an increased attention in the research community recently, with
most attempts usually focusing on solving this task by using
pretrained object detectors. However, pre-trained object
detectors require bounding box annotations for detecting
relevant objects in the vocabulary, which may not always
be feasible for real-life large-scale applications. In this paper, we focus on a more relaxed setting: the grounding of
relevant visual entities in a weakly supervised manner by
training on the VQA task alone. To address this problem, we
propose a visual capsule module with a query-based selection mechanism of capsule features, that allows the model
to focus on relevant regions based on the textual cues about
visual information in the question. We show that integrating the proposed capsule module in existing VQA systems
significantly improves their performance on the weakly supervised grounding task. Overall, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on two state-of-the-art VQA
systems, stacked NMN and MAC, on the CLEVR-Answers
benchmark, our new evaluation set based on CLEVR scenes
with groundtruth bounding boxes for objects that are relevant for the correct answer, as well as on GQA, a real world
VQA dataset with compositional questions. We show that
the systems with the proposed capsule module consistently
outperform the respective baseline systems in terms of answer grounding, while achieving comparable performance
on VQA task.1

1. Introduction
VQA systems have now matured to the point where their usage is increasing in real life applications such as answering
questions based on radiology images [1], helping visually
impaired people [10], and human-robot interactions [38].
However, with the increasing maturity of such systems, it
also becomes important to know how the answer is actually
generated in order to assess if it is based on the right cues
1 Code will be available at https://github.com/aurooj/
WeakGroundedVQA_Capsules.git

Figure 1. Problem definition: Given an input image and a question, we want to answer the question as well as localize the evidence (shown in green boxes) with VQA supervision alone. Best
viewed in color.

or not. If the question is “Are there black horses to the right
of the vehicle?” (see figure 1), it may be important to know
if the answer is generated because the network found black
horses at the right place in the image or not. This allows to
judge the overall correctness beyond simply evaluating the
textual answer. Recent works [17, 36, 4, 20] try to address
this problem by starting to evaluate not only the VQA accuracy, but also the accuracy of grounding that the answer is
based on. The grounding of an answer is usually assessed
by considering the respective attention map of the image
for the given answer, and by evaluating if the objects that
are relevant for the right answer are attended to or not.
To achieve good grounding accuracy, most approaches
in this field rely on input feature maps from object detection
models that are pretrained with the relevant object classes.
This restricts the scope to known object classes such as MS
COCO [31], or require to annotate the regions of relevant
objects, and to pretrain an object detector for them[17].
Only few attempts have been made so far to address this
problem to train both, the VQA as well as the grounding,
without pretrained object detection based on the information of the VQA task alone as e.g. in context of the GQA
dataset by only using spatial (appearance) features [17].
This paper focuses on exactly this scenario: weakly supervised visual grounding based on VQA supervision. The
idea here is that both tasks, the visual question-answering
as well as the correct visual grounding, should be learned

8465

