Image Inpainting Guided by Coherence Priors of Semantics and Textures
Liang Liao1,2 Jing Xiao1,∗ Zheng Wang1 Chia-Wen Lin3 Shin’ichi Satoh2
1
National Engineering Research Center for Multimedia Software,
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University
2
National Institute of Informatics 3 National Tsinghua University
{liaoliangwhu, wangzwhu, jing}@whu.edu.cn, cwlin@ee.nthu.edu.tw, satoh@nii.ac.jp

Abstract
Existing inpainting methods have achieved promising
performance in recovering defective images of specific
scenes. However, filling holes involving multiple semantic categories remains challenging due to the obscure semantic boundaries and the mixture of different semantic
textures. In this paper, we introduce coherence priors between the semantics and textures which make it possible to
concentrate on completing separate textures in a semanticwise manner. Specifically, we adopt a multi-scale joint optimization framework to first model the coherence priors
and then accordingly interleaving optimize image inpainting and semantic segmentation in a coarse-to-fine manner.
A Semantic-Wise Attention Propagation (SWAP) module is
devised to refine completed image textures across scales by
exploring non-local semantic coherence, which effectively
mitigates the mix-up of textures. We also propose two coherence losses to constrain the consistency between the semantics and the inpainted image in terms of the overall structure
and detailed textures. Experimental results demonstrate the
superiority of our proposed method for challenging cases
with complex holes.

1. Introduction
High-quality image inpainting aims to fill in missing regions with synthetic content [1, 2, 5]. It requires both semantically meaningful structures and visually pleasing textures. To this end, deep learning-based methods [24, 39,
42, 44, 46, 47] resort to encoder-decoder based networks to
infer the context of a corrupted image and then refine the
texture details in the initial inference of a missing region by
some tools, such as non-local algorithms. Although current
image inpainting methods have made significant progress,
it still poses technical challenges in completing complex
holes, particularly when a missing region involves multiple sub-regions with different semantic classes. The main
reason falls in the failure of modeling the prior distributions

Textures
Textures

Edges

A ni m al
textures of the
same class
similar edges
semantic class

Tr ee
B ui ld in g

Semantics

Figure 1: Upper part: Mapping between image textures and
edges/semantics (Dot arrow - extraction of edges/semantics; solid
arrow - texture generation). Notice that two similar edge patches
in a green circle could be mapped to completely different semantic
textures, but one semantic will be clearly mapped to a certain texture category. Lower part: an example showing two similar edge
patches map to two different semantic textures.

of a mixture of different semantic regions, which usually
result in blurry boundaries and unrealistic textures [15, 16].
A feasible approach is to adopt structural information,
such as edges [12, 21], contours [38], and smooth images [26], as guidance to complete missing structures and
textures in two steps. The assumption is that structures offer semantic clues for inferring an unknown scene, making them suitable for guiding the filling of textures. However, we notice that the correspondence between structural
information and textures is not apparent, making the filled
textures still highly rely on the local correlation around the
missing region. Figure 1 demonstrates the ambiguity of the
mapping from mid-level structures (e.g., the edges) to the
textures, which can significantly degrade the visual authenticity of the generated textures.

6539

