EvDistill: Asynchronous Events to End-task Learning via Bidirectional
Reconstruction-guided Cross-modal Knowledge Distillation
Lin Wang1 , Yujeong Chae1∗, Sung-Hoon Yoon1∗ , Tae-Kyun Kim2 , and Kuk-Jin Yoon1
1
Visual Intelligence Lab., KAIST, Korea
2
ICVL Lab., KAIST, Korea and Imperial College London, UK
{wanglin, yujeong, yoon307, kimtaekyun, kjyoon}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Event cameras sense per-pixel intensity changes and
produce asynchronous event streams with high dynamic
range and less motion blur, showing advantages over the
conventional cameras. A hurdle of training event-based
models is the lack of large qualitative labeled data. Prior
works learning end-tasks mostly rely on labeled or pseudolabeled datasets obtained from the active pixel sensor (APS)
frames; however, such datasets’ quality is far from rivaling those based on the canonical images. In this paper,
we propose a novel approach, called EvDistill, to learn
a student network on the unlabeled and unpaired event
data (target modality) via knowledge distillation (KD) from
a teacher network trained with large-scale, labeled image data (source modality). To enable KD across the unpaired modalities, we first propose a bidirectional modality reconstruction (BMR) module to bridge both modalities
and simultaneously exploit them to distill knowledge via the
crafted pairs, causing no extra computation in the inference.
The BMR is improved by the end-tasks and KD losses in
an end-to-end manner. Second, we leverage the structural
similarities of both modalities and adapt the knowledge by
matching their distributions. Moreover, as most prior feature KD methods are uni-modality and less applicable to
our problem, we propose an affinity graph KD loss to boost
the distillation. Our extensive experiments on semantic segmentation and object recognition demonstrate that EvDistill achieves significantly better results than the prior works
and KD with only events and APS frames.

1. Introduction
Event cameras have recently received much attention in
the computer vision and robotics community for their distinctive advantages, such as high dynamic range (HDR)
and much less motion blur. Event cameras sense the intensity changes at each pixel asynchronously and produce
event streams encoding time, pixel location, and polarity
∗ These two authors contributed equally.

Figure 1: EvDistill distills knowledge from a teacher network
trained with large labeled images to a student network learning unpaired and unlabeled events for the end-tasks. To distill
knowledge, a bidirectional modality reconstruction and distribution adaptation schemes, with the novel KD losses, are proposed.

(sign) of intensity changes. Recently, deep neural network
(DNN)-based methods with large-scale, labeled image data
have shown significant performance gains on many tasks.
However, learning effective event-based DNNs has been
impeded by the lack of large pixel-level labeled event data.
Prior works learning event-based high-level tasks have resorted to the manually annotated task-specific datasets in a
supervised manner [1, 4, 7, 18, 19, 37, 40, 54, 62, 69]. Although some labeled event datasets [30, 45, 83] have been
collected, the quantity and quality are far less favorable
compared to those based on the canonical images. Some
works [1, 18] have made pseudo labels using the active pixel
sensor (APS) images; however, these labels are less accurate due to the low quality of APS images and considerable
domain gap with the source data. While [83, 85] have explored unsupervised learning, they only focus on the pixellevel prediction tasks, e.g., depth estimation. Another line
of research has reconstructed intensity images from events
[41, 54, 59, 63, 65, 66], and these images have been used
to learn DNNs on end-tasks, e.g., object recognition [54];
however, annotated labels are still needed, and extra latency
is introduced in the inference time.
We explore to leverage large labeled image data (a.k.a.
source modality) and the learned models, and aim to learn
a model on the unpaired and unlabeled events (a.k.a. target
1608

