StereoPIFu: Depth Aware Clothed Human Digitization via Stereo Vision
Yang Hong1

Juyong Zhang1 * Boyi Jiang1
1

Yudong Guo1

University of Science and Technology of China

2

Ligang Liu1

Hujun Bao2

Zhejiang University

{hymath@mail., juyong@, jby1993@mail., gyd2011@mail., lgliu@}ustc.edu.cn

bao@cad.zju.edu.cn

Left image
Right image

Input

Ground Truth

DeepHuman [60]

PIFu using 2-view images [46]

PIFuHD [47]

Ours

Figure 1. Our proposed StereoPIFu could recover high-ﬁdelity and depth-aware reconstruction of clothed human body. Compared with
state-of-the-art methods, our reconstruction is more accurate and maintains correct relative positions of different parts of the human body.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose StereoPIFu, which integrates
the geometric constraints of stereo vision with implicit function representation of PIFu, to recover the 3D shape of
the clothed human from a pair of low-cost rectified images.
First, we introduce the effective voxel-aligned features from
a stereo vision-based network to enable depth-aware reconstruction. Moreover, the novel relative z-offset is employed
to associate predicted high-fidelity human depth and occupancy inference, which helps restore fine-level surface details. Second, a network structure that fully utilizes the
geometry information from the stereo images is designed
to improve the human body reconstruction quality. Consequently, our StereoPIFu can naturally infer the human
body’s spatial location in camera space and maintain the
correct relative position of different parts of the human
body, which enables our method to capture human performance. Compared with previous works, our StereoPIFu significantly improves the robustness, completeness, and accuracy of the clothed human reconstruction, which is demonstrated by extensive experimental results.

1. Introduction
Human digitization is the key to many applications
like AR/VR, virtual try-on, holographic communication,
* Corresponding author

ﬁlm/game production etc. While high-ﬁdelity and geometric detail preserved 3D human digitalization can be
achieved with high-end acquisition equipment and welldesigned capture environment [17, 22], it is not suitable
for general consumers. Recently, with the popularization
of consumer-level acquisition devices, human digitization
with simple inputs becomes a hot research topic in the ﬁeld
of 3D computer vision and computer graphics.
Many methods have been proposed for clothed human reconstruction from simple inputs (e.g., single image). Among them, some methods reconstruct the 3D
human body with the help of parametric models [13, 29,
33, 34, 36, 45, 27]. However, parametric models are
mainly used for reconstructing naked body and can not
deal with topology changes. To solve these problems, implicit function based representations have been recently introduced [25, 43, 38, 46, 47, 16, 10, 21, 23]. Representatively, Saito et al. [46] proposed Pixel-Aligned Implicit
Function (PIFu), which performs implicit function prediction based on the z-value of a 3D query point and its projected 2D image feature. PIFu is memory-efﬁcient and can
generate a plausible surface with a single image. Later, PIFuHD [47] further improves the results of PIFu in the aspect
of ﬁne-level geometric details recovery with the aid of predicted normal maps and higher resolution. However, like
other single image-based approaches, PIFu can not predict
the precise spatial location and suffers from depth ambiguity, which results in inconsistent results noticeable from
different perspectives. Besides, PIFu related methods are

535

