Discovering Hidden Physics Behind Transport Dynamics
Peirong Liu1

Lin Tian1

Yubo Zhang1

Stephen Aylward3

Yueh Lee2

Marc Niethammer1

1 Department of Computer Science, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA
2 Department of Radiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, USA
3 Kitware Inc., New York, USA
{peirong, lintian, zhangyb, mn}@cs.unc.edu

Abstract
Transport processes are ubiquitous. They are, for example, at the heart of optical flow approaches; or of perfusion imaging, where blood transport is assessed, most commonly by injecting a tracer. An advection-diffusion equation is widely used to describe these transport phenomena.
Our goal is estimating the underlying physics of advectiondiffusion equations, expressed as velocity and diffusion tensor fields. We propose a learning framework (YETI) building on an auto-encoder structure between 2D and 3D image time-series, which incorporates the advection-diffusion
model. To help with identifiability, we develop an advectiondiffusion simulator which allows pre-training of our model
by supervised learning using the velocity and diffusion tensor fields. Instead of directly learning these velocity and
diffusion tensor fields, we introduce representations that
assure incompressible flow and symmetric positive semidefinite diffusion fields and demonstrate the additional benefits of these representations on improving estimation accuracy. We further use transfer learning to apply YETI on
a public brain magnetic resonance (MR) perfusion dataset
of stroke patients and show its ability to successfully distinguish stroke lesions from normal brain regions via the
estimated velocity and diffusion tensor fields.

1. Introduction
Many transport phenomena can be formalized by partial differential equations (PDEs). However, numerically
solving PDEs is expensive for high spatial dimensions
and across timescales [4]. Significant developments in
deep learning have recently led to an explosive growth of
data-driven solutions for PDEs via deep neural networks
(DNNs). This work either directly models the solution via
This work was supported by the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
under award number NIH 2R42NS086295.

stephen.aylward@kitware.com

yueh lee@med.unc.edu

DNNs [14, 41, 45] or learns mesh-free, infinite-dimensional
operators with DNNs [31, 6, 39, 44, 28].
Despite of the significant progress achieved by the aforementioned methods for solving PDEs forward, inverse PDE
problems, i.e., parameter estimation, remains challenging [29, 47]. Such problems have been extensively explored
in the context of optical flow and for general image registration, where the underlying PDE model is typically an
advection equation and the sought-for parameter is a displacement or velocity vector field [22, 7, 37, 5, 21]. DNN
solutions have also been studied [12, 49, 3, 43].
In contrast, we are interested in estimating the spatiallyvarying velocity and diffusion tensor fields (termed
physics parameter fields in what follows) for more general
advection-diffusion equations. Challenges arise from identifiability (i.e., if observed transport is due to advection or
diffusion), physical plausibility (e.g., for fluid flow, vector
fields should be divergence-free) and diffusion tensor structure (i.e., predominant direction and anisotropy). Further,
while optical flow and registration approaches typically deal
with image pairs, the parameter estimation for advectiondiffusion equations is generally based on time-series data.
Limited work to estimate the parameter fields of
advection-diffusion equations exist. Tartakovsky et al. [47]
do not consider advection or diffusion tensors, but instead
proposed a DNN to learn 2D diffusion fields only from diffusion PDEs. Bézenac et al. [10] learn 2D velocity and diffusion fields of advection-diffusion PDEs by DNNs. Liu et
al. [30] proposed an optimization approach to estimate velocity and diffusion fields of an advection-diffusion equation in 3D. Though promising, the numerical optimization
approach is time-consuming, especially when dealing with
large datasets. Koundal et al. [24] use optimal mass transport combined with a spatially constant diffusion. Note that
all aforementioned methods assume isotropic diffusion (i.e.,
not general diffusion tensors), which is insufficient to accurately model complex materials (e.g., anisotropic porous
media, brain tissue) where diffusion is mostly anisotropic.

10082

