StEP: Style-based Encoder Pre-training for Multi-modal Image Synthesis
Moustafa Meshry Yixuan Ren Larry S. Davis Abhinav Shrivastava
University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
We propose a novel approach for multi-modal Imageto-image (I2I) translation. To tackle the one-to-many relationship between input and output domains, previous works
use complex training objectives to learn a latent embedding,
jointly with the generator, that models the variability of the
output domain. In contrast, we directly model the style variability of images, independent of the image synthesis task.
Specifically, we pre-train a generic style encoder using a
novel proxy task to learn an embedding of images, from arbitrary domains, into a low-dimensional style latent space.
The learned latent space introduces several advantages over
previous traditional approaches to multi-modal I2I translation. First, it is not dependent on the target dataset, and
generalizes well across multiple domains. Second, it learns
a more powerful and expressive latent space, which improves
the fidelity of style capture and transfer. The proposed style
pre-training also simplifies the training objective and speeds
up the training significantly. Furthermore, we provide a
detailed study of the contribution of different loss terms to
the task of multi-modal I2I translation, and propose a simple
alternative to VAEs to enable sampling from unconstrained
latent spaces. Finally, we achieve state-of-the-art results on
six challenging benchmarks with a simple training objective
that includes only a GAN loss and a reconstruction loss.

1. Introduction
Image-to-Image (I2I) translation is the task of transforming images from one domain to another (e.g., semantic maps
→ scenes, sketches → photo-realistic images, etc.). Many
problems in computer vision and graphics can be cast as I2I
translation, such as photo-realistic image synthesis [1–3],
super-resolution [4], colorization [5, 6], and inpainting [7].
Therefore, I2I translation has recently received significant
attention in the literature. One main challenge in I2I translation is the multi-modal nature for many such tasks – the
relation between an input domain A and an output domain
B is often times one-to-many, where a single input image
IiA ∈ A can be mapped to different output images from
domain B. For example, a sketch of a shoe or a handbag can
be mapped to corresponding objects with different colors or

styles, or a semantic map of a scene can be mapped to many
scenes with different appearance, lighting and/or weather
conditions. Since I2I translation networks typically learn
one-to-one mappings due to their deterministic nature, an
extra input is required to specify an output mode to which
an input image will be translated. Simply injecting extra
random noise as input proved to be ineffective as shown
in [2, 8], where the generator network just learns to ignore
the extra noise and collapses to a single or few modes (which
is one form of the mode collapse problem). To overcome
this problem, Zhu et al. [8] proposed BicycleGAN, which
trains an encoder network E, jointly with the I2I translation
network, to encode the distribution of different possible outputs into a latent vector z, and then learns a deterministic
mapping G : (A, z) → B. So, depending on the latent
vector z, a single input IiA ∈ A can be mapped to multiple
outputs in B. While BicycleGAN requires paired training
data, several works , like MUNIT [9] and DRIT [10], extended it to the unsupervised case, where images in domains
A and B are not in correspondence (‘unpaired’). One main
component of unpaired I2I is a cross-cycle consistency constraint, where the network generates an intermediate output
by swapping the styles of a pair of images, then swaps the
style between the intermediate output again to reconstruct
the original images. This enforces that the latent vector
z preserves the encoded style information when translated
from an image i to another image j and back to image i
again. This constraint can also be applied to paired training
data, where it encourages style/attribute transfer between images. However, training BicycleGAN [8] or its unsupervised
counterparts [9, 10] is not trivial. For example, BicycleGAN
combines the objectives of both conditional Variational AutoEncoders (cVAEs) [11] and a conditional version of Latent
Regressor GANs (cLR-GANs) [12, 13] to train their network. The training objective of [9, 10] is even more involved
to handle the unsupervised setup.
In this work, we propose a novel weakly-supervised pretraining strategy to learn an expressive latent space for the
task of multi-modal I2I translation. While end-to-end training of the encoder network E with the I2I translation network
poses a convenience, we show that it can be advantageous
to break down the training into proxy tasks. In specific, we

3712

