High-Fidelity Neural Human Motion Transfer from Monocular Video
Moritz Kappel1
Hans-Peter Seidel2
2

Vladislav Golyanik2
Susana Castillo1

Mohamed Elgharib2
Christian Theobalt2

Jann-Ole Henningson1
Marcus Magnor1

1
Computer Graphics Lab, TU Braunschweig, Germany {lastName}@graphics.tu-bs.de
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany {lastName}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Figure 1. Our human motion transfer framework translates 2D pose skeletons (A) to photorealistic images (D) by explicitly estimating
the actor’s 2D shape (B) and internal structure of clothing (C), enabling direct deformation handling and support of high-frequency details
such as wrinkles and shadows.

Abstract
Video-based human motion transfer creates video animations of humans following a source motion. Current
methods show remarkable results for tightly-clad subjects.
However, the lack of temporally consistent handling of plausible clothing dynamics, including fine and high-frequency
details, significantly limits the attainable visual quality. We
address these limitations for the first time in the literature
and present a new framework which performs high-fidelity
and temporally-consistent human motion transfer with natural pose-dependent non-rigid deformations, for several
types of loose garments. In contrast to the previous techniques, we perform image generation in three subsequent
stages: synthesizing human shape, structure, and appearance. Given a monocular RGB video of an actor, we train
a stack of recurrent deep neural networks that generate
these intermediate representations from 2D poses and their
temporal derivatives. Splitting the difficult motion transfer problem into subtasks that are aware of the temporal
motion context helps us to synthesize results with plausible
dynamics and pose-dependent detail. It also allows artistic
control of results by manipulation of individual framework
stages. In the experimental results, we significantly outperform the state-of-the-art in terms of video realism. The
source code is available at https://graphics.tu-bs.
de/publications/kappel2020high-fidelity .

1. Introduction
Human motion transfer methods, also known as performance cloning or reenactment methods, can generate real-

istic video animations of an actor following a target motion specified by a user. This has several applications in
AR/VR and video editing. Building upon new advances in
machine learning, current motion transfer methods tackle
this challenging problem by learning a direct mapping between an actor-independent motion space and the resulting
target actor’s appearance space. These methods often require a training video of an actor performing a rich set of
motions [2, 5, 17, 19, 27, 33].
Some recent motion transfer approaches parameterize
motion as skeletal pose sequences that can be computed
from videos with off-the-shelf pose detectors [5, 27]. Others
use pre-captured template meshes or parameterized body
models to provide additional guidance to the synthesis
step [17, 19]. Acquisition of such templates [17], however,
requires an extensive structure-from-motion reconstruction
of the static target actor under constant lighting. Furthermore, existing human motion transfer approaches are likely
to produce notable temporal and spatial artifacts when actors wear loose clothing, such as dresses, skirts and hoodies [2, 5, 19, 33]. On such garments, they struggle to realistically reproduce the appearance of fine-scale details like
folds and wrinkles, as well as plausible dynamics.
In this paper, we present a new human motion transfer
framework that generates visually plausible video animations of humans that are spatially and temporally coherent,
and show natural dynamics, even for actors wearing loose
garments (see Fig. 1). Given a single monocular video of
an actor performing a rich set of motions, we train a stack
of deep generative networks to learn a mapping from 2D
pose to a silhouette with semantic part labels, and per-pixel

1541

