RGB-D Local Implicit Function for Depth Completion of Transparent Objects
Luyang Zhu1,2 *
Arsalan Mousavian2
Yu Xiang2
Hammad Mazhar2
Jozef van Eenbergen2
Shoubhik Debnath2
Dieter Fox1,2
1
2
University of Washington
NVIDIA

Abstract
Majority of the perception methods in robotics require
depth information provided by RGB-D cameras. However,
standard 3D sensors fail to capture depth of transparent
objects due to refraction and absorption of light. In this
paper, we introduce a new approach for depth completion
of transparent objects from a single RGB-D image. Key
to our approach is a local implicit neural representation
built on ray-voxel pairs that allows our method to generalize to unseen objects and achieve fast inference speed.
Based on this representation, we present a novel framework that can complete missing depth given noisy RGBD input. We further improve the depth estimation iteratively using a self-correcting refinement model. To train
the whole pipeline, we build a large scale synthetic dataset
with transparent objects. Experiments demonstrate that our
method performs significantly better than the current stateof-the-art methods on both synthetic and real world data.
In addition, our approach improves the inference speed
by a factor of 20 compared to the previous best method,
ClearGrasp [43]. Code will be released at https :
//research.nvidia.com/publication/202103_RGB-D-Local-Implicit.

1. Introduction
Depth data captured from RGB-D cameras has been
widely used in many applications such as augmented reality and robot manipulation. Despite their popularity,
commodity-level depth sensors, such as structured-light
cameras and time-of-flight cameras, fail to produce correct
depth for transparent objects due to the lack of light reflection. As a result, many algorithms utilizing RGB-D data
cannot be directly applied to recognize transparent objects
which are very common in household scenarios.
Previous works on estimating geometry of transparent
objects are often studied under controlled settings [47, 51].
Recently, Li et al. [26] proposed a physically-based neu1 Work done while author was an intern at NVIDIA.

Figure 1. Our method can predict the depth of unseen transparent
objects from a noisy RGB-D image. We back-project the depth
map into the point cloud and render it in a novel viewpoint to better
visualize the 3D shape. Zoom in to see details.

ral network to reconstruct 3D shape of transparent objects
from multi-view images. Although their method is less restricted compared to previous ones, it still requires the environment map and the refractive index of transparent objects.
ClearGrasp [43] achieves impressive results on depth completion of transparent objects. It first predicts masks, occlusion boundaries and surface normals from RGB images
using deep networks, and then optimizes initial depth based
on the network predictions. However, the optimization requires transparent objects to have contact edges with other
non-transparent objects. Otherwise, the depth in transparent area becomes undetermined and can be assigned random value. In addition, it can not be deployed in real time
applications due to the expensive optimization process.
In this paper, to overcome the limitations of existing
works, we present a fast end-to-end framework for depth
completion of transparent objects from a single RGB-D image. The core to our approach is a Local Implicit Depth
Function (LIDF) defined on ray-voxel pairs consisting of

4649

