Seesaw Loss for Long-Tailed Instance Segmentation
Jiaqi Wang1

Wenwei Zhang2
Kai Chen3,4

Yuhang Zang2 Yuhang Cao1 Jiangmiao Pang5
Ziwei Liu2 Chen Change Loy2 Dahua Lin1

Tao Gong6

1

SenseTime-CUHK Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 3 SenseTime Research
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory 5 Zhejiang University 6 University of Science and Technology of China
2

{wj017,cy020,dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

{wenwei001,zang0012,ziwei.liu,ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg

{pangjiangmiao,gongtao950513}@gmail.com

Abstract
Instance segmentation has witnessed a remarkable
progress on class-balanced benchmarks. However, they fail
to perform as accurately in real-world scenarios, where
the category distribution of objects naturally comes with
a long tail. Instances of head classes dominate a longtailed dataset and they serve as negative samples of tail
categories. The overwhelming gradients of negative samples on tail classes lead to a biased learning process for
classifiers. Consequently, objects of tail categories are more
likely to be misclassified as backgrounds or head categories.
To tackle this problem, we propose Seesaw Loss to dynamically re-balance gradients of positive and negative samples for each category, with two complementary factors,
i.e., mitigation factor and compensation factor. The mitigation factor reduces punishments to tail categories w.r.t.
the ratio of cumulative training instances between different
categories. Meanwhile, the compensation factor increases
the penalty of misclassified instances to avoid false positives of tail categories. We conduct extensive experiments
on Seesaw Loss with mainstream frameworks and different
data sampling strategies. With a simple end-to-end training
pipeline, Seesaw Loss obtains significant gains over CrossEntropy Loss, and achieves state-of-the-art performance on
LVIS dataset without bells and whistles. Code is available
at https://github.com/open-mmlab/mmdetection.

1. Introduction
Deep learning-based object detection and instance segmentation approaches have achieved immense success on
datasets with relatively balanced category distribution, e.g.,
COCO dataset [26]. However, the distribution of categories in the real world is long-tailed [28]. There are a
few head classes containing abundant instances, while most
other classes comprise relatively few instances.
On long-tailed datasets, existing instance segmentation

chenkai@sensetime.com

Cross-Entropy Loss

Seesaw Loss

gradients of positive samples on a tail class

Mitigation

gradients of negative samples on a tail class

Compensation

Classification Accuracy
Cross-Entropy

Instance Segmentation 𝑨𝑷

Seesaw Loss

Cross-Entropy
Seesaw Loss

Sorted Category Index

Sorted Category Index

Figure 1: Seesaw Loss dynamically re-balances the gradients of
positive and negative samples on a tail class with two complementary factors. It mitigates the overwhelming punishments on the tail
class as well as compensates them to reduce the risk of inducing
false positives. In Mask R-CNN [15], Seesaw Loss achieves remarkable higher classification accuracy of tail classes than CrossEntropy Loss on LVIS [12] dataset. As a result, instance segmentation AP on tail classes is significantly improved, leading to better
overall performance.

frameworks [1, 3, 15] fail to perform as accurately as on
the datasets with balanced category distribution, exhibiting
unsatisfactory performance on tail classes. Figure 1 shows
the classification accuracy and instance segmentation performance of Mask R-CNN [15] on LVIS [12] dataset. The
classifier in Mask R-CNN trained by Cross-Entropy Loss
tends to misclassify tail categories as backgrounds or other
confusing head classes, which leads to extremely low accuracy on tail classes.

9695

