Improving Transferability of Adversarial Patches on Face Recognition with
Generative Models
Zihao Xiao1 *† Xianfeng Gao1,4 * Chilin Fu2 Yinpeng Dong1,3 Wei Gao5‡
Xiaolu Zhang2 Jun Zhou2 Jun Zhu3†
1
RealAI 2 Ant Financial 3 Tsinghua University
4
Beijing Institute of Technology 5 Nanyang Technological University
zihao.xiao@real.ai, ggxxff@bit.edu.cn, chilin.fcl@antgroup.com, dyp17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
gaow0007@ntu.edu.sg, {yueyin.zxl, jun.zhoujun}@antfin.com, dcszj@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Face recognition is greatly improved by deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs). Recently, these face recognition models have been used for identity authentication in
security sensitive applications. However, deep CNNs are
vulnerable to adversarial patches, which are physically realizable and stealthy, raising new security concerns on the
real-world applications of these models. In this paper, we
evaluate the robustness of face recognition models using
adversarial patches based on transferability, where the attacker has limited accessibility to the target models. First,
we extend the existing transfer-based attack techniques to
generate transferable adversarial patches. However, we observe that the transferability is sensitive to initialization and
degrades when the perturbation magnitude is large, indicating the overfitting to the substitute models. Second, we
propose to regularize the adversarial patches on the low
dimensional data manifold. The manifold is represented by
generative models pre-trained on legitimate human face images. Using face-like features as adversarial perturbations
through optimization on the manifold, we show that the gaps
between the responses of substitute models and the target
models dramatically decrease, exhibiting a better transferability. Extensive digital world experiments are conducted
to demonstrate the superiority of the proposed method in
the black-box setting. We apply the proposed method in the
physical world as well.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have led
to substantial performance improvements on many com* Equal contributions.
† Corresponding authors.
‡ Work done as an intern at RealAI.

Figure 1. Demonstration of adversarial patches against face recognition models. (a) The attacker who wants to impersonate the target identity. (b) An image of the target identity. (c) The adversarial
patch and the corresponding adversarial example generated by the
TAP-TIDIM algorithm. (d) The adversarial patch and the corresponding adversarial example generated by the proposed GenAPDI algorithm. The proposed GenAP algorithms use face-like features as perturbations to improve the transferability.

puter vision tasks. As an important task, face recognition
is also greatly facilitated by deep CNNs [17, 23, 4]. Due
to their excellent recognition performance, deep face recognition models have been used for identity authentication in
security-sensitive applications, e.g., finance/payment, public access, face unlock on smart phones, etc.
However, deep CNNs are shown to be vulnerable to adversarial examples at test time [21, 5]. Adversarial examples are elaborately perturbed images that can fool models to make wrong predictions. Early adversarial examples
on deep CNNs are indistinguishable from legitimate ones
for human observers by slightly perturbing every pixel in
an image. Later, [18] proposes adversarial patches, which
only perturb a small cluster of pixels. Several works have

11845

