Self-supervised Video Representation Learning by Context and Motion
Decoupling
Lianghua Huang, Yu Liu, Bin Wang, Pan Pan, Yinghui Xu, Rong Jin
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group
xuangen.hlh,ly103369,ganfu.wb,panpan.pp,renji.xyh,jinrong.jr@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
A key challenge in self-supervised video representation learning is how to effectively capture motion information besides context bias. While most existing works implicitly achieve this with video-specific pretext tasks (e.g.,
predicting clip orders, time arrows, and paces), we develop a method that explicitly decouples motion supervision
from context bias through a carefully designed pretext task.
Specifically, we take the key frames and motion vectors in
compressed videos (e.g., in H.264 format) as the supervision sources for context and motion, respectively, which can
be efficiently extracted at over 500 fps on CPU. Then we design two pretext tasks that are jointly optimized: a context
matching task where a pairwise contrastive loss is cast between video clip and key frame features; and a motion prediction task where clip features, passed through an encoderdecoder network, are used to estimate motion features in a
near future. These two tasks use a shared video backbone
and separate MLP heads. Experiments show that our approach improves the quality of the learned video representation over previous works, where we obtain absolute gains
of 16.0% and 11.1% in video retrieval recall on UCF101
and HMDB51, respectively. Moreover, we find the motion
prediction to be a strong regularization for video networks,
where using it as an auxiliary task improves the accuracy of
action recognition with a margin of 7.4% ∼ 13.8%.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised representation learning from unlabeled
videos has recently received considerable attention [18, 50].
Compared with static images, the redundancy, temporal
consistency, and multi-modality of videos potentially provide richer sources of “supervision”. Various methods have
been proposed in this field that learn video representation by
designing video-specific pretext tasks [33, 54, 49], adapting
contrastive learning to videos [17, 50, 38, 18], cross-modal
learning [23, 43, 36, 32], and contrastive clustering [2].

RGB
images

(a) Decoded stream of a video.
Motion
vectors

Residuals

I-frame

P-frame

P-frame

P-frame

P-frame

…

(b) Compressed stream of a video.

Figure 1: (a) and (b) show the decoded and compressed
streams of a sample video, respectively. We notice that the
context and motion information are roughly decoupled in
I-frames and motion vectors of the compressed stream. We
exploit these modalities as the supervision sources for selfsupervised video representation learning.

This paper focuses on visual-only video representation
learning, and we distinguish two orthogonal but complementary aspects of video representation: context and motion. Context depicts coarse-grained and relatively static
environments, while motion represents dynamic and finegrained movements or actions. Context information alone
can be used to classify certain actions (e.g., swimming is
most likely to take place at swimming pool), but it also leads
to background bias [40, 28]. For actions that heavily depend
on movement patterns (e.g., breaststroke and frontcrawl),
motion information must be introduced. We aim to design
a self-supervised video representation learning method that
jointly learns these two complementary information. Our
idea is to design a multi-task framework, where context and
motion representation learning is decoupled in pretext tasks.
One problem here is the source of supervision. Considering the scalability of our framework on larger datasets, we
endeavor to avoid the use of computationally expensive features such as optical flow [59, 6] and dense trajectories [47].
113886

