FACE S EC: A Fine-grained Robustness Evaluation Framework
for Face Recognition Systems
Liang Tong1,2 *, Zhengzhang Chen2†, Jingchao Ni2 , Wei Cheng2 ,
Dongjin Song3 , Haifeng Chen2 , Yevgeniy Vorobeychik1
1
Washington University in St. Louis, {liangtong, yvorobeychik}@wustl.edu
2
NEC Laboratories America, {zchen,jni,weicheng,haifeng}@nec-labs.com
3
University of Connecticut, dongjin.song@uconn.edu

Abstract
We present FACE S EC, a framework for fine-grained robustness evaluation of face recognition systems. FACE S EC
evaluation is performed along four dimensions of adversarial modeling: the nature of perturbation (e.g., pixel-level or
face accessories), the attacker’s system knowledge (about
training data and learning architecture), goals (dodging or
impersonation), and capability (tailored to individual inputs or across sets of these). We use FACE S EC to study
five face recognition systems in both closed-set and open-set
settings, and to evaluate the state-of-the-art approach for
defending against physically realizable attacks on these. We
find that accurate knowledge of neural architecture is significantly more important than knowledge of the training data in
black-box attacks. Moreover, we observe that open-set face
recognition systems are more vulnerable than closed-set systems under different types of attacks. The efficacy of attacks
for other threat model variations, however, appears highly
dependent on both the nature of perturbation and the neural
network architecture. For example, attacks that involve adversarial face masks are usually more potent, even against
adversarially trained models, and the ArcFace architecture
tends to be more robust than the others.

1. Introduction
Face recognition has received much attention [12, 23, 25,
34, 15, 33] in recent years. Empowered by deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs), it has become widely used in
various areas, including security-sensitive applications, such
as airport check-in, online financial transactions, and mobile
device login. The success of such deep face recognition
is particularly striking, with >99% prediction accuracy on
benchmark datasets [23, 16, 15, 6].
* Work done during an internship at NEC Laboratories America.
† Corresponding author.

Despite its widespread success in computer vision applications, recent studies have found that deep face recognition
models are vulnerable to adversarial examples in both digital space [18, 8, 36] and physical space [26]. The former
directly modifies an input face image by adding imperceptible perturbations to mislead face recognition (henceforth,
digital attacks). The latter is characterized by adding adversarial perturbations that can be realized on physical objects
(e.g., wearing an adversarial eyeglass frame [26]), which are
subsequently captured by a camera and then fed into a face
recognition model to fool prediction (henceforth, physically
realizable attacks). As such, the aforementioned domains,
especially critical domains such as security and finance, are
subjected to risks of opening the backdoor for the attackers.
For example, in face recognition supported financial/banking
services, an illegal user may bypass biometric verification
and steal money from victims’ accounts. Therefore, there
exists a vital need for methods that can comprehensively and
systematically evaluate the robustness of face recognition
systems in adversarial settings, which in turn can shed light
on the design of robust models for downstream tasks.
The main challenges of comprehensive evaluation of the
robustness of face recognition lie in dealing with the diversity
of face recognition systems and adversarial environments.
First, different face recognition systems consist of various
key components (e.g., training data and neural architecture);
such diversity results in different performance and robustness. To enable comprehensive and systematic evaluations,
it is crucial to assess the robustness of every individual or a
combination of face recognition components in adversarial
settings. Second, adversarial example attacks can vary by the
nature of perturbations (e.g., pixel-level or physical space),
an attacker’s goal, knowledge, and capability. For a given
face recognition system, its robustness against a specific type
of attack may not generalize to other kinds [35].
In spite of recent advances in adversarial attacks [26, 8,
36] that demonstrate the vulnerability of face recognition

13254

