FAPIS: A Few-shot Anchor-free Part-based Instance Segmenter
Khoi Nguyen and Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University
Corvallis, OR 97330, USA
{nguyenkh,sinisa}@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
This paper is about few-shot instance segmentation,
where training and test image sets do not share the same
object classes. We specify and evaluate a new few-shot
anchor-free part-based instance segmenter (FAPIS). Our
key novelty is in explicit modeling of latent object parts
shared across training object classes, which is expected to
facilitate our few-shot learning on new classes in testing.
We specify a new anchor-free object detector aimed at scoring and regressing locations of foreground bounding boxes,
as well as estimating relative importance of latent parts
within each box. Also, we specify a new network for delineating and weighting latent parts for the final instance segmentation within every detected bounding box. Our evaluation on the benchmark COCO-20i dataset demonstrates
that we significantly outperform the state of the art.

1. Introduction
This paper addresses the problem of few-shot instance
segmentation. In training, we are given many pairs of support and query images showing instances of a target object
class, and the goal is to produce a correct instance segmentation of the query given access to the ground-truth instance
segmentation masks of the supports. In testing, we are given
only one or a very few support images with their groundtruth instance segmentation masks, and a query image in
which we are supposed to segment all instances of the target class. Importantly, the training and test image sets do
not share the same object classes. Few-shot instance segmentation is a basic vision problem. It appears in many
applications where providing manual segmentations of all
object instances is prohibitively expensive. The key challenge is how to conduct a reliable training on small data.
Fig. 1 illustrates a common framework for few-shot instance segmentation that typically leverages Mask-RCNN
[12, 43, 29]. First, the support and query images are input to a backbone CNN and feature pyramid network (FPN)
[23] for computing the support’s and query’s feature maps.

Feature Extraction

For each 𝑃$ , 𝑖 = 3 … 7
Channel-wise
multiplication

Query multi-level Support multi-level
feature maps
feature maps
𝑃&

𝑃&

o
o
o

o
o
o

𝑃%

𝑃%

Query
feature map 𝐹!

*

Masked
avg. pool

Support image 𝑥"

Mask R-CNN

Support
feature map 𝐹"

Backbone + FPN

Query image 𝑥!

Conditional
feature map 𝐹!#

Replaced by
our method

Support feature
vector 𝑓"

Query mask 𝑚!

Support mask 𝑚"

Figure 1. A common framework of prior work. The query and
support image(s) are input to a backbone CNN with feature pyramid network (FPN) to extract the feature maps. The support’s
features modulate the query’s features by channel-wise multiplication, resulting in the conditional query features, which are then
input to Mask-RCNN for instance segmentation of the query. Our
approach replaces Mask-RCNN with two new modules for anchorfree object detection, and part-based instance segmentation.

Second, for every feature map and every support’s segmentation mask, the masked average pooling computes the
support’s feature vector. Third, the support’s feature vector is used to modulate the query’s feature maps through
a channel-wise multiplication, resulting in the conditional
query feature maps. Finally, the conditional query features
are forwarded to the remaining modules of Mask-RCNN to
produce instance segmentation of the query.
This framework has limitations. First, Mask-RCNN is
anchor-based, and hence might overfit to particular sizes
and aspect ratios of training objects, which do not characterize new classes in testing. Second, the Mask-RCNN learns
feature prototypes [12] which are correlated with the feature map from the backbone in order to produce object segmentation. However, the prototypes typically capture global
outlines of objects seen in training [12], and hence may not
be suitable for segmenting new object classes with entirely

11099

