Learning Spatial-Semantic Relationship for Facial Attribute Recognition
with Limited Labeled Data
Ying Shu1 ,

Yan Yan1∗, Si Chen2 ,

Jing-Hao Xue3 ,

Chunhua Shen4 ,

Hanzi Wang1

1

3

Xiamen University, China 2 Xiamen University of Technology, China
University College London, UK 4 The University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract

Spatial Information
②

⑥

Recent advances in deep learning have demonstrated excellent results for Facial Attribute Recognition (FAR), typically trained with large-scale labeled data. However, in
many real-world FAR applications, only limited labeled data are available, leading to remarkable deterioration in performance for most existing deep learning-based FAR methods. To address this problem, here we propose a method
termed Spatial-Semantic Patch Learning (SSPL). The training of SSPL involves two stages. First, three auxiliary tasks,
consisting of a Patch Rotation Task (PRT), a Patch Segmentation Task (PST), and a Patch Classification Task (PCT), are jointly developed to learn the spatial-semantic relationship from large-scale unlabeled facial data. We thus
obtain a powerful pre-trained model. In particular, PRT
exploits the spatial information of facial images in a selfsupervised learning manner. PST and PCT respectively
capture the pixel-level and image-level semantic information of facial images based on a facial parsing model. Second, the spatial-semantic knowledge learned from auxiliary
tasks is transferred to the FAR task. By doing so, it enables
that only a limited number of labeled data are required to
fine-tune the pre-trained model. We achieve superior performance compared with state-of-the-art methods, as substantiated by extensive experiments and studies.

1. Introduction
Facial attribute recognition (FAR), which aims to predict
multiple attributes (such as gender, age, and race) of a given
facial image, can greatly facilitate a variety of applications, including face verification and identification [19, 29, 32],
image generation [9, 36], and image retrieval [4, 33]. However, FAR is challenging due to significant facial appearance variations caused by pose, illumination, occlusion, etc.
State-of-the-art deep learning-based FAR methods usu∗ Corresponding author (email: yanyan@xmu.edu.cn).

Facial Attributes

③

①

⑦

blond hair
attractive
mustache
...

④

⑤

⑨
⑧

Transfer

PRT

① background, hair
...
⑤ eye, nose
...
⑧ mouth, hair, neck
...

PCT

Large-Scale
Unlabeled Data

FAR

ConvNet

ConvNet

Image-level
Semantic Information

✓
✓


Pixel-level
Semantic Information

①

...

Limited
Labeled Data

⑤ ... ⑧ ...

PST

Figure 1 – Illustration of our proposed SSPL method. First,
three auxiliary tasks (namely, PRT, PST, and PCT) are jointly
learned to model the spatial-semantic relationship of facial images from large-scale unlabeled data, and a pre-trained model is
obtained. Then, the pre-trained model is transferred to perform
FAR with limited labeled data.

ally rely heavily on a large number of labeled training data for achieving good classification accuracy. Unfortunately, in many real-world FAR applications, often only a small number of training data are labeled since labeling a
massive amount of multi-attribute images can be very timeconsuming and costly. As a result, the performance of these
deep learning-based FAR methods significantly decreases
in real-world applications. Here, we focus on the challenging problem of FAR with limited labeled data.
To alleviate the challenge of learning with limited labeled data, considerable efforts [6, 7, 8, 25, 34] have been
spent on extracting high-level feature representations from
unlabeled data in an unsupervised manner. Among these efforts, self-supervised learning has emerged as a prominent
learning paradigm. The training of self-supervised learning involves two tasks: a pretext task and a downstream
task [16]. Apart from self-supervised learning methods,
some semi-supervised learning methods [1, 13, 18, 23, 26]
have also been proposed, where labeled and unlabeled data
are simultaneously used for training.

11916

