Positional Encoding as Spatial Inductive Bias in GANs
Rui Xu1
1

Xintao Wang3

Kai Chen4,5

Bolei Zhou1

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3

Applied Research Center, Tencent PCG

4

2

S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University

SenseTime Research

{xr018, bzhou}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Chen Change Loy2

5

Shanghai AI Laboratory

xintao.wang@outlook.com

chenkai@sensetime.com

ccloy@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
SinGAN shows impressive capability in learning internal patch distribution despite its limited effective receptive
field. We are interested in knowing how such a translationinvariant convolutional generator could capture the global
structure with just a spatially i.i.d. input. In this work, taking
SinGAN and StyleGAN2 as examples, we show that such
capability, to a large extent, is brought by the implicit positional encoding when using zero padding in the generators.
Such positional encoding is indispensable for generating images with high fidelity. The same phenomenon is observed in
other generative architectures such as DCGAN and PGGAN.
We further show that zero padding leads to an unbalanced
spatial bias with a vague relation between locations. To
offer a better spatial inductive bias, we investigate alternative positional encodings and analyze their effects. Based
on a more flexible positional encoding explicitly, we propose a new multi-scale training strategy and demonstrate
its effectiveness in the state-of-the-art unconditional generator StyleGAN2. Besides, the explicit spatial inductive bias
substantially improves SinGAN for more versatile image
manipulation.1

1. Introduction
SinGAN [42] and StyleGAN [21, 22] are among the few
representative Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) that
show impressive image generative capability. Both of their
generators are based on a fully translation-invariant convolutional network. One would expect that in an unconditional
setting with a spatially i.i.d. input, the translation invariance property should result in position-agnostic outputs like
Fig. 1(b). Nonetheless, the results of SinGAN shows surprisingly structured results like Fig. 1(a).
We carefully study this phenomenon and find that it is
the zero padding that causes a location-aware bias in the
distribution of feature maps. Such a spatial bias gradually
spreads from the border to the center of feature maps through
1 Project page: https://nbei.github.io/gan-pos-encoding.html

Original Image

Original Image

(a) SinGAN

(b) SinGAN w/o padding

(c) SinGAN w/ padding

(d) SinGAN w/o padding

(e) SinGAN w/ Cartesian Grid

(f) SinGAN w/ SPE

Figure 1: Images sampled from the internal patch distribution learned by SinGAN. Above the dotted line, we present
sampled balloons with standard SinGAN and padding-free
SinGAN. A more challenging case of generating a school of
fish is shown below the dotted line. (c)-(f) show the effects of
different positional encodings that we explore on SinGAN.
the stacked convolutional layers in the generator. One can
regard this spatial bias as an implicit positional encoding,
which contributes to the high fidelity of images generated by
SinGAN and StyleGAN. Interestingly, we also observe this
phenomenon in other unconditional generative architectures
such as DCGAN [36] and PGGAN [20].
Our observation reveals the importance of introducing
positional encoding in generative models. The original intention of zero padding is to maintain the spatial size of feature maps. It is not specially designed to offer the required
spatial inductive bias. In particular, we find that the bias
caused by zero padding is unbalanced over the image space.
Since paddings are introduced at image borders and corners,
the positional encoding at those locations is structured. In
contrast, the spatial encoding in the center region is highly
unstructured due to the gradually diminishing effects of zero
padding from borders to the center. The shortcoming of such
bias can be observed from Fig. 1 where we use SinGAN

13569

