Deep Animation Video Interpolation in the Wild
Li Siyao1∗
Shiyu Zhao1,2∗
Weijiang Yu3
Wenxiu Sun1,4
Dimitris Metaxas2
Chen Change Loy5
Ziwei Liu5 B
1
2
SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI
Rutgers University 3 Sun Yat-sen University
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory 5 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
lisiyao1@sensetime.com
sunwenxiu@sensetime.com

sz553@rutgers.edu

dnm@cs.rutgers.edu

weijiangyu8@gmail.com

{ccloy, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg

Frame 0
Frame 1
DAIN
SoftSplat
Ours
Figure 1: A typical example for animation video interpolation. Our approach is capable of estimating optical flows for
large motions correctly and restore the content, while competing methods fail to handle such motions.

Abstract
In the animation industry, cartoon videos are usually
produced at low frame rate since hand drawing of such
frames is costly and time-consuming. Therefore, it is desirable to develop computational models that can automatically
interpolate the in-between animation frames. However, existing video interpolation methods fail to produce satisfying
results on animation data. Compared to natural videos,
animation videos possess two unique characteristics that
make frame interpolation difficult: 1) cartoons comprise
lines and smooth color pieces. The smooth areas lack textures and make it difficult to estimate accurate motions on
animation videos. 2) cartoons express stories via exaggeration. Some of the motions are non-linear and extremely
large. In this work, we formally define and study the animation video interpolation problem for the first time. To
address the aforementioned challenges, we propose an effective framework, AnimeInterp, with two dedicated modules
in a coarse-to-fine manner. Specifically, 1) Segment-Guided
Matching resolves the “lack of textures” challenge by exploiting global matching among color pieces that are piecewise coherent. 2) Recurrent Flow Refinement resolves the
“non-linear and extremely large motion” challenge by recurrent predictions using a transformer-like architecture. To
facilitate comprehensive training and evaluations, we build
a large-scale animation triplet dataset, ATD-12K, which
comprises 12,000 triplets with rich annotations. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our approach outperforms ex∗ Equal contributions; B Corresponding author.

isting state-of-the-art interpolation methods for animation
videos. Notably, AnimeInterp shows favorable perceptual
quality and robustness for animation scenarios in the wild.
The proposed dataset and code are available at https:
//github.com/lisiyao21/AnimeInterp/.

1. Introduction
In the animation industry, cartoon videos are produced
from hand drawings of expert animators using a complex
and precise procedure. To draw each frame of an animation
video manually would consume tremendous time, thus leading to a prohibitively high cost. In practice, the animation
producers usually replicate one drawing two or three times
to reduce the cost, which results in the actual low frame
rate of animation videos. Therefore, it is highly desirable to
develop computational algorithms to interpolate the intermediate animation frames automatically.
In recent years, video interpolation has made great
progress on natural videos. However, in animations, existing video interpolation methods are not able to produce
satisfying in-between frames. An example from the film
Children Who Chase Lost Voices is illustrated in Figure 1,
where the current state-of-the-art methods fail to generate a
piece of complete luggage due to the incorrect motion estimation, which is shown in the lower-left corner of the image.
The challenges here stem from the two unique characteristics
of animation videos: 1) First, cartoon images consist of explicit sketches and lines, which split the image into segments
of smooth color pieces. Pixels in one segment are similar,
which yields insufficient textures to match the corresponding

6587

