Discover Cross-Modality Nuances for Visible-Infrared Person Re-Identification
Qiong Wu1 , Pingyang Dai1 ,* Jie Chen2,7 , Chia-Wen Lin3 , Yongjian Wu4 , Feiyue Huang4 ,
Bineng Zhong5 , Rongrong Ji1,6,7
1
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, China.
2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, China.
3
National Tsing Hua University. 4 Tencent Youtu Lab. 5 Guangxi Normal University, China.
6
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University. 7 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.
qiong@stu.xmu.edu.cn, pydai@xmu.edu.cn, chenj@pcl.ac.cn, cwlin@ee.nthu.edu.tw,
{littlekenwu, garyhuang}@tencent.com, bnzhong@gxnu.edu.cn, rrji@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Visible-infrared person re-identification (Re-ID) aims to
match the pedestrian images of the same identity from different modalities. Existing works mainly focus on alleviating the modality discrepancy by aligning the distributions
of features from different modalities. However, nuanced but
discriminative information, such as glasses, shoes, and the
length of clothes, has not been fully explored, especially in
the infrared modality. Without discovering nuances, it is
challenging to match pedestrians across modalities using
modality alignment solely, which inevitably reduces feature
distinctiveness. In this paper, we propose a joint Modality and Pattern Alignment Network (MPANet) to discover
cross-modality nuances in different patterns for visibleinfrared person Re-ID, which introduces a modality alleviation module and a pattern alignment module to jointly
extract discriminative features. Specifically, we first propose a modality alleviation module to dislodge the modality
information from the extracted feature maps. Then, We devise a pattern alignment module, which generates multiple
pattern maps for the diverse patterns of a person, to discover nuances. Finally, we introduce a mutual mean learning fashion to alleviate the modality discrepancy and propose a center cluster loss to guide both identity learning and
nuances discovering. Extensive experiments on the public
SYSU-MM01 and RegDB datasets demonstrate the superiority of MPANet over state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) [3] aims at matching individual pedestrian images in a query set to ones in a gallery
set captured by different cameras. It is challenging due
to the variations of viewpoints, body poses, illuminations,
* Corresponding Author.

(a)

(b)

(c)
Infrared Modality

Visible Modality

Difference

Figure 1. (a) Infrared and (b) visible pedestrian images, where the
images in the same column are captured from the same identity.
The difference among the visible identities is much more obvious
than that among the infrared ones due to the limited information
in the infrared modality. The nuances among different infrared
images in different patterns provide a great number of differences
which worth it discovering.

and backgrounds. Most existing person Re-ID methods
[10, 20, 21, 22, 27, 32, 37, 39, 41, 42] focus on matching pedestrian images captured by visible cameras which
can be formulated as a single-modality matching problem.
However, these methods are not workable for images captured by visible surveillance cameras under poor illumination conditions (e.g., at night), from which it is difficult to
extract discriminative information.
Cutting-edge surveillance systems are able to automatically switch from visible to infrared mode, which have
accumulated a significant amount of cross-modality data.
Re-ID problem in such a cross-modality setting thereby becomes extremely challenging, which is essentially a crossmodality retrieval problem. Compared to conventional per14330

