Self-supervised Video Hashing via Bidirectional Transformers
Shuyan Li1,3 , Xiu Li1,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2, *, Jie Zhou1,2
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
3
Graduate School at Shenzhen, Tsinghua University, China
1

li-sy16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; xiu.li@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn;{lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Most existing unsupervised video hashing methods are
built on unidirectional models with less reliable training
objectives, which underuse the correlations among frames
and the similarity structure between videos. To enable efficient scalable video retrieval, we propose a self-supervised
video Hashing method based on Bidirectional Transformers (BTH). Based on the encoder-decoder structure of transformers, we design a visual cloze task to fully exploit the
bidirectional correlations between frames. To unveil the
similarity structure between unlabeled video data, we further develop a similarity reconstruction task by establishing reliable and effective similarity connections in the video
space. Furthermore, we develop a cluster assignment task
to exploit the structural statistics of the whole dataset such
that more discriminative binary codes can be learned. Extensive experiments implemented on three public benchmark datasets, FCVID, ActivityNet and YFCC, demonstrate
the superiority of our proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Scalable video retrieval aims at automatically seeking
similar videos from a large database related to the content of a query video. Because of the ever-growing abundance of videos from a variety of social media and search
engines, developing effective video retrieval technologies
has become an urgent need. In order to meet the expectations of efﬁcient scalable retrieval and low storage cost,
hashing methods have won lots of interests which transforms high-dimensional data to compact binary codes while
preserving the similarity structure between data [3, 5–8, 13,
23, 25, 27, 28, 41, 43]. Among them, learning-based hashing which leverages data properties or label supervision to
learn reliable hash functions has achieved promising performance in image retrieval. Compared with images, however,
* Corresponding author

Figure 1: Basic idea of BTH. We design BTH model as
bidirectional transformers to better capture the correlations
among frames. Then we design a self-supervised learning
framework to learn discriminative binary codes.

structured data such as videos have not been adequately
studied in hashing ﬁeld [9, 10, 18, 20, 34, 35, 47–49]. For
one thing, exploiting the correlations between video frames
adds difﬁculties to video hashing. For another, lack of largescale labeled dataset such as ImageNet [31] brings further
challenges to capture the similarity structure in video data.
Therefore, developing effective unsupervised video hashing
methods is urgently needed.
State-of-the-art unsupervised video hashing approaches
focus on exploiting the inherent visual information in each
video by using deep neural networks such as Recurrent
Neural Networks (RNNs) [1, 17, 19, 35, 35, 49]. Some of
them further equip the network with manually constructed
similarity guidance [19, 35]. However, most of these methods are built on unidirectional models which underuse the
bidirectional correlations among frames. Besides, they fail
to adequately exploit the similarity structure in the video
data due to suboptimal similarity matrix construction.
In this paper, we propose a self-supervised video hashing method based on bidirectional transformers, which ad-

13549

