...

...

Zero-shot Adversarial Quantization
Yuang Liu , Wei Zhang*, Jun Wang*
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China

...

{frankliu624, zhangwei.thu2011, wongjun}@gmail.com

synthetic

Abstract
Model quantization is a promising approach to compress
deep neural networks and accelerate inference, making it
possible to be deployed on mobile and edge devices. To
retain the high performance of full-precision models, most
existing quantization methods focus on fine-tuning quantized
model by assuming training datasets are accessible. However, this assumption sometimes is not satisfied in real situations due to data privacy and security issues, thereby making these quantization methods not applicable. To achieve
zero-short model quantization without accessing training
data, a tiny number of quantization methods adopt either
post-training quantization or batch normalization statisticsguided data generation for fine-tuning. However, both of
them inevitably suffer from low performance, since the former is a little too empirical and lacks training support for
ultra-low precision quantization, while the latter could not
fully restore the peculiarities of original data and is often low
efficient for diverse data generation. To address the above issues, we propose a zero-shot adversarial quantization (ZAQ)
framework, facilitating effective discrepancy estimation and
knowledge transfer from a full-precision model to its quantized model. This is achieved by a novel two-level discrepancy modeling to drive a generator to synthesize informative
and diverse data examples to optimize the quantized model in
an adversarial learning fashion. We conduct extensive experiments on three fundamental vision tasks, demonstrating the
superiority of ZAQ over the strong zero-shot baselines and
validating the effectiveness of its main components. Code is
available at https://git.io/Jqc0y.

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks (DNNs), especially deep
convolutional networks (DCNs), have achieved remarkable performance in a broad range of computer vision
tasks [20, 40, 24, 34], their ever-growing complexities —
a large number of model parameters — inhibit the appli* Corresponding author.

gap

BNS

transfer

G

original
(a)
Full-precision model

(b)
Quantized model

Figure 1. Overview of our framework. The methods based on
sample reconstruction are shown as part (a), and part (b) is the
overview of our framework. BNS is short for batch normalization
statistics stored in the BN layers.

cations on cloud and edge devices. As a consequence,
model quantization, converting high-precision parameters
to low-precision ones, becomes one of the main paradigms
in model compression and acceleration [10]. To mitigate
the performance degradation issue due to model quantization, quantization-aware fine-tuning approaches have been
extensively studied to optimize quantized models on the full
training datasets [41, 16, 38]. However, in real situations,
original training data is sometimes inaccessible due to privacy and security issues. For instance, electronic health
records usually contain patients’ private information. As
such, the quantization-aware fine-tuning methods are no
longer applicable.
Post-training quantization methods [2, 30, 47] therefore
emerge to quantize weights and activations in DNNs through
correction strategies, without fine-tuning. However, there
is a negligible gap between the strategies and the goals of
target tasks, causing the quantized models to suffer from
performance degradation. This issue is even amplified for
the ultra-low precision situation. To address this, batch normalization statistics (BNS)-guided data generation is leveraged by recent methods [4, 42]. They aim at synthesizing
data samples that match the real-data statistics encoded in
the batch normalization layers of full-precision deep models. The synthetic data is further leveraged to fine-tune the

1512

