Cross-Domain Adaptive Clustering for Semi-Supervised Domain Adaptation
Jichang Li1
Guanbin Li2∗
Yemin Shi3
1
2
The University of Hong Kong
Sun Yat-sen University

Yizhou Yu1∗
3
Deepwise AI Lab

csjcli@connect.hku.hk, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, shiyemin@deepwise.com, yizhouy@acm.org

Source Cluster Core
Target Cluster Core

Label Source
Label Target

Unlabeled Target
Target with Pseudo-labels

Abstract
In semi-supervised domain adaptation, a few labeled
samples per class in the target domain guide features of the
remaining target samples to aggregate around them. However, the trained model cannot produce a highly discriminative feature representation for the target domain because
the training data is dominated by labeled samples from the
source domain. This could lead to disconnection between
the labeled and unlabeled target samples as well as misalignment between unlabeled target samples and the source
domain. In this paper, we propose a novel approach called
Cross-domain Adaptive Clustering to address this problem.
To achieve both inter-domain and intra-domain adaptation,
we first introduce an adversarial adaptive clustering loss to
group features of unlabeled target data into clusters and
perform cluster-wise feature alignment across the source
and target domains. We further apply pseudo labeling to
unlabeled samples in the target domain and retain pseudolabels with high confidence. Pseudo labeling expands the
number of “labeled" samples in each class in the target
domain, and thus produces a more robust and powerful
cluster core for each class to facilitate adversarial learning. Extensive experiments on benchmark datasets, including DomainNet, Office-Home and Office, demonstrate that
our proposed approach achieves the state-of-the-art performance in semi-supervised domain adaptation.

1. Introduction
Semi-supervised domain adaptation (SSDA) is a variant of the unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) problem.
With a small number of labeled samples in the target domain, SSDA has the potential to signiﬁcantly boost performance in comparison to UDA. In general, domain adaptation needs to reduce inter-domain gap (i.e., differences in
feature distributions between two domains) and decrease
intra-domain gap (i.e., differences among class-wise sub*Corresponding Authors.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Overview of our Cross-domain Adaptive Clustering
(CDAC) approach. (a) Supervision on labeled data from both
source and target domains to ensure partial cross-domain feature
alignment. (b) Pseudo labeling for giving pseudo-labels on unlabeled target samples to form enhanced target cluster cores with
higher robustness and power. (c) Minimization of the adversarial adaptive clustering loss for grouping features from the target
domain into clusters. (d) Maximization of the adversarial adaptive clustering loss to facilitate cross-domain cluster-wise feature
alignment.

distributions in the target domain) in order to achieve interdomain adaptation and intra-domain adaptation simultaneously [26].
Many existing domain adaptation approaches start with
inter-domain adaptation, and guide their models to learn
cross-domain sample-wise feature alignment [34, 6, 4], or
distribution-wise feature alignment [12, 22, 18]. In the
semi-supervised learning setting, adversarial learning is
employed in [32, 25] to improve sample-wise feature alignment for inter-domain adaptation. However, such previous
work ignores extra information indicated by class-wise subdistributions in the target domain, and thus results in crossdomain feature mismatch during model training, thereby reducing model generalization performance on novel test data
in the target domain.
Whereafter, much work on domain adaptation has turned
to intra-domain adaptation [16, 13]. By optimizing classwise sub-distributions within the target domain, the generalization performance of adaptation models can be improved. In the context of semi-supervised domain adaptation, the presence of few labeled target samples is utilized
to help features of unlabeled target samples from different

2505

