Guided Integrated Gradients: an Adaptive Path Method for Removing Noise
Andrei Kapishnikov, Subhashini Venugopalan, Besim Avci, Ben Wedin, Michael Terry, Tolga Bolukbasi
Google Research
{kapishnikov, vsubhashini, besim, wedin, michaelterry, tolgab}@google.com

Abstract
Integrated Gradients (IG) [29] is a commonly used feature attribution method for deep neural networks. While IG
has many desirable properties, the method often produces
spurious/noisy pixel attributions in regions that are not related to the predicted class when applied to visual models.
While this has been previously noted [27], most existing solutions [25, 17] are aimed at addressing the symptoms by
explicitly reducing the noise in the resulting attributions. In
this work, we show that one of the causes of the problem
is the accumulation of noise along the IG path. To minimize the effect of this source of noise, we propose adapting
the attribution path itself - conditioning the path not just on
the image but also on the model being explained. We introduce Adaptive Path Methods (APMs) as a generalization of
path methods, and Guided IG as a specific instance of an
APM. Empirically, Guided IG creates saliency maps better aligned with the model’s prediction and the input image
that is being explained. We show through qualitative and
quantitative experiments that Guided IG outperforms other,
related methods in nearly every experiment.

1. Introduction
As deep neural network computer vision models are integrated into critical applications such as healthcare and
security, research on explaining these models has intensified. Feature attribution techniques strive to explain which
inputs the model considers to be most important for a
given prediction, making them useful tools in debugging
models or understanding what they have likely learned.
However, while a plethora of techniques have been developed [24, 29, 13, 9, 20], there are still behaviors of these
attribution techniques that remain to be understood. In
this context, our work is focused on studying the source of
noise in attributions produced by path-integral-based methods [27].
Gradient-based feature attribution techniques [24, 22]
are of particular interest in our work. The main idea behind
these techniques is that the partial derivative of the output

(a) Input image

(b) IG attributions

(c) Guided IG

Figure 1: Comparing feature attribution for Integrated Gradients
and Guided Integrated Gradients. Both (b) and (c) use a black
baseline to explain the “house finch” prediction. While (b) has
attributions on the bird, there is substantial noise in the attributions compared to (c). This work studies the source of noise, and
presents Guided IG as a solution.

with respect to the input is considered as a measure of the
sensitivity of the network for each input dimension. While
early methods [24] use the gradients multiplied by the input
as a feature attribution technique, more recent methods exploit gradients of the activation maps [22], or integrate gradients over a path [29]. This work studies Integrated Gradients (IG) [29], a commonly used method that is based on
game-theoretic ideas in [1]. IG avoids the problem of diminishing influences of features due to gradient saturation,
and has desirable theoretical properties.
One commonly observed problem while calculating Integrated Gradients for vision models is the noise in pixel
attribution (Figure 1) originating from gradient accumulation [11, 25, 27, 30] along the integration path. A few possible explanations for this noise have been put forth: (a)
high curvature of the output manifold [7]; (b) approximation of the integration with Riemann sum; and (c) choice
of baselines [30, 27]. Our experiments indicate that one
source of attribution noise comes from regions of correlated, high-magnitude gradients on irrelevant pixels found
along the straight line integration path. Our findings correlate with observations in [7], which state that the model
surface plays a large role in determining the magnitude of
attribution values.
Methods have been proposed to explicitly reduce the
noise in attributions. SmoothGrad [25] averages attributions over multiple samples of the input, created by adding
Gaussian noise to the original input. The aggregation im-

5050

