RSN: Range Sparse Net for Efficient, Accurate LiDAR 3D Object Detection
Pei Sun1
Alex Bewley2

Weiyue Wang1
Xiao Zhang1

Yuning Chai1
Gamaleldin Elsayed2
Cristian Sminchisescu2 Dragomir Anguelov1

1

Waymo LLC, 2 Google
{peis}@waymo.com

Abstract
The detection of 3D objects from LiDAR data is a critical component in most autonomous driving systems. Safe,
high speed driving needs larger detection ranges, which are
enabled by new LiDARs. These larger detection ranges require more efficient and accurate detection models. Towards
this goal, we propose Range Sparse Net (RSN) – a simple, efficient, and accurate 3D object detector – in order to
tackle real time 3D object detection in this extended detection
regime. RSN predicts foreground points from range images
and applies sparse convolutions on the selected foreground
points to detect objects. The lightweight 2D convolutions
on dense range images results in significantly fewer selected
foreground points, thus enabling the later sparse convolutions in RSN to efficiently operate. Combining features from
the range image further enhance detection accuracy. RSN
runs at more than 60 frames per second on a 150m × 150m
detection region on Waymo Open Dataset (WOD) while being more accurate than previously published detectors. As of
11/2020, RSN is ranked first in the WOD leaderboard based
on the APH/LEVEL 1 metrics for LiDAR-based pedestrian
and vehicle detection, while being several times faster than
alternatives.

1. Introduction
Concurrent with steady progress towards improving the
accuracy and efficiency of 3D object detector algorithms
[37, 24, 21, 16, 42, 32, 22, 30, 5, 35, 3], LiDAR sensor
hardware has been improving in maximum range and fidelity,
in order to meet the needs of safe, high speed driving. Some
of the latest commercial LiDARs can sense up to 250m [12]
and 300m [36] in all directions around the vehicle. This
large volume coverage places strong demands for efficient
and accurate 3D detection methods.
Grid based methods [43, 16, 42, 35, 8] divide the 3D
space into voxels or pillars, each of these being optionally encoded using PointNet [25]. Dense convolutions are applied

Figure 1. Accuracy (3D AP/L1 on WOD validation set) vs Latency
(ms). RSN models significantly outperform others. See Table 1 and
Table 2 for more details.

on the grid to extract features. This approach is inefficient
for large grids which are needed for long range sensing or
small object detection. Sparse convolutions [30] scale better
to large detection ranges but are usually slow due to the inefficiencies of applying to all points. Range images are native,
dense representations, suitable for processing point clouds
captured by a single LiDAR. Range image based methods
[21, 3] perform convolutions directly over the range in order
to extract point cloud features. Such models scale well with
distance, but tend to perform less well in occlusion handling,
accurate object localization, and for size estimation. A second stage, refining a set of initial candidate detections, can
help mitigate some of these quality issues, at the expense of
significant computational cost.
To address the shortcomings of existing approaches, we

5725

