Scene Text Retrieval via Joint Text Detection and Similarity Learning
Hao Wang1 , Xiang Bai1 ,* Mingkun Yang1 , Shenggao Zhu2 , Jing Wang2 , Wenyu Liu1
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 2 Huawei Cloud & AI
{wanghao4659,xbai,yangmingkun,liuwy}@hust.edu.cn, {zhushenggao,wangjing105}@huawei.com
Abstract
Scene text retrieval aims to localize and search all text
instances from an image gallery, which are the same or
similar with a given query text. Such a task is usually realized by matching a query text to the recognized words,
outputted by an end-to-end scene text spotter. In this paper, we address this problem by directly learning a crossmodal similarity between a query text and each text instance from natural images. Specifically, we establish an
end-to-end trainable network, jointly optimizing the procedures of scene text detection and cross-modal similarity learning. In this way, scene text retrieval can be simply performed by ranking the detected text instances with
the learned similarity. Experiments on three benchmark
datasets demonstrate our method consistently outperforms
the state-of-the-art scene text spotting/retrieval approaches.
In particular, the proposed framework of joint detection
and similarity learning achieves significantly better performance than separated methods. Code is available at:
https://github.com/lanfeng4659/STR-TDSL.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, scene text understanding has received rapidly growing interest from this community due
to a large amount of everyday scene images that contain
texts. Most previous approaches for scene text understanding focus on the topics of text detection, text recognition
and word spotting, succeeding in many practical applications such as information security, intelligent transportation
system [38, 29], geo-location, and visual search [3]. Different from the above topics, we study the task of scene text
retrieval introduced by Mishra et al. [26], aiming to search
all the text instances from a collection of natural images,
which are the same or similar with a given text query. Different from a scene text reading system that must localize
and recognize all words contained in scene images, scene
text retrieval only looks for the text of interest, given by a
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Given a query text “google”, the end-to-end scene text
retrieval method aims to retrieve the images containing “google”
from gallery, as well as their locations in the images.

user. Such a task is quite useful in many applications including product image retrieval, book search in library [37]
and key frame extraction of videos [30].
As depicted in Fig. 1, the goal of scene text retrieval is
to return all images that are likely to contain the query text,
as well as the bounding boxes of such text. In this sense,
scene text retrieval is a cross-modal retrieval/matching task
that aims to close the semantic gap between a query text
and each text proposal. Traditional text retrieval methods [2, 1, 5, 7] are often designed to handle cropped document text images. Since the well-cropped bounding boxes
are not easy to obtain by a detector for natural images, these
methods cannot be directly applied in scene text retrieval.
Mishra et al. [26] first study text retrieval in scene images,
which is cast as two separated sub-tasks: text detection and
text image retrieval. However, the performance is limited,
as their framework is designed based on handcraft features.
Another feasible solution to scene text retrieval is based
on an end-to-end text recognition system, such as [14, 12].
Under this setting, the retrieval results are determined according to the occurrences of the given query word within
the spotted words. As verified by [26, 6], such methods of-

4558

