When Age-Invariant Face Recognition Meets Face Age Synthesis:
A Multi-Task Learning Framework
Zhizhong Huang1
Junping Zhang1
Hongming Shan2,3∗
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, School of Computer Science,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
2
Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-inspired Intelligence and MOE Frontiers Center
for Brain Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China
3
Shanghai Center for Brain Science and Brain-inspired Technology, Shanghai 200031, China
1

{zzhuang19, jpzhang, hmshan}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
To minimize the effects of age variation in face recognition, previous work either extracts identity-related discriminative features by minimizing the correlation between
identity- and age-related features, called age-invariant face
recognition (AIFR), or removes age variation by transforming the faces of different age groups into the same age
group, called face age synthesis (FAS); however, the former
lacks visual results for model interpretation while the latter suffers from artifacts compromising downstream recognition. Therefore, this paper proposes a unified, multi-task
framework to jointly handle these two tasks, termed MTLFace, which can learn age-invariant identity-related representation while achieving pleasing face synthesis. Specifically, we first decompose the mixed face features into
two uncorrelated components—identity- and age-related
features—through an attention mechanism, and then decorrelate these two components using multi-task training and
continuous domain adaption. In contrast to the conventional one-hot encoding that achieves group-level FAS, we
propose a novel identity conditional module to achieve
identity-level FAS, with a weight-sharing strategy to improve the age smoothness of synthesized faces. In addition, we collect and release a large cross-age face dataset
with age and gender annotations to advance AIFR and
FAS. Extensive experiments on five benchmark cross-age
datasets demonstrate the superior performance of our proposed MTLFace over state-of-the-art methods for AIFR and
FAS. We further validate MTLFace on two popular general face recognition datasets, showing competitive performance for face recognition in the wild. The source code
and dataset are available at https://github.com/
Hzzone/MTLFace.
∗ Corresponding author

10-

11-20

21-30

31-40

41-50

51-60

60+

8.0

13.0

27.0

31.0

43.0

55.0

76.0

Age Regression

Age Progression

Figure 1: Sample results by our MTLFace. First row: the
real faces of the same person at different ages with estimated age labels underneath. Remaining rows: the synthesized faces when given input faces in the red boxes.

1. Introduction
Face recognition has been a hot research topic in computer vision for many years. Recently, deep-learning-based
methods achieve excellent performance, even surpassing
humans in several scenarios, by empowering the face recognition models with deep neural networks [12, 20, 41]. The
traditional wisdom is to utilize the margin-based metrics to
increase the intra-class compactness and train the models
with a massive amount of data to improve face recognition
performance [51].
Despite the remarkable success of general face recognition (GFR), how to minimize the effects of age variation is a
lingering challenge for current face recognition systems to
correctly identify faces in many practical applications such
as finding lost children. Therefore, it is of great significance

7282

