Boosting Ensemble Accuracy by Revisiting Ensemble Diversity Metrics
Yanzhao Wu, Ling Liu, Zhongwei Xie, Ka-Ho Chow, Wenqi Wei
School of Computer Science
Georgia Institute of Technology
Atlanta, Georgia 30332
yanzhaowu@gatech.edu, lingliu@cc.gatech.edu, {zhongweixie, khchow, wenqiwei}@gatech.edu

Abstract
Neural network ensembles are gaining popularity by
harnessing the complementary wisdom of multiple base
models. Ensemble teams with high diversity promote high
failure independence, which is effective for boosting the
overall ensemble accuracy. This paper provides an in-depth
study on how to design and compute ensemble diversity,
which can capture the complementary decision capacity of
ensemble member models. We make three original contributions. First, we revisit the ensemble diversity metrics in
the literature and analyze the inherent problems of poor
correlation between ensemble diversity and ensemble accuracy, which leads to the low quality ensemble selection
using such diversity metrics. Second, instead of computing
diversity scores for ensemble teams of different sizes using
the same criteria, we introduce focal model based ensemble
diversity metrics, coined as FQ-diversity metrics. Our new
metrics significantly improve the intrinsic correlation between high ensemble diversity and high ensemble accuracy.
Third, we introduce a diversity fusion method, coined as the
EQ-diversity metric, by integrating the top three most representative FQ-diversity metrics. Comprehensive experiments
on two benchmark datasets (CIFAR-10 and ImageNet) show
that our FQ and EQ diversity metrics are effective for selecting high diversity ensemble teams to boost overall ensemble accuracy.

1. Introduction
Ensemble learning aims to produce a strong model by
harnessing the combined and complementary wisdom of
multiple base models. There are two broad categories of
approaches to construct high quality ensemble teams: (1)
data driven or model driven training of multiple models to
form an ensemble and (2) selecting ensemble teams from
a given pool of diverse base models (learners). The former is represented by boosting algorithms [3, 17], bagging
methods [1], and random forests [2]. The latter is repre-

sented by ensembles of base models, which are trained using diverse neural network structures and diverse settings
of hyperparameters [7, 11, 19, 23, 24, 27], including those
pre-trained models in public domains. This paper is dedicated to the second category, namely the problem of selecting high quality ensemble teams from a base model pool.
Given a pool of M diverse base models, there are M exponential number of possible candidate ensemble teams, a
large portion of which may not offer high ensemble performance due to insufficient failure independence among their
member models [13, 14, 15, 18, 25]. Ensemble diversity
metrics are widely regarded as representative methods for
capturing failure independence among member models of
ensemble teams and expected to have stable correlation with
ensemble accuracy.

1.1. Related Work
Both pairwise and non-pairwise diversity metrics have
been proposed in the literature. The pairwise diversity metrics are represented by Cohen’s Kappa (CK) [14], Q Statistics (QS) [26], and Binary Disagreement (BD) [18]. The
non-pairwise diversity metrics are represented by Fleiss’
Kappa (FK) [5], Kohavi-Wolpert Variance (KW) [9, 12],
and Generalized Diversity (GD) [15]. For presentation
brevity, we refer to these exiting diversity metrics as Qmetrics. These diversity metrics and their relationship to
ensemble accuracy have been studied over traditional machine learning models [12] and over trained neural network
models [25]. These Q-diversity metrics share one common
property: they compute the diversity of ensemble teams of
different sizes using a common criterion.

1.2. Scope and Contributions
In this paper, we revisit and analyze the inherent problems of choosing ensembles using the existing diversity
metrics and why these diversity metrics are inefficient to
capture failure independence among member models of an
ensemble team. We introduce six new diversity metrics,
coined as FQ-diversity metrics. The main idea of FQ-

16469

