Patchwise Generative ConvNet: Training Energy-Based Models
from a Single Natural Image for Internal Learning
Zilong Zheng 1 *, Jianwen Xie 2 , Ping Li 2
University of California, Los Angeles, CA
2
Cognitive Computing Lab, Baidu Research, Bellevue, WA
1

z.zheng@ucla.edu, {jianwenxie,liping11}@baidu.com

Abstract
Exploiting internal statistics of a single natural image has long been recognized as a significant research
paradigm where the goal is to learn the internal distribution of patches within the image without relying on external training data. Different from prior works that model
such a distribution implicitly with a top-down latent variable model (e.g., generator), this paper proposes to explicitly represent the statistical distribution within a single natural image by using an energy-based generative framework,
where a pyramid of energy functions, each parameterized
by a bottom-up deep neural network, are used to capture the
distributions of patches at different resolutions. Meanwhile,
a coarse-to-fine sequential training and sampling strategy is
presented to train the model efficiently. Besides learning to
generate random samples from white noise, the model can
learn in parallel with a self-supervised task (e.g., recover
the input image from its corrupted version), which can further improve the descriptive power of the learned model.
The proposed model is simple and natural in that it does not
require an auxiliary model (e.g., discriminator) to assist the
training. Besides, it also unifies internal statistics learning
and image generation in a single framework. Experimental results presented on various image generation and manipulation tasks, including super-resolution, image editing,
harmonization, style transfer, etc, have demonstrated the effectiveness of our model for internal learning.

1. Introduction
Learning internal statistics or modeling the internal distribution of patches within a single natural image can date
back to learning statistical models for texture synthesis in
computer vision. In 1926, a pioneer Julesz [16] initiated
the research on texture perception in pre-attentive vision by
* This work was conducted when Zilong Zheng was a research intern at
Baidu Research – 10900 NE 8th St. Bellevue, WA 98004, USA.

raising the following fundamental question:
What features and statistics are characteristics of
a texture pattern, so that texture pairs that share
the same features and statistics cannot be told
apart by pre-attentive human visual perception?
— Béla Julesz [16]
Julesz’s question implies two challenging tasks: (1) What
are the internal statistical properties that define a texture
from the human perception perspective? (2) Given a set of
statistical properties, how can we synthesize diverse realistic texture patterns with identical internal statistical properties? These two questions motivate various researchers on
pursuing statistical representation and learning frameworks
for texture synthesis. Representative pioneer works include
k-gon statistics [45], primal sketch [22], and FRAME (Filters, Random field, And Maximum Entropy) [46] etc. The
FRAME, in particular, models texture as an energy-based
model (EBM) [19], seeking to represent stochastic textures
by simultaneously learning statistics of textures based on
Gabor filter responses and generating novel texture patterns
that exhibit the same statistics as the learned texture image
by Gibbs sampling [10].
Empowered with the recent development of deep learning techniques, the energy-based Generative ConvNet [36]
(also known as DeepFRAME model [34]) has been proposed as a deep generalization of the FRAME model for
modeling high dimensional signals. Remarkable successes
of the generative ConvNets have been shown in modeling and synthesizing images [36, 6, 27, 5, 12], video sequences [41, 42], 3D voxels [38, 39], molecule [4], unordered point clouds [37], etc.
More recently, the computer vision community has
shown a growing interest in the research topic of deep internal learning (DIL), with works [33, 30, 28] that train deep
models on a single natural example. In this paper, we bring
the powerful energy-based generative ConvNet framework
into DIL by proposing an unconditional generative model
12961

