Deep Burst Super-Resolution
Goutam Bhat

Martin Danelljan
Luc Van Gool
Radu Timofte
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

RAW Input burst

Single Image SR

Burst SR (Ours)

HR Reference

Figure 1. Our network generates a super-resolved RGB image from an input burst consisting of multiple noisy RAW frames. In contrast to
the single image baseline, our approach combines information from multiple frames to obtain a more detailed reconstruction of the scene.
The results shown are for super-resolution by a factor of 4.

Abstract
While single-image super-resolution (SISR) has attracted substantial interest in recent years, the proposed
approaches are limited to learning image priors in order to
add high frequency details. In contrast, multi-frame superresolution (MFSR) offers the possibility of reconstructing
rich details by combining signal information from multiple
shifted images. This key advantage, along with the increasing popularity of burst photography, have made MFSR an
important problem for real-world applications.
We propose a novel architecture for the burst superresolution task. Our network takes multiple noisy RAW
images as input, and generates a denoised, super-resolved
RGB image as output. This is achieved by explicitly aligning
deep embeddings of the input frames using pixel-wise optical flow. The information from all frames are then adaptively merged using an attention-based fusion module. In
order to enable training and evaluation on real-world data,
we additionally introduce the BurstSR dataset, consisting of
smartphone bursts and high-resolution DSLR ground-truth.
We perform comprehensive experimental analysis, demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed architecture.

1. Introduction
Super-resolution (SR) is the task of generating a highresolution (HR) image, given one or several low-resolution
(LR) observations. It is a widely studied problem [6, 8, 20,
21, 23, 24, 26, 29, 39, 42, 45, 48, 51] with numerous practical applications. In recent years, the SR community has
mainly focused on the single image super-resolution (SISR)
task, where an HR image is estimated from a single LR
input. Due to the ill-posed nature of the SISR problem,
these methods are limited to adding high frequency details
through learned image priors.
The multi-frame super-resolution (MFSR), on the other
hand, aims to reconstruct the original HR image using multiple LR images. If the input images have sub-pixel shifts
with respect to each other, due to e.g. camera motion, they
provide different LR samplings of the underlying scene.
MFSR approaches can thus exploit this additional signal information to generate a higher quality image, compared to
the SISR approaches (see Fig. 1). The MFSR problem naturally arises in the increasingly popular mobile burst photography, where the images have different sub-pixel shifts
due to natural hand tremors [45]. This opens up the possibility of using MFSR to overcome the resolution constraint
19209

