Equivariant Point Network for 3D Point Cloud Analysis
Haiwei Chen1,2 , Shichen Liu1,2 , Weikai Chen2,3 , Hao Li4 , Randall Hill1,2
1
University of Southern California
2
USC Institute for Creative Technologies
3
Tencent Game AI Research Center
4
Pinscreen
{chenh,lshichen,hill}@ict.usc.edu chenwk891@gmail.com hao@hao-li.com

Abstract
Features that are equivariant to a larger group of symmetries have been shown to be more discriminative and
powerful in recent studies [4, 40, 5]. However, higher-order
equivariant features often come with an exponentiallygrowing computational cost. Furthermore, it remains relatively less explored how rotation-equivariant features can
be leveraged to tackle 3D shape alignment tasks. While
many past approaches have been based on either nonequivariant or invariant descriptors to align 3D shapes, we
argue that such tasks may benefit greatly from an equivariant framework. In this paper, we propose an effective
and practical SE(3) (3D translation and rotation) equivariant network for point cloud analysis that addresses both
problems. First, we present SE(3) separable point convolution, a novel framework that breaks down the 6D convolution into two separable convolutional operators alternatively performed in the 3D Euclidean and SO(3) spaces
respectively. This significantly reduces the computational
cost without compromising the performance. Second, we introduce an attention layer to effectively harness the expressiveness of the equivariant features. While jointly trained
with the network, the attention layer implicitly derives the
intrinsic local frame in the feature space and generates attention vectors that can be integrated with different alignment tasks. We evaluate our approach through extensive
studies and visual interpretations. The empirical results
demonstrate that our proposed model outperforms strong
baselines in a variety of benchmarks. Code is available at
https://github.com/nintendops/EPN PointCloud.

1. Introduction
The success of 2D CNNs stems in large part from the
ability of exploiting the translational symmetries via weight
sharing and translation equivariance. Recent trends strive

Figure 1: The core of our network is a convolution operator on point clouds, termed SE(3) separable point convolution (SPConv), that consumes features defined in the SE(3)
space and outputs per-point features that are SE(3) equivariant. When the output feature is spatially pooled over the Euclidean space, it becomes SO(3) equivariant, as visualized
above by projecting onto the spherical domain. Our method
also supports a faithful conversion from the equivariant feature to its invariant counterpart by using a novel attentive
fusing mechanism. Thereby, we offer a general framework
that can generate equivariant or invariant point feature depending on the nature of downstream applications.
to duplicate this success to 3D domain in order to shed new
light on the 3D learning tasks. With the 3D scanning technology being the mainstream manner of measuring the real
world, point cloud arises naturally as one of the most prominent 3D representations. Yet, despite its simple and unified
structure, it remains a nuisance to extend the CNN architecture to analyzing point clouds. In addition, the group
of transformations in 3D data is more complex compared
to 2D images, as 3D entities are often transformed by arbitrary 3D translations and 3D rotations when observed.
Although group-invariant operators could render identical

14514

