Learning High Fidelity Depths of Dressed Humans
by Watching Social Media Dance Videos
Yasamin Jafarian

Hyun Soo Park

University of Minnesota
{yasamin, hspark}@umn.edu

Input image

Output depth estimation

Input human mask

Reconstructed surface

Figure 1: This paper presents a novel approach to estimate high fidelity depths of dressed humans from a single view image
by leveraging a new data resource: a number of social media dance videos that span diverse appearance, clothing styles,
performances, and identities. We show an example of a sequence of this data and the corresponding human mask along with
the estimated depth (the darker, the closer) and the reconstructed surface.

Abstract
A key challenge of learning the geometry of dressed humans lies in the limited availability of the ground truth
data (e.g., 3D scanned models), which results in the performance degradation of 3D human reconstruction when applying to real-world imagery. We address this challenge by
leveraging a new data resource: a number of social media dance videos that span diverse appearance, clothing
styles, performances, and identities. Each video depicts dynamic movements of the body and clothes of a single person
while lacking the 3D ground truth geometry. To utilize these
videos, we present a new method to use the local transformation that warps the predicted local geometry of the person from an image to that of another image at a different
time instant. This allows self-supervision as enforcing a
temporal coherence over the predictions. In addition, we
jointly learn the depth along with the surface normals that
are highly responsive to local texture, wrinkle, and shade
by maximizing their geometric consistency. Our method is
end-to-end trainable, resulting in high fidelity depth estimation that predicts fine geometry faithful to the input real

image. We demonstrate that our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art human depth estimation and human shape
recovery approaches on both real and rendered images.

1. Introduction
Clothes are an integral part of our everyday life to function, express, and protect ourselves. With the increasing
prevalence of VR and AR, the ability to precisely model
the complex geometry of dressed humans is becoming the
key to authentic social tele-presence. To capture the local
geometry, e.g., wrinkle and fabric texture, photogrammetry
based on massive camera infrastructure (e.g., 40-500 cameras to cover full body shape) [12, 25, 55] has been used,
resulting in production-level rendering [9, 32] and 3D fabrication [3, 5]. Despite its promise, the practical deployment
of such massive camera systems in our daily environment is
still challenging because of its hardware requirements and
computational complexity. Single view reconstruction is an
immediate remedy to address this challenge where 3D representation of humans can be learned from the scanned human 3D models [1–3]. Nonetheless, the amount of these

12753

