DANNet: A One-Stage Domain Adaptation Network for Unsupervised
Nighttime Semantic Segmentation

1

Xinyi Wu1∗ , Zhenyao Wu1,2∗, Hao Guo1 , Lili Ju1† , Song Wang1†
2
University of South Carolina, USA
Farsee2 Technology Ltd, China

{xinyiw, zhenyao, hguo}@email.sc.edu, ju@math.sc.edu, songwang@cec.sc.edu

Abstract
Semantic segmentation of nighttime images plays an
equally important role as that of daytime images in autonomous driving, but the former is much more challenging
due to poor illuminations and arduous human annotations.
In this paper, we propose a novel domain adaptation network (DANNet) for nighttime semantic segmentation without using labeled nighttime image data. It employs an adversarial training with a labeled daytime dataset and an
unlabeled dataset that contains coarsely aligned day-night
image pairs. Specifically, for the unlabeled day-night image pairs, we use the pixel-level predictions of static object
categories on a daytime image as a pseudo supervision to
segment its counterpart nighttime image. We further design
a re-weighting strategy to handle the inaccuracy caused
by misalignment between day-night image pairs and wrong
predictions of daytime images, as well as boost the prediction accuracy of small objects. The proposed DANNet is the
first one-stage adaptation framework for nighttime semantic segmentation, which does not train additional day-night
image transfer models as a separate pre-processing stage.
Extensive experiments on Dark Zurich and Nighttime Driving datasets show that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance for nighttime semantic segmentation.

1. Introduction
Aiming to label each pixel of a given image to an object
category, semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer
vision task and plays an important role in many applications
such as autonomous driving [11], medical imaging [5] and
human parsing [49]. With the advancement of deep learning and computing power, the state-of-the-art performance
of semantic segmentation for natural scene images taken
at the daytime has been significantly improved in recent
∗ Equal contribution.
† Co-corresponding authors. Code is available at https://github.
com/W-zx-Y/DANNet.

Input image

Ground truth

MGCDA
DANNet (Ours)
Figure 1. Visual comparison of the nighttime semantic segmentation results between the state-of-the-art transfer-based approach
“MGCDA” [35] and our proposed DANNet.

years [10, 17]. Many researchers have started to segment
more challenging images under various kinds of degradations, such as those taken in foggy weather [34] or at the
nighttime [33]. In this paper, we focus on semantic segmentation of nighttime images, which has wide and important
applications in autonomous driving.
With many indiscernible regions and visual hazards [47],
e.g., under/over exposure and motion blur, it is usually difficult even for human to build high-quality pixel-level annotations of the nighttime scene images as ground truth,
which, however, is a prerequisite for training many deep
neural networks for semantic image segmentation. To handle this problem, several domain adaptation methods have
been proposed to transfer the semantic segmentation models
from daytime to nighttime without using labels in the nighttime domain. For example, in [8, 33, 35], an intermediate
twilight domain is taken as a bridge to build the adaptation
between daytime to nighttime. In [33, 30, 37, 26, 35], an
image transferring network is trained to stylize nighttime or
daytime images and construct synthetic datasets. All these
methods require an additional pre-processing stage of training an image transfer model between daytime and nighttime. This is not only time-consuming but also making the

15769

