PixMatch: Unsupervised Domain Adaptation via Pixelwise Consistency Training
Arjun K. Manrai
Harvard University
Boston Children’s Hospital
Boston, MA

Luke Melas-Kyriazi
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA
lmelaskyriazi@college.harvard.edu

Arjun Manrai@hms.harvard.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation is a promising technique for semantic segmentation and other computer vision tasks for which large-scale data annotation is costly
and time-consuming. In semantic segmentation, it is attractive to train models on annotated images from a simulated
(source) domain and deploy them on real (target) domains.
In this work, we present a novel framework for unsupervised
domain adaptation based on the notion of target-domain
consistency training. Intuitively, our work is based on the
idea that in order to perform well on the target domain, a
model’s output should be consistent with respect to small
perturbations of inputs in the target domain. Specifically,
we introduce a new loss term to enforce pixelwise consistency between the model’s predictions on a target image
and a perturbed version of the same image. In comparison
to popular adversarial adaptation methods, our approach
is simpler, easier to implement, and more memory-efficient
during training. Experiments and extensive ablation studies
demonstrate that our simple approach achieves remarkably
strong results on two challenging synthetic-to-real benchmarks, GTA5-to-Cityscapes and SYNTHIA-to-Cityscapes.

1. Introduction
Deep neural network approaches for semantic image segmentation have shown widespread success in the past decade,
but they remain reliant on large datasets with pixel-level
annotations. Data labeling for semantic segmentation is notoriously laborious and expensive, especially in domains
where experts are required (e.g. medical image segmentation). Even for annotations that can be performed by nonexperts like parsing an urban scene into familiar objects,
as in the Cityscapes dataset [15], it takes an estimated 90
minutes to annotate a single image [43].
The need to build generalizable models with limited data
has motivated work on unsupervised domain adaptation

(UDA) approaches for semantic segmentation [63, 49, 52, 7,
23, 11], where annotated images from a simulated (source)
domain, which are plentiful, are used in conjunction with
unlabeled images from a real (target) domain. The simulated
source domain in this “synthetic to real” translation task can
be creative, such as the video game Grand Theft Auto V
in the GTA5-to-Cityscapes benchmark [40] and the simulation platform SYNTHIA as in the SYNTHIA-to-Cityscapes
benchmark [41].
The literature on UDA for semantic segmentation is dominated by adversarial methods, which aim to learn domaininvariant representations across multiple domains by introducing adversarial losses [23]. These methods have shown
strong performance, but due to the instability of their adversarial losses, they are well-known to be highly sensitive to
hyperparameters and difficult to train [54, 8, 19].
Recently, a new line of work on UDA for semantic
segmentation has emerged around self-training [63, 52, 7].
These methods add loss terms to the training objective that
encourage the segmentation model to make more confident
predictions on the target domain (for example, by encouraging low-entropy predictions) [52, 7, 63].
This paper begins with the observation that we do not
simply desire a model that makes confident predictions in
target domain, rather we desire a model that makes consistent
predictions in the target domain. That is, we desire a model
for which small perturbations of inputs in the target domain
lead to small, consistent changes in the output segmentation.
If a model’s predictions are always confident, but they are not
stable with respect to small perturbations of target images,
the model is likely to be poorly-adapted to the target domain.
Conversely, if a model behaves smoothly with respect to
perturbations of images in the target domain, the model is
likely to be better-adapted to that domain.
We propose a consistency training-based framework to
directly enforce this notion of smoothness in the target domain. Our method, denoted PixMatch, adds a loss term that
encourages the segmentation model’s predictions on a target
domain image and a perturbed version of the same image to

12435

