Anticipating human actions by correlating past with the future with Jaccard
similarity measures
Basura Fernando
IHPC, A*STAR, Singapore.

Samitha Herath
Dept of Data Science & AI, Monash University

Abstract
We propose a framework for early action recognition and
anticipation by correlating past features with the future using three novel similarity measures called Jaccard vector
similarity, Jaccard cross-correlation and Jaccard Frobenius
inner product over covariances. Using these combinations
of novel losses and using our framework, we obtain state-ofthe-art results for early action recognition in UCF101 and
JHMDB datasets by obtaining 91.7 % and 83.5 % accuracy respectively for an observation percentage of 20. Similarly, we obtain state-of-the-art results for Epic-Kitchen55
and Breakfast datasets for action anticipation by obtaining
20.35 and 41.8 top-1 accuracy respectively.

1. Introduction
Action anticipation ability of humans is an evolutionary gift that allows us to perform daily tasks effectively,
efficiently and safely. This phenomena is known as mental time travel [30]. Even if humans are good at predicting the immediate future, how this happens internally inside our brain remains a mystery. In an era where Artificial Intelligence is growing, human action anticipation
has naturally become an important problem in Computer
Vision. Various forms of action prediction problems have
been studied in the literature such as early action recognition [5, 15, 17, 18, 25, 26, 28, 36], anticipation [4, 20, 23]
and activity forecasting [1, 14, 22]. The objective of Early
Action Recognition [17] (EAR) (also known as action prediction) is to classify a given video from a partial observation of the action. In this case, the observed video and
the full video contain the same action and methods observe
about 10%-50% of the full video to recognize the action.
In contrast, Action Anticipation (AA) methods [4, 20] aim
at predicting a future action δt seconds before the future
action starts and the observed video contains an action different from the future action. In both cases, models observe
the first part of the video and predict the ongoing action or
the future action.
Humans have the natural ability to correlate past experi-

ences with what might happen in the future. For example,
when we see someone walking toward the door inside a corridor, we can say that person will open the door with a high
confidence. Perhaps the action of walking towards the door
correlates with the future action of ”opening the door” with
a high probability and humans may learn these associations
from a very young age. In this paper, we propose to solve
the problem of action anticipation and early prediction by
correlating past features with the future. To do this, we propose a new framework and three novel loss functions.
Our framework maximizes the correlation between observed and the future video representations. By doing so, at
train time our model learns to encapsulate future action information given the observed video. At test time our model
exploits this correlation to infer future temporal information
and makes accurate action predictions. Similar ideas have
been explored before in the literature. However, what remains unclear is at what abstraction one should exploit this
correlation between the future and past? We argue it is better to exploit this correlation at the higher levels of the video
representation and also at class level. The second question
is how to maximize this correlation at higher levels of the
video representation?
In this paper, we show that commonly used techniques
such as minimizing the L2 distance or maximizing the
vector correlation or the cosine similarity between future
and observed video representations is not ideal. Although
conceptually the vector correlation makes sense, it is not
bounded. The cosine vector similarity seems a relevant
choice for this problem. However, when used for deep representation learning, there are limitations to cosine similarity. We discuss these limitations in detail in section 3.3.1.
Briefly, the cosine similarity between a vector z and kz
(where k is a scalar) is always 1.0 (or -1.0) irrespective of
the value of k. This property of cosine similarity could potentially hurt the learned representation. Ideally, a vector
similarity measure should take into account both the magnitude and angle between vectors and the similarity should
be bounded. Inspired by Jaccard Similarity overs sets, we
propose Jaccard Vector Similarity (JVS) which has good
properties when learning representations by maximizing the

13224

