iMiGUE: An Identity-free Video Dataset for Micro-Gesture Understanding and
Emotion Analysis
Xin Liu† , Henglin Shi‡ , Haoyu Chen‡ , Zitong Yu‡ , Xiaobai Li‡ , Guoying Zhao‡∗
‡
Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Finland
†
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, China
https://github.com/linuxsino/iMiGUE

Abstract
We introduce a new dataset for the emotional artificial
intelligence research: identity-free video dataset for MicroGesture Understanding and Emotion analysis (iMiGUE).
Different from existing public datasets, iMiGUE focuses on
nonverbal body gestures without using any identity information, while the predominant researches of emotion analysis concern sensitive biometric data, like face and speech.
Most importantly, iMiGUE focuses on micro-gestures, i.e.,
unintentional behaviors driven by inner feelings, which are
different from ordinary scope of gestures from other gesture
datasets which are mostly intentionally performed for illustrative purposes. Furthermore, iMiGUE is designed to evaluate the ability of models to analyze the emotional states by
integrating information of recognized micro-gesture, rather
than just recognizing prototypes in the sequences separately (or isolatedly). This is because the real need for emotion AI is to understand the emotional states behind gestures in a holistic way. Moreover, to counter for the challenge of imbalanced sample distribution of this dataset, an
unsupervised learning method is proposed to capture latent representations from the micro-gesture sequences themselves. We systematically investigate representative methods on this dataset, and comprehensive experimental results reveal several interesting insights from the iMiGUE, e.g.,
micro-gesture-based analysis can promote emotion understanding. We confirm that the new iMiGUE dataset could
advance studies of micro-gesture and emotion AI.

1. Introduction
Emotional artificial intelligence (emotion AI) is using
machine learning methods to enable computers to under∗ Corresponding author. Xin Liu’s work mostly done at the University
of Oulu. This paper is supported by Academy of Finland, KAUTE foundation, and National Natural Science Foundation of China.

Figure 1. Three frames (cropped) from a post-match press conference video to illustrate the identity-free micro-gestures, such as
“cover face”, “fold arms”, and “cross fingers”. Could machine
recognize these micro-gestures, and understand emotional states
of the player in a holistic way, and further identify if the player
has won or lost the match (positive or negative emotional states)?

stand human emotions. It plays a vital role in humancomputer interaction since emotions are on all the time, presented in all kinds of human activities, thinking, and decision makings. According to psychological studies, body
language is an essential part for understanding human emotions. Every day, we respond to thousands of such nonverbal behaviors including facial expressions, eye movements
or gaze, tone of voices, gestures, touches, and the use of
space. Body language-based emotion understanding has attracted extensive attention in the communities of computer
vision and affective computing, and a considerable number
of datasets have been proposed, e.g., posed facial expressions [30, 56, 92, 82, 25, 96], spontaneous facial behaviors [1, 47, 4, 51, 12, 35], micro-expressions [91, 41, 11],
voice/speech [65, 66, 51, 61], social signals [28, 29], and
multi-modal datasets with facial expressions and physiological signals [73, 34, 51, 61]. Although computational
methodologies were proposed correspondingly and consecutively to improve the performance on these datasets, there
are still significant gaps between current studies and the
needs of real applications. Major limitations include:
1) Intentional behavioral-based gestures. Previous
gesture studies mostly focused on illustrative (or iconic)
gestures [84], e.g., waving hands as “hello” or “goodbye”,
which are intentionally performed for conveying certain

10631

