Revamping Cross-Modal Recipe Retrieval with Hierarchical Transformers and
Self-supervised Learning
Amaia Salvador

Erhan Gundogdu

Loris Bazzani

Michael Donoser

Amazon
{asalvada, eggundog, bazzanil, donoserm}@amazon.com

Abstract

𝜙rec
Title: Mac n cheese skillet

Cross-modal recipe retrieval has recently gained substantial attention due to the importance of food in people’s
lives, as well as the availability of vast amounts of digital
cooking recipes and food images to train machine learning models. In this work, we revisit existing approaches
for cross-modal recipe retrieval and propose a simplified
end-to-end model based on well established and high performing encoders for text and images. We introduce a hierarchical recipe Transformer which attentively encodes individual recipe components (titles, ingredients and instructions). Further, we propose a self-supervised loss function
computed on top of pairs of individual recipe components,
which is able to leverage semantic relationships within
recipes, and enables training using both image-recipe and
recipe-only samples. We conduct a thorough analysis and
ablation studies to validate our design choices. As a result,
our proposed method achieves state-of-the-art performance
in the cross-modal recipe retrieval task on the Recipe1M
dataset. We make code and models publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Food is one of the most fundamental and important elements for humans, given its connection to health, culture,
personal experience, and sense of community. With the development of the Internet and the rise of social networks,
we witnessed a substantial surge in digital recipes that are
shared online by users. Designing powerful tools to navigate such large amounts of data can support individuals
in their cooking activities to enhance their experience with
food, and has thus become an attractive research field [30].
Often times, digital recipes come along with companion
content such as photos, videos, nutritional information, user
reviews, and comments. The availability of such rich large
scale food datasets has opened the doors for new applications in the context of food computing [37, 34, 24], one of
1 https://github.com/amzn/image-to-recipe-transformers

Ingredients
2 cups elbow macaroni
1-1/2 cups water
2 tbsp. sweet onion
...
Instructions
Cook macaroni according to package
directions.
Melt butter over medium heat.
Add onion and saute for 2 minutes.
...

ℒrec

𝜙ttl

𝜙ing

𝜙mrg

ℒpair

𝜙img

𝜙ins

Figure 1: Model overview. Our method is composed of
three distinct parts: the image encoder φimg , the recipe encoder φrec , and the training objectives Lpair and Lrec .
the most prevalent ones being cross-modal recipe retrieval,
where the goal is to design systems that are capable of finding relevant cooking recipes given a user submitted food image. Approaching this challenge requires developing models in the intersection of natural language processing and
computer vision, as well as being able to deal with unstructured, noisy, and incomplete data.
In this work, we focus on learning joint representations
for textual and visual modalities in the context of food
images and cooking recipes. Recent works on the task
of cross-modal recipe retrieval [37, 3, 7, 42, 50] have introduced approaches for learning embeddings for recipes
and images, which are projected into a joint embedding
space that is optimised using contrastive or triplet loss functions. Advances were made by proposing complex models
and loss functions, such as cross-modal attention [14], adversarial networks [50, 42], the use of auxiliary semantic
losses [37, 3, 42, 50, 42], multi-stage training [37, 13], and
reconstruction losses [14]. These works are either complementary or orthogonal to each other while bringing certain
disadvantages such as glueing independent models [37, 13],
which needs extra care, relying on a pre-trained text representations [37, 3, 7, 42, 50, 13] and complex training
pipelines involving adversarial losses [50, 42]. In contrast
to previous works, we revisit ideas in the context of crossmodal recipe retrieval and propose a simplified end-to-end
joint embedding learning framework that is plain, effective,

15475

