Repopulating Street Scenes
Yifan Wang1∗
Andrew Liu2
Richard Tucker2
Jiajun Wu3
Brian L. Curless1,2
Steven M. Seitz1,2
Noah Snavely2
1
2
3
University of Washington
Google Research
Stanford University

Abstract
We present a framework for automatically reconfiguring
images of street scenes by populating, depopulating, or repopulating them with objects such as pedestrians or vehicles.
Applications of this method include anonymizing images to
enhance privacy, generating data augmentations for perception tasks like autonomous driving, and composing scenes to
achieve a certain ambiance, such as empty streets in the early
morning. At a technical level, our work has three primary
contributions: (1) a method for clearing images of objects,
(2) a method for estimating sun direction from a single image,
and (3) a way to compose objects in scenes that respects
scene geometry and illumination. Each component is learned
from data with minimal ground truth annotations, by making
creative use of large-numbers of short image bursts of street
scenes. We demonstrate convincing results on a range of
street scenes and illustrate potential applications.

of imagery, while also increase flexibility to compose new
scenarios (e.g., an empty street or lunchtime scene). These
capabilities could also be useful in other applications, such as
automatic generation of novel scene configurations as a way
to augment data for training autonomous driving—especially
emergency scenarios that might be rare in real data. In order
for such reconfigured images to look realistic, they must respect the illumination and geometry of the underlying scene.
Our learning-based method takes such factors into account.
As shown in Fig. 1, our framework takes as input a single
street image, and can realistically remove all objects and
generate repopulated images. To remove objects, we use
nearby patches to inpaint not only the objects themselves,
but also the shadows they cast onto the scene. To repopulate
with new objects, our framework can automatically select
objects that match the lighting of the scene, and compose
them into the scene with proper scale, occlusion, and cast
shadows consistent with the scene’s geometry and lighting.
Our method consists of four main components:
1. a removal network that removes all existing objects
(cars, pedestrians, and bicycles) – along with their shadows – from a street image and realistically fills the resulting holes, rendering an empty version of the scene;

1. Introduction
Websites such as Google Street View enable users to
explore places around the world through street-level imagery. These sites can provide a rich sense of what different
locales—neighborhoods, parks, tourist sites, etc—are really
like. However, the imagery provided by such sites also has
key limitations. A given image might be full of cars and
pedestrians, making it difficult to observe the environment.
Alternatively, a user might want to see how a scene appears at
a certain time of day, e.g., lunchtime, but only have access to
a morning image. And, importantly, the fact that the imagery
records real people and vehicles may require anonymization
efforts to protect privacy, e.g., by blurring faces and license
plates [10, 1] or by removing pedestrians from images by
leveraging multiple views [9].
We propose learning-based tools that mitigate these limitations by removing objects from a scene and then repopulating that scene with, for instance, anonymized images and
vehicles. Our method could thus be used to enhance privacy
∗ This work was done while Yifan was an intern at Google.

2. a sun estimation network that takes a street image, and
estimates a dominant lighting (sun) direction;
3. a method to compose the inserted object into the scene
with proper scale, occlusion based on its placement in
the scene; and
4. an insertion network that takes a segmented object, e.g.,
drawn from an anonymized collection, and inserts it
into a scene, generating a realistic shadow.
Our method yields realistic results that improve upon prior
work. In particular, unlike standard methods such as image
inpainting [27, 38, 39, 37], our approach can realistically
remove and render object shadows. Instead of learning to
cast shadows into one specific scene captured with a long
video sequence [35], our approach learns from short image
bursts, then generalizes to any single image of a street scene.
Our three networks are learned in a novel way that involves observing large numbers of street scenes, with no

5110

