Improving the Transferability of Adversarial Samples with Adversarial
Transformations
Weibin Wu, Yuxin Su, Michael R. Lyu, Irwin King
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
{wbwu, yxsu, lyu, king}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Although deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
tremendous performance in diverse vision challenges, they
are surprisingly susceptible to adversarial examples, which
are born of intentionally perturbing benign samples in a
human-imperceptible fashion. It thus poses security concerns on the deployment of DNNs in practice, particularly
in safety- and security-sensitive domains. To investigate the
robustness of DNNs, transfer-based attacks have attracted
a growing interest recently due to their high practical applicability, where attackers craft adversarial samples with
local models and employ the resultant samples to attack a
remote black-box model. However, existing transfer-based
attacks frequently suffer from low success rates due to overfitting to the adopted local model. To boost the transferability of adversarial samples, we propose to improve the
robustness of synthesized adversarial samples via adversarial transformations. Specifically, we employ an adversarial transformation network to model the most harmful
distortions that can destroy adversarial noises and require
the synthesized adversarial samples to become resistant to
such adversarial transformations. Extensive experiments
on the ImageNet benchmark showcase the superiority of our
method to state-of-the-art baselines in attacking both undefended and defended models.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have emerged as stateof-the-art solutions to a dizzying array of challenging vision tasks [35, 22]. Despite their astonishing performance, DNNs are surprisingly vulnerable to adversarial
samples, which are crafted by purposely attaching humanimperceptible noises to legitimate images and can mislead DNNs into wrong predictions [34, 38]. It poses a
severe threat to the security of DNN-based systems, especially in safety- and security-critical domains like selfdriving [26, 39, 43]. Therefore, learning how to synthe-

Figure 1: From left to right: An example of the clean image,
the resultant image distorted by our adversarial transformation network, and the corresponding adversarial image generated by our method.

size adversarial samples can serve as a crucial surrogate
to evaluate the robustness of DNN-based systems before
deployment [9] and spur the development of effective defenses [18, 36].
There are generally two lines of adversarial attacks studied in the literature [2]. One focuses on the white-box setting, where the attackers possess perfect knowledge about
the target model [9, 17, 25]. The other considers the blackbox setting, where attackers do not know the specifics
of the target model, such as its architecture and parameters [28, 10]. Compared to the white-box counterpart,
black-box attacks are recognized as a more realistic threat
to DNN-based systems in practice [28]. Besides, among existing black-box attacks, transfer-based attacks have gained
increasing interest recently due to their high practical applicability, where attackers craft adversarial samples based on
local source models and directly harness the resultant adversarial examples to fool the remote black-box victims [5, 37].
However, existing transfer-based attacks frequently manifest limited transferability due to overfitting to the employed source model [9, 5, 44]. Concretely, although the
generated adversarial samples can fool the source model
with high success rates, they can hardly remain malicious to
a different target model. Inspired by the data augmentation
strategy [12, 16, 31], prior efforts have endeavored to improve the transferability of adversarial samples by training

9024

