Transferable Query Selection for Active Domain Adaptation
Bo Fu∗, Zhangjie Cao∗, Jianmin Wang, Mingsheng Long (B)
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
{microhhh9,caozhangjie14}@gmail.com, {jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) enables transferring knowledge from a related source domain to a fully
unlabeled target domain. Despite the significant advances
in UDA, the performance gap remains quite large between
UDA and supervised learning with fully labeled target data.
Active domain adaptation (ADA) mitigates the gap under
minimal annotation cost by selecting a small quota of target
samples to annotate and incorporating them into training.
Due to the domain shift, the query selection criteria of prior
active learning methods may be ineffective to select the most
informative target samples for annotation. In this paper, we
propose Transferable Query Selection (TQS), which selects
the most informative samples under domain shift by an ensemble of three new criteria: transferable committee, transferable uncertainty, and transferable domainness. We further develop a randomized selection algorithm to enhance
the diversity of the selected samples. Experiments show that
TQS remarkably outperforms previous UDA and ADA methods on several domain adaptation datasets. Deeper analyses demonstrate that TQS can select the most informative
target samples under the domain shift.

1. Introduction
Wide attention has been paid to Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) [11, 42], which adapts a model learned
in the labeled source domain to the target domain with only
unlabeled data. However, UDA still falls far in accuracy behind its supervised learning counterpart [37, 3]. As shown
in [19], the “market value” of target labeled data is much
more pronounced than that of source labeled data, and even
a few target labeled data can improve Domain Adaptation
(DA) models significantly. Thus, a promising DA paradigm
is to informatively annotate a small quota of target data that
maximally benefits the DA model. This learning paradigm
is known as Active Domain Adaptation (ADA) [27].
Pool-based active learning [33] adopts a query selection
∗ Equal contribution

pen

computer

(pen)

(computer) (bottle)

bottle

soda

mouse

speaker

source

normal
need
annotation

outliers

target

(soda) (mouse) (speaker)

Figure 1. Examples of three kinds of target data. The normal row
is similar to source images and can be classified correctly by UDA
methods. The need annotation row is quite different from source
images and cannot be recognized by UDA, which needs manual
annotation. The outliers row shows outlier samples like black images or noisy objects, which are not informative for classification.

strategy to select the most useful data for training from a
large unlabeled data pool, which can be incorporated into
DA to maximize the revenue of the small labeling budget.
Previous active learning methods mainly apply three query
selection strategies: committee, uncertainty, and representativeness [33], which respectively query the samples with
maximal disagreement by a classifier committee [4, 34], of
the highest uncertainty [15, 12], and more distinctive from
labeled samples [13, 35]. While successful in general for
single-domain active learning, these traditional criteria are
not transferable. As we explained later, these criteria fail to
select informative target samples under the domain shift.
The selection criterion under domain shift is the major
challenge of Active Domain Adaptation (ADA). In this paper, we propose Transferable Query Selection (TQS) by
transferable committee, transferable uncertainty, and transferable domainness. The ‘transferable’ here means that the
criteria are specially designed to mitigate the domain gap.
To build a transferable committee, we enforce multiple classifiers to only pass target low-density areas by training with
adversarial samples. Based on the multi-classifier architecture of the transferable committee, we compute the trans-

7272

