Verifiability and Predictability: Interpreting Utilities of Network Architectures
for Point Cloud Processing
Wen Shen2,∗ , Zhihua Wei2,∗ , Shikun Huang2 , Binbin Zhang2 , Panyue Chen2 , Ping Zhao2 ,
Quanshi Zhang1,†
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
2
Tongji University, Shanghai, China
{wen shen,zhihua wei,hsk,0206zbb,2030793,zhaoping}@tongji.edu.cn,zqs1022@sjtu.edu.cn

Ve f ab

Abstract

Intermediate-layer architectures

In this paper, we diagnose deep neural networks for
3D point cloud processing to explore utilities of different
intermediate-layer network architectures. We propose a
number of hypotheses on the effects of specific intermediatelayer network architectures on the representation capacity
of DNNs. In order to prove the hypotheses, we design five
metrics to diagnose various types of DNNs from the following perspectives, information discarding, information concentration, rotation robustness, adversarial robustness, and
neighborhood inconsistency. We conduct comparative studies based on such metrics to verify the hypotheses. We further use the verified hypotheses to revise intermediate-layer
architectures of existing DNNs and improve their utilities.
Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method.
The code will be released when this paper is accepted.

1. Introduction
Recently, a series of works use deep neural networks
(DNNs) for 3D point cloud processing and have achieved
superior performance in various 3D tasks. However, traditional studies usually designed intermediate-layer architectures based on empiricism. Exploring and verifying utilities of each specific intermediate-layer architecture from the
perspective of a DNN’s representation capacity still present
significant challenges for state-of-the-art algorithms.
In this study, we aim to bridge the gap between the
intermediate-layer architecture and its utilities. Table 1 lists
three kinds of utilities considered in this study, including rotation robustness, adversarial robustness, and neighborhood
inconsistency. Although there are many heuristic insights
∗ Wen Shen and Zhihua Wei have equal contributions.
† Quanshi Zhang is the corresponding author. He is with the John
Hopcroft Center and the MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, at the Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.

Rotation Adversarial Neighborhood
robustness robustness consistency

(a) Modules of using information of
P ed c ab –
X
local density to reweight features [40].
(b) Modules of using Impro
information
e of ili ies of e is
ing
DNNs.
X
–
local coordinates to reweight features [40].
(c) Modules of concatenating
–
X
Verifiability
multi-scale features [18].
(d) Modules of computing
X
–
orientation-aware features [11].

–
–
X
–

Predictability
Improve utilities of existing DNNs.
Table 1. Illustration of the verified utilities of specific
intermediate-layer architectures. “–” denotes that the utility has
not been examined, instead of indicating non-existence of the utility. Please see Fig. 1 for architectural details.

on utilities of existing architectures for 3D point cloud processing, there does not exist a rigorous and quantitative verification of such insights.
Therefore, we propose a method to quantitatively diagnose the utilities of intermediate-layer network architectures, which will provide new insights into architectural design. This is a necessary step towards the deep learning
with scientific rigour. Note that, utilities are not necessarily
equivariant to advantages. For example, in most cases, the
rotation robustness is supposed to be a good property. However, the rotation robustness sometimes requires a DNN not
to encode rotation-sensitive but discriminative features.
This study focuses on two terms, i.e. verifiability and
predictability. In terms of verifiability, we design new metrics to quantify utilities of existing intermediate-layer architectures to prove intuitive insights. In terms of predictability, we further use the verified insights to revise other networks to improve their utilities. Note that, the revision of
intermediate-layer architectures generally dose not change
the depth of DNNs, so that we eliminate the influence of the
depth change.

10703

