Room-and-Object Aware Knowledge Reasoning for
Remote Embodied Referring Expression
Chen Gao1 *, Jinyu Chen1 *, Si Liu1†, Luting Wang1 , Qiong Zhang3 ,
1
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
2
The University of Adelaide 3 Xiaomi AI Lab, Xiaomi Inc

Qi Wu2

Abstract
The Remote Embodied Referring Expression (REVERIE)
is a recently raised task that requires an agent to navigate to and localise a referred remote object according to
a high-level language instruction. Different from related
VLN tasks, the key to REVERIE is to conduct goal-oriented
exploration instead of strict instruction-following, due to
the lack of step-by-step navigation guidance. In this paper,
we propose a novel Cross-modality Knowledge Reasoning
(CKR) model to address the unique challenges of this task.
The CKR, based on a transformer-architecture, learns to
generate scene memory tokens and utilise these informative history clues for exploration. Particularly, a Roomand-Object Aware Attention (ROAA) mechanism is devised
to explicitly perceive the room- and object-type information from both linguistic and visual observations. Moreover, through incorporating commonsense knowledge, we
propose a Knowledge-enabled Entity Relationship Reasoning (KERR) module to learn the internal-external correlations among room- and object-entities for agent to make
proper action at each viewpoint. Evaluation on REVERIE
benchmark demonstrates the superiority of the CKR model,
which significantly boosts SPL and REVERIE-success rate
by 64.67% and 46.05%, respectively. Code is available at:
https://github.com/alloldman/CKR.

1. Introduction
The Embodied-AI (E-AI), where embodied agents perform various egocentric perception tasks, has attracted a
surge of interest within both computer vision and natural
language processing communities. In recent years, numerous datasets [1, 6, 16] and simulators [5, 26, 49] have been
constructed to provide 3D assets with annotations and simulate the agent respectively. These platforms support legions
of tasks including Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) [1],
Embodied Question Answering [6], etc.
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author (liusi@buaa.edu.cn)

Figure 1. At viewpoint A, our agent with commonsense turns right
into the ‘meeting room’ through perceived ‘chair’ and ‘meetingdesk’. Then at viewpoint B, it seeks for easy-to-find related objects (e.g., ‘computer’) at first for efficient exploration, where target ‘mouse’ is usually around. C is the final viewpoint it arrived.

Most recently, a valuable task named Remote Embodied Visual referring Expression in Real Indoor Environments (REVERIE) [37] was proposed to further facilitate
the E-AI field. The goal of REVERIE is for a robot in a
photo-realistic 3D indoor environment to navigate closer to
and localise a referred target object according to the given
high-level instruction, which is similar to VLN task. However, simply utilising approaches in VLN is not capable of
completing REVERIE task satisfactorily, which has been
proved in [37] through extensive experiments.
The REVERIE contains several challenges. Firstly, essentially different from previous VLN tasks (e.g., R2R [1])
that provide step-by-step navigation guidance, REVERIE
towards practicability only annotates high/semantic-level
instructions like ‘Go to the corner of meeting room, bring
me the mouse on the table’, as shown in Fig. 1. This is
more natural and closer to the human needs from a home
assistance function perspective, but it is more challenging. Therefore, instead of strict instruction-following, the
agent needs to conduct goal-oriented exploration in an un-

3064

