Improving Multiple Pedestrian Tracking by
Track Management and Occlusion Handling

1

Daniel Stadler1,2,3 Jürgen Beyerer2,1,3
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology 2 Fraunhofer IOSB 3 Fraunhofer Center for Machine Learning
{daniel.stadler,juergen.beyerer}@iosb.fraunhofer.de

Abstract
Multi-pedestrian trackers perform well when targets are
clearly visible making the association task quite easy. However, when heavy occlusions are present, a mechanism to reidentify persons is needed. The common approach is to extract visual features from new detections and compare them
with the features of previously found tracks. Since those detections can have substantial overlaps with nearby targets –
especially in crowded scenarios – the extracted features are
insufficient for a reliable re-identification. In contrast, we
propose a novel occlusion handling strategy that explicitly
models the relation between occluding and occluded tracks
outperforming the feature-based approach, while not depending on a separate re-identification network. Furthermore, we improve the track management of a regressionbased method in order to bypass missing detections and to
deal with tracks leaving the scene at the border of the image.
Finally, we apply our tracker in both temporal directions
and merge tracklets belonging to the same target, which further enhances the performance. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our tracking components with ablative experiments and surpass the state-of-the-art methods on the three
popular pedestrian tracking benchmarks MOT16, MOT17,
and MOT20.

1. Introduction
The tracking of multiple pedestrians is an important component in many different applications, especially
surveillance related tasks. The goal is to detect and identify
each pedestrian in a video throughout the whole sequence
by assigning every target a unique ID.
Most of the existing approaches follow the tracking-bydetection paradigm [4, 5, 28, 30, 32, 33, 34] first generating
a set of bounding boxes for each frame independently and
then associating those detections to tracks based on motion
patterns or visual cues. While this association step is easy to
perform when all pedestrians are clearly visible, the prob-

lem gets much harder in crowded scenes, where occlusions
lead to missing detections. To recover pedestrians, many
methods extract deep features from the detected bounding
boxes with a re-identification model [12, 28, 31, 33, 34].
The problems of these approaches are two-fold. First,
besides the object detector, a separate network has to be
trained, which is time consuming and increases the computational complexity of the whole tracking pipeline. Second, the image areas of the detected bounding boxes often
include parts of nearby pedestrians, especially in crowded
scenarios. This harms the representation ability of the extracted visual features and can cause false re-identifications.
In contrast, we propose a new strategy to re-identify targets that explicitly models the occlusion of pedestrians and
only takes their motion into account. We introduce the concept of occluding and occluded tracks and check for new arriving detections, whether they belong to a previously found
occluded track only considering its motion, thus removing
the need for a separate re-identification network.
The two new tracking states are combined with the idea
of active and inactive tracks with a sophisticated track management that also includes the termination of tracks which
are leaving the scene. To utilize the recognized tracks in
the consecutive frame, we follow the tracking-by-regression
paradigm first introduced in [2], where the regression head
of a two-stage object detector is exploited to regress the previously found bounding boxes to their new position, making the association step obsolete. We extend this regression
to inactive tracks, while preferring active ones in the subsequent non-maximum suppression (NMS) in order to allow a
regression-based re-identification without the confusion of
active and inactive tracks under occlusion.
Furthermore, we propose an offline extension, which can
be applied to any multi-object tracker, that exploits a video
sequence in both temporal directions and merges intermediate results to further boost the tracking performance.
The effectiveness of our components is shown with ablative experiments and state-of-the-art results are achieved
on the three benchmarks MOT16 [23], MOT17 [23], and
MOT20 [8].

10958

