Towards Real-World Blind Face Restoration with Generative Facial Prior
Xintao Wang Yu Li Honglun Zhang Ying Shan
Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG
{xintaowang, ianyli, honlanzhang, yingsshan}@tencent.com

Input

From real life

HiFaceGAN
ACMMM 20

DFDNet

Wan et al.

ECCV 20

CVPR 20

PULSE
CVPR 20

GFP-GAN
Ours

Figure 1: Comparisons with state-of-the-art face restoration methods: HiFaceGAN [67], DFDNet [44], Wan et al. [61] and
PULSE [52] on the real-world low-quality images. While previous methods struggle to restore faithful facial details or retain
face identity, our proposed GFP-GAN achieves a good balance of realness and fidelity with much less artifacts. In addition,
the powerful generative facial prior allows us to perform restoration and color enhancement jointly. (Zoom in for best view)

Abstract
Blind face restoration usually relies on facial priors,
such as facial geometry prior or reference prior, to restore
realistic and faithful details. However, very low-quality
inputs cannot offer accurate geometric prior while highquality references are inaccessible, limiting the applicability in real-world scenarios. In this work, we propose
GFP-GAN that leverages rich and diverse priors encapsulated in a pretrained face GAN for blind face restoration.
This Generative Facial Prior (GFP) is incorporated into
the face restoration process via spatial feature transform
layers, which allow our method to achieve a good balance
of realness and fidelity. Thanks to the powerful generative facial prior and delicate designs, our GFP-GAN could
jointly restore facial details and enhance colors with just a
single forward pass, while GAN inversion methods require
image-specific optimization at inference. Extensive experiments show that our method achieves superior performance
to prior art on both synthetic and real-world datasets.

1. Introduction
Blind face restoration aims at recovering high-quality
faces from the low-quality counterparts suffering from unknown degradation, such as low-resolution [13, 48, 9],
noise [71], blur [39, 58], compression artifacts [12], etc.
When applied to real-world scenarios, it becomes more
challenging, due to more complicated degradation, diverse
poses and expressions. Previous works [9, 69, 6] typically
exploit face-specific priors in face restoration, such as facial landmarks [9], parsing maps [6, 9], facial component
heatmaps [69], and show that those geometry facial priors
are pivotal to recover accurate face shape and details. However, those priors are usually estimated from input images
and inevitably degrades with very low-quality inputs in the
real world. In addition, despite their semantic guidance, the
above priors contain limited texture information for restoring facial details (e.g., eye pupil).
Another category of approaches investigates reference
priors, i.e., high-quality guided faces [46, 45, 11] or facial

9168

