AQD: Towards Accurate Quantized Object Detection
Peng Chen2 *
1

Monash University

Jing Liu1 * Bohan Zhuang1†
2

The University of Adelaide

https://github.com/aim-uofa/model-quantization

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved great success in many computer vision tasks, such as image classification [11, 21, 12], semantic segmentation [31, 10, 5], object detection [37, 27, 26], etc. However, DNNs are always
equipped with a large number of parameters and consume
heavy computational resources, which hinders their applications, especially on resource-constrained devices such
as smartphones and drones. To reduce the memory footprint and computational burden, several network compression methods have been proposed, such as channel pruning [13, 32, 53], efficient architecture design [15, 39, 35]
and network quantization [49, 52, 52].
In particular, network quantization aims to project
* First two authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author. E-mail: bohan.zhuang@monash.edu

3

Chunhua Shen1,2

South China University of Technology

Table 1 – Energy and Area cost for different precision operations (on 45nm CMOS technology) [9, 14, 25].

Abstract
Network quantization allows inference to be conducted
using low-precision arithmetic for improved inference efficiency of deep neural networks on edge devices. However,
designing aggressively low-bit (e.g., 2-bit) quantization
schemes on complex tasks, such as object detection, still
remains challenging in terms of severe performance degradation and unverifiable efficiency on common hardware. In
this paper, we propose an Accurate Quantized object Detection solution, termed AQD, to fully get rid of floating-point
computation. To this end, we target using fixed-point operations in all kinds of layers, including the convolutional
layers, normalization layers, and skip connections, allowing the inference to be executed using integer-only arithmetic. To demonstrate the improved latency-vs-accuracy
trade-off, we apply the proposed methods on RetinaNet and
FCOS. In particular, experimental results on MS-COCO
dataset show that our AQD achieves comparable or even
better performance compared with the full-precision counterpart under extremely low-bit schemes, which is of great
practical value. Source code and models are available at:

Mingkui Tan3

Operation
16-bit Floating-point Add
16-bit Floating-point Mult
32-bit Floating-point Add
32-bit Floating-point Mult
8-bit Fixed-point Add
8-bit Fixed-point Mult
32-bit Fixed-point Add
32-bit Fixed-point Mult

Energy (pJ)
0.4
1.1
0.9
3.7
0.03
0.2
0.1
3.1

Area (µm2 )
1360
1640
4184
7700
36
282
137
3495

floating-point values onto a spaced grid, where the original floating-point values can be approximated by a set of
discrete values. In this way, the compute-intensive floatingpoint operations can be replaced by power-efficient fixedpoint or bitwise operations, which greatly reduces the computational cost of the networks.
Recently, many quantization methods [52, 20, 8] have
been proposed and achieved promising results on some
tasks such as image classification. However, using aggressively low-bit quantized networks for more complex tasks
such as object detection still remains a challenge. Developing quantized object detectors is a challenging task since
a detector not only performs object classification, but also
needs to predict other rich information, such as the locations of bounding boxes for regression. Some existing quantized object detection methods [18, 50] reduce the precision of detectors to 4 or 8 bits and achieve promising performance. However, when it comes to aggressively low
bitwidth (e.g., 2-bit) quantization, directly quantizing the
detector incurs a significant performance drop compared
to their full-precision counterpart. Moreover, some layers
(e.g., batch normalization, and skip connections) in the network still require floating-point arithmetic units for inference. This means both integer and floating-point arithmetic
units are needed for inference. As shown in Table 1, compared with fixed-point operations, floating-point operations
consume much higher energy and area cost. Besides, data
exchange between different types of arithmetic units may
further hamper the energy efficiency of the network.

104

