Sign-Agnostic Implicit Learning of Surface Self-Similarities for Shape Modeling
and Reconstruction from Raw Point Clouds
Wenbin Zhao1 *, Jiabao Lei1∗ , Yuxin Wen1 , Jianguo Zhang4 , Kui Jia123†
South China University of Technology. 2 Pazhou Lab. 3 Peng Cheng Lab.
4
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Southern University of Science and Technology.
{eemszhaowb,eejblei,wen.yuxin}@mail.scut.edu.cn,
zhangjg@sustech.edu.cn, kuijia@scut.edu.cn
1

Abstract
Shape modeling and reconstruction from raw point
clouds of objects stand as a fundamental challenge in vision and graphics research. Classical methods consider
analytic shape priors; however, their performance is degraded when the scanned points deviate from the ideal conditions of cleanness and completeness. Important progress
has been recently made by data-driven approaches, which
learn global and/or local models of implicit surface representations from auxiliary sets of training shapes. Motivated
from a universal phenomenon that self-similar shape patterns of local surface patches repeat across the entire surface of an object, we aim to push forward the data-driven
strategies and propose to learn a local implicit surface network for a shared, adaptive modeling of the entire surface
for a direct surface reconstruction from raw point cloud;
we also enhance the leveraging of surface self-similarities
by improving correlations among the optimized latent codes
of individual surface patches. Given that orientations of
raw points could be unavailable or noisy, we extend signagnostic learning into our local implicit model, which enables our recovery of signed implicit fields of local surfaces from the unsigned inputs. We term our framework as
Sign-Agnostic Implicit Learning of Surface Self-Similarities
(SAIL-S3). With a global post-optimization of local sign
flipping, SAIL-S3 is able to directly model raw, un-oriented
point clouds and reconstruct high-quality object surfaces.
Experiments show its superiority over existing methods.

1. Introduction
Surface reconstruction from point clouds is of significance during the course of digitally representing the world
around us, especially when we have witnessed the development of scanning devices that makes it easier to acquire
* Equal contribution
† Correspondence to Kui Jia <kuijia@scut.edu.cn>

Figure 1: 3D reconstructions from our proposed SignAgnostic Implicit Learning of Surface Self-Similarities. For
each sculpture, we visualize the raw, un-oriented point
cloud on the left, and the reconstructed surface on the
right. The surface is reconstructed by interpolation from
the learned local implicit subfields, where we isolate some
of their zero-level sets for better understanding.
point cloud data. This problem is severely ill-posed [5],
since there could be infinite solutions of the continuous surface given the discrete approximation of point clouds, especially when the points are noisy, irregularly distributed,
and/or incomplete. As such, proper priors of geometric regularity are necessary to tackle this problem. Classical methods adopt analytic priors such as local linearity and smoothness [26, 7, 2]. However, performance of these methods is
degraded when encountering sensing imperfection, or unavailable of surface normals for the observed points.
More recently, deep neural networks are introduced to
learn geometric priors from auxiliary shapes [20, 33] in
a data-driven manner, which have shown their superiority
over classical methods. The pipeline starts from approaches
[33, 11, 31] that globally embed a shape into a latent shape
space based on auto-encoders. Encoding global shape priors might simplify the problem, which, however, is limited in generalizing the learned priors to unseen shapes.
To improve generalization, there has been some attempts

10256

