Regressive Domain Adaptation for Unsupervised Keypoint Detection
Junguang Jiang1 , Yifei Ji1 , Ximei Wang1 , Yufeng Liu2 , Jianmin Wang1 , Mingsheng Long1 (B)
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
2
Y-tech, Kuaishou Technology
{jjg20,jiyf17,wxm17}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Before Adaptation

Abstract
Domain adaptation (DA) aims at transferring knowledge from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target
domain. Though many DA theories and algorithms have
been proposed, most of them are tailored into classification settings and may fail in regression tasks, especially in
the practical keypoint detection task. To tackle this difficult but significant task, we present a method of regressive
domain adaptation (RegDA) for unsupervised keypoint detection. Inspired by the latest theoretical work, we first utilize an adversarial regressor to maximize the disparity on
the target domain and train a feature generator to minimize
this disparity. However, due to the high dimension of the
output space, this regressor fails to detect samples that deviate from the support of the source. To overcome this problem, we propose two important ideas. First, based on our
observation that the probability density of the output space
is sparse, we introduce a spatial probability distribution to
describe this sparsity and then use it to guide the learning
of the adversarial regressor. Second, to alleviate the optimization difficulty in the high-dimensional space, we innovatively convert the minimax game in the adversarial training to the minimization of two opposite goals. Extensive experiments show that our method brings large improvement
by 8% to 11% in terms of PCK on different datasets.

1. Introduction
Many computer vision tasks have achieved great success
with the advent of deep neural networks in recent years.
However, the success of deep networks relies on a large
amount of labeled data [14], which is often expensive and
time-consuming to collect. Domain adaptation (DA) [21],
which aims at transferring knowledge from a labeled source
domain to an unlabeled target domain, is a more economical and practical option than annotating sufficient target
samples, especially in the keypoint detection tasks. The
fast development of computer vision applications leads to
huge increases in demand for keypoint detection but the an-

After Adaptation

Figure 1. Visualization before and after adaptation on the unlabeled target domain. (Left) The wrong predictions before adaptation are usually located at other keypoints. (Right) The predictions
of the adapted model look more like hands or bodies.

notations of this task are more complex than classification
tasks, requiring much more labor work especially when the
objects are partially occluded. On the contrary, accurately
labeled synthetic images can be obtained in abundance by
computer graphics processing at a low cost [27, 23]. Hence,
enabling domain adaptation in regression settings for unsupervised keypoint detection has a promising future.
There are many effective DA methods for classification
[17, 6, 22, 30], but we empirically found that few methods
work on regression. One possible reason is that there exist explicit task-specific boundaries between classes in classification. By applying domain alignment, the margins of
boundaries between different classes on the target domain
are enlarged, thereby helping the model generalize to the
unlabeled target domain. However, the regression space is
usually continuous on the contrary, i.e., there is no clear decision boundary. Meanwhile, although images have limited
pixels, the keypoint is still in a large discrete space due to
a combination of different axes, posing another huge challenge for most DA methods.
To solve the issues caused by the large output space, we
delved into the predictions of a source-only keypoint detection model. We observed that when the predictions on
the unlabeled domain are wrong, they are not equally distributed on the image. For example, if the position of a right
ankle is mistaken (Figure 1), the wrong prediction is most
likely at the position of the left ankle or other keypoints,
instead of somewhere in the background as we expected.
This unexpected observation reveals that the output space is
sparse in the sense of probability. Consider an extremely

6780

