Semi-Supervised Action Recognition with Temporal Contrastive Learning
Ankit Singh1∗ Omprakash Chakraborty2* Ashutosh Varshney2 Rameswar Panda3
Rogerio Feris3 Kate Saenko3,4 Abir Das2
2
1
IIT Madras, IIT Kharagpur, 3 MIT-IBM Watson AI Lab, 4 Boston University

1. Introduction
Supervised deep learning approaches have shown remarkable progress in video action recognition [7, 15, 16,
17, 36, 49]. However, being supervised, these models are
critically dependent on large datasets requiring tedious human annotation effort. This motivates us to look beyond the
supervised setting as supervised methods alone may not be
enough to deal with the volume of information contained in
videos. Semi-supervised learning approaches use structural
invariance between different views of the same data as a
source of supervision for learning useful representations. In
recent times, semi-supervised representation learning models [10, 29, 38, 50] have performed very well even surpassing its supervised counterparts in case of images [22, 47].
∗ The first two authors contributed equally.

Top-1 accuracy

Learning to recognize actions from only a handful of labeled videos is a challenging problem due to the scarcity
of tediously collected activity labels. We approach this
problem by learning a two-pathway temporal contrastive
model using unlabeled videos at two different speeds leveraging the fact that changing video speed does not change
an action. Specifically, we propose to maximize the similarity between encoded representations of the same video
at two different speeds as well as minimize the similarity
between different videos played at different speeds. This
way we use the rich supervisory information in terms of
‘time’ that is present in otherwise unsupervised pool of
videos. With this simple yet effective strategy of manipulating video playback rates, we considerably outperform video
extensions of sophisticated state-of-the-art semi-supervised
image recognition methods across multiple diverse benchmark datasets and network architectures. Interestingly, our
proposed approach benefits from out-of-domain unlabeled
videos showing generalization and robustness. We also perform rigorous ablations and analysis to validate our approach. Project page: https://cvir.github.io/TCL/.

Mini-Something-V2

60

40
30
20

Pseudo-label
Fully Supervised (100%)
TCL (Ours)
FixMatch

10

Jester

100

50

0

Top-1 accuracy

Abstract

90
80
70
Pseudo-label
Fully Supervised (100%)
TCL (Ours)
FixMatch

60
50

1

5

10

15

20

25

Percentage of labeled data

30

33

0

5

10

15

Percentage of labeled data

Figure 1: Comparison of top-1 accuracy for TCL (Ours) with
Pseudo-Label [35] and FixMatch [47] baselines trained with
different percentages of labeled training data. We evaluate the
efficacy of the approaches in terms of the least proportion of labeled data required to surpass the fully supervised [36] performance (shown with the red dotted line). With only 33% and 15%
of labeled data, our proposed TCL framework surpasses the supervised approaches in Mini-Something-V2 [23] and Jester [37]
datasets respectively. The two other compared methods fail to
reach the accuracy of the fully supervised approach with such
small amount of labeled data. (Best viewed in color.)
Notwithstanding their potential, semi-supervised video
action recognition has received very little attention. Trivially extending the image domain approaches to videos
without considering the rich temporal information may not
quite bridge the performance gap between the semi and the
fully supervised learning. But, in videos, we have another
source of supervision: time. We all know that an action recognizer is good if it can recognize actions irrespective of
whether the actions are performed slowly or quickly. Recently, supervised action recognition has benefited a lot by
using differently paced versions of the same video during
training [17, 54]. Motivated by the success of using slow
and fast versions of videos for supervised action recognition
as well as by the success of the contrastive learning frameworks [26, 41], we propose Temporal Contrastive Learning (TCL) for semi-supervised action recognition in videos
where consistent features representing both slow and fast
versions of the same videos are learned.
Starting with a model trained with limited labeled data,
we present a two-pathway model that processes unlabeled
videos at two different speeds and finds their representations. Though played at two different speeds, the videos
share the same semantics. Thus, similarity between these

10389

