Open-book Video Captioning with Retrieve-Copy-Generate Network
Ziqi Zhang1,2,3 , Zhongang Qi2 , Chunfeng Yuan1 ,* Ying Shan2 , Bing Li1 , Ying Deng5 , Weiming Hu1,3,4
1
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology
5
School of Aeronautical Manufacturing Engineering, Nanchang Hangkong University
{ziqi.zhang,cfyuan,bli,wmhu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,{zhongangqi,yingsshan}@tencent.com

Abstract
In this paper, we convert traditional video captioning
task into a new paradigm, i.e., Open-book Video Captioning, which generates natural language under the prompts
of video-content-relevant sentences, not limited to the video
itself. To address the open-book video captioning problem, we propose a novel Retrieve-Copy-Generate network,
where a pluggable video-to-text retriever is constructed to
retrieve sentences as hints from the training corpus effectively, and a copy-mechanism generator is introduced to
extract expressions from multi-retrieved sentences dynamically. The two modules can be trained end-to-end or separately, which is flexible and extensible. Our framework coordinates the conventional retrieval-based methods with orthodox encoder-decoder methods, which can not only draw
on the diverse expressions in the retrieved sentences but
also generate natural and accurate content of the video.
Extensive experiments on several benchmark datasets show
that our proposed approach surpasses the state-of-the-art
performance, indicating the effectiveness and promising of
the proposed paradigm in the task of video captioning.

1. Introduction
Video captioning is one of the most important visionlanguage tasks, and it seeks to automatically describe what
has happened in the video according to the visual content.
Recently, many promising methods [36, 22, 24, 34, 2] have
been proposed to address this task. These methods mainly
focus on learning the spatial-temporal representations of
videos to fully tap visual information and devising novel
decoders to achieve visual-textual alignment or controllable
decoding. In general, there exist some drawbacks for most
of the existing work: first, since the video content is the
only source of input, the generation process lacks appropri* Corresponding author.

Existing
Methods

Generator

A little girl
practices in a room

Video-to-Text
Retriever

Text
Corpus

Our
Method

Text1: A girl is on a mat
...doing a backflip
Text2: ... does somersaults
... other little girls watch

Copy-Mechanism
Generator

A kid doing a
somersault on a mat
while a boy watches

Figure 1. Pipeline comparison of the existing methods and our method.
Our generation is produced based on not only video content but also the
cues of multi-retrieved sentences searched from text corpus by a crossmodal retriever. Pluggable retriever provides guidance and expansion for
the generating model.

ate guidance, resulting in the generations of more generic
sentences; second, the memory or knowledge domain of the
model is fixed after training and cannot be expanded or revisited unless retraining.
To address these issues, we propose an Open-book Video
Captioning paradigm. We first compare the two crossmodal tasks for better illustration: Video-Text Retrieval
(VTR) and Video Captioning (VC). VTR is a discriminative task that can access all the information of visual and
textual modalities all the time; VC as a generative task can
only produce words based on current generated words and
visual information, which is more challenging than VTR.
Instead of performing the VC task directly, we propose to
convert it into two-stages: we first perform VTR to search
for sentences relevant to the given video from the text corpus; then, we leverage the retrieval sentences as extra hints
or guidance for caption generation. During the inference,
the generator can generate words based on the video content or directly copy expressions from retrieved sentences.

9837

