Continual Semantic Segmentation via Repulsion-Attraction of Sparse and
Disentangled Latent Representations
Umberto Michieli
Pietro Zanuttigh
Department of Information Engineering, University of Padova
{umberto.michieli, zanuttigh}@dei.unipd.it

current batch prototype
cumulative prototype
attractive force (clustering)
attractive force (proto. distillation)
repulsive force
unconstrained latent space span

Abstract
Deep neural networks suffer from the major limitation of
catastrophic forgetting old tasks when learning new ones.
In this paper we focus on class incremental continual learning in semantic segmentation, where new categories are
made available over time while previous training data is not
retained. The proposed continual learning scheme shapes
the latent space to reduce forgetting whilst improving the
recognition of novel classes. Our framework is driven by
three novel components which we also combine on top of
existing techniques effortlessly. First, prototypes matching
enforces latent space consistency on old classes, constraining the encoder to produce similar latent representation for
previously seen classes in the subsequent steps. Second,
features sparsification allows to make room in the latent
space to accommodate novel classes. Finally, contrastive
learning is employed to cluster features according to their
semantics while tearing apart those of different classes. Extensive evaluation on the Pascal VOC2012 and ADE20K
datasets demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach,
significantly outperforming state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is a challenging computer vision
problem with many real-world applications ranging from
robot sensing, to autonomous driving, video surveillance,
virtual reality, and many others. For most applications, continuously improving the set of classes to be distinguished is
a fundamental requirement. Current state-of-the-art semantic segmentation approaches are typically based on autoencoder structures and on fully convolutional models [38]
that are trained in a single-shot requiring all the dataset to
be available at once. Indeed, existing architectures are not
designed to incrementally update their inner classification
model to accommodate new categories. This issue is wellknown for deep neural networks and it is called catastrophic
forgetting [41, 18, 20], as deep architectures fail to update

Figure 1. Our continual learning scheme is driven by 3 main components: latent contrastive learning, prototypes matching and features sparsity. Latent representations of old classes are preserved
via prototypes matching and clustering, whilst also making room
for accommodating new classes via sparsity and repulsive force of
contrastive learning. The decoder preserves previous knowledge
via output-level distillation. In the figure, bike and cars represent
old classes and leave more space to new classes (the dog) thanks to
the novel constraints (green dotted ovals versus gray-filled ovals).

their parameters for learning new categories while preserving good performance on the old ones.
Continual learning has been widely studied in image
classification [32, 36] and object detection [56, 34], while
has been tackled only recently in the semantic segmentation field [42, 58, 4, 33]. In this paper, we investigate classincremental continual learning in semantic segmentation.
Differently from the majority of previous approaches both
in image classification [36, 51, 3] and semantic segmentation [58, 42, 4, 33], we do not mainly or solely rely on
output-level knowledge distillation. In this work, we focus
on latent space organization which has been only marginally
investigated in the current literature, and we empirically
prove it to be complementary to other existing techniques.
The main idea is depicted in Fig. 1, where some of the latent
space constraints are introduced. First, a prototype matching is devised to enforce features extraction consistency on
old classes between the cumulative prototype computed using all previous samples and the current prototype (i.e., the
prototype computed on the current batch only). In other

1114

