Introvert: Human Trajectory Prediction via Conditional 3D Attention
Nasim Shafiee
Northeastern University

Taskin Padir
Northeastern University

Ehsan Elhamifar
Northeastern University

shafiee.n@northeastern.edu

t.padir@northeastern.edu

e.elhamifar@northeastern.edu

Abstract
Predicting human trajectories is an important component of autonomous moving platforms, such as social robots
and self-driving cars. Human trajectories are affected by
both the physical features of the environment and social interactions with other humans. Despite recent surge of studies on human path prediction, most works focus on static
scene information, therefore, cannot leverage the rich dynamic visual information of the scene. In this work, we propose Introvert, a model which predicts human path based on
his/her observed trajectory and the dynamic scene context,
captured via a conditional 3D visual attention mechanism
working on the input video. Introvert infers both environment constraints and social interactions through observing
the dynamic scene instead of communicating with other humans, hence, its computational cost is independent of how
crowded the surrounding of a target human is. In addition,
to focus on relevant interactions and constraints for each
human, Introvert conditions its 3D attention model on the
observed trajectory of the target human to extract and focus
on relevant spatio-temporal primitives. Our experiments on
five publicly available datasets show that the Introvert improves the prediction errors of the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Predicting future trajectories of humans in dynamic environments, such as streets, airports, shopping malls and
sports fields, is an important task in computer vision with
applications in autonomous driving, human-robot interaction, urban safety and advertising, among others [50, 11,
48, 21, 15]. Forecasting human motions, however, is an extremely difficult problem, due to physical, social and mental
factors that collectively influence people’s trajectories. In
particular, as we move in an environment, we avoid physical
constraints and obstacles, follow landmarks, yield right-ofway to nearby people, follow social norms and change our
trajectory based on changes in the environment. This has
motivated a large body of works in recent years that aim to
model and incorporate various influencing factors for human trajectory prediction [1, 39, 23, 3, 13].

Prior Works and Challenges. Earlier works [14, 9, 10,
24, 25, 30, 36, 4, 49, 46, 51, 42, 53] have designed energy
functions to model human-human interactions, also referred
to as “social forces”. Despite their relative success, such
methods require careful feature and energy function design,
which often could capture only simple interactions but not
complex interactions in crowded environments. To mitigate
these limitations, more recent methods have proposed datadriven approaches by leveraging advances in deep neural
networks. In particular, sequence prediction methods based
on recurrent neural networks (RNNs) model each person’s
trajectory by an RNN, whose latent states capture human
motion, followed by social pooling that allows recurrent
models of nearby trajectories to share their states [1, 13].
However, they cannot capture the influence of farther people to a target trajectory, while giving the nearby trajectories the same importance weights. To overcome these limitations, attention-based models have been integrated with
RNNs [39, 3] and spatio-temporal graphs [41, 40, 33, 20] to
weigh different trajectories by adjusting the importance of
neighbors to each target human. However, most approaches
discussed above rely on only kinematics data, which contains information about only moving agents in the scene.
Given that videos contains rich information about physical configuration of the scene and navigation constraints,
several works have tried to use the visual context of the
scene in conjunction with kinematics data for more effective
predictions. This has been achieved by concatenating the
states of all RNNs with visual features of a current frame extracted via CNNs [40, 26, 41], which could be followed by
an attention model to select relevant features [39, 40]. However, existing works face multiple challenges. First, current
methods extract visual information that is often shared and
identical for all people moving in the environment. However, in practice, each person’s trajectory depends on the
region of the terrain where he/she is moving, physical constraints between the current position and the intended destination, as well as other humans relevant to the path. In
other words, different parts of the scene and visual features
have different importance that depends on the target human.
Second, visual features obtained by encoding one frame at
116815

