Deep Multi-Task Learning for Joint Localization, Perception, and Prediction
John Phillips1,2 Julieta Martinez1
Sergio Casas1,3 Abbas Sadat1
1

Uber Advanced Technologies Group

2

Ioan Andrei Bârsan1,3
Raquel Urtasun1,3

University of Waterloo

3

University of Toronto

{john.phillips,julieta,andreib,sergio.casas,asadat,urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
Over the last few years, we have witnessed tremendous
progress on many subtasks of autonomous driving including perception, motion forecasting, and motion planning.
However, these systems often assume that the car is accurately localized against a high-definition map. In this paper
we question this assumption, and investigate the issues that
arise in state-of-the-art autonomy stacks under localization
error. Based on our observations, we design a system that
jointly performs perception, prediction, and localization.
Our architecture is able to reuse computation between the
three tasks, and is thus able to correct localization errors
efficiently. We show experiments on a large-scale autonomy
dataset, demonstrating the efficiency and accuracy of our
proposed approach.

1. Introduction
Many tasks in robotics can be broken down into a series
of subproblems that are easier to study in isolation, and facilitate the interpretability of system failures [75]. In particular,
it is common to subdivide the self-driving problem into five
critical subtasks: (i) Localization: placing the car on a highdefinition (HD) map with centimetre-level accuracy. (ii)
Perception: estimating the number and location of dynamic
objects in the scene. (iii) Prediction: forecasting the trajectories and actions that the observed dynamic objects might do
in the next few seconds. (iv) Motion planning: coming up
with a desired trajectory for the ego-vehicle, and (v) Control:
using the actuators (i.e., steering, brakes, throttle, etc.) to
execute the planned motion.
Moreover, it is common to solve the above problems sequentially, such that the output of one sub-system is passed
as input to the next, and the procedure is repeated iteratively
over time. This classical approach lets researchers focus
on well-defined problems that can be studied independently,
and these areas tend to have well-understood metrics that
measure progress on their respective sub-fields. For sim-

plicity, researchers typically study autonomy subproblems
under the assumption that its inputs are correct. For example, state-of-the-art perception-prediction (P2) and motion
planning (MP) systems often take HD maps as input, thereby
assuming access to accurate online localization. We focus
our attention on this assumption and begin by studying the
effect of localization errors on modern autonomy pipelines.
Here, we observe that localization errors can have serious
consequences for P2 and MP systems, resulting in missed
detections and prediction errors, as well as bad planning that
leads to larger discrepancies with human trajectories, and increased collision rates. Please refer to Fig. 1 for an example
of an autonomy error caused by inaccurate localization.
In contrast to the classical formulation, recent systems
have been designed to perform multiple autonomy tasks
jointly. This joint formulation often comes with a shared
neural backbone that decreases computational and system
complexity, while still producing interpretable outputs that
make it easier to diagnose system failures. However, these
approaches have so far been limited to jointly performing
perception and prediction (P2) [11,13,41,43], P2 and motion
planning (P3) [52, 69, 70], semantic segmentation and localization [51] or road segmentation and object detection [60].
In this paper, and informed by our analysis of the effects
of localization error, we apply the joint design philosophy
to the tasks of localization, perception, and prediction; we
refer to this joint setting as LP2. We design an LP2 system
that shares computation between the tasks, which makes
it possible to perform localization with as little as 2 ms of
computational overhead while still producing intepretable
localization and P2 outputs. We evaluate our proposed system on a large-scale dataset in terms of motion planning
metrics, and show that the proposed approach matches the
performance of a traditional system with separate localization and perception components, while being able to correct
localization errors online, and having reduced run time and
engineering complexity.

4679

