Towards Unified Surgical Skill Assessment
Daochang Liu1,3,5 , Qiyue Li 1 , Tingting Jiang1 , Yizhou Wang1,4 , Rulin Miao2 , Fei Shan2 , Ziyu Li2
1
NELVT, Department of Computer Science, Peking University
2
Peking University Cancer Hospital, 3 Deepwise AI Lab
4
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University
5
Advanced Institute of Information Technology, Peking University
{daochang, liqiyue, ttjiang}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Surgical skills have a great influence on surgical safety
and patients’ well-being. Traditional assessment of surgical skills involves strenuous manual efforts, which lacks
efficiency and repeatability. Therefore, we attempt to automatically predict how well the surgery is performed using the surgical video. In this paper, a unified multi-path
framework for automatic surgical skill assessment is proposed, which takes care of multiple composing aspects of
surgical skills, including surgical tool usage, intraoperative
event pattern, and other skill proxies. The dependency relationships among these different aspects are specially modeled by a path dependency module in the framework. We
conduct extensive experiments on the JIGSAWS dataset of
simulated surgical tasks, and a new clinical dataset of real
laparoscopic surgeries. The proposed framework achieves
promising results on both datasets, with the state-of-the-art
on the simulated dataset advanced from 0.71 Spearman’s
correlation to 0.80. It is also shown that combining multiple skill aspects yields better performance than relying on a
single aspect.

1. Introduction
Hundreds of millions of surgeries are performed worldwide annually [57]. The proficiency of the operating surgeon is a key factor affecting outcomes after surgery [8].
To ensure patient safety and reduce clinical errors, surgical
skill assessment has become an indispensable part of surgical training [47] and credentialing [56].
Conventional surgical skill assessment is undertaken
manually by experts with direct observation [47] or structured rating protocols [35]. Such human assessment is slow
and hardly reproducible. Meanwhile, the prevalence of laparoscopic and robot-assisted surgeries nowadays brings a
large volume of surgery videos captured by the built-in cam-

1) Tool
Usage

Tool Movement

Dissection Area

Procedural Event

Adverse Event

2) Field
Clearness

3) Event
Pattern

High Skill

Low Skill

Figure 1. Different aspects of surgical skills. Surgical skills can
be assessed from many aspects, e.g., 1) the usage of surgical tools
2) the clearness of the operating field 3) the distribution of surgical
events. This paper proposes a unified framework for surgical skill
assessment, which exploits these different aspects and the interaction among them. Best viewed in color.

eras in surgical devices, which lay the foundation for automatic learning-based approaches to provide efficient and
repeatable skill assessment [52]. This paper works on automatic surgical skill assessment using surgical videos.
Surgical skills are complex with many facets. No universally accepted skill assessment criterion exists in the medical field currently [10]. By discussion with clinicians, we
identify three important aspects from the medical literature
that are likely to characterize surgical skills and also suitable for automatic assessment, i.e., surgical tool usage, surgical field clearness, and surgical event pattern. The first
aspect is the movement of surgical tools [19, 36], which
could reflect the instrument handling proficiency and motion efficiency of the surgeon. As in Fig. 1, a high-skill
surgeon will have a short and smooth tool trajectory con-

9522

