Open Domain Generalization with Domain-Augmented Meta-Learning
Yang Shu*, Zhangjie Cao*, Chenyu Wang, Jianmin Wang, Mingsheng Long (B)
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
{shu-y18,caozj14,cy-wang18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Leveraging datasets available to learn a model with high
generalization ability to unseen domains is important for
computer vision, especially when the unseen domain’s annotated data are unavailable. We study a novel and practical
problem of Open Domain Generalization (OpenDG), which
learns from different source domains to achieve high performance on an unknown target domain, where the distributions
and label sets of each individual source domain and the target domain can be different. The problem can be generally
applied to diverse source domains and widely applicable to
real-world applications. We propose a Domain-Augmented
Meta-Learning framework to learn open-domain generalizable representations. We augment domains on both featurelevel by a new Dirichlet mixup and label-level by distilled
soft-labeling, which complements each domain with missing classes and other domain knowledge. We conduct metalearning over domains by designing new meta-learning tasks
and losses to preserve domain unique knowledge and generalize knowledge across domains simultaneously. Experiment
results on various multi-domain datasets demonstrate that
the proposed Domain-Augmented Meta-Learning (DAML)
outperforms prior methods for unseen domain recognition.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks have achieved stateof-the-art performance on wide ranges of computer vision
applications with access to large-scale labeled data [23, 20,
39, 19]. However, for a target domain of interest, collecting
enough training data is prohibitive. A practical solution is to
generalize the model learned on the existing data to the unseen domain. Since the existing source datasets for training
may be from different resources, they may fall into different
domains and hold different label sets, e.g., ImageNet [8]
and DomainNet [36]. Besides, the target domain is totally
unknown, and may also have a distribution shift and a different label set from the source domains. We call the valuable
and challenging problem as Open Domain Generalization
* Equal contribution.

(OpenDG), where we need to learn generalizable representation from disparate source domains that generalizes well
to any unseen target domain, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Unseen target domain

Known classes
Open classes

Source domain 1

Source domain 2

Figure 1. Open Domain Generalization (OpenDG). Different source
domains hold disparate label sets. The goal is to learn generalizable
representations from these source domains to help classify the
known classes and detect open classes in the unseen target domain.

There are two key challenges for open domain generalization. (1) Distinct source domains and the unseen target
domain are drawn from different distributions with a large
distribution shift. (2) The different label sets of distinct
source domains cause some classes to exist in many more
domains than other classes. The data of minor classes existing in few domains are lacking in diversity. This makes the
problem extremely difficult for existing methods [25, 29].
To address the first challenge, previous works minimize
the distribution distance between domains by adversarial
learning [34, 29], which successfully closes the domain gap
when all source domains share the same label set. However,
according to the second challenge, the different label sets
between domains cause these distribution alignment methods
to suffer from severe mismatch of classes. For the second
challenge, a straightforward way is to manually sample data
of minor classes existing in few domains, but the diversity
in domains of the class is still limited. The generalization on
the minor class is still inferior to other classes.
To generalize from arbitrary source domains to an unseen
target domain, we propose a Domain-Augmented Meta-

9624

