Learning Dynamic Alignment via Meta-filter for Few-shot Learning
Chengming Xu∗1 Yanwei Fu∗1 Chen Liu1
Chengjie Wang2 Jilin Li2 Feiyue Huang2 Li Zhang1 Xiangyang Xue1
1
Fudan University 2 Youtu Lab, Tencent

Abstract

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have excelled in many computer
vision tasks such as image recognition [15, 39, 19] and ob∗ indicates equal contributions. Li Zhang is the corresponding author.

Chengming Xu, Yanwei Fu, Chen Liu, Li Zhang and Xiangyang
Xue are with School of Data Science, MOE Frontiers Center for Brain
Science, and Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing,
Fudan University. Email: {cmxu18, yanweifu, chenliu18, lizhangfd,
xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn
Chengjie Wang, Jilin Li and Feiyue Huang are with Youtu Lab, Tencent. Email: {jasoncjwang, jerolinli, garyhuang}@tencent.com

Query

Channel 1

Query feature

weight

Few-shot learning (FSL), which aims to recognise new
classes by adapting the learned knowledge with extremely
limited few-shot (support) examples, remains an important
open problem in computer vision. Most of the existing methods for feature alignment in few-shot learning only consider image-level or spatial-level alignment while omitting
the channel disparity. Our insight is that these methods
would lead to poor adaptation with redundant matching,
and leveraging channel-wise adjustment is the key to well
adapting the learned knowledge to new classes. Therefore, in this paper, we propose to learn a dynamic alignment, which can effectively highlight both query regions
and channels according to different local support information. Specifically, this is achieved by first dynamically
sampling the neighbourhood of the feature position conditioned on the input few shot, based on which we further
predict a both position-dependent and channel-dependent
Dynamic Meta-filter. The filter is used to align the query
feature with position-specific and channel-specific knowledge. Moreover, we adopt Neural Ordinary Differential
Equation (ODE) to enable a more accurate control of the
alignment. In such a sense our model is able to better
capture fine-grained semantic context of the few-shot example and thus facilitates dynamical knowledge adaptation for
few-shot learning. The resulting framework establishes the
new state-of-the-arts on major few-shot visual recognition
benchmarks, including miniImageNet and tieredImageNet.

Channel 2
Channel 1 Channel 2
Spatial-specific
Overall Aligned

Channel-specific

feature
CAN Ours
Figure 1. While position-specific alignment cannot eliminate the
negative influence of badly-learned channels, channel-specific one
can. CAN denotes Cross Attention Network [16] which is one of
the position-specific alignment models in FSL.

ject detection [14, 46]. However, they highly rely on an
avalanche of labeled training data and have difficulty transferring the learned knowledge to unseen categories. For
example, an object detector trained on 80 categories of
MSCOCO [23] would fail to detect a new class of mouse.
This severely limits their scalability to open-ended learning
of long tail categories in real-world. In contrast, learning
from extremely constrained (e.g., one or few) examples is
an important ability for humans. For example, children have
no problem forming the concept of “giraffe” by only taking
a glance from a picture, or hearing its description as looking
like a deer with a long neck.
Motivated by above observations, there has been a recent resurgence of research interest in few-shot learning
(FSL) [18, 11, 43, 40, 42]. It aims to recognise new classes
by adapting the learned knowledge with extremely limited
few-shot (support) examples. The most naive baseline for
few-shot classification is to learn a discriminative feature
representation by deep convolution neural network. Query
features are then assigned with the class label of the nearest
support feature. As an alternative to that, learnable metric

5182

