Self-Promoted Prototype Refinement for Few-Shot Class-Incremental Learning
Kai Zhu1∗
Yang Cao1∗
Wei Zhai1
Jie Cheng2
Zheng-Jun Zha1†
1
2
University of Science and Technology of China
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd.
{zkzy@mail., forrest@, wzhai056@mail.}ustc.edu.cn

jiecheng2009@google.com

zhazj@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Few-shot class-incremental learning is to recognize the
new classes given few samples and not forget the old
classes. It is a challenging task since representation optimization and prototype reorganization can only be achieved
under little supervision. To address this problem, we propose a novel incremental prototype learning scheme. Our
scheme consists of a random episode selection strategy that
adapts the feature representation to various generated incremental episodes to enhance the corresponding extensibility, and a self-promoted prototype refinement mechanism
which strengthens the expression ability of the new classes
by explicitly considering the dependencies among different
classes. Particularly, a dynamic relation projection module
is proposed to calculate the relation matrix in a shared embedding space and leverage it as the factor for bootstrapping the update of prototypes. Extensive experiments on
three benchmark datasets demonstrate the above-par incremental performance, outperforming state-of-the-art methods by a margin of 13%, 17% and 11%, respectively.

1. Introduction
Currently, deep convolutional neural networks [23, 11,
35] have made significant breakthroughs in a large number
of recognition tasks. When the class is given in advance
and the sample is sufficient, we can get a good recognition
model by typical supervised learning. In practice, however,
we are likely to encounter new classes that were not seen
before in continual data stream, and need to add them into
the recognition tasks, which forms the problem of classincremental learning (CIL) [20].
In this case, it is both time consuming and computationally expensive to retrain the model on all the old and new
data. And in many cases the old data may not be available,
due to data privacy or limited storage. A common solution is to fine-tune old models with new data, but it may
∗ Co-first Author
† Corresponding Author

Figure 1. The t-SNE [19] results in different methods at two stages.
The initial deep representations obtained by typical incremental
learning method [20, 1] and our proposed method are visualized
in the upper row (60 classes used, and 5 classes visualized in
color). In each colored class, deep-color points are learnable prototypes, and light-color ones show the distribution of real data.
The lower row shows the refined representations and prototypes
of each class after the increment of the gray class. Compared with
previous method, (1) the representations of the incremental classes
are more clustered (regions circled in violet dotted lines), (2) and
their corresponding prototypes are more discriminative, where the
incremental prototype visualized in black is representative and no
longer confused with that in red color.

arise the problem of catastrophic forgetting. To this end, recent learning-based approaches present to maintain the representation space for the old classes by preserving memories of old classes (e.g., examplar [20]) and introducing
various distillation losses, and then reconstruct classifiers
(e.g., fully connected layer [31], learnable prototypes [12])
in different ways to correct their preference for new classes.
However, existing methods assume that new class samples are available in large quantities, while the incremental
classes are usually atypical and the sample size is small in
practical applications. For example, in industrial visual inspection tasks, with the continuous progress of production,
new classes of defects often appear due to equipment wear
and other reasons. These defect samples may not only be

6801

