Densely connected multidilated convolutional networks for dense prediction tasks
Naoya Takahashi, Yuki Mitsufuji
Sony Corporation, Japan

Abstract
Tasks that involve high-resolution dense prediction require a modeling of both local and global patterns in a large
input field. Although the local and global structures often depend on each other and their simultaneous modeling
is important, many convolutional neural network (CNN)based approaches interchange representations in different
resolutions only a few times. In this paper, we claim the importance of a dense simultaneous modeling of multiresolution representation and propose a novel CNN architecture
called densely connected multidilated DenseNet (D3Net).
D3Net involves a novel multidilated convolution that has
different dilation factors in a single layer to model different resolutions simultaneously. By combining the multidilated convolution with the DenseNet architecture, D3Net
incorporates multiresolution learning with an exponentially
growing receptive field in almost all layers, while avoiding
the aliasing problem that occurs when we naively incorporate the dilated convolution in DenseNet. Experiments on
the image semantic segmentation task using Cityscapes and
the audio source separation task using MUSDB18 show that
the proposed method has superior performance over stateof-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Dense prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation and audio source separation typically accept highdimensional input data and produce predictions with the
same (or similar) dimensions. To efficiently handle highdimensional data and model the context that lies in a large
field, various neural network architectures have been proposed [24, 38, 47, 44]. In particular, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become an essential component,
and a variety of advanced CNN architectures have been proposed to improve performance on the basis of motivations
such as making the networks deeper while improving a gradient flow [13, 16, 18], multibranch convolution [40, 39]
and explicitly modeling interchannel dependences of convolutional features [14]. One key component of these architectures is a skip connection that creates short paths from

early layers to later layers. In [16], a simple yet powerful skip connectivity pattern that connects all preceding layers, called DenseNet, is proposed. Such dense connectivity
allows maximum information flow, making CNNs deeper
while keeping the model size small by efficiently reusing
intermediate representations of preceding layers.
One of the benefits of a deeper CNN is its larger receptive field that allows a large context to be modeled, which is
important for tasks that require the utilization of a widearea or long-term dependence in a high-resolution input.
For example, sufficiently large parts of objects have to be
modeled for semantic segmentation [2, 50, 1, 55, 56, 33,
47, 8, 52, 57], whereas modeling a long-term dependence is
shown to be important for various audio tasks such as audio
event recognition and source separation [43, 42, 41]. Although the receptive field grows linearly with respect to the
number of layers stacked, the simple stacking of convolution layers is not the optimal way to increase it, as too many
layers are required to cover a sufficiently large input, which
makes the network training difficult. A popular approach
to incorporate a large context with a reasonable model size
is to repeatedly downsample intermediate network outputs
and apply operations in lower resolution representations. In
dense prediction tasks, the low-resolution representations
are again upsampled to recover the resolution lost while carrying over the global perspective from downsampled layers
[28, 29, 24, 47, 41]. Another approach is dilated convolution, where dilation factors are set to grow exponentially
as layers are stacked; and therefore, the networks cover a
large receptive field with a small number of layers. Dilated
convolution is shown to be effective for many tasks that require high-resolution dense predictions [50, 3, 46]. Most
previously proposed CNN architectures interchange information in different resolutions only a few times, e.g., once
or a few times at the end of the network [24, 55, 56], or once
at the beginning or end of each module [29, 47]. However,
since the local and global patterns can depend on each other,
i.e., a local structure can be more accurately estimated by
knowing a global structure and vice versa, a more frequent
(dense) interchange of information among representations
in multiple resolutions could be beneficial.
In this work, we propose a novel CNN architecture for

993

