Reciprocal Landmark Detection and Tracking with Extremely Few Annotations
Jianzhe Lin1
Ghazal Sahebzamani1
Christina Luong2,3
Mohammad Jafari1
Purang Abolmaesumi1
1

Fatemeh Taheri Dezaki1
Teresa Tsang2,4

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of British Columbia, Canada
2
Vancouver General Hospital, Canada
3
Department of Medicine, The University of British Columbia
4
The Division of Cardiology, The University of British Columbia
{jianzhelin, ghazal, fatemeht, mohammadj, purang}@ece.ubc.ca
{Christina.Luong, t.tsang}@ubc.ca

Abstract
Localization of anatomical landmarks to perform twodimensional measurements in echocardiography is part of
routine clinical workflow in cardiac disease diagnosis. Automatic localization of those landmarks is highly desirable
to improve workflow and reduce interobserver variability.
Training a machine learning framework to perform such localization is hindered given the sparse nature of gold standard labels; only few percent of cardiac cine series frames
are normally manually labeled for clinical use. In this paper, we propose a new end-to-end reciprocal detection and
tracking model that is specifically designed to handle the
sparse nature of echocardiography labels. The model is
trained using few annotated frames across the entire cardiac cine sequence to generate consistent detection and
tracking of landmarks, and an adversarial training for the
model is proposed to take advantage of these annotated
frames. The superiority of the proposed reciprocal model
is demonstrated using a series of experiments.

1. Introduction
Data scarcity and lack of annotation is a general problem for developing machine learning models in medical
imaging. Among various medical imaging modalities, ultrasound (US) is the most frequently used modality given
its widespread availability, lower cost, and safety since it
does not involve ionizing radiation. Specifically, US imaging, in the form of echocardiography (echo), is the standardof-care in cardiac imaging for the detection of heart disease. Echo examinations are performed across up to 14
standard views from several acoustic windows on the chest.
In this paper, we specifically focus on the parasternal long

axis (PLAX), which is one of the most common view acquired in the point-of-care US for rapid examination of cardiac function (Fig. 1). Several measurements from PLAX
require the localization of anatomical landmarks across discrete points in the cardiac cycle. Our work specifically investigates automatic localization of the left ventricle (LV)
internal dimension (LVID), which is routinely used to estimate the ejection fraction (EF), a strong indicator of cardiac
function abnormality. In clinics, LVID landmarks are determined in two frames of the cardiac cycle, i.e. end-diastolic
and end-systolic. However, such annotation is challenging,
specially for general physicians at point-of-care who do not
have the experience of cardiologists. As such, the automation of landmark localization is highly desirable. However,
developing a machine learning model for such automation
has been hindered by the availability of only sparse set of labeled frames in cardiac cines. Manually labeling all cardiac
frames for a large set of cardiac cines is virtually impractical, given limited expert time.
Instead of manually labeling, we propose a new Reciprocal landmark Detection and Tracking (RDT) model that enables automation in measurements across the entire cardiac
cycle. The model only uses prior knowledge from sparsely
labeled key frames that are temporally distant in a cardiac
cycle. Meanwhile, we take advantage of temporal coherence of cardiac cine series to impose cycle consistency in
tracking landmarks across unannotated frames that are between these two annotated frames. To impose consistent
detection and tracking of the landmarks, we propose a reciprocal training as a self-supervision process.
In summary, we propose a RDT model, which is weakly
supervised by only two annotated keyframes in an image sequence for model training. For testing, the model is an endto-end model that detects the landmark in the first frame,

15170

