Towards Bridging Event Captioner and Sentence Localizer for
Weakly Supervised Dense Event Captioning
Shaoxiang Chen and Yu-Gang Jiang∗
Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing,
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{sxchen13, ygj}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Dense Event Captioning (DEC) aims to jointly localize and describe multiple events of interest in untrimmed
videos, which is an advancement of the conventional video
captioning task (generating a single sentence description
for a trimmed video). Weakly Supervised Dense Event Captioning (WS-DEC) goes one step further by not relying
on human-annotated temporal event boundaries. However,
there are few methods trying to tackle this task, and how to
connect localization and description remains an open problem. In this paper, we demonstrate that under weak supervision, the event captioning module and localization module
should be more closely bridged in order to improve description performance. Different from previous approaches, in
our method, the event captioner generates a sentence from
a video segment and feeds it to the sentence localizer to reconstruct the segment, and the localizer produces word importance weights as a guidance for the captioner to improve
event description. To further bridge the sentence localizer
and event captioner, a concept learner is adopted as the
basis of the sentence localizer, which can be utilized to construct an induced set of concept features to enhance video
features and improve the event captioner. Finally, our proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art WS-DEC methods on the ActivityNet Captions dataset.

1. Introduction
A conventional video captioning task [6, 53] refers to
generating a single sentence description for a trimmed video
(usually around 10 seconds long), and it has been extensively studied in recent years [45, 58, 34, 17, 46, 61, 67].
Since natural videos contain multiple events, the Dense
Event Captioning (DEC) task [20] is later introduced, which
aims at generating multiple temporally localized event descriptions for untrimmed videos with the help of temporal
∗ Corresponding author.

(a) Previous WS-DEC method

GT sentence

𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿

𝑅𝑅

segment

(b) Proposed method

GT sentence
𝑅𝑅

Reconstruction Loss
Network Module

𝑅𝑅

segment

𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶

𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶

𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼𝐼

𝑅𝑅

sentence

sentence

𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿
𝑅𝑅

𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿𝐿

segment

segment

𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶𝐶

Figure 1. Comparison of the workflows of the previous
method [11] (a) and our proposed method (b). ‘Cpt’ and ‘ISAB’
denote concept learner and induced set attention block. The yellow connections highlight our advantages, and they bridge the captioner and localizer more closely by allowing richer bidirectional
information passing between the two modules.

boundary annotations for each event. Weakly Supervised
Dense Event Captioning (WS-DEC) [11] goes one step further by not relying on the resource-consuming temporal
boundary annotations, and this also makes the task more
challenging.
For strongly supervised dense event captioning, the event
localization module can receive strong supervision signals
to learn to predict precise temporal boundaries and the captioning module can focus on more accurate video segments
during both training and testing. Thus most existing methods [47, 22, 68, 32] design a localization module similar to
temporal action detection networks [5, 24] to firstly generate events of interest and then describe them with a captioning module. But for weakly supervised dense event
captioning, other than the sentence annotation, the localization and captioning modules can only receive information from each other. As shown in Fig. 1 (a), the first WSDEC method [11] adopted an iterative approach, in which
the event captioner and sentence localizer in turn feed outputs to each other. Its underlying assumption is that by op-

8425

