Data-Free Model Extraction
Jean-Baptiste Truong*
Worcester Polytechnic Institute

Pratyush Maini*†
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi

jtruong2@wpi.edu

pratyush.maini@gmail.com

Robert J. Walls
Worcester Polytechnic Institute

Nicolas Papernot
University of Toronto and Vector Institute

rjwalls@wpi.edu

nicolas.papernot@utoronto.ca

Abstract

predictions directly accessible to customers. However, the
exposure of the model’s predictions represents a significant
risk as an adversary can leverage this information to steal
the model’s knowledge [26, 41, 7, 32, 31, 11, 28, 19]. The
threat of such model extraction attacks is two-fold: adversaries may use the stolen model for monetary gains or as a
reconnaissance step to mount further attacks [33, 37].

Current model extraction attacks assume that the adversary has access to a surrogate dataset with characteristics similar to the proprietary data used to train the victim model. This requirement precludes the use of existing
model extraction techniques on valuable models, such as
those trained on rare or hard to acquire datasets. In contrast, we propose data-free model extraction methods that
do not require a surrogate dataset. Our approach adapts
techniques from the area of data-free knowledge transfer
for model extraction. As part of our study, we identify that
the choice of loss is critical to ensuring that the extracted
model is an accurate replica of the victim model. Furthermore, we address difficulties arising from the adversary’s
limited access to the victim model in a black-box setting.
For example, we recover the model’s logits from its probability predictions to approximate gradients. We find that
the proposed data-free model extraction approach achieves
high-accuracy with reasonable query complexity – 0.99⇥
and 0.92⇥ the victim model accuracy on SVHN and CIFAR10 datasets given 2M and 20M queries respectively.

1. Introduction
Machine learning (ML) and deep learning, in particular, often require large amounts of training data to achieve
high performance on a particular task [39]. Curating
such data necessitates significant time and monetary investment [17, 12]. Thus, the resulting ML model becomes valuable intellectual property, especially when considering the
computing resources and human expertise required [5, 13].
Often to monetize these models, companies make them
available as a service via APIs over the web (MLaaS). These
models are also deployed to end-user devices, making their
* equal contribution
† Work done while an intern at the Vector Institute.

While model extraction is in many ways similar to model
distillation, it differs in that the victim’s proprietary training set is not accessible to the adversary. To stage a model
extraction attack, the adversary typically queries the victim
using samples from a surrogate dataset with semantic or distributional similarity to the original training set [31]. In the
classification setting, the victim’s response may be limited
to the most-likely label [6] or include confidence values for
different class labels [19]. The number of queries—i.e., the
query complexity—is also an important consideration for
the adversary. The greater the query complexity, the higher
the cost of the attack—unless the victim model is available
offline (e.g., deployed on-device).
In this work, we first demonstrate in Section 3 that the
success of current established practices for model extraction, which often take the form of distillation, depends on
the closeness of the surrogate distribution to the victim’s
proprietary training distribution. This finding has important
implications for the practicality of existing model extraction
techniques.
To remedy this, we propose techniques for data-free
model extraction (DFME). In short, we demonstrate the feasibility of extracting ML models without any knowledge of
the distribution of the proprietary training data. In practice,
gathering a surrogate dataset for the purpose of model extraction can be a very expensive process, both in terms of
the time and money required to curate it. In particular, the
most valuable models are often those for which it is most
challenging to curate an appropriate surrogate dataset, i.e.,
when the victim model’s value arises from its proprietary

4771

