Cross-Domain Gradient Discrepancy Minimization
for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation

1

Zhekai Du1 , Jingjing Li *1 , Hongzu Su1 , Lei Zhu2 , Ke Lu1
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China; 2 Shandong Normal Unversity

{zhekaid, hongzus}@std.uestc.edu.cn, lijin117@yeah.net, leizhu0608@gmail.com, kel@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) aims to generalize the knowledge learned from a well-labeled source
domain to an unlabled target domain. Recently, adversarial domain adaptation with two distinct classifiers (biclassifier) has been introduced into UDA which is effective to align distributions between different domains. Previous bi-classifier adversarial learning methods only focus
on the similarity between the outputs of two distinct classifiers. However, the similarity of the outputs cannot guarantee the accuracy of target samples, i.e., traget samples may
match to wrong categories even if the discrepancy between
two classifiers is small. To challenge this issue, in this paper, we propose a cross-domain gradient discrepancy minimization (CGDM) method which explicitly minimizes the
discrepancy of gradients generated by source samples and
target samples. Specifically, the gradient gives a cue for the
semantic information of target samples so it can be used
as a good supervision to improve the accuracy of target
samples. In order to compute the gradient signal of target smaples, we further obtain target pseudo labels through
a clustering-based self-supervised learning. Extensive experiments on three widely used UDA datasets show that our
method surpasses many previous state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Conventional deep learning methods suffer from the
challenge of heavy dependency on large-scale labeled data,
which is extremely expensive in many real-world scenarios such as medical image analysis. To avoid expensive
data annotation, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA)
[30, 19, 18] attempts to transfer a model trained on labeled
data collected in the source domain to a similar target domain with unlabled data. To mitigate the domain shift, one
popular paradigm in UDA is to reduce the distribution divergence between domains by minimizing a specific metric
[24, 27, 42]. Another widely used paradigm aims to learn
* Jingjing Li is the corresponding author.

Ambiguous target samples
Source

Match to the wrong class
Target

Decision boundary

Figure 1. Illustration of the issue in previous bi-classifier adversarial learning. Previous methods only consider the discrepancy
between classifiers and neglect the accuracy of the target samples.

domain-invariant feature representations by leveraging the
idea of adversarial learning [9], which has achieved remarkable success in the field of UDA recently.
Existing adversarial domain adaptation methods can be
implemented in two ways. One way is to apply an extra domain discriminator to distinguish whether a sample comes
from the source or the target domain. At the same time, a
feature extractor is used to fool the domain discriminator
by learning undistinguishable features from input samples
[10, 9, 25]. However, these domain adversarial methods neglect the category information of target samples, which may
result in deterioration of the feature discriminability [5].
Another adversarial paradigm proposes a within-network
adversarial strategy with two classifiers [36, 14]. Through
the minimax game between the classifiers and the generator
on the cross-classifier outputs discrepancy, the target samples outside the support of the source domain can be detected by the decision boundaries effectively, thus the feature alignment could be established while the discriminability is also preserved.
Although bi-classifier adversarial learning has shown
promising performance, methods with this paradigm only
focus on the similarity between two distinct classifiers
through a discrepancy metric such as ℓ1 distance [36]
and slide wasserstein distance [14]. Here we argue that
only considering the discrepancy between classifiers cannot guarantee the accuracy and diversity of classification
on target samples, because it is possible that both classi-

3937

