NeRV: Neural Reflectance and Visibility Fields for Relighting and View Synthesis
Pratul P. Srinivasan

Boyang Deng

Xiuming Zhang

Matthew Tancik

Google Research

Google Research

MIT

UC Berkeley

Ben Mildenhall

Jonathan T. Barron

UC Berkeley

Google Research

Abstract
We present a method that takes as input a set of images
of a scene illuminated by unconstrained known lighting, and
produces as output a 3D representation that can be rendered
from novel viewpoints under arbitrary lighting conditions.
Our method represents the scene as a continuous volumetric
function parameterized as MLPs whose inputs are a 3D location and whose outputs are the following scene properties
at that input location: volume density, surface normal, material parameters, distance to the first surface intersection
in any direction, and visibility of the external environment
in any direction. Together, these allow us to render novel
views of the object under arbitrary lighting, including indirect illumination effects. The predicted visibility and surface
intersection fields are critical to our model’s ability to simulate direct and indirect illumination during training, because
the brute-force techniques used by prior work are intractable
for lighting conditions outside of controlled setups with a single light. Our method outperforms alternative approaches
for recovering relightable 3D scene representations, and
performs well in complex lighting settings that have posed a
significant challenge to prior work.

1. Introduction
A central problem in computer vision is that of inferring
the physical geometry and material properties that together
explain observed images. In addition to its importance for
recognition and robotics, a solution to this open problem
would have significant value for computer graphics — the
ability to create realistic 3D models from standard photos
could democratize 3D content creation and allow anyone
to use real-world objects in photography, filmmaking, and
game development. In this paper, we work towards this
goal and present an approach for estimating a volumetric 3D
representation from images of a scene under arbitrary known
lighting conditions, such that high-quality novel images can
be rendered from arbitrary unseen viewpoints and under

(a) Input images of the scene under unconstrained varying (known) lighting conditions

(b) Output renderings from novel viewpoints and lighting conditions

Figure 1: We optimize a Neural Reflectance and Visibility Field
(NeRV) 3D representation from a set of input images of a scene
illuminated by known but unconstrained lighting. Our NeRV representation can be rendered from novel views under arbitrary lighting
conditions not seen during training. Here, we visualize example
input data and renderings for two scenes. The first two output
rendered images for each scene are from the same viewpoint, each
illuminated by a point light at a different location, and the last image
is from a different viewpoint under a random colored illumination.

novel unobserved lighting conditions, as shown in Figure 1.
The vision and graphics research communities have recently made substantial progress towards the novel view
synthesis portion of this goal. The Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [32] approach has shown that it is possible to synthesize photorealistic images of scenes by training a simple
neural network to map 3D locations in the scene to a continuous field of volume density and color. Volume rendering is
trivially differentiable, so the parameters of a NeRF can be
optimized for a single scene by using gradient descent to minimize the difference between renderings of the NeRF and a
set of observed images. Though NeRF produces compelling
results for view synthesis, it does not provide a solution for
relighting. This is because NeRF models just the amount of

7495

