PointGuard: Provably Robust 3D Point Cloud Classification
Hongbin Liu∗

Jinyuan Jia∗
Neil Zhenqiang Gong
Duke University

{hongbin.liu, jinyuan.jia, neil.gong}@duke.edu

Abstract
3D point cloud classification has many safety-critical
applications such as autonomous driving and robotic grasping. However, several studies showed that it is vulnerable to
adversarial attacks. In particular, an attacker can make a
classifier predict an incorrect label for a 3D point cloud via
carefully modifying, adding, and/or deleting a small number of its points. Randomized smoothing is state-of-the-art
technique to build certifiably robust 2D image classifiers.
However, when applied to 3D point cloud classification,
randomized smoothing can only certify robustness against
adversarially modified points.
In this work, we propose PointGuard, the first defense
that has provable robustness guarantees against adversarially modified, added, and/or deleted points. Specifically,
given a 3D point cloud and an arbitrary point cloud classifier, our PointGuard first creates multiple subsampled point
clouds, each of which contains a random subset of the
points in the original point cloud; then our PointGuard predicts the label of the original point cloud as the majority
vote among the labels of the subsampled point clouds predicted by the point cloud classifier. Our first major theoretical contribution is that we show PointGuard provably predicts the same label for a 3D point cloud when the number
of adversarially modified, added, and/or deleted points is
bounded. Our second major theoretical contribution is that
we prove the tightness of our derived bound when no assumptions on the point cloud classifier are made. Moreover,
we design an efficient algorithm to compute our certified
robustness guarantees. We also empirically evaluate PointGuard on ModelNet40 and ScanNet benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
3D point cloud, which comprises a set of 3D points, is
a crucial data structure in modelling a 3D shape or object.
In recent years, we have witnessed an increasing interest
in 3D point cloud classification [23, 17, 24, 30] because it
∗ The first two authors made equal contributions.

Modify 10 points

Prediction: radio

Add 10 points

Prediction: radio

Delete 274 points

Prediction: tent

Label: plane
Prediction: plane

Figure 1: Top: point modification attack. Middle: point
addition attack. Bottom: point deletion attack. Red
points are added and yellow points are deleted.
has many applications, such as robotic grasping [28], autonomous driving [2, 36], etc.. However, multiple recent
studies [34, 31, 38, 39, 35, 20] showed that 3D point cloud
classifiers are vulnerable to adversarial attacks. In particular, given a 3D point cloud, an attacker can carefully modify, add, and/or delete a small number of points such that a
3D point cloud classifier predicts an incorrect label for it.
We can categorize these attacks into four types based on the
capability of an attacker: point modification, addition, deletion, and perturbation attacks. In particular, in a point modification/addition/deletion attack [34, 31, 38, 35], an attacker
can only modify/add/delete points in a 3D point cloud. An
attacker, however, can apply one or more of the above three
operations, i.e., modification, addition, and deletion, to a
3D point cloud in a point perturbation attack. Figure 1 illustrates the point modification, addition, and deletion attacks.
These adversarial attacks pose severe security concerns to
point cloud classification in safety-critical applications.
Several empirical defenses [18, 40, 35, 6] have been proposed to mitigate the attacks. Roughly speaking, these defenses aim to detect the attacks or train more robust point
cloud classifiers. For instance, Zhou et al. [40] proposed a
defense called DUP-Net, whose key step is to detect outlier
points and discard them before classifying a point cloud.

6186

