Coming Down to Earth: Satellite-to-Street View Synthesis for Geo-Localization
Aysim Toker

Qunjie Zhou
Maxim Maximov
Technical University of Munich

Laura Leal-Taixé

{aysim.toker, qunjie.zhou, maxim.maximov, leal.taixe}@tum.de

Figure 1: For a collection of satellite and street images, our method synthesizes the street view for each satellite input (right).
It also simultaneously determines the geographic location of a query street image by matching it with the closest satellite
image in the database (left→right). This is done in one single architecture which allows for end-to-end training.

Abstract
The goal of cross-view image based geo-localization is
to determine the location of a given street view image by
matching it against a collection of geo-tagged satellite images. This task is notoriously challenging due to the drastic
viewpoint and appearance differences between the two domains. We show that we can address this discrepancy explicitly by learning to synthesize realistic street views from
satellite inputs. Following this observation, we propose a
novel multi-task architecture in which image synthesis and
retrieval are considered jointly. The rationale behind this
is that we can bias our network to learn latent feature representations that are useful for retrieval if we utilize them
to generate images across the two input domains. To the
best of our knowledge, ours is the first approach that creates realistic street views from satellite images and localizes the corresponding query street-view simultaneously in
an end-to-end manner. In our experiments, we obtain stateof-the-art performance on the CVUSA and CVACT benchmarks. Finally, we show compelling qualitative results for
satellite-to-street view synthesis.

1. Introduction
Estimating the geographic location of an image is a
fundamental problem in computer vision with applications
in autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented reality.

Originally, the problem was cast as an image retrieval
task [27, 9, 37, 6, 2, 31, 38, 26], where the goal is to determine the geographic location of a query street view image by comparing it against a database of GPS-tagged street
images. The main limitation of this approach is that, even
though there are large databases available for this type of
imagery, the coverage varies a lot between different regions
of the world, and it is generally sparse in rural areas.
Satellite imagery, on the other hand, is broadly available
for most parts of the world with services like Google maps.
This encouraged researchers to focus on cross-view imagebased geo-localization [36, 16, 33, 17, 28, 4, 30, 29] as a
more general and inclusive alternative. The overall idea is to
predict the latitude and longitude of a street-level image by
matching it against a GPS-tagged satellite database. Even
though this approach helps to cover vast parts of the world,
the significant domain gap between a pair of street view and
top-view satellite images, shown in Figure 1, makes crossview image based geo-localization extremely challenging.
For instance, the appearance of the two images can vary
significantly as they are typically taken at different times
and with different cameras, leading to illumination changes.
The biggest challenge, however, comes from the dramatically different viewpoints of street and satellite images –
even for human eyes, it is far from obvious that two images
show the same location. Satellite images cover a broader
area in comparison to the ego-centric viewpoint of the street
images. On the other hand, there are a lot of additional fea-

6488

