Feature-Level Collaboration: Joint Unsupervised Learning of Optical Flow,
Stereo Depth and Camera Motion
Cheng Chi1 , Qingjie Wang1 , Tianyu Hao1 , Peng Guo1 , Xin Yang1∗
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{chengchi2019, wqj, hty, guopeng, xinyang2014} @hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Precise estimation of optical flow, stereo depth and camera motion are important for the real-world 3D scene understanding and visual perception. Since the three tasks
are tightly coupled with the inherent 3D geometric constraints, current studies have demonstrated that the three
tasks can be improved through jointly optimizing geometric
loss functions of several individual networks. In this paper, we show that effective feature-level collaboration of the
networks for the three respective tasks could achieve much
greater performance improvement for all three tasks than
only loss-level joint optimization. Specifically, we propose
a single network to combine and improve the three tasks.
The network extracts the features of two consecutive stereo
images, and simultaneously estimates optical flow, stereo
depth and camera motion. The whole network mainly contains four parts: (I) a feature-sharing encoder to extract
features of input images, which can enhance features’ representation ability; (II) a pooled decoder to estimate both
optical flow and stereo depth; (III) a camera pose estimation module which fuses optical flow and stereo depth information; (IV) a cost volume complement module to improve
the performance of optical flow in static and occluded regions. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance
among the joint unsupervised methods, including optical
flow and stereo depth estimation on KITTI 2012 and 2015
benchmarks, and camera motion estimation on KITTI VO
dataset.

1. Introduction
Optical flow, depth and camera motion estimation are
three fundamental tasks in the field of computer vision.
Deep learning methods have greatly advanced the state-ofthe-art in optical flow and stereo depth estimation [32, 13,
7]. Meanwhile, learning-based camera ego-motion prediction [53, 52] has also made significant progress recently.
∗ represents the corresponding author

Jointly estimating optical flow, stereo depth and camera motion can be applied in a wide range of applications, such
as autonomous navigation [9, 42], 3D scene reconstruction [38] and robot control [1]. Many unified unsupervised
framework [6, 44, 45, 27, 2] have been proposed to jointly
optimize two or three tasks concurrently. These joint methods demonstrate that jointly tackling these tasks has a positive effect on each of them.
There is a tight geometric relationship among optical
flow, stereo depth and camera pose, due to that each one
of the three tasks can be calculated by the other two. Therefore, previous joint methods [4, 30, 21, 45] usually estimate
them by several individual networks, and construct various
geometric consistency constraint losses to mutually guide
each other. Recently, some works [24, 27] have tried to
share the same network for stereo depth and optical flow
estimation. However, based on the epipolar constraint, the
stereo depth estimation network only needs to search pixel
correspondences in horizontal lines, while the optical flow
estimation network demands a more comprehensive search
in both horizontal and vertical directions. So these methods only treat the stereo depth and optical flow estimation
as exactly the same task, but fail to allow full play the advantage of sharing features between stereo depth and optical flow estimation. That is, most if not all, existing joint
methods [4, 30, 45, 21, 24, 27] do not take full advantage of
the feature-level collaboration to constrain each other in the
learning process of the three tasks.
In this paper, we demonstrate that effective feature-level
collaboration for the three respective tasks could achieve
much greater performance improvement for all three tasks
than loss-level joint optimization. The intuition behind this
idea is that both stereo depth and optical flow estimation
networks find pixel correspondences between two images,
sharing features between the two tasks is reasonable and
meanwhile constrain the training process of the two tasks.
In addition, camera motion can be directly calculated by
the optical flow and stereo depth, so utilizing the featurelevel information of optical flow and stereo depth could add
further geometric constraint for feature training. To this
12463

