Fast Bayesian Uncertainty Estimation and Reduction of Batch Normalized
Single Image Super-Resolution Network
Aupendu Kar, Prabir Kumar Biswas
Indian Institute of Technology Kharagpur, WB, India
Webpage: aupendu.github.io/sr-uncertainty
mailtoaupendu@gmail.com, pkb@ece.iitkgp.ac.in

Abstract
Convolutional neural network (CNN) has achieved unprecedented success in image super-resolution tasks in recent years. However, the network’s performance depends
on the distribution of the training sets and degrades on outof-distribution samples. This paper adopts a Bayesian approach for estimating uncertainty associated with output
and applies it in a deep image super-resolution model to
address the concern mentioned above. We use the uncertainty estimation technique using the batch-normalization
layer, where stochasticity of the batch mean and variance
generate Monte-Carlo (MC) samples. The MC samples,
which are nothing but different super-resolved images using different stochastic parameters, reconstruct the image,
and provide a confidence or uncertainty map of the reconstruction. We propose a faster approach for MC sample
generation, and it allows the variable image size during
testing. Therefore, it will be useful for image reconstruction
domain. Our experimental findings show that this uncertainty map strongly relates to the quality of reconstruction
generated by the deep CNN model and explains its limitation. Furthermore, this paper proposes an approach to
reduce the model’s uncertainty for an input image, and it
helps to defend the adversarial attacks on the image superresolution model. The proposed uncertainty reduction technique also improves the performance of the model for outof-distribution test images. To the best of our knowledge, we
are the first to propose an adversarial defense mechanism in
any image reconstruction domain.

1. Introduction
Single image super-resolution (SISR) is an ill-posed low
vision problem, where we upscale the image to increase the
image’s spatial resolution. Besides improving the perceptual quality of images for human interpretation, SISR boosts
other computer vision tasks’ performance [22]. Due to the

(a) LR Image

(b) HR Image

(c) SR Image

(d) Uncertainty

Figure 1. In the first row images, the left image is an LR image,
and the model’s uncertainty during upscaling is in the right. Two
cropped regions have different textures. We can observe from two
patches in the second and third-row that whenever the model fails
to reconstruct the texture correctly (second-row image), it leads to
higher uncertainty.

advancement of deep learning techniques, the community
has developed a state-of-the-art SISR network using different topology-based deep neural architectures [26]. However, due to deep learning models’ black-box nature, it is
always hard to trust CNN’s outcome and the limitations of
the models are unknown.
Understanding the model’s limitations is a crucial part
of many machine learning systems. Deep learning models learn powerful abstract representations from highdimensional images to map it to the outputs. The output results on the unknown test data are often considered
blindly and believed to be reliable, which is not always
true. Bayesian uncertainty plays a vital role in determining the confidence of the model during testing. Uncertainty

4957

