Ranking Neural Checkpoints
Yandong Li 1,2 * Xuhui Jia2 Ruoxin Sang2
Yukun Zhu2 Bradley Green2 Liqiang Wang1 Boqing Gong2
1
University of Central Florida 2 Google
lyndon.leeseu@outlook.com

lwang@cs.ucf.edu

Abstract
This paper is concerned with ranking many pre-trained
deep neural networks (DNNs), called checkpoints, for the
transfer learning to a downstream task. Thanks to the broad
use of DNNs, we may easily collect hundreds of checkpoints
from various sources. Which of them transfers the best to
our downstream task of interest? Striving to answer this
question thoroughly, we establish a neural checkpoint ranking benchmark (NeuCRaB) and study some intuitive ranking measures. These measures are generic, applying to the
checkpoints of different output types without knowing how
the checkpoints are pre-trained on which datasets. They
also incur low computation cost, being practically meaningful. Our results suggest that the linear separability of
the features extracted by the checkpoints is a strong indicator of transferability. We also arrive at a new ranking
measure, N LEEP, which gives rise to the best performance
in the experiments. Code will be made publicly available.

1. Introduction
There is an increasing number of pre-trained deep neural
networks (DNNs), which we call checkpoints. We may produce hundreds of intermediate checkpoints when we sweep
through various learning rates, optimizers, and losses to
train a DNN. Furthermore, semi-supervised [10, 4, 47, 35,
56, 38, 36, 8] and self-supervised [14, 25, 11, 60, 42] learning make it feasible to harvest DNN checkpoints with scarce
or no labels. Fine-tuning [63, 43] has become a de facto
standard to adapt the pre-trained checkpoints to target tasks.
It leads to faster convergence [15, 26, 49] and better performance [34] on the downstream tasks.
However, not all checkpoints are equally useful for a target task, and some could even under-perform a randomly
initialized checkpoint (cf. Section 2.2). This paper is concerned with ranking neural checkpoints, which aims to
measure how effectively fine-tuning can transfer knowledge
* This work was done while the first author was an intern at Google.

{xhjia,rxsang,yukun,brg,bgong}@google.com

from the pre-trained checkpoints to the target task. The
measurement should be generic enough for all the neural checkpoints, meaning that it works without knowing
any pre-training details (e.g., pre-training examples, hyperparameters, losses, early stopping stages, etc.) of the checkpoints. It also should be lightweight, ideally without training on the downstream task, to make it practically useful.
We may use the measurement to choose the top few checkpoints before running fine-tuning, which is computationally
more expensive than calculating the measurements.
Ranking neural checkpoints is crucial. Some domains or
applications lack large-scale human-curated data, like medical images [46], raising a pressing need for high-quality
pre-trained checkpoints as a warm start for fine-tuning. Fortunately, there exist hundreds of thousands of checkpoints
of popular neural network architectures. For instance,
many computer vision models are built upon ResNet [27],
Inception-ResNet [54], and VGG [50]. As a result, we can
construct a candidate pool by collecting the checkpoints released by different groups, for various tasks, and over distinct datasets.
It is nontrivial to rank the checkpoints for a downstream task. We explain this point by drawing insights from
the related, yet arguably easier, task transferability problem [1, 18, 64, 40], which aims to provide high-level guidance about how well a neural network pre-trained in one
task might transfer to another. However, not all checkpoints
pre-trained in the same source task transfer equally well
to the target task [68, 34]. The pre-training strategy also
matters. Zhai et al. [66] find that combining supervision
with self-supervision improves a network’s transfer results
on downstream tasks. He et al. [25] also show that selfsupervised pre-training benefits object detection more than
its supervised counterpart under the same fine-tuning setup.
We may also appreciate the challenge in ranking neural checkpoints by comparing it with another related line
of work: predicting DNNs’ generalization gaps [39, 30, 5].
Jiang et al. [29] use a linear regressor to predict a DNN’s
generalization gap, i.e., the discrepancy between its training
and test accuracies, by exploring the training data’s margin

2663

