Object classification from randomized EEG trials
Hamad Ahmed

Ronnie B. Wilbur Hari M. Bharadwaj Jeffrey Mark Siskind
Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, 47907
{ahmed90,wilbur,hbharadwaj,qobi}@purdue.edu

Abstract
New results suggest strong limits to the feasibility of object classification from human brain activity evoked by image stimuli, as measured through EEG. Considerable prior
work suffers from a confound between the stimulus class
and the time since the start of the experiment. A prior attempt to avoid this confound using randomized trials was
unable to achieve results above chance in a statistically significant fashion when the data sets were of the same size as
the original experiments. Here, we attempt object classification from EEG using an array of methods that are representative of the state-of-the-art, with a far larger (20×)
dataset of randomized EEG trials, 1,000 stimulus presentations of each of forty classes, all from a single subject. To
our knowledge, this is the largest such EEG data-collection
effort from a single subject and is at the bounds of feasibility. We obtain classification accuracy that is marginally
above chance and above chance in a statistically significant
fashion, and further assess how accuracy depends on the
classifier used, the amount of training data used, and the
number of classes. Reaching the limits of data collection
with only marginally above-chance performance suggests
that the prevailing literature substantially exaggerates the
feasibility of object classification from EEG.

1. Introduction
There has been considerable recent interest in applying
deep learning to electroencephalography (EEG). Two recent survey papers [7, 33] collectively contain 372 references. Much of this work attempts to classify human brain
activity evoked from visual stimuli. A recent CVPR oral
[35] claims to decode one of forty object classes when subjects view images from ImageNet [9] with 82.9% accuracy. Considerable follow-on work uses the same dataset
[5, 10, 11, 12, 13, 15, 16, 17, 19, 21, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,
30, 43, 46, 47, 48, 49], often claiming even higher accuracy. Li et al. [22] demonstrate that this classification accuracy is severely overinflated due to flawed experimental
design. All stimuli of the same class were presented to sub-

jects as a single block (Fig. 1a). Further, training and test
samples were taken from the same block. Because all EEG
data contain long-term temporal correlations that are unrelated to stimulus processing and their design confounded
block-effects with class label, Spampinato et al. [35] were
classifying these long-term temporal patterns, not the stimulus class. Because the training and test samples were taken
in close temporal proximity from the same block, the temporal correlations in the EEG introduced label leakage between the training and test data sets. When the experiment
of Spampinato et al. [35] is repeated with randomized trials,
where stimuli of different classes are randomly intermixed,
classification accuracy drops to chance [22].
Another recent paper [8] attempts to remedy the shortcomings of a block design by recording two different sessions for the same subject, each organized as a block design, one to be used as training data and one to be used as
test data. However, both sessions used the same stimulus
presentation order (Fig. 1b). Li et al. [22] demonstrate that
classification accuracy can even be severely inflated with
such a cross-session design that employs the same stimulus presentation order in both sessions due to the same
long-term transients that are unrelated to stimulus processing. While an analysis of training and test sets coming from
different sessions with the same stimulus presentation order yields lower accuracy than an analysis where they come
from the same session, accuracy drops to chance when the
two sessions have different stimulus presentation order.
All this prior work is fundamentally flawed due to improper experimental design. Essentially, the EEG signal encodes a clock and any experimental design where stimulus
class correlates with time since beginning of experiment allows classifying the clock instead of the stimuli. This means
that all data collected in this fashion is irreparably contaminated.
Li et al. [22] attempted to replicate the experiment of
Spampinato et al. [35] six times with nine different classifiers, including the LSTM employed by them, with randomized trials (Fig. 1c) instead of a block design. All attempts
failed, yielding chance performance.
Given that considerable prior work suffers from this

3845

