FBI-Denoiser: Fast Blind Image Denoiser for Poisson-Gaussian Noise
Jaeseok Byun1∗, Sungmin Cha1∗, and Taesup Moon2†
1
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, Korea
2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{wotjr3868, csm9593}@skku.edu, tsmoon@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We consider the challenging blind denoising problem for
Poisson-Gaussian noise, in which no additional information
about clean images or noise level parameters is available.
Particularly, when only “single” noisy images are available for training a denoiser, the denoising performance of
existing methods was not satisfactory. Recently, the blind
pixelwise affine image denoiser (BP-AIDE) was proposed
and significantly improved the performance in the above
setting, to the extent that it is competitive with denoisers
which utilized additional information. However, BP-AIDE
seriously suffered from slow inference time due to the inefficiency of noise level estimation procedure and that of the
blind-spot network (BSN) architecture it used. To that end,
we propose Fast Blind Image Denoiser (FBI-Denoiser) for
Poisson-Gaussian noise, which consists of two neural network models; 1) PGE-Net that estimates Poisson-Gaussian
noise parameters 2000 times faster than the conventional
methods and 2) FBI-Net that realizes a much more efficient
BSN for pixelwise affine denoiser in terms of the number
of parameters and inference speed. Consequently, we show
that our FBI-Denoiser blindly trained solely based on single
noisy images can achieve the state-of-the-art performance
on several real-world noisy image benchmark datasets with
much faster inference time (×10), compared to BP-AIDE.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural network (CNN)-based denoisers
achieved impressive state-of-the-art denoising performances
mainly by utilizing the supervised learning approach based
on collecting many clean and noisy image pairs. The performance gain was first shown in the additive white Gaussian
noise setting [47, 42, 48, 26, 36, 14], then the approach was
extended also to the Poisson-Gaussian noise setting, which
better models the real-world source-dependent noise. It was
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author (E-mail: tsmoon@snu.ac.kr)

demonstrated that the gain was attained not only with respect
to the quantitative metrics, e.g., PSNR or SSIM [44], on the
real-world noise benchmarks such as DND [35], SIDD [3]
and FMD [49], but also with respect to the inference time for
denoising (using GPUs), compared to the more conventional
prior- or optimization-based methods [17, 21].
Despite above promising achievements, the plain supervised learning approach has a critical drawback in a more
practical, real-world setting, since the availability of the
enough number of the clean-noisy images pairs for training
is sometimes a luxury that cannot be simply assumed. For
example, in medical imaging (CT or MRI), obtaining the underlying clean image for a noisy image becomes extremely
time-consuming and expensive. In order to overcome this
drawback, several attempts have been made in recent years.
The first approach is to utilize unpaired clean images and
generate synthetic noisy images to again carry on the supervised training with the generated pairs. For example, in
[7, 46], based on in-camera signal processing (ISP) pipeline
and specific Poisson-Gaussian noise parameters, they generated synthetic noisy sRGB or rawRGB images from clean
sRGB images. Another examples can be found in [45, 16], in
which they learned a model to generate noise present in the
given noisy images, then used that model to corrupt the clean
images to build paired supervised training set. While these
approaches were shown to achieve good performance for
some specific settings, they either lack generalities or have
limited performance for real-world noisy image denoising.
The second recent approach to remove the requirement of
clean-noisy pairs is to train a denoiser solely based on noisy
images [25, 23, 6, 24, 38, 34, 13, 41]. However, those methods also had their own limitations, such as requiring pairs
of independently realized noisy images for the same clean
source [25, 50], poor performance on benchmark datasets
[23, 6], large inference time due to requiring many number
of samplings [38], or limited or no experiment on real-world
noise setting [24, 34, 41, 50, 13].
Recently, BP-AIDE [10], which extends the framework
of [12, 11], was proposed as another attempt to lift the requirement of clean images. Namely, the scheme made a

5768

