Generalized Focal Loss V2: Learning Reliable Localization Quality Estimation
for Dense Object Detection
Xiang Li1,2 , Wenhai Wang3 , Xiaolin Hu4 , Jun Li1 , Jinhui Tang1 , and Jian Yang1∗
1

Nanjing University of Science and Technology 2 Momenta 3 Nanjing University 4 Tsinghua University
{xiang.li.implus, junli, jinhuitang, csjyang}@njust.edu.cn, wangwenhai362@163.com, xlhu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Localization Quality Estimation (LQE) is crucial and
popular in the recent advancement of dense object detectors since it can provide accurate ranking scores that benefit
the Non-Maximum Suppression processing and improve detection performance. As a common practice, most existing
methods predict LQE scores through vanilla convolutional
features shared with object classification or bounding box
regression. In this paper, we explore a completely novel and
different perspective to perform LQE – based on the learned
distributions of the four parameters of the bounding box.
The bounding box distributions are inspired and introduced
as “General Distribution” in GFLV1, which describes the
uncertainty of the predicted bounding boxes well. Such a
property makes the distribution statistics of a bounding box
highly correlated to its real localization quality. Specifically, a bounding box distribution with a sharp peak usually
corresponds to high localization quality, and vice versa. By
leveraging the close correlation between distribution statistics and the real localization quality, we develop a considerably lightweight Distribution-Guided Quality Predictor
(DGQP) for reliable LQE based on GFLV1, thus producing
GFLV2. To our best knowledge, it is the first attempt in object detection to use a highly relevant, statistical representation to facilitate LQE. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method. Notably, GFLV2 (ResNet101) achieves 46.2 AP at 14.6 FPS, surpassing the previous
state-of-the-art ATSS baseline (43.6 AP at 14.6 FPS) by absolute 2.6 AP on COCO test-dev, without sacrificing the
efficiency both in training and inference.
∗ Corresponding author. Xiang Li, Jun Li and Jian Yang are from PCA
Lab, Key Lab of Intelligent Perception and Systems for High-Dimensional
Information of Ministry of Education, and Jiangsu Key Lab of Image and
Video Understanding for Social Security, School of Computer Science and
Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology. Xiang Li is
also a visiting scholar at Momenta.

1. Introduction
Dense object detector [28, 23, 42, 33, 18, 27] which directly predicts pixel-level object categories and bounding
boxes over feature maps, becomes increasingly popular due
to its elegant and effective framework. One of the crucial techniques underlying this framework is Localization
Quality Estimation (LQE). With the help of better LQE,
high-quality bounding boxes tend to score higher than lowquality ones, greatly reducing the risk of mistaken suppression in Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) processing.
Many previous works [28, 29, 30, 33, 40, 36, 14, 18, 39,
43, 27] have explored LQE. For example, the YOLO family
[28, 29, 30] first adopt Objectness to describe the localization quality, which is defined as the Intersection-over-Union
(IoU) between the predicted and ground-truth box. After
that, IoU is further explored and proved to be effective in
IoU-Net [13], IoU-aware [36], PAA [14], GFLV1 [18] and
VFNet [39]. Recently, FCOS [33] and ATSS [40] introduce Centerness, the distance degree to the object center, to
suppress low-quality detection results. Generally, the aforementioned methods share a common characteristic that they
are all based on vanilla convolutional features, e.g., features
of points, borders or regions (see Fig. 2 (a)-(g)), to estimate
the localization quality.
Different from previous works, in this paper, we explore
a brand new perspective to conduct LQE – by directly utilizing the statistics of bounding box distributions, instead
of using the vanilla convolutional features (see Fig. 2).
Here the bounding box distribution is introduced as “General Distribution” in GFLV1 [18], where it learns a discrete
probability distribution of each predicted edge (Fig. 1 (a))
for describing the uncertainty of bounding box regression.
Interestingly, we observe that the statistic of the General
Distribution has a strong correlation with its real localization quality, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b). More specifically
in Fig. 1 (c) and (d), the shape (flatness) of bounding box
distribution can clearly reflect the localization quality of the

11632

