Neural Geometric Level of Detail:
Real-time Rendering with Implicit 3D Shapes
Towaki Takikawa1,2,4 *
Joey Litalien1,3 *
Kangxue Yin1
Karsten Kreis1
Charles Loop1
3
2
1,3
Derek Nowrouzezahrai
Alec Jacobson
Morgan McGuire
Sanja Fidler1,2,4
1

2

NVIDIA

University of Toronto

3

McGill University

4

Vector Institute

nv-tlabs.github.io/nglod

Abstract
Neural signed distance functions (SDFs) are emerging
as an effective representation for 3D shapes. State-of-theart methods typically encode the SDF with a large, fixedsize neural network to approximate complex shapes with
implicit surfaces. Rendering with these large networks is,
however, computationally expensive since it requires many
forward passes through the network for every pixel, making
these representations impractical for real-time graphics.
We introduce an efficient neural representation that, for
the first time, enables real-time rendering of high-fidelity
neural SDFs, while achieving state-of-the-art geometry
reconstruction quality. We represent implicit surfaces
using an octree-based feature volume which adaptively
fits shapes with multiple discrete levels of detail (LODs),
and enables continuous LOD with SDF interpolation. We
further develop an efficient algorithm to directly render our
novel neural SDF representation in real-time by querying
only the necessary LODs with sparse octree traversal. We
show that our representation is 2–3 orders of magnitude
more efficient in terms of rendering speed compared to
previous works. Furthermore, it produces state-of-the-art
reconstruction quality for complex shapes under both 3D
geometric and 2D image-space metrics.

1. Introduction
Advanced geometric modeling and rendering techniques
in computer graphics use 3D shapes with complex details,
arbitrary topology, and quality, usually leveraging polygon
meshes. However, it is non-trivial to adapt those representations to learning-based approaches since they lack differentiability, and thus cannot easily be used in computer vision applications such as learned image-based 3D reconstruction. Recently, neural approximations of signed distance functions (neural SDFs) have emerged as an attrac* Authors contributed equally.

7.63 KB

19.25 KB

56.00 KB

210.75 KB

903.63 KB

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

Figure 1: Levels of Detail. Our representation pools features from
multiple scales to adaptively reconstruct high-fidelity geometry
with continuous level of detail (LOD). The subfigures show surfaces (blue) at varying LODs, superimposed on the corresponding
coarse, sparse octrees (orange) which contain the features of the
learned signed distance functions. These were directly rendered in
real-time using our efficient sparse sphere tracing algorithm.

tive choice to scale up computer vision and graphics applications. Prior works [36, 31, 6, 8] have shown that neural
networks can encode accurate 3D geometry without restrictions on topology or resolution by learning the SDF, which
defines a surface by its zero level-set. These works commonly use a large, fixed-size multi-layer perceptron (MLP)
as the learned distance function.
Directly rendering and probing neural SDFs typically relies on sphere tracing [17], a root-finding algorithm that can

11358

