Probabilistic Selective Encryption of
Convolutional Neural Networks for Hierarchical Services
Jinyu Tian1 , Jiantao Zhou1,* , and Jia Duan2
State Key Laboratory of Internet of Things for Smart City,
Department of Computer and Information Science, University of Macau
2
JD Explore, JD
1

{yb77405, jtzhou}@um.edu.mo, duanjia1@jd.com

Abstract
Model protection is vital when deploying Convolutional
Neural Networks (CNNs) for commercial services, due to
the massive costs of training them. In this work, we propose
a selective encryption (SE) algorithm to protect CNN models from unauthorized access, with a unique feature of providing hierarchical services to users. Our algorithm firstly
selects important model parameters via the proposed Probabilistic Selection Strategy (PSS). It then encrypts the most
important parameters with the designed encryption method
called Distribution Preserving Random Mask (DPRM), so
as to maximize the performance degradation by encrypting only a very small portion of model parameters. We
also design a set of access permissions, using which different amount of most important model parameters can be
decrypted. Hence, different levels of model performance
can be naturally provided for users. Experimental results
demonstrate that the proposed scheme could effectively protect the classification model VGG19 by merely encrypting
8% parameters of convolutional layers. We also implement the proposed model protection scheme in the denoising model DnCNN, showcasing the hierarchical denoising
services.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) has been used to
achieve unparalleled results across various tasks such as object detection [5, 10, 20], super-resolution reconstruction
[9, 13, 15], and image inpainting [36, 37, 38]. The construction of a successful CNN model is not a trivial task,
which usually requires substantial investments in expertise,
time, and resources. To encourage healthy business investment and competitions, it is crucial to prevent unauthorized
access to CNN models. Meanwhile, there is a recent trend
of deploying pretrained CNN models through cloud-based

services. Under such circumstance, it is much desirable to
offer hierarchical services, such that users with different access privileges could enjoy different levels of model performance. For instance, when using CNN model for image denoising task, the lowest access privilege leads to a roughly
denoised version; this could serve as a promotion of the denoising service, which could be free. When users prefer
sophisticatedly denoised images, they can pay for advanced
access privileges for better services.
A straightforward strategy to achieve model protection
and access control is to encrypt all model parameters via
traditional cryptographic methods such as RSA [26], TDES
[6], and Twofish [27]. On the order of millions or more parameters, both the encryption and decryption of them would
be very expensive, especially for resource-constrained devices. In comparison, it is much desirable to encrypt parameters selectively. This strategy is known as Selective
Encryption (SE) and has practical applications in multimedia security and Internet security [3, 7, 11, 23, 35]. On
the other hand, encrypting all model parameters indiscriminately cannot provide fine-grained hierarchical services.
The motivation of the SE derives from Shannon’s
seminar work, which pointed out that effective encryption/decryption can be performed by decreasing the redundancy of a system [28]. In general, reducing the redundancy
of a system relies on the prior knowledge of the importance
of system components. For instance, Abomhara et. al. [2]
protected the bitstreams of H.264/AVC video codec by selectively encrypting the I-frames, which have larger impacts
on the quality of reconstructed frames, compared with Pand B- frames. In fact, in the deep learning community,
several works [19, 24, 31, 39] showed that the parameters
in a CNN model are NOT equally important, and some of
them contain more useful information for a given task. The
unequal importance of model parameters motivates us to design a new SE for protecting a CNN model by only encrypting those important parameters.
12205

