OpenRooms: An Open Framework for Photorealistic Indoor Scene Datasets
Zhengqin Li1 Ting-Wei Yu1 Shen Sang1 Sarah Wang1 Meng Song1 Yuhan Liu1 Yu-Ying Yeh1
Rui Zhu1 Nitesh Gundavarapu1 Jia Shi1 Sai Bi1 Hong-Xing Yu1 Zexiang Xu2
Kalyan Sunkavalli2 Miloš Hašan2 Ravi Ramamoorthi1 Manmohan Chandraker1
1

UC San Diego

Abstract
We propose a novel framework for creating large-scale
photorealistic datasets of indoor scenes, with ground truth
geometry, material, lighting and semantics. Our goal is to
make the dataset creation process widely accessible, transforming scans into photorealistic datasets with high-quality
ground truth for appearance, layout, semantic labels, high
quality spatially-varying BRDF and complex lighting, including direct, indirect and visibility components. This enables important applications in inverse rendering, scene
understanding and robotics. We show that deep networks
trained on the proposed dataset achieve competitive performance for shape, material and lighting estimation on real
images, enabling photorealistic augmented reality applications, such as object insertion and material editing. We
also show our semantic labels may be used for segmentation and multi-task learning. Finally, we demonstrate that
our framework may also be integrated with physics engines,
to create virtual robotics environments with unique ground
truth such as friction coefficients and correspondence to
real scenes. The dataset and all the tools to create such
datasets will be made publicly available.1

1. Introduction
Indoor scenes represent important environments for visual perception and scene understanding, for applications
such as augmented reality and robotics. However, their
appearance is a complex function of multiple factors such
as shape, material and lighting, and demonstrates phenomena like significant occlusions, shadows, interreflections and large spatial variations in lighting. Reasoning
about these underlying, entangled factors requires largescale high-quality ground truth, which remains hard to acquire. While ground truth geometry can be captured using a 3D scanner, it is extremely challenging (if not nearly
impossible) to accurately acquire the complex spatiallyvarying material and lighting of indoor scenes. An alternative is to consider synthetic datasets, but large-scale syn1 Webpage: https://ucsd-openrooms.github.io/

2

Adobe Research

thetic datasets of indoor scenes with plausible geometry,
materials and lighting are also non-trivial to create.
This paper presents OpenRooms, a framework for synthesizing photorealistic indoor scenes, with broad applicability across computer vision, graphics and robotics. It has
several advantages over prior works, summarized in Table 1. First, rather than use artist-created scenes and assets, we ascribe high-quality material and lighting to RGBD
scans of real indoor scenes. Beyond just the data, we
provide all the tools necessary to accomplish this, allowing any researcher to inexpensively create such datasets.
While prior works can align CAD models to scanned point
clouds [5, 26, 6], they do not explore how to assign materials and lighting appropriately to build a large-scale photorealistic dataset. Second, we provide extensive highquality ground truth for complex light transport that is unmatched in prior works. Our material is represented by a
spatially-varying microfacet bidirectional reflectance distribution function (SVBRDF), and our lighting includes windows, environment maps and area lights, along with their
per-pixel spatially-varying effects to account for visibility,
shadows and inter-reflections. Third, we render photorealistic images with our data and tools, which include a custom
GPU-accelerated physically-based renderer.
We create an instance of such a dataset by building
on existing repositories: 3D scans from ScanNet [16],
CAD model alignment [5], reflectance [1] and illumination
[23, 24]. The resulting dataset contains over 100K HDR images with ground-truth depths, normals, spatially-varying
BRDF and light sources, along with per-pixel spatiallyvarying lighting and visibility masks for every light source.
We also provide per-pixel semantic labels. Besides being publicly available, the dataset can be significantly extended through future community efforts based on our tools.
We also demonstrate applicability of our method to other
choices for material [4] and geometry [48].
We believe that our effort will significantly accelerate
research in multiple areas. Inverse rendering tasks are directly related, including single-view [17] and multi-view
[55] depth prediction, intrinsic decomposition [33, 11], material classification [10] and lighting estimation [20, 21, 32].

7190

