Fine-grained Angular Contrastive Learning with Coarse Labels
Guy Bukchin3,2 , Eli Schwartz1,2 , Kate Saenko1,4 ,
Ori Shahar3 , Rogerio Feris1 , Raja Giryes*2 , Leonid Karlinsky*∗ 1
IBM Research AI1 , Tel-Aviv University2 , Penta-AI3 , Boston University4

Abstract

seen

dog

Maltese

persian ragdoll scottish british

cat

siamese guppy goldfish sunfish

fish

american rex ridgeback silkie

spinner

unseen
guinea
pig dolphin

∗ Equal contribution

pug

fish

In the most commonly encountered learning scenario,
supervised learning, a set of target (class) labels is provided
for a set of samples (images) using which we train a model
(CNN [26, 18, 53] or Transformer [66, 40]) that casts these
samples into some representation space from which predictions are made, e.g. using a linear classifier. Nevertheless, while supervised learning is a very common setting,
in many practical applications the set of the target labels of
interest is not static, and may change over time. One good
example is few-shot learning [57, 49, 55], where a model is
pre-trained in such a way that more classes could be added

beagle collie

cat

1. Introduction

(few-shot) Testing (fine)
dog

Few-shot learning methods offer pre-training techniques
optimized for easier later adaptation of the model to new
classes (unseen during training) using one or a few examples. This adaptivity to unseen classes is especially
important for many practical applications where the pretrained label space cannot remain fixed for effective use
and the model needs to be ”specialized” to support new
categories on the fly. One particularly interesting scenario,
essentially overlooked by the few-shot literature, is Coarseto-Fine Few-Shot (C2FS), where the training classes (e.g.
animals) are of much ‘coarser granularity’ than the target (test) classes (e.g. breeds). A very practical example
of C2FS is when the target classes are sub-classes of the
training classes. Intuitively, it is especially challenging as
(both regular and few-shot) supervised pre-training tends
to learn to ignore intra-class variability which is essential
for separating sub-classes. In this paper, we introduce a
novel ’Angular normalization’ module that allows to effectively combine supervised and self-supervised contrastive
pre-training to approach the proposed C2FS task, demonstrating significant gains in a broad study over multiple
baselines and datasets. We hope that this work will help to
pave the way for future research on this new, challenging,
and very practical topic of C2FS classification.

Training (coarse)

baji atlantic hourglass

Figure 1. The Coarse-to-Fine Few-Shot (C2FS): During training
we observe only coarse class labels (in red, e.g. animals), while
at test time we are expected to adapt our model to support the fine
classes (in blue, e.g. breeds) using one or few samples. The fine
classes may be sub-classes of the train classes (seen) or sub-classes
of classes unseen during training.

later with only very few additional labeled examples used
for adapting the model to support these new classes.
However, in previous few-shot learning works most (if
not all) of the new classes: (i) are separate from the classes
the model already knows, in the sense that they either belong to a different branch of the class hierarchy or are siblings to the known classes; and (ii) are of same or similar level of granularity (same level of class hierarchy).
But what about the very practical situation when the new
classes are fine-grained sub-classes strictly included inside
the known (coarse) classes being their descendants in the
class taxonomy? This situation typically occurs during the
lifespan of the model when the application requires separating some sub-classes of the current classes into separate
classes and yet when the training dataset was created these
(unknown in advance) sub-classes were not annotated. For
example, this could occur in product specialization for product search, or during personalizing a generic model to a specific customer. Naturally, going back to re-labeling each
time this occurs is much too costly to be an option.
In this paper, we target the Coarse-to-Fine Few-Shot
(C2FS) task (Fig. 1) where a model pre-trained on a set
of base classes (denoted as the ‘coarse’ classes), needs to
18730

