The Neural Tangent Link Between CNN Denoisers and Non-Local Filters
Julián Tachella, Junqi Tang and Mike Davies
School of Engineering
University of Edinburgh
{julian.tachella, j.tang, mike.davies}@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) are now a wellestablished tool for solving computational imaging problems.
Modern CNN-based algorithms obtain state-of-the-art performance in diverse image restoration problems. Furthermore, it has been recently shown that, despite being highly
overparameterized, networks trained with a single corrupted
image can still perform as well as fully trained networks.
We introduce a formal link between such networks through
their neural tangent kernel (NTK), and well-known non-local
filtering techniques, such as non-local means or BM3D. The
filtering function associated with a given network architecture can be obtained in closed form without need to train
the network, being fully characterized by the random initialization of the network weights. While the NTK theory accurately predicts the filter associated with networks trained
using standard gradient descent, our analysis shows that it
falls short to explain the behaviour of networks trained using
the popular Adam optimizer. The latter achieves a larger
change of weights in hidden layers, adapting the non-local
filtering function during training. We evaluate our findings
via extensive image denoising experiments1 .

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks are now ubiquitous in
deep learning solutions for computational imaging and computer vision, ranging from image restoration tasks such as
denoising, deblurring, inpainting and super-resolution, to image reconstruction tasks such as computed tomography [19]
and magnetic resonance imaging [18]. However, the empirical success of CNNs is in stark contrast with our theoretical
understanding. Contrary to traditional sparse models [8],
there is little understanding of the implicit assumptions on
the set of plausible signals imposed by CNNs.
Perhaps surprisingly, Ulyanov et al. [29] discovered that
1 Code available at https://gitlab.com/Tachella/neural_
tangent_denoiser

training a CNN only with a single corrupted image (the
one being restored) could still achieve competitive reconstructions in comparison to fully trained networks, naming
this phenomenon the deep image prior (DIP). This discovery challenges traditional wisdom that networks should be
trained with large amounts of data and illustrates the powerful bias of CNN architectures towards natural images. Similar ideas have also been explored in Noise2Self [4] and other
variants [14]. In this setting, the number of weights (e.g.,
2,000,000 for a U-Net CNN [29, 26]) is much larger than the
number of pixels in the training image (e.g., 50,000 pixels
of a standard 128 × 128 color image). The clean version
of the corrupted image is obtained by early-stopping the
optimization process before the network fully matches the
noisy image or by considering a loss that does not allow the
network to learn the corrupted image exactly [4]. These surprising results raise the following questions: how, amongst
all possible optimization trajectories towards the multiple
global minima of the training loss, the procedure consistently
provides close to state-of-the-art reconstructions? What is
the role of the optimization algorithm on the trajectory towards the global minima, and how does it affect the bias
towards clean images?
Despite their surprisingly good performance, these methods provide comparable or slightly worse denoising results
than classical patch-based non-local filtering techniques,
such as non-local means (NLM) [5] or BM3D [7], which also
only have access to the corrupted image. Moreover, training
a large neural network is more computationally intensive.
Subsequent questions then arise: is the neural network performing a similar filtering process? Can we avoid the slow
training, and apply this filter in a more direct way? These insights are important to build a better framework in which we
can optimize and design new denoisers and other low-level
computer vision algorithms.
Denoising is generally considered as the fundamental
building block of any image restoration problem. In many
applications, CNNs are used to perform denoising steps,
either in unrolled schemes [19] or in the context of plug-andplay methods [25, 31]. Hence, understanding better the bias

8618

