Learning Deep Classifiers Consistent with Fine-Grained Novelty Detection
Jiacheng Cheng
Nuno Vasconcelos
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California, San Diego
{jicheng,nvasconcelos}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
The problem of novelty detection in fine-grained visual
classification (FGVC) is considered. An integrated understanding of the probabilistic and distance-based approaches to novelty detection is developed within the framework of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). It is shown
that softmax CNN classifiers are inconsistent with novelty
detection, because their learned class-conditional distributions and associated distance metrics are unidentifiable. A
new regularization constraint, the class-conditional Gaussianity loss, is then proposed to eliminate this unidentifiability, and enforce Gaussian class-conditional distributions.
This enables training Novelty Detection Consistent Classifiers (NDCCs) that are jointly optimal for classification and
novelty detection. Empirical evaluations show that NDCCs
achieve significant improvements over the state-of-the-art
on both small- and large-scale FGVC datasets.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) enabled
significant breakthroughs in image classification [25, 49,
19]. However, CNN classifiers are trained under the closedworld assumption that test examples belong to one of the
classes on which the CNN was trained. These are referred
to as seen or known classes. This assumption is violated
in many practical settings, e.g. medical diagnosis [46] or
autonomous driving [3], where CNNs can be exposed to
images from both seen and unseen classes, i.e. classes that
do not appear in the training set. In this setting, CNNs are
well-known to assign examples from unseen classes to seen
classes with high confidence [6, 56]. In fact, an entire literature on adversarial attacks [51, 16] has grown out of this
observation. Novelty detection aims to thwart this problem,
by identifying and rejecting examples from unseen classes.
Novelty detection can be divided into the one-class and
multi-class settings depending on the number of known
classes. In one-class novelty detection [43, 36, 38], which
is also known as one-class classification (OCC), all train-

ing examples are assumed from the same class and have
no labels. When seen and unseen classes are from different domains, novelty detection becomes out-of-distribution
(OOD) detection [20, 28, 52, 12, 27]. For instance, a classifier of handwritten digit images is confronted with natural
images. While OCC and OOD detection have gained significant attention, they are best suited when seen and unseen
classes are fundamentally different.
In this work, we address a different and more challenging
setting where both seen and unseen classes are sub-classes
(e.g., African hunting dog vs. Chesapeake Bay retriever)
of a common category (e.g., dog). This is of very practical value for intelligent systems. For example, there might
be cases in which it is necessary for surveillance systems
deployed at wildlife sanctuaries to detect unseen animal
species which might become alien-invasive species. Moreover, this is more frequent during the regular operation of
vision systems. In applications such as autonomous driving, it is impossible to train for all object sub-classes that
already exist, e.g. all road obstacles, or will be created after deployment of the classifier, e.g. new types of scooters
or construction signs. Hence, sooner or later, the classifier
will face unseen sub-classes. Since this type of novelty detection requires fine distinctions between seen and unseen
classes, it is best addressed in the multi-class setting, where
seen classes are modeled individually.
The core of a novelty detection algorithm is a novelty
score or a measure of an example x not belonging to seen
classes [9, 39]. This score can be computed by projecting x
onto a feature space V, usually the embedding learned by a
CNN, and thresholded to produce a novelty detection decision. Two popular classes of novelty scores are probabilistic
and metric-based [41]. The former estimates the probability
of x under the distributions of seen classes. The latter estimates distances between x and seen class representatives.
It can be shown that these two approaches are intrinsically
connected for exponential family distributions [5], a family
of probability densities that includes most parametric models in common use. Exponential family distributions are defined by a sufficient statistic, which can be seen as a feature

1664

