Fully Convolutional Networks for Panoptic Segmentation
Yanwei Li1

Hengshuang Zhao2 Xiaojuan Qi3 Liwei Wang1
Zeming Li4 Jian Sun4 Jiaya Jia1,5

The Chinese University of Hong Kong1 University of Oxford2
The University of Hong Kong3 MEGVII Technology4 SmartMore5

Abstract
In this paper, we present a conceptually simple, strong,
and efficient framework for panoptic segmentation, called
Panoptic FCN. Our approach aims to represent and predict foreground things and background stuff in a unified
fully convolutional pipeline. In particular, Panoptic FCN
encodes each object instance or stuff category into a specific kernel weight with the proposed kernel generator and
produces the prediction by convolving the high-resolution
feature directly. With this approach, instance-aware and
semantically consistent prosperties for things and stuff can
be respectively satisfied in a simple generate-kernel-thensegment workflow. Without extra boxes for localization or
instance separation, the proposed approach outperforms
previous box-based and -free models with high efficiency
on COCO, Cityscapes, and Mapillary Vistas datasets with
single scale input. Our code is made publicly available at
https://github.com/Jia-Research-Lab/PanopticFCN.1

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation, aiming to assign each pixel with
a semantic label and unique identity, is regarded as a challenging task. In panoptic segmentation [19], countable and
uncountable instances (i.e., things and stuff) are expected
to be represented and resolved in a unified workflow. One
main difficulty impeding unified representation comes from
conflicting properties requested by things and stuff. Specifically, to distinguish among various identities, countable
things usually rely on instance-aware features, which vary
with objects. In contrast, uncountable stuff would prefer semantically consistent characters, which ensures consistent
predictions for pixels with the same semantic meaning. An
example is given in Fig. 1, where embedding of individuals
should be diverse for inter-class variations, while characters
of grass should be similar for intra-class consistency.
1 Part of the work was done in MEGVII Research.

(a) Separate representation

(b) Unified representation

Figure 1. Compared with traditional methods, which often utilize
separate branches to handle things and stuff in 1(a), the proposed
Panoptic FCN 1(b) represents things and stuff uniformly with generated kernels. Here, an example with box-based stream for things
is given in 1(a). The shared backbone is omitted for concision.

For conflict at feature level, specific modules are usually tailored for things and stuff separately, as presented in
Fig. 1(a). In particular, instance-aware demand of things is
satisfied mainly from two streams, namely box-based [18,
50, 25] and box-free [51, 10, 6] methods. Meanwhile,
the semantic-consistency of stuff is met in a pixel-by-pixel
manner [33], where similar semantic features would bring
identical predictions. A classic case is Panoptic FPN [18],
which utilizes Mask R-CNN [12] and FCN [33] in separated branches to respectively classify things and stuff, similar to that of Fig. 1(a). Although attempt [51, 10, 6] has
been made to predict things without boxes, extra predictions
(e.g., affinities [10], and offsets [51]) together with postprocess procedures are still needed to distinguish among
instances, which slow down the whole system and hinder
it from being fully convolutional. Consequently, a unified
representation is required to bridge this gap.
In this paper, we propose a fully convolutional framework for unified representation, called Panoptic FCN. In
particular, Panoptic FCN encodes each instance into a specific kernel and generates the prediction by convolutions directly. Thus, both things and stuff can be predicted together

214

