Toward Joint Thing-and-Stuff Mining for Weakly Supervised
Panoptic Segmentation
Yunhang Shen1 , Liujuan Cao1 *, Zhiwei Chen1 , Feihong Lian1 , Baochang Zhang2
Chi Su3 , Yongjian Wu4 , Feiyue Huang4 , Rongrong Ji1,5,6
1
Media Analytics and Computing Lab, Department of Artificial Intelligence,
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, China, 2 Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Beihang University, Beijing, China, 3 KingSoft Cloud Co. Ltd., Beijing, China
4
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China, 5 Institute of Artificial Intelligence,
Xiamen University, Xiamen, China, 6 Peng Cheng Laborotory, Shenzhen, China
shenyunhang01@gmail.com, caoliujuan@xmu.edu.cn, zhiweichen.xmu@gmail.com
lianfh@stu.xmu.edu.cn, bczhang@buaa.edu.cn, suchi@kingsoft.com
littlekenwu@tencent.com, garyhuang@tencent.com, rrji@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract
Panoptic segmentation aims to partition an image to object instances and semantic content for thing and stuff categories, respectively. To date, learning weakly supervised
panoptic segmentation (WSPS) with only image-level labels remains unexplored. In this paper, we propose an efficient jointly thing-and-stuff mining (JTSM) framework for
WSPS. To this end, we design a novel mask of interest pooling (MoIPool) to extract fixed-size pixel-accurate feature
maps of arbitrary-shape segmentations. MoIPool enables
a panoptic mining branch to leverage multiple instance
learning (MIL) to recognize things and stuff segmentation
in a unified manner. We further refine segmentation masks
with parallel instance and semantic segmentation branches
via self-training, which collaborates the mined masks from
panoptic mining with bottom-up object evidence as pseudoground-truth labels to improve spatial coherence and contour localization. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of JTSM on PASCAL VOC and MS COCO. As
a by-product, we achieve competitive results for weakly supervised object detection and instance segmentation. This
work is a first step towards tackling challenge panoptic segmentation task with only image-level labels.

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation focuses on simultaneously segmenting all object instances and semantic content in an
image. It is one of the most important tasks in computer
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1: The overall flowchart of our JTSM framework.
vision due to its great academic values and industrial applications. Recent rapid progress on panoptic segmentation has been driven by combining the strength of instance
segmentation and semantic segmentation tasks via a multibranch scheme. However, these deep models heavily rely
on a large amount of training data with expensive instancelevel and pixel-wise annotations. Collecting such training
data has been a particular bottleneck on the way of applying panoptic segmentation to real-world applications, e.g.,
autonomous driving, robotics, and image editing, where labelling each pixel for numerous images is particularly timeconsuming. For example, fully annotating a single image in
Cityscapes [1] required more than 1.5 hours on average.
One way to reduce the requirement of strong supervision
is the weakly supervised panoptic segmentation (WSPS),
which seeks to use weak annotations for model training. To
our best knowledge, the only previous work that attempted
to address WSPS problem is that of [2], which requires
bounding boxes for thing categories and image-level tags
for stuff during training. However, for applications needing
very large-scale image sets and categories, bounding-boxlevel annotations still require enormous human effort. It is

16694

