Cascaded Prediction Network via Segment Tree for Temporal Video Grounding
∗

Yang Zhao, Zhou Zhao , Zhu Zhang, Zhijie Lin
College of Computer Science, Zhejiang University
{awalk, zhaozhou, zhangzhu, linzhijie}@zju.edu.cn

Query: Several people begin chopping vegetables.

Abstract
Temporal video grounding aims to localize the target
segment which is semantically aligned with the given sentence in an untrimmed video. Existing methods can be divided into two main categories, including proposal-based
approaches and proposal-free approaches. However, the
former ones suffer from the extra cost of generating proposals and inflexibility in determining fine-grained boundaries, and the latter ones usually attempt to decide the start
and end timestamps directly, which brings about much difficulty and inaccuracy. In this paper, we convert this task
into a multi-step decision problem and propose a novel Cascaded Prediction Network (CPN) to generate the grounding
result in a coarse-to-fine manner. Concretely, we first encode video and query into the same latent space and fuse
them into integrated representations. Afterwards, we construct a segment-tree-based structure and make predictions
via decision navigation and signal decomposition in a cascaded way. We evaluate our proposed method on three
large-scale publicly available benchmarks, namely ActivityNet Caption, Charades-STA and TACoS, where our CPN
surpasses the performance of the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of Internet technology, video
has become a significant medium for information communication and dissemination, which brings great application value and prospect for the field of automatic video
analysis. After the release of several large-scale datasets
[3, 4, 13, 36, 38], research in this area is gradually moving
towards video-text understanding tasks, including videotext retrieval [39, 43], video captioning [21, 33], video question answering [30, 49] and so forth. Considering the application scenarios in video websites and search engines, an
increasing number of researchers begin to focus on the task
of temporal video grounding.
∗ Zhou Zhao is the corresponding author.

GT:

41.91s

110.49s

Figure 1. An illustration of temporal video grounding.

Figure 2. The overall perspective of our proposed model.

As the example in Figure 1 illustrates, temporal video
grounding aims to automatically determine when an action or event corresponding to a given text query occurs
in the video. The previous approaches in this area can be
mainly categorized into two groups, including proposalbased methods [5, 9, 34, 37, 41, 44, 46, 48] and proposalfree methods [12, 20, 24, 35, 42, 45]. The former ones
mainly follow the paradigm to manually predefine some
proposals and select the best one by considering the correlation between proposal features and the given semantic information. And the latter ones try to tackle this problem by
utilizing fully integrated features to determine the start and
end timestamps aligned to the given description directly.
However, for the proposal-based methods, the handcrafted pre-definitions heavily rely on the prior knowledge
to the length distribution of target segments for the specific
datasets and bring much extra computational cost for preprocessing. Besides, the proposal boundaries are usually
fixed, leading to the incapability to work out more flexible results. As for the proposal-free methods, the decision
space for the final prediction is always too large for the
model to generate accurate results in a single-shot classification or regression. Moreover, due to the lack of supervision from the inside of segments, these methods are strongly
dependent on the expression ability of fusion modules.
To alleviate these problems, we devise a novel Cas14197

