Event-based Synthetic Aperture Imaging with a Hybrid Network
Xiang Zhang,* Wei Liao,* Lei Yu†, Wen Yang, Gui-Song Xia
Wuhan University, Wuhan, China.
{xiangz, weiliao, ly.wd, yangwen, guisong.xia}@whu.edu.cn

Abstract
Synthetic aperture imaging (SAI) is able to achieve the
see through effect by blurring out the off-focus foreground
occlusions and reconstructing the in-focus occluded targets
from multi-view images. However, very dense occlusions
and extreme lighting conditions may bring significant disturbances to the SAI based on conventional frame-based
cameras, leading to performance degeneration. To address
these problems, we propose a novel SAI system based on the
event camera which can produce asynchronous events with
extremely low latency and high dynamic range. Thus, it can
eliminate the interference of dense occlusions by measuring
with almost continuous views, and simultaneously tackle the
over/under exposure problems. To reconstruct the occluded
targets, we propose a hybrid encoder-decoder network composed of spiking neural networks (SNNs) and convolutional
neural networks (CNNs). In the hybrid network, the spatiotemporal information of the collected events is first encoded
by SNN layers, and then transformed to the visual image
of the occluded targets by a style-transfer CNN decoder.
Through experiments, the proposed method shows remarkable performance in dealing with very dense occlusions and
extreme lighting conditions, and high quality visual images
can be reconstructed using pure event data.

1. Introduction
Harsh environments, e.g. with dense occlusions and extreme lighting conditions, often prohibit the efficient imaging of real scenes, due to the fact that the collected light
information is very limited and moreover severely disturbed. Synthetic aperture imaging (SAI) tackles the problem of seeing through occlusions via multi-view exposures
[18, 17], forming the light field [29] of the target scene un† Corresponding author
* Equal contribution

The research was partially supported by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grants 61871297, the National Natural Science
Foundation of China Enterprise Innovation Development Key Project under Grant U19B2004 and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central
University under Grant 2042020kf0019.

Figure 1: Prototype of the event-based synthetic aperture imaging (E-SAI) system and the illustrative examples
of see through imaging under harsh environments via (b)
the conventional frame-based SAI and (c) the event-based
SAI. Under either very dense occlusions or extreme lighting
scenes, the proposed E-SAI method can successfully generate high quality visual images for the occluded scenes.

der occlusions. The basic idea of SAI is to extract the light
information of the occluded scenes while filter out foreground occlusions [11, 26]. However, very dense occlusions and extreme lighting scenes may bring severe disturbances, leading to serious degradation on imaging quality
or even failure reconstructions (e.g., Fig. 1).
• Very dense occlusions: With conventional framebased cameras, the light cues are captured via brightness intensities. Very dense occlusions will greatly decrease the “signal”, i.e. the light from target scenes,
while increase the “noise”, i.e. disturbances from fore-

14235

