Learning optical flow from still images
Filippo Aleotti∗
Matteo Poggi∗
Stefano Mattoccia
Department of Computer Science and Engineering (DISI)
University of Bologna, Italy
{filippo.aleotti2, m.poggi, stefano.mattoccia }@unibo.it

Abstract
This paper deals with the scarcity of data for training optical flow networks, highlighting the limitations of existing
sources such as labeled synthetic datasets or unlabeled real
videos. Specifically, we introduce a framework to generate
accurate ground-truth optical flow annotations quickly and
in large amounts from any readily available single real picture. Given an image, we use an off-the-shelf monocular
depth estimation network to build a plausible point cloud
for the observed scene. Then, we virtually move the camera
in the reconstructed environment with known motion vectors and rotation angles, allowing us to synthesize both a
novel view and the corresponding optical flow field connecting each pixel in the input image to the one in the new
frame. When trained with our data, state-of-the-art optical flow networks achieve superior generalization to unseen
real data compared to the same models trained either on annotated synthetic datasets or unlabeled videos, and better
specialization if combined with synthetic images.

1. Introduction
The problem of estimating per-pixel motion between
video frames, also known as optical flow [50], has a long
history in computer vision and remains far from being
solved. On top of it, several higher-level tasks such as tracking, action recognition and more are typically performed.
Among the main challenges for optical flow systems, there
are occlusions, motion blur and lack of texture.
Deep learning has played a crucial role in the latest years
of research on this topic, at first to learn a data term [1, 65]
and then to directly infer the dense optical flow field in
end-to-end manner [7, 20, 51, 52, 18, 19, 17, 53], currently
representing the state-of-the-art in this field. This achievement has been made possible by the availability of extensive training data labeled with ground-truth optical flow
fields, most of them obtained through computer graphics
∗ Joint first authorship.

a)

b)

c)

d)

Figure 1. Depthstillation from still images. From left to right: a)
single input image, b) estimated depth map, c) optical flow field
consequence of virtual camera motion, d) virtual view. We show
b) as inverse depth to improve visualization.

[5, 7, 20]. Unfortunately, these large datasets alone are not
enough to train a neural network for its deployment in real
environments, because of the well-known domain shift occurring when moving from synthetic images to real ones.
A notable example is represented by the KITTI optical
flow benchmarks [10, 35], over which deep networks that
have been trained only on synthetic data perform poorly,
as witnessed by recent works [20, 51, 53]. This problem
is known in literature and has been faced for other tasks
such as semantic segmentation [15, 39, 43, 55] or stereo
depth estimation [56, 57, 68, 61]. To fully restore a level
of accuracy comparable to the one achieved on synthetic
data, fine-tuning on imagery similar to the testing domain
is usually required. Anyway, obtaining ground-truth optical
flow labels for real images is particularly challenging because there exists virtually no sensor capable of acquiring
ground-truth correspondences between points in challenging real-world scenes [37]. A viable strategy consists into
passing through depth sensors (e.g., LiDARs), indeed optical flow fields can be obtained by projecting the 3D points
from a given frame into the next frame [10], although it
cannot take into account independently moving objects, for
which manual post-processing or annotation remains necessary [35, 37]. The literature is rich of self-supervised strate-

15201

