Learning a Non-blind Deblurring Network for Night Blurry Images
Liang Chen1∗†, Jiawei Zhang2‡† , Jinshan Pan3 , Songnan Lin2 , Faming Fang1 , Jimmy S. Ren2,4
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing,
School of Computer Science and Technology, East China Normal University
2
SenseTime Research
3
Nanjing University of Science and Technology
4
Qing Yuan Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China

Abstract

prior term R(I) must be imposed to regularize the solution
space, which gives,

Deblurring night blurry images is difficult, because the
common-used blur model based on the linear convolution
operation does not hold in this situation due to the influence of saturated pixels. In this paper, we propose a nonblind deblurring network (NBDN) to restore night blurry
images. To mitigate the side effects brought by the pixels that violate the blur model, we develop a confidence
estimation unit (CEU) to estimate a map which ensures
smaller contributions of these pixels in the deconvolution
steps which are optimized by the conjugate gradient (CG)
method. Moreover, unlike the existing methods using manually tuned hyper-parameters in their frameworks, we propose a hyper-parameter estimation unit (HPEU) to adaptively estimate hyper-parameters for better image restoration. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed network performs favorably against state-of-the-art
algorithms both quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Non-blind deblurring aims to recover the latent image
from the given blurry image and blur kernel. Mathematically, the blurring process can be modeled as
B = I ⊗ K + η,

(1)

where B, I, K, and η denote the blurry image, latent image, blur kernel, and additive noises, respectively. We use
⊗ to represent the convolution operator. Due to the irreversible loss of high-frequency information in the blurring
process and the interference of noises, restoring the latent
image is fundamentally ill-posed [26]. Thus, an efficient
∗ This work was done when Liang Chen was an intern at SenseTime.
† equal contribution
‡ Corresponding author

minI kB − I ⊗ Kk2 + µR(I).

(2)

Then, the solution is the one that minimizes the summation
of the fidelity term and the prior term weighted by the parameter µ.
However, the non-blind deblurring task becomes more
challenging for night blurry images. The reason is that saturated pixels are often presented under night condition, and
these pixels violate the blur model in Eq. (1). As the saturated pixels are usually clipped to the maximum value due
to the limited sensor range in the exposure time, a clipping
function is adopted in Eq. (1):
B = C(I ⊗ K) + η,

(3)

where C(·) denotes the clipping function. When I ⊗ K
is within the dynamic range, C(I ⊗ K) = I ⊗ K; otherwise, C(I ⊗K) returns the maximum intensity of the sensor
range. Because of the influence of the non-linear function
C(·), the affected pixels can no longer be modeled by the
blur model in Eq. (1). Thus, the method based on this
model is less effective for the image with saturated pixels
(Figure 1 (g) and (h)).
Significant efforts have been made to solve this problem. Cho et al. [7] adopt an Expectation-Maximizationbased framework to locate pixels violating the blur model
and exclude them during the updating process. However,
this strategy requires a predefined density of the saturated
pixels and a heuristic estimation of the noise levels for all
the images, which may be less effective because the densities and noise levels vary across different situations. Whyte
et al. [25] extend the Richardson-Lucy algorithm with an
approximation function [3] to model the property of saturated pixels. Moreover, [19, 6] develop specially-designed
fidelity terms to fit the degrading process in Eq. (3). However, these approaches require empirical parameter tuning

10542

