UAV-Human: A Large Benchmark for Human Behavior Understanding with
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
Tianjiao Li1
1

Jun Liu1 *

Wei Zhang2 *

Yun Ni1

Wenqian Wang2

Zhiheng Li2

Information Systems Technology and Design, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
2
School of Control Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong
tianjiao li@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, {jun liu, ni yun}@sutd.edu.sg
davidzhang@sdu.edu.cn, {wqwang, zhihengli}@mail.sdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Human behavior understanding with unmanned aerial
vehicles (UAVs) is of great significance for a wide range
of applications, which simultaneously brings an urgent demand of large, challenging, and comprehensive benchmarks
for the development and evaluation of UAV-based models.
However, existing benchmarks have limitations in terms of
the amount of captured data, types of data modalities, categories of provided tasks, and diversities of subjects and
environments. Here we propose a new benchmark - UAVHuman - for human behavior understanding with UAVs,
which contains 67,428 multi-modal video sequences and
119 subjects for action recognition, 22,476 frames for pose
estimation, 41,290 frames and 1,144 identities for person
re-identification, and 22,263 frames for attribute recognition. Our dataset was collected by a flying UAV in multiple urban and rural districts in both daytime and nighttime over three months, hence covering extensive diversities
w.r.t subjects, backgrounds, illuminations, weathers, occlusions, camera motions, and UAV flying attitudes. Such a
comprehensive and challenging benchmark shall be able
to promote the research of UAV-based human behavior understanding, including action recognition, pose estimation,
re-identification, and attribute recognition. Furthermore,
we propose a fisheye-based action recognition method that
mitigates the distortions in fisheye videos via learning unbounded transformations guided by flat RGB videos. Experiments show the efficacy of our method on the UAV-Human
dataset.

1. Introduction
Given the flexibility and capability of long-range tracking, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) equipped with cameras are often used to collect information from remote for
* Corresponding Authors

the scenarios where it is either impossible or not sensible to
use ground cameras [24, 35, 22]. One particular area where
UAVs are often deployed is human behavior understanding
and surveillance in the wild, where video sequences of human subjects can be collected for analysis (such as action
recognition, pose estimation, human re-identification, and
attribute analysis), and for subsequent decision making.
Compared to videos collected by common ground cameras, the video sequences captured by UAVs generally
present more diversified yet unique viewpoints, more obvious motion blurs, and more varying resolutions of the
subjects, owing to the fast motion and continuously changing attitudes and heights of the UAVs during flight. These
factors lead to significant challenges in UAV-based human
behavior understanding, clearly requiring the design and
development of human behavior understanding methods
specifically taking the unique characteristics of UAV application scenarios into consideration.
Existing works [8] have demonstrated the great importance of leveraging large, comprehensive, and challenging benchmarks to develop and evaluate the state-of-the-art
deep learning methods for handling various computer vision tasks. However, in the UAV-based human behavior understanding area, existing datasets [3, 26] have limitations
in multiple aspects, including: (1) Very limited number of
samples, while a large scale of the dataset is often important
for mitigating over-fitting issues and enhancing the generalization capability of the models developed on it. (2) Limited number and limited diversity of subjects, while the diversities of human ages, genders, and clothing are crucial
for developing robust models for analyzing the behaviors of
various subjects. (3) Constrained capturing conditions. In
practical application scenarios, UAVs often need to work
in various regions (e.g., urban, rural, and even mountain
and river areas), under diversified weathers (e.g., windy and
rainy weathers), in different time periods (e.g, daytime and
nighttime). However, samples in existing datasets are usu-

16266

