Iterative Shrinking for Referring Expression Grounding Using Deep
Reinforcement Learning

1

Mingjie Sun1,2 , Jimin Xiao1,∗, Eng Gee Lim1
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, 2 University of Liverpool

mingjie.sun@liverpool.ac.uk, {jimin.xiao,enggee.lim}@xjtlu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we are tackling the proposal-free referring
expression grounding task, aiming at localizing the target
object according to a query sentence, without relying on
off-the-shelf object proposals. Existing proposal-free methods employ a query-image matching branch to select the
highest-score point in the image feature map as the target
box center, with its width and height predicted by another
branch. Such methods, however, fail to utilize the contextual
relation between the target and reference objects, and lack
interpretability on its reasoning procedure. To solve these
problems, we propose an iterative shrinking mechanism to
localize the target, where the shrinking direction is decided
by a reinforcement learning agent, with all contents within
the current image patch comprehensively considered. Besides, the sequential shrinking processes enable to demonstrate the reasoning about how to iteratively find the target. Experiments show that the proposed method boosts
the accuracy by 4.32% against the previous state-of-theart (SOTA) method on the RefCOCOg dataset, where query
sentences are long and complex with many targets referred
by other reference objects.

1. Introduction
The aim of referring expression grounding (REG) is to
recognize and localize the target object in an image according to its query sentence (referring expression), which requires joint comprehension in both visual and linguistic domains. REG is a fundamental multi-modality task, serving as the basis for many downstream tasks, including the
visual question answering [15, 4, 17, 54, 20, 1, 48], image caption [9, 5, 7, 34, 65, 49, 42], image-text matching
[25, 65, 3, 64, 6, 51, 21], etc. It attracts much attention from
∗ corresponding author
1 The work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of

China under 61972323 and Key Program Special Fund in XJTLU under
KSF-T-02, KSF-P-02.
https://github.com/insomnia94/ISREG

Figure 1. Illustration of the difference between (a) existing featurepoint level matching methods, and (b) the proposed iterative
shrinking method. The query sentence for the target in this image is “the cat above the shelf”. In (a), dots depict the feature
points within the image feature map, with the surrounding area
representing its corresponding image region. Red dots indicate the
feature points whose corresponding image regions may cover the
target (i.e., the cat on the shelf) or distracting objects (i.e., cats on
other places), while black dots are unrelated feature points. It can
be observed that there is no such feature point whose image region
can cover both the target object (i.e., cat) and the reference object
(i.e., shelf). In (b), for each iteration, the area in the dashed box indicates the image patch after shrinking, and the red arrow depicts
the shrinking direction, which is decided by comprehensively considering all contents in the image patch before shrinking.

both computer vision (CV) and natural language processing
(NLP) areas in recent years.
Conventional methods formulate REG as a regionretrieval problem [61, 63, 56, 53, 26, 27, 10], with proposals
of all candidate objects provided in advance. The candidate
proposals can be either provided from the bounding box

14060

