Unsupervised Disentanglement of Linear-Encoded Facial Semantics
Yutong Zheng, Yu-Kai Huang, Ran Tao, Zhiqiang Shen and Marios Savvides
Carnegie Mellon University
{yutongzh,yukaih2,rant,zhiqians,marioss}@andrew.cmu.edu

original

yaw

red

blue

beard

eye

eyebrow

glasses

mouth

Figure 1: Facial manipulation result by sampling along latent representations in StyleGAN, learned by our unsupervised
framework. First column: Original generations. Column 2-4: manipulation on univariate environmental semantics. Column 5-9: manipulation on localized facial semantics.

Abstract
We propose a method to disentangle linear-encoded facial semantics from StyleGAN without external supervision.
The method derives from linear regression and sparse representation learning concepts to make the disentangled latent representations easily interpreted as well. We start by
coupling StyleGAN with a stabilized 3D deformable facial
reconstruction method to decompose single-view GAN generations into multiple semantics. Latent representations are
then extracted to capture interpretable facial semantics. In
this work, we make it possible to get rid of labels for disentangling meaningful facial semantics. Also, we demonstrate
that the guided extrapolation along the disentangled representations can help with data augmentation, which sheds
light on handling unbalanced data. Finally, we provide an
analysis of our learned localized facial representations and
illustrate that the semantic information is encoded, which
surprisingly complies with human intuition. The overall unsupervised design brings more flexibility to representation
learning in the wild.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [12] have been a great success in synthesizing

photo-realistic images given a set of latent codes. Despite
the rapid boost in image quality, the interpretability of the
generation process has become another major area of research. In general, interpretability requires latent codes
to encode disentangled semantic information of the image. Further, ideally, well-disentangled semantics are supposed to be factorized to practically interpretable components and each component should be linear-encoded in the
latent space as representation [15, 9, 5, 19, 30, 11].
StyleGAN [17] proposes a new architecture by bringing an intermediate latent space to provide support for disentanglement property for face generation. Consequently,
facial semantics are linear-encoded as latent representations. Based on StyleGAN, recent works show that sampling along the linear-encoded representation vector in latent space will change the associated facial semantics accordingly [32], which makes it possible to manipulate the
face generations to meet a target requirement. However,
in current frameworks, mapping a particular facial semantics to a latent representation vector relies on training offline classifiers with manually labeled datasets. Thus they
require artificially defined semantics and provide the associated labels for all facial images. The disadvantages for
training with labeled facial semantics include: first, they
demand extra effort on human annotations for each new attributes proposed; second, each semantics is defined artificially, and the scope of semantics is limited to the linear

3917

