Representing Videos as Discriminative Sub-graphs for Action Recognition*
Dong Li† , Zhaofan Qiu‡ , Yingwei Pan‡ , Ting Yao‡ , Houqiang Li† , and Tao Mei‡
†

University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China

‡

JD AI Research, Beijing, China

{dongli1995.ustc, zhaofanqiu, panyw.ustc, tingyao.ustc}@gmail.com
lihq@ustc.edu.cn, tmei@jd.com

Abstract
Human actions are typically of combinatorial structures
or patterns, i.e., subjects, objects, plus spatio-temporal interactions in between. Discovering such structures is therefore a rewarding way to reason about the dynamics of interactions and recognize the actions. In this paper, we introduce a new design of sub-graphs to represent and encode
the discriminative patterns of each action in the videos.
Specifically, we present MUlti-scale Sub-graph LEarning
(MUSLE) framework that novelly builds space-time graphs
and clusters the graphs into compact sub-graphs on each
scale with respect to the number of nodes. Technically,
MUSLE produces 3D bounding boxes, i.e., tubelets, in each
video clip, as graph nodes and takes dense connectivity
as graph edges between tubelets. For each action category, we execute online clustering to decompose the graph
into sub-graphs on each scale through learning Gaussian
Mixture Layer and select the discriminative sub-graphs as
action prototypes for recognition. Extensive experiments
are conducted on both Something-Something V1 & V2 and
Kinetics-400 datasets, and superior results are reported
when comparing to state-of-the-art methods. More remarkably, our MUSLE achieves to-date the best reported accuracy of 65.0% on Something-Something V2 validation set.

1. Introduction
The recognition of human actions is to analyze a video
and identify the actions taking place in the video. In general, an action arises from interactive motion, and involves
actors, objects and functional interactions in between. This
characteristics motivate us to represent the structure of a
video as a spatio-temporal graph. The graph nodes correspond to the volumes of actor or object regions in spacetime and the edges capture the interactions between the volumes. Then, a valid question is how to reason about such
* This work was performed at JD AI Research.

(a) Skateboarding

(b) Assembling computer

Figure 1. Two example videos of the action of “skateboarding” and
“assembling computer,” respectively.

graph structure to recognize the action. The difficulty originates from two aspects: 1) is it necessary to capitalize on
the whole graph for reasoning? 2) considering the fact that
the complexity of different actions is various, how to discover and model the discriminative patterns for each action
in a unified framework?
In an effort to answer the two questions, let’s look at
the two action instances illustrated in Figure 1. In the upper video clip of action “skateboarding,” the objects contain “building,” “pole,” “plants,” and “skateboard.” Nevertheless, the action of “skateboarding” only involves the actor (person), the object of “skateboard,” and the occurring
interactions. In other words, the action is irrelevant to the
other objects and only necessitates using a part of video
structure (graph). As a result, we propose to mitigate this issue through learning discriminative sub-graphs as the prototypes of each action category rather than performing reasoning on the whole graph. The design of such prototypes takes
the advantages of clustering on sub-graphs, on one hand, offers greater discriminative power in recognition, and on the
other, is helpful for encoding intra-class variance. Compared to the upper video in which the action is related to
only one object “skateboard,” the lower one of action “assembling computer” correlates with more objects, including
“screwdriver,” “computer parts,” and “computer.” From this
view, the action “assembling computer” is relatively more
complex and thus its prototypical sub-graphs should include
more nodes. To take the complexity of actions into account,
the framework should enable flexibility in the scale of subgraphs, i.e., the number of nodes in sub-graphs, to better
reflect the inherent properties of different actions.

3310

