SSTVOS: Sparse Spatiotemporal Transformers for Video Object Segmentation
Brendan Duke1,4,5 * Abdalla Ahmed4
1

2

University of Toronto
4

Christian Wolf3

Parham Aarabi1,4
3

University of Guelph
5

Modiface, Inc.

Graham W. Taylor2,5

Université de Lyon, INSA-Lyon, LIRIS

Vector Institute

Abstract
In this paper we introduce a Transformer-based approach
to video object segmentation (VOS). To address compounding error and scalability issues of prior work, we propose
a scalable, end-to-end method for VOS called Sparse Spatiotemporal Transformers (SST). SST extracts per-pixel representations for each object in a video using sparse attention over spatiotemporal features. Our attention-based formulation for VOS allows a model to learn to attend over a
history of multiple frames and provides suitable inductive
bias for performing correspondence-like computations necessary for solving motion segmentation. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of attention-based over recurrent networks
in the spatiotemporal domain. Our method achieves competitive results on YouTube-VOS and DAVIS 2017 with improved scalability and robustness to occlusions compared
with the state of the art. Code is available at https:
//github.com/dukebw/SSTVOS.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) involves simultaneous
tracking and segmentation of one or more objects throughout a video clip. VOS is a challenging task in which algorithms must overcome object appearance changes, occlusion and disocclusion, as well as distinguish similar objects
in motion over time.
A highly performant VOS system is important in downstream tracking applications where pixelwise tracking information is useful, such as player tracking in sports analytics, person tracking in security footage, and car and road
obstacle tracking in self-driving vehicle applications. VOS
methods are also relevant in interactive annotation of video
data, where annotator time can be used more efficiently by
using automatic video object segmentation in an annotatepredict-refine loop. Our work uses VOS as a proxy task to
investigate scalable algorithms for extracting spatiotempo* Corresponding Author: brendanw.duke@gmail.com

Figure 1: We propose a Transformer-based model for video
object segmentation featuring self-attention over time and
over space. To segment an output frame, the model learns
to look up similar regions in the temporal history and to
search for reference masks. We address the high computational complexity of the problem with a sparse Transformer
formulation, which allows each cell to attend to each other
cell over one or multiple hops. Here, interactions propagate
from a given feature cell via our sparse spatiotemporal attention variants: (a) grid attention, and (b) strided attention.

ral representations from video in general, and these algorithms can be re-used for yet other video prediction tasks.
Previous methods that attempt to solve VOS can be divided into three major categories: online finetuning, mask
refinement, and temporal feature propagation. Each of these
categories, reviewed in detail in §2, has inherent drawbacks.

5912

