Guided Interactive Video Object Segmentation
Using Reliability-Based Attention Maps
Yuk Heo
Korea University

Yeong Jun Koh
Chungnam National University

Chang-Su Kim
Korea University

yukheo@mcl.korea.ac.kr

yjkoh@cnu.ac.kr

changsukim@korea.ac.kr

1st round
2nd round

We propose a novel guided interactive segmentation
(GIS) algorithm for video objects to improve the segmentation accuracy and reduce the interaction time. First,
we design the reliability-based attention module to analyze the reliability of multiple annotated frames. Second, we develop the intersection-aware propagation module
to propagate segmentation results to neighboring frames.
Third, we introduce the GIS mechanism for a user to select unsatisfactory frames quickly with less effort. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm
provides more accurate segmentation results at a faster
speed than conventional algorithms. Codes are available
at https://github.com/yuk6heo/GIS-RAmap.

Video

Abstract

Provide annotations

Inspect results

Execute VOS

Figure 1: Illustration of the round-based interactive VOS.
The proposed algorithm greatly reduces the inspection time,
by guiding users to select a frame for annotations efﬁciently
and effectively. It is recommended to watch the supplementary video with a real-time demo of the proposed guided
interactive system.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) is a task to cut out objects of interest in a video. It is useful in various applications such as video editing, video summarization, video inpainting, and self-driving cars. VOS is challenging since
it should deal with multiple objects, object deformation,
and object occlusion. Because of this difﬁculty, semisupervised VOS, which uses a fully annotated segmentation
mask in the ﬁrst frame, has been widely researched. This
approach can improve the segmentation performance but requires a lot of time and effort for annotations (e.g. around 79
seconds per instance [4]). Also, it does not have a fallback
mechanism when unsatisfactory results are obtained.
Interactive VOS adopts user-friendly annotations, e.g.
scribbles, which are simple enough to provide repeatedly.
Figure 1 shows the round-based interactive VOS process.
First, a user selects a target frame and draws scribble annotations on it. After extracting query object information
from the scribbles, the algorithm obtains segmentation results for all frames. Second, the user ﬁnds a frame with unsatisfactory results and then provides additional scribbles.
The algorithm then exploits both sets of scribbles to reﬁne
the VOS results. This is repeated until the user is satisﬁed.

Recently, an automatic simulation scheme of the roundbased interactive VOS was designed in [4]. However, the
simulation is signiﬁcantly different from real applications in
that it immediately determines segmentation results to correct, by comparing them with the ground-truth. In contrast,
a real user should spend considerable time to inspect the
results and select poorly segmented regions. Since conventional interactive VOS algorithms [7, 20, 22, 24] have been
developed based on the simulation in [4], they do not consider the time for ﬁnding unsatisfactory results in practice.
In contrast, we propose a guided interactive segmentation
(GIS) algorithm for video objects, which guides users to
ﬁnd poorly segmented regions quickly and effectively.
Moreover, although interactive VOS can use the information in N annotated frames in the N th round, the conventional algorithms [7, 20] do not exploit those multiple
annotated frames thoroughly. Heo et al. [7] simply average the features from multiple annotated frames. Miao et
al. [20] use only the best matching result between a target
frame and multiple annotated frames. On the contrary, we
analyze the reliability of each annotated frame to reﬁne segmentation results in a target frame more accurately.

7322

