ID-Unet: Iterative Soft and Hard Deformation for View Synthesis
Mingyu Yin1 Li Sun1,2∗ Qingli Li1
1
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Multidimensional Information Processing,
2
Key Laboratory of Advanced Theory and Application in Statistics & Data Science,
East China Normal University, 200241 Shanghai, China
m18201815596@163.com

sunli@ee.ecnu.edu.cn

qlli@cs.ecnu.edu.cn

Abstract
View synthesis is usually done by an autoencoder, in
which the encoder maps a source view image into a latent
content code, and the decoder transforms it into a target
view image according to the condition. However, the source
contents are often not well kept in this setting, which leads
to unnecessary changes during the view translation. Although adding skipped connections, like Unet, alleviates the
problem, but it often causes the failure on the view conformity. This paper proposes a new architecture by performing the source-to-target deformation in an iterative way.
Instead of simply incorporating the features from multiple
layers of the encoder, we design soft and hard deformation
modules, which warp the encoder features to the target view
at different resolutions, and give results to the decoder to
complement the details. Particularly, the current warping
flow is not only used to align the feature of the same resolution, but also as an approximation to coarsely deform
the high resolution feature. Then the residual flow is estimated and applied in the high resolution, so that the deformation is built up in the coarse-to-fine fashion. To better constrain the model, we synthesize a rough target view
image based on the intermediate flows and their warped
features. The extensive ablation studies and the final results on two different data sets show the effectiveness of the
proposed model. https://github.com/MingyuY/
Iterative-view-synthesis

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis, also known as view translation,
facilitates the computer to render the same object under arbitrary poses, given an input object image in a source pose.
This is a challenging task, since it requires the model to
understand not only the image content, but also the relation
∗ Corresponding author, supported by the the Science and Technology
Commission of Shanghai Municipality (No.19511120800).

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) The ID-Unet realizes the translation from the
source view to the target, either existing in the MultiPIE
dataset (−30◦ ,−15◦ ,0◦ ), or under a new view (inside the
yellow box) by the linear interpolation between two adjacent view conditions. (b) Extra results on CelebA from the
existing model training on MultiPIE.
between the object poses and its appearances showing in the
image. The model needs to figure out the intrinsic shape of
the object and keep it stable during the translation. Meanwhile, it should be able to synthesize the appearance of the
object, conforming to the target view condition.
Recently, learning-based method has been employed
broadly for this task. Particularly, view synthesis is commonly regarded as a multi-domain image-to-image translation task, which is often modeled by the autoencoder (AE)
[6, 42] or variational autoencoder (VAE) [4, 43]. Both consist of a pair of encoder and decoder, in which only the last
layer of the encoder connects to the decoder, as shown in
Figure 2 (a). However, their limitation has already been realized [20, 41]. Basically, using the latent code from the
last layer is not enough to represent the content. Since the
decoder can only get one latent code, the source content
cannot be kept well in the translated image. A simple but
effective solution is the Unet [30] structure. It utilizes several skipped connections by making the shortcuts from the
encoder to the decoder, therefore the output can take more
features from the source, as shown in Figure 2 (b). Such as
V-Unet [9] is a VAE model with skipped connections and

7220

