AGQA: A Benchmark for Compositional Spatio-Temporal Reasoning
Madeleine Grunde-McLaughlin
University of Pennsylvania

Ranjay Krishna
Stanford University

Maneesh Agrawala
Stanford University

mgrund@sas.upenn.edu

ranjaykrishna@cs.stanford.edu

maneesh@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract

Spatio-temporal
scene graph:

holding
phone

left of

hold

phone

twist

picking up phone taking a picture putting a phone down

Visual events are a composition of temporal actions involving actors spatially interacting with objects. When
developing computer vision models that can reason about
compositional spatio-temporal events, we need benchmarks
that can analyze progress and uncover shortcomings. Existing video question answering benchmarks are useful, but
they often conflate multiple sources of error into one accuracy metric and have strong biases that models can exploit,
making it difficult to pinpoint model weaknesses. We present
Action Genome Question Answering (AGQA), a new benchmark for compositional spatio-temporal reasoning. AGQA
contains 192M unbalanced question answer pairs for 9.6K
videos. We also provide a balanced subset of 3.9M question
answer pairs, 3 orders of magnitude larger than existing
benchmarks, that minimizes bias by balancing the answer
distributions and types of question structures. Although
human evaluators marked 86.02% of our question-answer
pairs as correct, the best model achieves only 47.74% accuracy. In addition, AGQA introduces multiple training/test
splits to test for various reasoning abilities, including generalization to novel compositions, to indirect references,
and to more compositional steps. Using AGQA, we evaluate modern visual reasoning systems, demonstrating that
the best models barely perform better than non-visual baselines exploiting linguistic biases and that none of the existing models generalize to novel compositions unseen during
training.
G99VH.mp4

Template: What did they <relation> last <time><action>, a <object1> or <object2> ?

Q1: What did they touch last, a phone or some medicine ?
A1: medicine

Q2: What did they touch last before holding some medicine, a phone or some medicine ?
A2: phone

Q3: What did they touch last before holding some medicine, a phone or the object they twisted ?
A3: phone

Q4: What did they touch last before the longest action, a phone or the object they twisted ?
A4: phone

1. Introduction
People represent visual events as a composition of temporal actions, where each action encodes how an actor’s relationships with surrounding objects evolves over time [44,
46, 30, 37]. For instance, people can encode the video in
Figure 1 as a set of actions like putting a phone down and
holding a bottle. The action holding a bottle can be further
decomposed into how the actor’s relationship with the bottle evolves – initially the actor may be twisting the bottle
and then later shift to holding it. This ability to decompose

behind

bottle

hold

left of

hold

bottle

bottle
holding a bottle

Time

Example compositional spatio-temporal questions:
Q: What did the person hold after putting a phone somewhere?
Q: Were they taking a picture or holding a bottle for longer?
Q: Did they take a picture before or after they did the longest action?

A: bottle
A: holding a bottle
A: before

Generalization to novel compositions:
Q: Did the person twist the bottle after taking a picture?

A: yes
0

Generalization to indirect references:
Q: Did the person twist the bottle?
Q: Did the person twist the object they were holding last?

A: yes
A: yes
0

Generalization to more compositional steps:
Q: What did they touch last before holding the bottle and after
taking a picture, a phone or a bottle ?
Legend:

objects

relationships

actions

A: phone
0

time

Figure 1. We introduce AGQA: a new benchmark to test for compositional spatio-temporal reasoning. AGQA contains a balanced
3.9M and an unbalanced 192M question answer pairs associated
with 9.6K videos. We design handcrafted programs that operate
over spatio-temporal scene graphs to generate questions. These
questions explicitly test how well models generalize to novel compositions unseen during training, to indirect references of concepts, and to more compositional steps.

events is reflected in the language people use to communicate with one another [8, 42], so tasks involving both vision
and language comprehension, such as answering questions
about visual input, can test models’ compositional reasoning capability. We can ask questions like “What did the person hold after putting a phone down?” and expect a model
capable of compositional spatio-temporal reasoning to answer “bottle.” While such behavior seems fundamental to
developing vision models that can reason over events, the
vision community has only developed compositional question answering benchmarks using static images [17] or synthetic worlds [31, 56] which either are not spatio-temporal
or do not reflect the diversity of real-world events.
Although questions and visual events are composed of
multiple reasoning steps, existing video question answering benchmarks conflate multiple sources of model errors

11287

