AutoDO: Robust AutoAugment for Biased Data with Label Noise
via Scalable Probabilistic Implicit Differentiation
Denis Gudovskiy1
Luca Rigazio2
3
Shun Ishizaka
Kazuki Kozuka3
Sotaro Tsukizawa3
1
Panasonic AI Lab, USA 2 AIoli Labs, USA 3 Panasonic Technology Division, Japan
denis.gudovskiy@us.panasonic.com

luca@aiolilabs.com

{ishizaka.shun, kozuka.kazuki, tsukizawa.sotaro}@jp.panasonic.com

Abstract

5

latent space

train data

test data

AutoAugment [4] has sparked an interest in automated
augmentation methods for deep learning models. These
methods estimate image transformation policies for train
data that improve generalization to test data. While recent papers evolved in the direction of decreasing policy
search complexity, we show that those methods are not robust when applied to biased and noisy data. To overcome
these limitations, we reformulate AutoAugment as a generalized automated dataset optimization (AutoDO) task that
minimizes the distribution shift between test data and distorted train dataset. In our AutoDO model, we explicitly estimate a set of per-point hyperparameters to flexibly
change distribution of train data. In particular, we include
hyperparameters for augmentation, loss weights, and softlabels that are jointly estimated using implicit differentiation. We develop a theoretical probabilistic interpretation of
this framework using Fisher information and show that its
complexity scales linearly with the dataset size. Our experiments on SVHN, CIFAR-10/100, and ImageNet classification show up to 9.3% improvement for biased datasets with
label noise compared to prior methods and, importantly, up
to 36.6% gain for underrepresented SVHN classes1 .

1. Introduction
Data augmentation (DA) plays one of the key roles in
improving accuracy of deep neural networks (DNNs) [14].
DA increases size and diversity of train dataset and consequently improves generalization to test data distribution.
Unfortunately, DA design requires expert domain knowledge, dataset analysis, and numerous costly experiments. In
real applications with biased [31] and noisy-label data [39],
the handpicking of DA becomes a challenging task.
1 Our code is available at github.com/gudovskiy/autodo

Augment

classifier

2

Figure 1. Shared-policy DA dilemma: the distribution of augmented train data (dashed blue) may not match the test data (solid
red) in the latent space: ”2” is under-augmented, while ”5” is overaugmented. As a result, prior methods cannot match the test distribution and the decision of the learned classifier f (θ) is inaccurate.

The automation of DA aims to estimate data transformation models without incurring the aforementioned difficulties. The seminal AutoAugment [4] (AA) proposes a
DA policy model estimated by reinforcement learning (RL).
Though AA outperforms prior classification baselines, its
policy search takes thousands of GPU hours. Follow-up
works [9, 16, 8] address the search complexity problem
while keeping comparable accuracy results.
In this paper, we show that existing methods are not
robust to train dataset distortions such as distribution bias
and noisy labels. We attribute this to the policy model that
shares parameters across all data points. We illustrate this
with the toy classification task in Figure 1. The distribution of digits ”2” and ”5” in the train dataset (solid blue)
is uneven and less diverse than test distribution (solid red)
in the latent space before a linear classifier. Then, the estimated augmentation policies virtually increase train data
size (dashed blue line). However, such DA model evenly increases diversity of all digits: digit ”2” is under-augmented,
while digit ”5” is over-augmented. This pushes decision
boundary of the linear classifier in the wrong direction. A
multi-class classifier is even less robust [31], specifically,
when it overfits to examples with noisy labels [39].
To overcome these limitations, we propose to estimate

16601

