Inverting Generative Adversarial Renderer for Face Reconstruction
Jingtan Piao1 , Keqiang Sun1 , Quan Wang2,3 , Kwan-Yee Lin1,2 ,* Hongsheng Li1,4 *
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory 4 School of CST, Xidian University
{1155116308, kqsun}@link.cuhk.edu.hk, {wangquan, linjunyi}@sensetime.com, hsli@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Given a monocular face image as input, 3D face geometry reconstruction aims to recover a corresponding 3D
face mesh. Recently, both optimization-based and learningbased face reconstruction methods have taken advantage of
the emerging differentiable renderer and shown promising
results. However, the differentiable renderer, mainly based
on graphics rules, simplifies the realistic mechanism of the
illumination, reflection, etc., of the real world, thus cannot produce realistic images. This brings a lot of domainshift noise to the optimization or training process. In this
work, we introduce a novel Generative Adversarial Renderer (GAR) and propose to tailor its inverted version to
the general fitting pipeline, to tackle the above problem.
Specifically, the carefully designed neural renderer takes a
face normal map and a latent code representing other factors as inputs and renders a realistic face image. Since the
GAR learns to model the complicated real-world image, instead of relying on the simplified graphics rules, it is capable of producing realistic images, which essentially inhibits the domain-shift noise in training and optimization.
Equipped with the elaborated GAR, we further proposed a
novel approach to predict 3D face parameters, in which we
first obtain fine initial parameters via Renderer Inverting
and then refine it with gradient-based optimizers. Extensive experiments have been conducted to demonstrate the
effectiveness of the proposed generative adversarial renderer and the novel optimization-based face reconstruction
framework. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performances on multiple face reconstruction datasets.

1. Introduction
Faithfully recovering the 3D shapes of human faces from
unconstrained 2D images is a challenging task and has
numerous applications such as face recognition and face
animation [45, 48]. State-of-the-art 3D face reconstruction methods can be generally categorized into two groups,
learning-based methods and optimization-based methods.
* K. Lin and H. Li are the co-corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Comparisons with state-of-the-art face renderers. On the
second row are input geometry and the first row are corresponding
rendered images. Output of (b) [50] and (c) [13] are not realistic,
since they use graphics-based renderers. And there may exists inconsistency between the input and the rendered image in (d) [10].
Our method faithfully renders realistic images consistent with the
input geometry, as shown in (e).

The deep learning-based methods [50, 8, 14, 11] usually
take place in a regression manner, which takes facial images
as inputs and learn to regress the corresponding 3DMM
parameters. However, these methods usually require large
amounts of labeled data, while the ground truth 3DMM parameters are rather difficult to acquire. Optimization-based
methods [5, 22, 13, 49], on the other hand, generally treat
the imaging of faces as a generative process [29], which
takes a series of geometry coefficients (e.g., albedo, texture,
lighting, viewing angle, etc.) as inputs and outputs a rendered image according to certain graphics rules. The distances between the rendered images and the target images
are minimized with an optimization framework. However,
since the graphics rules generally employ simplified models
to characterize the physical process of capturing face images, many details of the imaging process cannot be modeled, which introduces difficulties for the optimization of
face reconstruction.
Recent developments of the differentiable renderers provide an efficient tool for both types of face reconstruction
methods. Specifically, the regressed parameters in learningbased methods could be rendered to images, with which the
photometric loss can be adopted for optimization. In this
manner, as shown in [11], learning-based models may be

15619

