Spatial Assembly Networks for Image Representation Learning
Yang Li1 Shichao Kan2 Jianhe Yuan1 Wenming Cao3 Zhihai He1 *
1
University of Missouri, MO, USA 2 Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
3
Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, China
yltb5@mail.missouri.edu 16112062@bjtu.edu.cn
{yuanjia, hezhi}@missouri.edu wmcao@szu.edu.cn

Abstract
It has been long recognized that deep neural networks
are sensitive to changes in spatial configurations or scene
structures. Image augmentations, such as random translation, cropping, and resizing, can be used to improve the robustness of deep neural networks under spatial transforms.
However, changes in object part configurations, spatial layout of object, and scene structures of the images may still
result in major changes in the their feature representations
generated by the network, creating significant challenges
for various visual learning tasks, including representation
or metric learning, image classification and retrieval. In
this work, we introduce a new learnable module, called spatial assembly network (SAN), to address this important issue. This SAN module examines the input image and performs a learned re-organization and assembly of feature
points from different spatial locations conditioned by feature maps from previous network layers so as to maximize
the discriminative power of the final feature representation.
This differentiable module can be flexibly incorporated into
existing network architectures, improving their capabilities
in handling spatial variations and structural changes of the
image scene. We demonstrate that the proposed SAN module is able to significantly improve the performance of various metric / representation learning, image retrieval and
classification tasks, in both supervised and unsupervised
learning scenarios.

1. Introduction
A key challenge in computer vision and machine learning is to construct or learn discriminative representations
for the semantic content of images, which should be invariant to changes in camera positions, perspective transforms, object scales, poses, part deformations, spatial displacement, and scene configurations [8, 25]. Recently, deep
* Corresponding author: Zhihai He, e-mail: hezhi@missouri.edu.

Figure 1. Illustration of invariant image representation learning under generic spatial variations.

neural networks have emerged as a powerful approach for
visual learning and representation. With its shared weights
for convolution across different spatial locations, average
or maximum pooling, coupled with sufficient training image augmentations, they are able to generate relatively invariant features or decisions under small spatial variations
or transforms. However, researchers have recognized that
deep neural networks are still vulnerable to relatively large
geometric transformations and spatial variations [23]. This
limitation originates from the fixed geometric structures of
deep neural modules. For example, the convolution processes the input image or feature images on a fixed grid
structure with a small reception field. The pooling layers
then process the outputs from the convolution layers with a
fixed spatial mapping or channel structures. There is lack
of internal mechanisms to handle the flexible spatial variations, including spatial transforms and changes in object
poses, spatial layout, and scene structures [22]. In their recent study [17], Kayhan and Gemert even found out that
deep neural networks are exploiting the absolution spatial
locations and image boundary conditions for object recognition and image classification, challenging the common assumption that convolution layers in modern CNNs are translation invariant.
Learning invariant features and visual representation
with deep neural networks has become an important yet

13876

