Improving Accuracy of Binary Neural Networks using Unbalanced Activation
Distribution
Hyungjun Kim1
1

Jihoon Park1

Changhun Lee1

Jae-Joon Kim1,2

2

Department of Convergence IT Engineering, Graduate School of Artificial Intelligence
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Korea
{hyungjun.kim, jihoon.park, changhun.lee, jaejoon}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
Binarization of neural network models is considered as
one of the promising methods to deploy deep neural network models on resource-constrained environments such as
mobile devices. However, Binary Neural Networks (BNNs)
tend to suffer from severe accuracy degradation compared
to the full-precision counterpart model. Several techniques
were proposed to improve the accuracy of BNNs. One of the
approaches is to balance the distribution of binary activations so that the amount of information in the binary activations becomes maximum. Based on extensive analysis, in
stark contrast to previous work, we argue that unbalanced
activation distribution can actually improve the accuracy of
BNNs. We also show that adjusting the threshold values of
binary activation functions results in the unbalanced distribution of the binary activation, which increases the accuracy of BNN models. Experimental results show that the
accuracy of previous BNN models (e.g. XNOR-Net and BiReal-Net) can be improved by simply shifting the threshold
values of binary activation functions without requiring any
other modification.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have achieved humanlevel performance in many computer vision tasks such as
image classification, object detection, and segmentation.
However, the increased compute cost and memory requirement of large DNN models pose a burden on resourceconstrained environments such as mobile devices. To mitigate this problem, various techniques including network
quantization [7, 17, 23, 29, 37], network pruning [15, 34],
and efficient architecture design [16, 31, 35] were introduced to reduce the compute cost and memory requirement
of DNN models. Among them, the network quantization
technique is being actively studied and recent works have
shown that a DNN model can even be quantized to a 1-bit

model [17, 25, 26, 29]. When a DNN model is binarized to a
Binary Neural Network (BNN) model, the memory requirement of the model is reduced by 32x since 32-bit floatingpoint weights can be represented by 1-bit weights. In addition, high precision multiply-and-accumulate operations
can be replaced by XNOR-and-popcount logics in BNNs
since both activation and weight have 1-bit precision. Due
to the lightweight nature, BNNs are garnering interests as a
promising solution for DNN computing on edge devices.
However, BNNs still suffer from the accuracy degradation caused by the aggressive quantization (32-bit to 1-bit).
While recent researches have shown that a DNN model
can be quantized to 2-bit precision with marginal accuracy loss [11], a severe performance gap still exists between a BNN model and its full-precision counterpart DNN
model. In general, it is known that weight quantization is
much easier than activation quantization [5, 20, 37]. In addition, when quantizing the activation, the accuracy loss
is marginal until 2-bit quantization, but a significant accuracy drop occurs when quantizing the activation to 1bit precision [20, 23, 27]. Previous works tried to explain the sharp accuracy drop from 2-bit activation to 1bit case based on the gradient mismatch problem caused
by the non-differentiable binary activation function [9, 25].
Since the quantization functions are non-differentiable, gradients cannot propagate through the quantization layer in
the back-propagation process. Therefore, previous works
used straight-through-estimator (STE) to compute the approximate gradient on non-differentiable layers [1, 17].
While STE enables back-propagation through quantization
layers, the discrepancy between the actual function and the
approximated function causes gradient mismatch problem.
Especially in BNNs, sign function is used to binarize activations and is usually approximated as hardtanh function
in back-propagation. Compared to other multi-bit quantization functions, sign function shows more severe gradient mismatch which leads to sharp accuracy degradation.
Hence, several works tried to design better approximation
function [9, 25] or to reduce the gradient mismatch using

7862

