How Privacy-Preserving are Line Clouds?
Recovering Scene Details from 3D Lines

1

Kunal Chelani1 Fredrik Kahl1 Torsten Sattler1,2
Chalmers University of Technology 2 Czech Technical University in Prague

Abstract
Visual localization is the problem of estimating the camera pose of a given image with respect to a known scene.
Visual localization algorithms are a fundamental building
block in advanced computer vision applications, including
Mixed and Virtual Reality systems. Many algorithms used
in practice represent the scene through a Structure-fromMotion (SfM) point cloud and use 2D-3D matches between
a query image and the 3D points for camera pose estimation. As recently shown, image details can be accurately
recovered from SfM point clouds by translating renderings
of the sparse point clouds to images. To address the resulting potential privacy risks for user-generated content, it
was recently proposed to lift point clouds to line clouds by
replacing 3D points by randomly oriented 3D lines passing
through these points. The resulting representation is unintelligible to humans and effectively prevents point cloudto-image translation. This paper shows that a significant
amount of information about the 3D scene geometry is preserved in these line clouds, allowing us to (approximately)
recover the 3D point positions and thus to (approximately)
recover image content. Our approach is based on the observation that the closest points between lines can yield a good
approximation to the original 3D points. Code is available
at https://github.com/kunalchelani/Line2Point.

1. Introduction
Visual localization is the problem of estimating the position and orientation from which an image was taken in
a known scene. Visual localization is a fundamental part
of computer vision systems such as self-driving cars [29,
66], Augmented and Mixed Reality applications [2, 12],
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [28, 31, 65, 69], and Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [18, 51, 57].
Classical approaches to visual localization [16, 30, 40–
42, 56, 59, 62, 86, 87] are based on local features such as
SIFT [43]. They use SfM to construct a sparse 3D point
cloud of the scene, where each point is associated with the
local image features it was triangulated from. Descriptor
matching between local features extracted in a test / query

image and the 3D points then yields a set of 2D-3D matches
that can be used for RANSAC-based camera pose estimation [9, 17, 23, 36–39].
Traditionally, work on visual localization has focused
on accurate and scalable algorithms able to cover large areas [15, 30, 40, 58, 74, 76, 86] or to run in real-time on mobile devices with limited memory and compute capabilities [2,42,46,47,50]. Thus, the underlying scene representations have been designed to enable efficient 2D-3D matching [30, 47, 58, 61, 63] and / or to limit memory consumption [10, 11, 41, 46, 47, 61]. Privacy aspects such as avoiding
user generated content from being recovered either through
3D models stored in the cloud or through query images sent
to a server have traditionally not been taken into account.
Recently, [55, 70] showed that it is possible to recover
images from SfM point clouds. Given a rendering of the
point cloud (and the feature descriptors associated with the
3D points), [55] uses a CNN to translate the rendering to a
complete image. Their work clearly demonstrates that storing SfM point clouds creates potential privacy risks as an
attacker could recover details from user-uploaded content
stored in the cloud. To prevent such attacks, [71] proposed
to replace each SfM point through a random line passing
through this point (cf . Fig. 1(left)). They showed that the resulting representation is unintelligible to humans, prevents
a direct application of [55], and still enables accurate camera pose estimation. This idea of lifting points to lines was
later adapted for privacy-perserving SLAM [67]. However,
this paper shows that it is possible to (approximately) recover the original 3D point positions from a line cloud (cf .
Fig. 1(middle)), again enabling us to use [55, 70] to obtain
images (cf . Fig. 1(right)).
In detail, this paper makes the following contributions:
(i) in the case that the line directions are chosen uniformly
at random, as is the case in [71], we show that knowledge
about local neighborhoods allows us to (approximately) recover the original 3D points based on the closest points between pairs of lines. (ii) based on this insight, we propose a
two-stage approach that first recovers these neighborhoods
and then estimates the 3D points corresponding to the input
lines. (iii) detailed experiments on both indoor and outdoor

15668

