Hijack-GAN: Unintended-Use of Pretrained, Black-Box GANs
Hui-Po Wang1

Ning Yu2,3

Mario Fritz1

1

2

CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security, Germany
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus, Germany
3
University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
While Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) show
increasing performance and the level of realism is becoming indistinguishable from natural images, this also comes
with high demands on data and computation. We show that
state-of-the-art GAN models – such as they are being publicly released by researchers and industry – can be used for
a range of applications beyond unconditional image generation. We achieve this by an iterative scheme that also
allows gaining control over the image generation process
despite the highly non-linear latent spaces of the latest GAN
models. We demonstrate that this opens up the possibility to
re-use state-of-the-art, difficult to train, pre-trained GANs
with a high level of control even if only black-box access is
granted. Our work also raises concerns and awareness that
the use cases of a published GAN model may well reach beyond the creators’ intention, which needs to be taken into
account before a full public release. Code is available at
https://github.com/a514514772/hijackgan.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Nets (GANs) [14] have achieved
remarkable success in many applications, such as image
synthesis [20, 19, 21] and image translation [8, 10, 9, 33].
By learning a mapping between noise and images, the models are skilled to produce photo-realistic images from random noise. However, as the architectures become sophisticated [20, 19, 7], training modern GANs often requires
massive data and computation resources. For example, it
takes one high-quality face dataset, 8 V100 GPUs, and one
week to train a single StyleGAN [1] model. In light of
this trend, it is crucial to reuse existing pre-trained GANs,
such as those being released by researchers or industry, for
building green AI systems, in which the critical factor is to
achieve other tasks beyond the original intention of GANs.
To reuse GANs for other tasks, prior works have shown
that semantic manipulation can be realized by vector arith-

metic [23] or moving along constant attribute vectors [13,
28, 25, 12] in latent spaces. For instance, InterfaceGAN [25] demonstrates that facial attribute manipulation
can be achieved by moving noise close to or away from the
linear decision boundary of the desired attribute. Although
these methods reveal the potential that pre-trained GANs
could go beyond unconditional generation, they highly rely
on the assumption of linear manifolds, thereby ignoring
the nature of highly non-linear latent spaces (e.g., Z-space
of StyleGAN [25, 34]). This strong assumption could be
harmful, especially for rare attributes, and lead to ineffective manipulation.
Inspired by this observation, we propose a novel framework, which gains high-level control over unconditional image generation by iteratively traversing the non-linear latent
spaces. Specifically, we first train a proxy model that bypasses the gradients from one pretrained GAN and other
fixed task models, and then dynamically decides the moving
direction in each step, thus producing smoother and more
effective attribute transition. Next, we propose an orthogonal constraint to solely edit the attribute of interest while retaining others in images. Despite only black-box access, we
show that our method can achieve various unintended tasks,
including manipulation over facial attributes, head poses,
and landmarks.
As a result of our experiments, we find that our framework with pre-trained GANs not only facilitates other vision tasks but raises concerns regarding further usage. Even
without access to model parameters, the models can still be
applied to unintended tasks potentially for malicious purposes. The owners of GANs should be aware and cautious about the potential risks before releasing their models.
Overall, our contributions are summarized below.
• We propose a framework which leverages off-the-shelf
GANs to approach unintended vision tasks in a blackbox setting.
• We propose a constraint that helps our framework
solely edit the attribute of interest while retaining others in images.

7872

