FFB6D: A Full Flow Bidirectional Fusion Network for 6D Pose Estimation
Yisheng He1 Haibin Huang3 Haoqiang Fan2 Qifeng Chen1 Jian Sun2
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Megvii Technology 3 Kuaishou Technology

Abstract
In this work, we present FFB6D, a Full Flow
Bidirectional fusion network designed for 6D pose estimation from a single RGBD image. Our key insight is that
appearance information in the RGB image and geometry
information from the depth image are two complementary
data sources, and it still remains unknown how to fully
leverage them. Towards this end, we propose FFB6D, which
learns to combine appearance and geometry information
for representation learning as well as output representation selection. Specifically, at the representation learning
stage, we build bidirectional fusion modules in the full
flow of the two networks, where fusion is applied to each
encoding and decoding layer. In this way, the two networks can leverage local and global complementary information from the other one to obtain better representations. Moreover, at the output representation stage, we
designed a simple but effective 3D keypoints selection algorithm considering the texture and geometry information
of objects, which simplifies keypoint localization for precise pose estimation. Experimental results show that our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art by large margins
on several benchmarks. Code and video are available at
https://github.com/ethnhe/FFB6D.git.

1. Introduction
6D Pose Estimation is an important component in lots
of real-world applications, such as augmented reality [40],
autonomous driving [13, 8, 69] and robotic grasping [9, 62,
17]. It has been proven a challenging problem due to sensor
noise, varying lighting, and occlusion of scenes. Recently,
the dramatic growth of deep learning techniques motivates
several works to tackle this problem using convolution neural networks (CNNs) on RGB images [68, 46, 70, 34]. However, the loss of geometry information caused by perspective projection limits the performance of these approaches
in challenging scenarios, such as poor lighting conditions,
low-contrast scenes, and textureless objects. The recent advent of inexpensive RGBD sensors provides extra depth information to ease the problem [5, 19, 23, 22] and also leads

CNN Encoder

CNN Decoder

Dense
Fusion
Point Cloud
Encoder

Pose
Estimation

Point Cloud
Decoder

(a) The DenseFusion [65] Network. The two networks extract features
from different modalities of data separately without any communication,
util the final layers of the encoding-decoding architecture.
CNN Encoder

CNN Decoder
Fusion module

Concatenate
Point Cloud
Encoder

Pose
Estimation

Point Cloud
Decoder

(b) The Proposed Full Flow Bidirectional Fusion Network. Bidirectional fusion modules are added as bridges for information communication
in the full flow of the two networks, where fusion is applied on each encoding and decoding layers. Local and global supplementary information from
each other is shared between the two networks for better appearance and
geometry representation learning, which is crucial for 6D pose estimation.

Figure 1: Network Comparison

to an interesting research question: How to fully leverage
the two data modalities effectively for better 6D pose estimation?
One line of existing works [68, 32] leverage the advantage of the two data sources within cascaded designs. These
works first estimate an initial pose from RGB images and
then refine it on point clouds using either the Iterative Closest Point (ICP) algorithm or multi-view hypothesis verification. Such refinement procedures are time-consuming and
can not be optimized with the pose from RGB images endto-end. On the other hand, works like [48, 69] apply a point
cloud network (PCN) and a CNN to extract dense features
from the cropped RGB image and point cloud respectively
and the extracted dense features are then concatenated for
pose estimation [65]. Recently, DenseFusion [65] proposed
a better fusion strategy which replaced the naive concatena-

3003

