Euro-PVI: Pedestrian Vehicle Interactions in Dense Urban Centers
Apratim Bhattacharyya1
1

Daniel Olmeda Reino2

Mario Fritz3

Bernt Schiele1

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
2
Toyota Motor Europe
3
CISPA Helmholtz Center for Information Security

Abstract
Accurate prediction of pedestrian and bicyclist paths is
integral to the development of reliable autonomous vehicles
in dense urban environments. The interactions between vehicle and pedestrian or bicyclist have a significant impact
on the trajectories of traffic participants e.g. stopping or
turning to avoid collisions. Although recent datasets and trajectory prediction approaches have fostered the development
of autonomous vehicles yet the amount of vehicle-pedestrian
(bicyclist) interactions modeled are sparse. In this work, we
propose Euro-PVI, a dataset of pedestrian and bicyclist trajectories. In particular, our dataset caters more diverse and
complex interactions in dense urban scenarios compared to
the existing datasets. To address the challenges in predicting future trajectories with dense interactions, we develop a
joint inference model that learns an expressive multi-modal
shared latent space across agents in the urban scene. This
enables our Joint-β-cVAE approach to better model the distribution of future trajectories. We achieve state of the art
results on the nuScenes and Euro-PVI datasets demonstrating the importance of capturing interactions between egovehicle and pedestrians (bicyclists) for accurate predictions.

1. Introduction
Notwithstanding recent progress in the development of
reliable self-driving vehicles, dense inner city environments
remain challenging. One of the key components for the
success of self-driving vehicles in dense urban environments
is anticipation [4, 22]. Anticipating the motion of traffic
participants in dense urban environments is made especially
challenging due to the effect of interactions between different
agents. For example, a pedestrian might turn onto the road to
avoid an obstacle on the sidewalk which requires the vehicle
to stop (Fig. 1c). Alternately, a pedestrian attempting to
cross the road ahead of the ego-vehicle might continue or
stop depending upon the distance and velocity of the vehicle

(a) Pedestrian speeds to avoid vehicle.

(b) Pedestrians yield to the vehicle.

(c) Vehicle slows to avoid pedestrian.

(d) Vehicle yields to the bicyclists.

Figure 1. Examples of interactions between the ego-vehicle and
pedestrians (bicyclists) in Euro-PVI.

(c.f . Fig. 2). Thus, interactions add significant complexity
to the distribution of the likely future trajectories which is
highly multi-modal.
Recently, datasets like nuScenes [6], Argoverse [8], or
Lyft L5 [18] have greatly aided the development of trajectory
prediction methods. However, these datasets are primarily
focused on trajectories of vehicles and vehicle-vehicle interactions – collected to a large extent on multi-lane roads
in North America or Asia, with sparse interactions between
the ego-vehicle and pedestrians or bicyclists (e.g. Figure
4 in [18]). Therefore, they do not represent trajectories in
dense urban environments well where interactions between
the trajectories of agents are prominent. Such scenarios are
particularly common in inner-city environments in Europe.
In this work, we propose the new European Pedestrian
Vehicle Interaction (Euro-PVI) dataset 1 which is collected
in a dense urban environment in Brussels and Leuven, Belgium. The Euro-PVI dataset contains a rich and diverse
set of interactions between the ego-vehicle and pedestrians
(bicyclists). Sequences are recorded near busy urban landmarks e.g. railway stations, narrow lanes or intersections
(c.f . Figs. 1 to 3) where interactions are frequent and it is
1 The dataset is available at www.europvi.mpi-inf.mpg.de

6408

