Adversarial Imaging Pipelines
Buu Phan1
1

Fahim Mannan1

Algolux

2

Felix Heide1,2

Princeton University
OBJECT: R.V.

Abstract
Adversarial attacks play a critical role in understanding deep neural network predictions and improving their
robustness. Existing attack methods aim to deceive convolutional neural network (CNN)-based classifiers by manipulating RGB images that are fed directly to the classifiers.
However, these approaches typically neglect the influence
of the camera optics and image processing pipeline (ISP)
that produce the network inputs. ISPs transform RAW measurements to RGB images and traditionally are assumed
to preserve adversarial patterns. In fact, these low-level
pipelines can destroy, introduce or amplify adversarial patterns that can deceive a downstream detector. As a result,
optimized patterns can become adversarial for the classifier
after being transformed by a certain camera ISP or optical
lens system but not for others. In this work, we examine
and develop such an attack that deceives a specific camera ISP while leaving others intact, using the same downstream classifier. We frame this camera-specific attack as a
multi-task optimization problem, relying on a differentiable
approximation for the ISP itself. We validate the proposed
method using recent state-of-the-art automotive hardware
ISPs, achieving 92% fooling rate when attacking a specific
ISP. We demonstrate physical optics attacks with 90% fooling rate for a specific camera lens.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have become a cornerstone
method in computer vision [7, 20, 21, 25, 58] with diverse
applications across fields, including safety-critical perception for self-driving vehicles, medical diagnosis, video security, medical imaging and assistive robotics. Although a
wide range of high-stakes applications base their decision
making on the output of deep networks, existing deep models have been shown to be susceptible to adversarial attacks
on the image that the network ingests. Specifically, existing
adversarial attacks perturb the input image with carefully
designed patterns to deceive the model while being imperceptible to a human viewer [34, 41, 44, 48, 37, 52]. As such,
understanding and exploring adversarial perturbations offer

OPTICS A

OPTICS B

OPTICS C

ISP A

ISP B

ISP C

CLASSIFIER

CLASSIFIER

CLASSIFIER

Original Image:
75% R.V.
Adversarial Image: 99% Anole

Original Image:
85% R.V.
Adversarial Image: 85% R.V.

Original Image:
93% R.V.
Adversarial Image: 93% R.V.

Figure 1: We illustrate and show the camera-specific attack. The
image is tampered such that it becomes only adversarial for a specific camera pipeline, even when the three pipelines deploy the
same classifier.

insights into the failure cases of today’s models and it allows
researchers to develop defense methods and models that are
resilient against proposed attacks [3, 33, 34, 42, 55].
Existing adversarial attacks find post-capture adversaries, tampering with the image after capture before it is
input to the deep network. Recently, a number of attack
methods have been demonstrated in the form of physical
objects that are placed in real-world scenes to generate adversarial patterns by capturing images of the physical objects [2, 14, 29]. The most successful methods for computing adversarial perturbations rely on network gradients
to form adversarial examples [48, 18, 29, 36, 41, 4] for
each input image, that struggle to transfer to other networks or images [48, 32, 39]. Alternative approaches rely

16051

