Learning to Restore Hazy Video: A New Real-World Dataset and A New Method
Xinyi Zhang1 * Hang Dong2,3 * † Jinshan Pan4 Chao Zhu3 Ying Tai1 Chengjie Wang1
Jilin Li1 Feiyue Huang1 Fei Wang3
1
Tencent Youtu Lab 2 ByteDance Intelligent Creation Lab
3
College of Artificial Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
4
Nanjing University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Most of the existing deep learning-based dehazing methods are trained and evaluated on the image dehazing
datasets, where the dehazed images are generated by only
exploiting the information from the corresponding hazy ones.
On the other hand, video dehazing algorithms, which can
acquire more satisfying dehazing results by exploiting the
temporal redundancy from neighborhood hazy frames, receive less attention due to the absence of the video dehazing
datasets. Therefore, we propose the first REal-world VIdeo
DEhazing (REVIDE) dataset which can be used for the supervised learning of the video dehazing algorithms. By
utilizing a well-designed video acquisition system, we can
capture paired real-world hazy and haze-free videos that
are perfectly aligned by recording the same scene (with or
without haze) twice. Considering the challenge of exploiting temporal redundancy among the hazy frames, we also
develop a Confidence Guided and Improved Deformable
Network (CG-IDN) for video dehazing. The experiments
demonstrate that the hazy scenes in the REVIDE dataset are
more realistic than the synthetic datasets and the proposed
algorithm also performs favorably against state-of-the-art
dehazing methods.

1. Introduction
Images and videos captured from the hazy scenes inevitably suffer from limited visibility and low color saturation due to the particles in the haze that will scatter and
absorption the light and decrease the albedo of the viewed
scene. The goal of the dehazing algorithms is to remove the
haze and restore a haze-free scene by given a hazy image or
video. This problem has received significant attention since
the dehazing algorithm is a necessary pre-processing step for
many high-level vision tasks (e.g., scene understanding [31]
and detection [18]) applied on the outdoor haze, indoor fire,
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

and smoking scenes.
Recently, the introduction of new techniques from machine learning and deep learning provides a broader perspective for dehazing problem and achieves impressive results.
Existing deep learning-based methods [9, 27, 40, 17, 38] are
usually trained on the synthetic datasets [19], in which the
hazy scene I is formulated by:
I(x) = T (x)J(x) + (1 − T (x))A,

(1)

where J denotes the haze-free scene, A describes the global
atmospheric light indicating the intensity of ambient light, T
is the transmission map, and x represents the pixel position.
However, the scattering atmosphere model in Equ. (1) has
shown several limitations: it cannot formulate realistic hazy
scenes with active light sources [20], with non-homogeneous
haze [5], with dense haze layer [4], and under complex
illumination conditions. Therefore, the networks trained
on these synthetic datasets often generate unsatisfied results
when handling real-world inputs due to the domain shift [34].
Recently, Some realistic image dehazing datasets [6, 3, 4,
5] are introduced to provide benchmarks for training and
evaluating real-world dehazing algorithms. Since then, great
progress has been made in the study of the real-world image
dehazing task [2, 7, 8].
Although significant achievements have been made in single image dehazing task, we believe that video dehazing algorithms can achieve better results by utilizing the temporal
redundancy from neighboring frames. However, due to the
difficulty of collecting real-world video dehazing datasets,
the video dehazing task receives less attention than image
dehazing [32]. Although plenty of synthetic hazy videos
can be obtained by using Equ. (1) [19], the domain gap
between synthetic and real-world hazy videos makes these
synthetic datasets low practical value. Therefore, collecting
a real-world video dehazing dataset for deep learning-based
algorithms is a challenging but valuable work.
In this paper, we build a Consecutive Frames Acquisition
System (CFAS), which can be used for collecting paired
videos via a controllable robot arm. By utilizing the accurate

9239

