Rethinking Class Relations: Absolute-relative Supervised and Unsupervised
Few-shot Learning
Hongguang Zhang1,2
Piotr Koniusz3,2
Songlei Jian5
Hongdong Li2
Philip H. S. Torr4
1
2
3
Systems Engineering Institute, AMS
Australian National University
Data61/CSIRO
4
5
University of Oxford
National University of Defense Technology
firstname.lastname@{anu.edu.au2 , data61.csiro.au3 ,eng.ox.ac.uk4 }

Abstract

1. Introduction

nfo. Predictor Deep learning, a popular learning paradigm in computer

vision, has improved the performance on numerous computer
vision tasks, such as category recognition, scene understandnfo. Predictor
ing and action recognition. However, deep models heavily
rely on large amounts of labeled training data, costly data
collection and labelling.
In contrast, humans enjoy the ability to learn and memorize new complex visual concepts from very few examples.
Inspired by this observation, researchers have focused on the
so-called Few-shot Learning (FSL), for which a network is
trained by the use of only few labeled training instances. Re-

re
ye d
llo
w
gre
en
fur
sm ry
oo
th
sp
o
ey t
es
leg
s

Predict

Learn to predict various class annotations
when simulating the object relations.

Relative Learning
Compare

How similar?
Relations? e. g., colour, shape
Learn to simulate realistic object relations
with all available class annotations.

Absolute-relative Learning
Compare

How similar?
Relations? e. g., colour, shape

Predict
re
ye d
llo
w
gre
en
fur
sm ry
oo
th
sp
o
ey t
es
leg
s

The majority of existing few-shot learning methods describe image relations with binary labels. However, such
binary relations are insufficient to teach the network complicated real-world relations, due to the lack of decision
smoothness. Furthermore, current few-shot learning models capture only the similarity via relation labels, but they
are not exposed to class concepts associated with objects,
which is likely detrimental to the classification performance
due to underutilization of the available class labels. For
instance, children learn the concept of tiger from a few of actual examples as well as from comparisons of tiger to other
animals. Thus, we hypothesize that both similarity and class
concept learning must be occurring simultaneously. With
these observations at hand, we study the fundamental problem of simplistic class modeling in current few-shot learning
methods. We rethink the relations between class concepts,
and propose a novel Absolute-relative Learning paradigm
to fully take advantage of label information to refine the
image an relation representations in both supervised and unsupervised scenarios. Our proposed paradigm improves the
performance of several state-of-the-art models on publicly
available datasets.

Absolute Learning

Absolute Labels: Colours, Shapes, Materials, WordNet Class Label, Scales, Rotations, Jigsaw
Relative Labels: Colours, Shapes, Materials, WordNet

Figure 1: Our few-shot learning paradigm. Absolute Learning
(AL) refers to the strategy where a pipeline learns to predict absolute object information e.g., object or concept class. Relative
Learning (RL) denotes similarity (relation) learning with the use of
binary {0, 1} and/or soft [0; 1] similarity labels. Absolute-relative
Learning (ArL) is a combination of AL and RL, which is akin to
multi-task learning, and unary and pair-wise potentials in semantic
segmentation. ArL is also conceptually closer to how humans learn
from few examples.

cently, deep networks based on relation-learning have gained
the popularity [39, 37, 38, 35, 46, 47, 48, 43, 49, 22, 36].
Such approaches often apply a form of metric learning
adapted to the few-shot learning task. They learn object
relations (similarity learning on query and support images)
based on support classes, and can be evaluated on images
containing novel classes.
However, there are two major problems in these relation
learning pipelines, namely, (i) binary {0, 1} labels are used to
express the similarity between pairs of images, which cannot
capture the similarity nuisances in the real-world setting due
to the hardness of such modeling, which leads to biases in
19432

