Cluster-wise Hierarchical Generative Model for Deep Amortized Clustering
Huafeng Liu, Jiaqi Wang, Liping Jing*
School of Computer and Information Technology
Beijing Key Lab of Traffic Data Analysis and Mining
Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing, China
{huafeng, jiaqi.wang, lpjing}@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we propose Cluster-wise Hierarchical
Generative Model for deep amortized clustering (CHiGac).
It provides an efficient neural clustering architecture by
grouping data points in a cluster-wise view rather than
point-wise view. CHiGac simultaneously learns what makes
a cluster, how to group data points into clusters, and how
to adaptively control the number of clusters. The dedicated
cluster generative process is able to sufficiently exploit pairwise or higher-order interactions between data points in
both inter- and intra-cluster, which is useful to sufficiently
mine the hidden structure among data. To efficiently minimize the generalized lower bound of CHiGac, we design
an Ergodic Amortized Inference (EAI) strategy by considering the average behavior over sequence on an inner variational parameter trajectory, which is theoretically proven
to reduce the amortization gap. A series of experiments
have been conducted on both synthetic and real-world data.
The experimental results demonstrated that CHiGac can efficiently and accurately cluster datasets in terms of both internal and external evaluation metrics (DBI and ACC).

1. Introduction
Clustering is a fundamental task in unsupervised machine learning to group similar data points into multiple
clusters. Aside from its usefulness in many downstream
tasks, clustering is an important tool for visualizing and understanding the underlying structures of datasets, as well
as a model for categorization in cognitive science. A
plethora of clustering methods have been developed and
successfully employed in various fields, including computer
vision [13, 6], natural language processing [18, 26], social network analysis [12], and medical informatics [35].
Among various clustering algorithms [47, 48], probabilistic
clustering model has been widely concerned because of its
* Corresponding author

flexibility and interpretability.
Probabilistic generative clustering models (or equivalently, mixture models) [8] are a staple of statistical modeling in which a discrete latent variable is introduced for
each observation, indicating its cluster identity. These generative clustering models can be roughly divided into two
categories: finite mixture model [8] and infinite mixture
model [44]. In recent years, finite mixture models have
been increasingly applied in unsupervised learning problems with the aid of deep neural networks. The most relevant research is that of deep generative clustering models [21, 31, 49], where neural networks are trained to predict
the states of latent variables given observations in a deep
generative model or probabilistic program [23, 42]. Instead
of using an arbitrary prior for the latent variable, these methods adopted finite mixture prior, such as Gaussian Mixture
Model (GMM) [21, 49]. A finite mixture model with a fixed
number of clusters may fit the given data set well, however,
it may be sub-optimal to use the same number of clusters if
more data comes under a slightly changed distribution. It
would be ideal if the clustering models can figure out the
unknown number of clusters automatically.
Alternatively, infinite mixture model is the application
of nonparametric Bayesian techniques to mixture modeling,
which allows for the automatic determination of an appropriate number of mixture components. The prior distribution can be specified in terms of a data point sequential process called Dirichlet process (e.g., Chinese restaurant process (CRP)), where the number of clusters can arbitrarily
grow to better accommodate data as needed. To approximate the corresponding infinite mixture posterior, recently,
deep amortized clustering [37, 38, 29, 39, 50] methods are
proposed in a black-box fashion [45]. Specifically, they
make use of neural networks for amortized inferring the
cluster assignments and parameters, which is flexible to define the clusters. To adaptively determine the number of
clusters, however, they have to construct the non-parametric
prior, which largely depends on the sequential data point
modeling. For large-scale dataset, this process will be time-

15109

