Continual Learning via Bit-Level Information Preserving
Yujun Shi1 Li Yuan1 Yunpeng Chen2 Jiashi Feng1
1
National University of Singapore 2 YITU Technology
{shi.yujun,yuanli}@u.nus.edu

yunpeng.chen@yitu-inc.com

Abstract
Continual learning tackles the setting of learning different tasks sequentially. Despite the lots of previous solutions,
most of them still suffer significant forgetting or expensive
memory cost. In this work, targeted at these problems, we
first study the continual learning process through the lens of
information theory and observe that forgetting of a model
stems from the loss of information gain on its parameters
from the previous tasks when learning a new task. From
this viewpoint, we then propose a novel continual learning
approach called Bit-Level Information Preserving (BLIP)
that preserves the information gain on model parameters
through updating the parameters at the bit level, which can
be conveniently implemented with parameter quantization.
More specifically, BLIP first trains a neural network with
weight quantization on the new incoming task and then estimates information gain on each parameter provided by
the task data to determine the bits to be frozen to prevent
forgetting. We conduct extensive experiments ranging from
classification tasks to reinforcement learning tasks, and the
results show that our method produces better or on par results comparing to previous state-of-the-arts. Indeed, BLIP
achieves close to zero forgetting while only requiring constant memory overheads throughout continual learning1 .

1. Introduction
Continual learning tackles the setting where an agent
learns different tasks sequentially. It is challenging since
the agent is usually not allowed to refer to the previously
learned tasks when learning a new one. Current artificial
neural networks generally fail as they tend to suffer severe
performance degradation on previously learned tasks after
learning new ones, which is known as catastrophic forgetting [23, 11]. A commonly acknowledged reason for this
problem is that model parameters drift when fitting the new
incoming task data.
Two types of methods have been developed to address
1 Code: https://github.com/Yujun-Shi/BLIP

elefjia@nus.edu.sg

this hazard. The first type of methods, which are based
on model pruning technique [10, 29, 22, 21], first identify model parameters important for a task and then store
a task-specific mask to mark these parameters and prohibit
them from changing in subsequent learning to prevent forgetting. During the evaluation stage, only the parameters
marked by the task-specific mask are applied on the given
task. While these methods usually enjoy relatively low forgetting rate, they suffer from the drawback of linearly growing memory overheads resulted from task-specific masks
as continual learning proceeds. The other type, known as
“regularization-based methods” [14, 12, 36, 26, 16], impose
model regularization terms when training on the new task to
prevent model parameters from deviating away from previously learned ones and thus alleviate forgetting issue. They
do not involve any task-specific masks but usually suffer
more severe forgetting comparing to pruning-based ones.
The hard trade-off between forgetting prevention and memory efficiency for these two types of methods is because
they only consider preventing forgetting on the parameterlevel.
In this paper, we dive into the finer granularity of bitlevel instead of parameter-level to investigate and address
the forgetting problem in continual learning. To start with,
we study continual learning from information theory perspective, which is developed from the Bayesian inference
framework that interprets supervised learning as an inference process over the model parameters from the training
data. For a continual learning (inference) process, where
data seen by model accumulate as the model experiences
more tasks, the inference on each model parameter should
become increasingly certain. To quantify this expected increase of certainty on model parameters given the streaming
data, we exploit information gain, which corresponds to the
reduction of entropy on parameters estimated after experiencing new task data. In this way, we consider continual
learning as a recursive process of gaining information on
model parameters, driven by the sequentially incoming task
data. From this viewpoint, forgetting can be understood as
loss of information provided by previous task data on model
parameters.

16674

