Self-Guided and Cross-Guided Learning for Few-Shot Segmentation
Bingfeng Zhang1,2 ,
Jimin Xiao1∗ , Terry Qin3
1
XJTLU, 2 University of Liverpool, 3 Dinnar Automation Technology
{Bingfeng.Zhang,Jimin.Xiao}@xjtlu.edu.cn, terry.qin@outlook.com

Abstract
Few-shot segmentation has been attracting a lot of attention due to its effectiveness to segment unseen object classes
with a few annotated samples. Most existing approaches
use masked Global Average Pooling (GAP) to encode an annotated support image to a feature vector to facilitate query
image segmentation. However, this pipeline unavoidably
loses some discriminative information due to the average
operation. In this paper, we propose a simple but effective
self-guided learning approach, where the lost critical information is mined. Specifically, through making an initial
prediction for the annotated support image, the covered and
uncovered foreground regions are encoded to the primary
and auxiliary support vectors using masked GAP, respectively. By aggregating both primary and auxiliary support
vectors, better segmentation performances are obtained on
query images. Enlightened by our self-guided module for
1-shot segmentation, we propose a cross-guided module for
multiple shot segmentation, where the final mask is fused using predictions from multiple annotated samples with highquality support vectors contributing more and vice versa.
This module improves the final prediction in the inference
stage without re-training. Extensive experiments show that
our approach achieves new state-of-the-art performances
on both PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i datasets. Source code
is available at https://github.com/zbf1991/SCL .

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has been making great progress
with recent advances in deep neural network especially
Fully Convolutional Network (FCN) [18]. Requiring sufficient and accurate pixel-level annotated data, state-of-theart semantic segmentation approaches can produce satisfying segmentation masks. However, these approaches heavily rely on massive annotated data. Their performance drops
dramatically on unseen classes or with insufficient anno∗ Corresponding author
1 The work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of
China under 61972323.

Support image

Encoder

same

share
weights

Encoder

Query image

guide

Ground-truth

Feature
Processing
+Decoder
Prediction

Figure 1. Motivation of our approach. Even using the same image as both support and query input, previous approaches cannot
generate accurate segmentation under the guide of its ground-truth
mask.

tated data [33].
Few-shot segmentation [8, 14, 20, 24] is a promising
method to tackle this issue. Compared to fully supervised
semantic segmentation [3, 5, 11, 13] which can solely segment the same classes in the training set, the objective of
few-shot segmentation is to utilize one or a few annotated
samples to segment new classes. Specifically, the data in
few-shot segmentation is divided into two sets: support set
and query set. This task requires to segment images from
the query set given one or several annotated images from
the support set. Thus, the key challenge of this task is how
to leverage the information from the support set. Most approaches [6, 17, 30, 35, 32, 26] adopt a Siamese Convolutional Neural Network (SCNN) to encode both support and
query images. In order to apply the information from support images, they mainly use masked Global Average Pooling (GAP) [38] or other strengthened methods [19] to extract all foreground [30, 35, 16] or background [30] as one
feature vector, which is used as a prototype to compute cosine distance [36] or make dense comparison [35] on query
images.
Using a support feature vector extracted from the support image does facilitate the query image segmentation,
but it does not carry sufficient information. Fig. 1 shows
an extreme example where the support image and query image are exactly the same. However, even the existing best

8312

