StyleSpace Analysis: Disentangled Controls for StyleGAN Image Generation
Zongze Wu
Hebrew University

Dani Lischinski
Hebrew University

Eli Shechtman
Adobe Research

zongze.wu@mail.huji.ac.il

danix@cs.huji.ac.il

elishe@adobe.com

Abstract
We explore and analyze the latent style space of StyleGAN2, a state-of-the-art architecture for image generation, using models pretrained on several different datasets.
We first show that StyleSpace, the space of channel-wise
style parameters, is significantly more disentangled than
the other intermediate latent spaces explored by previous
works. Next, we describe a method for discovering a large
collection of style channels, each of which is shown to control a distinct visual attribute in a highly localized and disentangled manner. Third, we propose a simple method for
identifying style channels that control a specific attribute,
using a pretrained classifier or a small number of example images. Manipulation of visual attributes via these
StyleSpace controls is shown to be better disentangled than
via those proposed in previous works. To show this, we
make use of a newly proposed Attribute Dependency metric.
Finally, we demonstrate the applicability of StyleSpace controls to the manipulation of real images. Our findings pave
the way to semantically meaningful and well-disentangled
image manipulations via simple and intuitive interfaces.

1. Introduction
Modern Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are
able to produce a wide variety of highly realistic synthetic
images. The phenomenal success of these generative models underscores the need for a better understanding of “what
makes them tick” and what kinds of control these models
offer over the generated data. Of particular practical importance are controls that are interpretable and disentangled, as
they suggest intuitive image manipulation interfaces.
In traditional GAN architectures, such as DCGAN [25]
and Progressive GAN [16], the generator starts with a random latent vector, drawn from a simple distribution, and
transforms it into a realistic image via a sequence of convolutional layers. Recently, style-based designs have become
increasingly popular, where the random latent vector is first
transformed into an intermediate latent code via a mapping
function. This code is then used to modify the channel-

wise activation statistics at each of the generator’s convolution layers. BigGAN [6] uses class-conditional BatchNorm
[14], while StyleGAN [17] uses AdaIN [13] to modulate
channel-wise means and variances. StyleGAN2 [18] controls channel-wise variances by modulating the weights of
the convolution kernels. It has been shown that the intermediate latent space is more disentangled than the initial
one [17]. Additionally, Shen et al. [28] show that the latent
space of StyleGAN [17, 18] is more disentangled than that
of Progressive GAN [16].
Some control over the generated results may be obtained
via conditioning [20], which requires training the model
with annotated data. In contrast, style-based design enables
discovering a variety of interpretable generator controls after training the generator. However, current methods require
either a pretrained classifier [10, 28, 29, 34], a large set of
paired examples [15], or manual examination of many candidate control directions [12], which limits the versatility of
these approaches. Furthermore, the individual controls discovered by these methods are typically entangled, affecting
multiple attributes, and are often non-local.
In this work, our goal is to understand to what degree
disentanglement is inherent in style-based generator architectures. Perhaps an even more important question is to how
to find these disentangled controls? In particular, can this
be done in an unsupervised manner, or with only a small
amount of supervision? In this paper we report several findings with respect to these questions.
Recent studies of disentangled representations [8, 27]
consider a latent representation to be perfectly disentangled if each latent dimension controls a single visual attribute (disentanglement), and each attribute is controlled
by a single dimension (completeness). Following this terminology, we explore the latent space of StyleGAN2 [18]. Unlike other works that analyze the (intermediate) latent space
W or W+ [1], we examine StyleSpace, the space spanned
by the channel-wise style parameters, denoted S. In Section 3 we measure and compare the disentanglement and
completeness of these spaces using the metrics proposed
for this purpose [8]. To our knowledge we are the first to
apply this quantitative framework to models trained on real

12863

