OpenMix: Reviving Known Knowledge for
Discovering Novel Visual Categories in an Open World
Zhun Zhong1 , Linchao Zhu2 , Zhiming Luo3 *, Shaozi Li3 , Yi Yang2 , Nicu Sebe1
1

MHUG, University of Trento

2

ReLER, University of Technology Sydney

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of discovering new
classes in unlabeled visual data given labeled data from
disjoint classes. Existing methods typically first pre-train
a model with labeled data, and then identify new classes in
unlabeled data via unsupervised clustering. However, the
labeled data that provide essential knowledge are often underexplored in the second step. The challenge is that the
labeled and unlabeled examples are from non-overlapping
classes, which makes it difficult to build a learning relationship between them. In this work, we introduce OpenMix to mix the unlabeled examples from an open set and
the labeled examples from known classes, where their nonoverlapping labels and pseudo-labels are simultaneously
mixed into a joint label distribution. OpenMix dynamically
compounds examples in two ways. First, we produce mixed
training images by incorporating labeled examples with unlabeled examples. With the benefit of unique prior knowledge in novel class discovery, the generated pseudo-labels
will be more credible than the original unlabeled predictions. As a result, OpenMix helps preventing the model
from overfitting on unlabeled samples that may be assigned
with wrong pseudo-labels. Second, the first way encourages the unlabeled examples with high class-probabilities
to have considerable accuracy. We introduce these examples as reliable anchors and further integrate them with unlabeled samples. This enables us to generate more combinations in unlabeled examples and exploit finer object relations among the new classes. Experiments on three classification datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed OpenMix, which is superior to state-of-the-art methods in novel class discovery.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have witnessed great
developments in visual recognition, especially image classification [4]. It is reported that modern image classification
* Corresponding author

3

IMT, Xiamen University

models [9, 18, 19] can identify thousands of classes with
high accuracy, but require a large number of labeled training samples. Although semi-supervised learning (SSL) [2]
and noisy label learning (NLL) [6] can mitigate the need
for annotations and maintain high performance, they still
require some clean (SSL) or noisy (NLL) annotations for
every class of interest. Furthermore, the generalization ability of learned classifiers is far from the human ability. In
fact, a human can easily identify samples of new classes that
may appear in real applications. However, a learned classifier can only recognize samples of the known classes, but
is likely to fail handling the ones of unseen (new) classes.
That is, it is significantly difficult and still underexplored to
identify new classes that are undefined previously and do
not have any annotated samples.
In this work, we attempt to address the recent proposed
problem, called novel class discovery [8], where we are
given labeled data of known (old) classes and unlabeled
data of novel (new) classes. It is an open set problem where
classes of unlabeled data are undefined previously and annotated samples of these novel classes are not available. The
goal of novel class discovery is to identify new classes in
unlabeled data with the support of knowledge of old classes.
To achieve this objective, existing methods [7, 8, 10, 11]
commonly follow a two-step learning strategy: 1) pre-train
the model with labeled data to obtain basic discriminative
ability; 2) recognize new classes in unlabeled data via unsupervised learning upon the trained model. However, the
labeled data are only used to learn off-the-shelf features in
the first step, but are largely ignored in the second step.
In this way, the model can only benefit from the off-theshelf knowledge of the labeled data, but fails to leverage the
underlying relationship between the labeled and unlabeled
data. In this work, we argue that the labeled data provide
essential knowledge about underlying object structures and
common visual patterns. However, the use of labeled data is
much harder than in semi-supervised learning [2, 16], due
to the fact that the labeled and unlabeled samples are from
disjoint classes.
To this end, the question is how to effectively exploit the
labeled data to promote the discovery of new classes? In

9462

