Lipstick ain’t enough: Beyond Color Matching for In-the-Wild Makeup Transfer
Thao Nguyen1 Anh Tuan Tran1,2 Minh Hoai1,3
1
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam, 2 VinUniversity, Hanoi, Vietnam,
3
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11790, USA
{v.thaontp79,v.anhtt152,v.hoainm}@vinai.io

Source image

Source image with transferred makeup from reference styles

Figure 1: In-the-wild facial makeup consists of both color transfer and pattern addition. We propose a holistic method that
can transfer the color and pattern from a reference makeup style to another image.

Abstract
Makeup transfer is the task of applying on a source face
the makeup style from a reference image. Real-life makeups
are diverse and wild, which cover not only color-changing
but also patterns, such as stickers, blushes, and jewelries.
However, existing works overlooked the latter components
and confined makeup transfer to color manipulation, focusing only on light makeup styles. In this work, we propose a holistic makeup transfer framework that can handle all the mentioned makeup components. It consists of an
improved color transfer branch and a novel pattern transfer branch to learn all makeup properties, including color,
shape, texture, and location. To train and evaluate such a
system, we also introduce new makeup datasets for real and
synthetic extreme makeup. Experimental results show that
our framework achieves the state of the art performance on
both light and extreme makeup styles. Code is available at
https://github.com/VinAIResearch/CPM .

1. Introduction
Across thousands of years of history, humankind has
been fascinated with facial beauty. Humans, particularly females, want to be attractive, and facial appearance is a crucial part of this. The cosmetic industry, as reported in 2007,
generates a turnover of about $170 billion each year [27].

Among face beautiﬁcation techniques, makeup is the most
popular method, accompanied by a wide range of commercial products including foundation, eye shadow, lipsticks,
blushes, stickers, facial drawings, and facial accessories.
Due to the popularity of makeup, makeup try-on is an
vital application in both retail and entertainment. Among
makeup try-on techniques, makeup transfer is the most convenient and effective way. Makeup transfer is the task of
transferring the makeup style from one reference face to another face. This task is not trivial; it needs to extract makeup
components from the composited reference image. It also
needs to analyze the face structure to transfer makeup components between unaligned faces correctly, and there are
many factors to account for, including head pose, illumination, facial expressions, and occlusions.
Deep-learning-based generative models are leading
methods in tackling this problem. BeautyGAN [16] and
BeautyGlow [6] can provide realistic after-makeup images
for simple styles on frontal faces. PSGAN [12] manages to handle faces at various head poses and expressions,
while CA-GAN [14] focuses on ﬁne-grained makeup-color
matching. However, these methods can only work with simple makeup styles based on color distributed in cosmetic regions such as skin foundations, lipsticks, and eye-shadows.
They fail miserably on the complex makeups that rely on
shape, texture, and location, such as blushes, face paintings,
and makeup jewelries. Only LADN [10] considers these ex-

13305

