V X 2T EXT: End-to-End Learning of Video-Based Text Generation
From Multimodal Inputs
Xudong Lin1
1

Gedas Bertasius2

Columbia University

Jue Wang2
Shih-Fu Chang1
2,4
Lorenzo Torresani
2
3
Facebook AI
Georgia Tech

Abstract
We present V X 2T EXT, a framework for text generation
from multimodal inputs consisting of video plus text, speech,
or audio. In order to leverage transformer networks, which
have been shown to be effective at modeling language, each
modality is first converted into a set of language embeddings by a learnable tokenizer. This allows our approach
to perform multimodal fusion in the language space, thus
eliminating the need for ad-hoc cross-modal fusion modules. To address the non-differentiability of tokenization
on continuous inputs (e.g., video or audio), we utilize a
relaxation scheme that enables end-to-end training. Furthermore, unlike prior encoder-only models, our network
includes an autoregressive decoder to generate open-ended
text from the multimodal embeddings fused by the language
encoder. This renders our approach fully generative and
makes it directly applicable to different “video+x to text”
problems without the need to design specialized network
heads for each task. The proposed framework is not only
conceptually simple but also remarkably effective: experiments demonstrate that our approach based on a single architecture outperforms the state-of-the-art on three videobased text-generation tasks—captioning, question answering and audio-visual scene-aware dialog.

1. Introduction
Among the fundamental goals of AI is the development
of conversational multimodal systems that can reliably perceive the real-world and communicate with humans in natural language. Progress in this area has been dramatically
advanced in recent years by the introduction of large-scale
benchmarks assessing the ability to interpret audiovisual information and translate this understanding to natural language. Prime examples include datasets for image or video
captioning [10, 38, 51, 24, 56, 28], question answering
(QA) [5, 13, 54, 58, 19, 36, 46, 26], as well as audio-visual
dialog [11, 1]. In order to perform well on such bench-

Devi Parikh2,3
4

Dartmouth

marks, the model must accomplish several goals: (1) extract salient information from each individual modality, (2)
effectively combine the different cues to address the given
query, and (3) generate and present the results in humancomprehensible text.
In this paper, we present V X 2T EXT, a simple videobased approach that embeds these three steps in a unified,
end-to-end trainable framework. Objectives (1) and (2) are
accomplished by utilizing modality-specific classifiers to
convert the semantics from each input signal into a common
semantic language space, which enables the application of
powerful language models to directly interpret multimodal
content. Specifically, our approach takes the textual labels
of the top classes predicted by each classifier pretrained on
existing datasets [9, 14] and transforms them into word embeddings, using a pretrained language model [12, 40]. The
benefit of this solution is that it opens up the possibility to
carry out multimodal fusion by means of powerful language
encoders such as T5 [40] without the need to design specialized cross-modal network modules [33, 29, 57, 35] or
to resort to pretext tasks to learn to combine the different
input signals [44, 55, 29]. Not only is such a design much
simpler but it also leads to better performance compared to
prior approaches.
In order to fulfill objective (3), we employ a generative
text decoder [40], which transforms the multimodal features
computed by the encoder into text, thus realizing the goal
of generating results in human-comprehensible language.
While prior multimodal works based on encoder-only architectures [44, 45, 33] are limited to operate in settings involving selection from a fixed set of text candidates, our
generative approach can be used for open-ended sentence
generation as, e.g., required in dialog applications. In addition, the use of a text decoder allows us to tackle different
“video+x to text” problems (e.g., answering and generating questions, dialog, as well as captioning) with the same
architecture, without having to design specialized network
heads for each task.
We integrate these conceptually-distinct steps into a single architecture, which we train end-to-end. To achieve this,

7005

