Memory-Efficient Network for Large-scale Video Compressive Sensing
Ziheng Cheng, Bo Chen*, Guanliang Liu, Hao Zhang, Ruiying Lu and Zhengjue Wang
Xidian University
zhcheng@stu.xidian.edu.cn, bchen@xidian.edu.cn
{lgl xidian,zhanghao xidian,ruiyinglu xidian,zhengjuewang}@163.com

Xin Yuan*
Bell Labs
xyuan@bell-labs.com

Abstract
Video snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) captures a sequence of video frames in a single shot using a 2D detector.
The underlying principle is that during one exposure time,
different masks are imposed on the high-speed scene to
form a compressed measurement. With the knowledge of
masks, optimization algorithms or deep learning methods
are employed to reconstruct the desired high-speed video
frames from this snapshot measurement. Unfortunately,
though these methods can achieve decent results, the
long running time of optimization algorithms or huge
training memory occupation of deep networks still preclude them in practical applications. In this paper, we
develop a memory-efficient network for large-scale video
SCI based on multi-group reversible 3D convolutional
neural networks. In addition to the basic model for the
grayscale SCI system, we take one step further to combine
demosaicing and SCI reconstruction to directly recover
color video from Bayer measurements. Extensive results
on both simulation and real data captured by SCI cameras demonstrate that our proposed model outperforms
previous state-of-the-art with less memory and thus can
be used in large-scale problems. The code is at https:
//github.com/BoChenGroup/RevSCI-net.

1. Introduction
Computational imaging (CI) [1, 34] introduces modulation (coding) in the optical path to advance the capability of traditional cameras. Snapshot compressive imaging
(SCI) [11, 25, 40, 43, 51] is a promising CI technique that
indirectly captures 3-dimensional (3D) data using a 2D detector, i.e., the original 3-dimensional data (videos or hy* Corresponding authors.

Bayer
Measurement

t
Original Scene

t
Dynamic Masks

Bayerfilter න
𝑡

⨀

t

Reconstruction
Algorithm
Camera

න
𝑡

Grayscale
Measurement

t

Figure 1. Principle of grayscale or color video SCI system. The
original scene is modulated by dynamic masks and then is integrated by the camera to obtain a snapshot measurement. Note that
for the color video SCI system, the camera captures the modulated
scene through the Bayer-filter not directly collecting the brightness. Having obtained measurements, the reconstruction algorithm recovers the desired video from it.

perspectral images) are coded by different masks and then
integrated into a single frame (measurement). As shown in
Fig. 1, in video SCI, the temporal dimension is modulated
and compressed, which avoids large memory storage and
transmission bandwidth during imaging. To make the SCI
system practical, an efficient reconstruction algorithm, i.e.,
recovering the desired images from the compressed measurement is critical. In this work, we focus on the practical
video SCI reconstruction algorithm that can scale to large
data.
The mainstream of reconstruction methods is the modelbased optimization problems with various prior knowledge, e.g., total variation (TV) used in GAP-TV [50] and
TwIST [2], and non-local low-rank [9] used in DeSCI [24].
These methods can provide usable results in an unsupervised manner but cannot balance the reconstruction quality
and speed (hours for DeSCI to reconstruct a 256 × 256 × 8
video from a single measurement), which makes them un-

16246

