High-speed Image Reconstruction through Short-term Plasticity
for Spiking Cameras
Yajing Zheng1† , Lingxiao Zheng1† , Zhaofei Yu1,2* , Boxin Shi1,2 ,
Yonghong Tian1 , Tiejun Huang1,2
1
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
2
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract
Fovea, located in the centre of the retina, is specialized
for high-acuity vision. Mimicking the sampling mechanism
of the fovea, a retina-inspired camera, named spiking camera, is developed to record the external information with a
sampling rate of 40,000 Hz, and outputs asynchronous binary spike streams. Although the temporal resolution of visual information is improved, how to reconstruct the scenes
is still a challenging problem. In this paper, we present a
novel high-speed image reconstruction model through the
short-term plasticity (STP) mechanism of the brain. We derive the relationship between postsynaptic potential regulated by STP and the firing frequency of each pixel. By setting up the STP model at each pixel of the spiking camera,
we can infer the scene radiance with the temporal regularity of the spike stream. Moreover, we show that STP can
be used to distinguish the static and motion areas and further enhance the reconstruction results. The experimental
results show that our methods achieve state-of-the-art performance in both image quality and computing time.

1. Introduction
High-speed imaging is desired in scientific imaging
and professional photography for clearly recording fastchanging processes in physics experiments, rapidly moving
particles in chemical reactions, fleeting moment in competitive sports and so on. The traditional digital camera
records scenes with a constant shutter speed (e.g., 30 fps),
which loses much visual information and suffers motion
blur. High-speed cameras can output images with a relatively high time sampling frequency of millions Hz or even
hundreds of millions Hz [1, 13]. However, enormous memory demands are needed to record these images. Moreover, high-speed cameras require specialized sensors that
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
* Corresponding authors: yuzf12@pku.edu.cn.

Traditional Camera

Event streams

y

t
x

Reconstruction

Event Camera

…

…

y

Spike streams
t
x

Reconstruction

Spiking Camera

…

…

Figure 1. Illustration of working mechanism for traditional cameras, event cameras, and spiking cameras. Traditional cameras
acquire images according to the constant frame rate, event cameras generate asynchronous events for all pixels when brightness
changes exceed a certain threshold, and spiking cameras continuously capture photons and generate asynchronous spike for all pixels when the accumulated intensity reaches a predefined threshold.

are highly expensive, which cannot be widely used.
Over the past decades, neuromorphic vision sensors [12]
have attracted extensive attention with its bio-inspired visual recording mechanism. Unlike conventional cameras,
which sample external light with the same exposure time
for all pixels, the neuromorphic vision sensors mimick the
retina’s sampling process and generate asynchronously binary outputs for all pixels based on the scene radiance
change. A commonly used neuromorphic vision sensors are
dynamic vision sensors (DVS) (also called event cameras),
in which events are generated only when the brightness
change exceeds a certain threshold [22, 5, 9]. Event cameras
have distinctive advantages over traditional frame cameras
such as low-latency, sparse output, low power consumption,
and high dynamic range. Despite this, it is difficult for an
event camera to reconstruct textures in scenes as visual in16358

