Generalization on Unseen Domains via Inference-time Label-Preserving Target
Projections
Prashant Pandey1 , Mrigank Raman*1 , Sumanth Varambally*1 , Prathosh AP1
1
IIT Delhi
{bsz178495, mt1170736, mt6170855, prathoshap}@iitd.ac.in
Abstract
Generalization of machine learning models trained on a
set of source domains on unseen target domains with different statistics, is a challenging problem. While many approaches have been proposed to solve this problem, they
only utilize source data during training but do not take advantage of the fact that a single target example is available
at the time of inference. Motivated by this, we propose a
method that effectively uses the target sample during inference beyond mere classification. Our method has three
components - (i) A label-preserving feature or metric transformation on source data such that the source samples are
clustered in accordance with their class irrespective of their
domain (ii) A generative model trained on the these features (iii) A label-preserving projection of the target point
on the source-feature manifold during inference via solving
an optimization problem on the input space of the generative model using the learned metric. Finally, the projected
target is used in the classifier. Since the projected target feature comes from the source manifold and has the same label
as the real target by design, the classifier is expected to perform better on it than the true target. We demonstrate that
our method outperforms the state-of-the-art Domain Generalization methods on multiple datasets and tasks.

1. Introduction
Domain shift refers to the existence of significant divergence between the distributions of the training and the test
data [41]. This causes the machine learning models trained
only on the training or the source data to perform poorly on
the test or target data. A naive way of handling this problem
is to fine-tune the model with new data which is often infeasible because of the difficulty in acquiring labelled data for
every new target domain. The class of Domain Adaptation
(DA) methods [42, 9, 14, 39, 26, 4, 31, 33, 34] tackle this
problem by utilizing the (unlabeled) target data to minimize
the domain shift; however they cannot be used when unla* Equal contribution

beled target data is unavailable.
Domain generalization (DG) [30, 21, 10, 22, 1, 23], on
the other hand, views the problem from the following perspective: how to make a model trained on single or multiple source domains generalize on completely unseen target domains. These methods do so via (i) learning feature representations that are invariant to the data domains
using methods such as adversarial learning [24, 25], (ii)
simulating the domain shift while learning through metalearning approaches [22, 1], and (iii) augmenting the source
dataset with synthesized data from fictitious target domains
[44, 48]. These methods have been shown to be effective in
dealing with the problem of domain shift. However, most
of the existing methods do not utilize the test sample from
the target distribution available at the time of inference beyond mere classification. On the other hand, it is a common
experience that when humans encounter an unseen object,
they often relate it to a previously perceived similar object.
Motivated by this intuition, in this paper, we make the
following contributions towards addressing the problem of
DG: (a) Given samples from multiple source distributions,
we propose to learn a source domain invariant representation that also preserves the class labels. (b) We propose to
‘project’ the target samples to the manifold of the sourcedata features before classification through an inference-time
label-preserving optimization procedure over the input of a
generative model (learned during training) that maps an arbitrary distribution (Normal) to the source-feature manifold.
(c) We demonstrate through extensive experimentation that
our method achieves new state-of-the-art performance on
standard DG tasks while also outperforming other methods
in terms of robustness and data efficiency.

2. Prior Work
Meta-learning : Meta-learning methods aim to improve
model robustness against unseen domains by simulating domain shift during training. This is done by splitting the
training set into a meta-train and meta-test set. [22] provide
a general framework for meta-learning-based DG, where

12924

