SurFree: a fast surrogate-free black-box attack
Thibault Maho, Teddy Furon, Erwan Le Merrer
Univ. Rennes, Inria, CNRS
IRISA, Rennes, France
thibault.maho@inria.fr

Abstract

70

0 Query

SurFree
GeoDA [23]
QEBA [14]
10-HSJA [3]

60

1. Introduction
The literature on adversarial examples is divided into two
shares, depending on the threat model: either the attacker
has full knowledge of the target classifier [2, 26, 17] (whitebox setting) or she/he has an unrestricted query access to the
unknown classifier [18, 1, 14, 23, 3, 28, 13, 27, 11, 5, 12, 4]
(black-box setting). The latter scenario is deemed as more
relevant to gauge the intrinsic robustness of classifiers in
1 Work supported by ANR / AID under Chaire IA SAIDA. Code available at https://github.com/t-maho/SurFree

50

Distortion

Machine learning classifiers are critically prone to evasion attacks. Adversarial examples are slightly modified
inputs that are then misclassified, while remaining perceptively close to their originals. Last couple of years have
witnessed a striking decrease in the amount of queries a
black box attack submits to the target classifier, in order
to forge adversarials. This particularly concerns the black
box score-based setup, where the attacker has access to top
predicted probabilites: the amount of queries went from to
millions of to less than a thousand.
This paper presents SurFree, a geometrical approach
that achieves a drastic reduction in the amount of queries
in the hardest setup: black box decision-based attacks (only
the top-1 label is available). We first highlight that the
most recent attacks in that setup, HSJA [3], QEBA [14]
and GeoDA [23] all perform costly gradient surrogate estimations. SurFree proposes to bypass these, by instead
focusing on careful trials along diverse directions, guided
by precise indications of geometrical properties of the classifier decision boundaries. We motivate this geometric approach before performing a head-to-head comparison with
previous attacks with the amount of queries as a first class
citizen. We exhibit a faster distortion decay under low query
amounts (few hundreds to a thousand), while remaining
competitive at higher query budgets.1

50 Queries

40

30

20
500 Queries

10

0

1000

2000

3000

4000

5000

Number of queries

Figure 1. The perturbation distortion (ℓ2 norm) vs. the number
of queries for image ‘lizard’. Competitor attacks waste queries to
estimate a gradient surrogate resulting in plateaus of distortion.

real-world applications (typically queried through an API).
Black box attacks are iterative procedures that keep on
refining the quality of an adversarial example based on the
pairs of submitted input / observed output. They are coined
score-based when the attacker observes the top-k predicted
probabilities or decision-based (a.k.a. hard label) when
she/he only learns the top-k labels (k ≥ 1). Indeed, the
latter case where the output is solely the top-1 label is the
most challenging because the attacker cannot rely on any
rich information for crafting these adversarial examples.
It is striking that black-box attacks always use substitution to replace information they are missing. Early blackbox attacks used a surrogate model (trained from a huge
number of input / output pairs) mimicking the targeted
model [20, 21]. The attack then boils down to a white-box
setting on the surrogate with the hope that the adversarial
example transfers to the target classifier. Almost all recent
score-based attacks resort to gradient estimation to compensate for the lack of back-propagation, which is the key instrument of any white-box attack [4, 27, 13, 28]. The HopSkipJump attack (HSJA [3]) estimates the decision boundary by an hyperplane. As a last example, authors in [12] turn
a decision-based setup into a score-based by probing noisy
versions of an image to derive a score-like function from the
top-k labels. The trend is thus to substitute missing infor-

10430

