Watching You: Global-guided Reciprocal Learning for Video-based Person
Re-identification
Xuehu Liu1,2 , Pingping Zhang1,3,∗ , Chenyang Yu1,2 , Huchuan Lu1,2,4, ,* Xiaoyun Yang5
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology
2
Ningbo Institute, Dalian University of Technology
3
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, Dalian University of Technology
4
Pengcheng Lab, 5 Remark Holdings
{snowtiger, yuchenyang}@mail.dlut.edu.cn, {zhpp, lhchuan}@dlut.edu.cn, xyang@remarkholdings.com

Abstract
Video-based person re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) aims to automatically retrieve video sequences of the same person
under non-overlapping cameras. To achieve this goal, it
is the key to fully utilize abundant spatial and temporal
cues in videos. Existing methods usually focus on the most
conspicuous image regions, thus they may easily miss out
ﬁne-grained clues due to the person varieties in image sequences. To address above issues, in this paper, we propose
a novel Global-guided Reciprocal Learning (GRL) framework for video-based person Re-ID. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst
propose a Global-guided Correlation Estimation (GCE)
to generate feature correlation maps of local features and
global features, which help to localize the high- and lowcorrelation regions for identifying the same person. After that, the discriminative features are disentangled into
high-correlation features and low-correlation features under the guidance of the global representations. Moreover,
a novel Temporal Reciprocal Learning (TRL) mechanism
is designed to sequentially enhance the high-correlation
semantic information and accumulate the low-correlation
sub-critical clues. Extensive experiments are conducted on
three public benchmarks. The experimental results indicate that our approach can achieve better performance than
other state-of-the-art approaches. The code is released at
https://github.com/flysnowtiger/GRL.

1. Introduction
Person re-identiﬁcation (Re-ID) aims to retrieve speciﬁc
pedestrians cross different cameras at different times and
places. Recently, this task has become a hot research topic
due to its importance in advanced applications, such as safe
* Corresponding Authors

community, intelligent surveillance and criminal investigation. Compared with other related Re-ID tasks, video-based
person Re-ID provides a video as the input to retrieve rather
than a single image. Although videos can provide comprehensive appearance information, motion cues, pose variations in temporal, at the same time, they bring more illumination changes, complicated backgrounds and person occlusions in a clip. Thus, there are still many challenges for
researches to handle in video-based person Re-ID.
Previous methods [30, 28, 17] can be coarsely summarized into two steps: spatial feature extraction and temporal
feature aggregation. First, Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) are utilized to extract frame-level spatial features
from each single image. Then, frame-level spatial features
are temporally aggregated into a feature vector as the video
representation to compute the similarity scores. Naturally,
how to fully explore the discriminative spatial-temporal
cues from multiple frames is seen as the key to tackle videobased person Re-ID. Generally speaking, the average pooling for spatial-temporal features can directly focus on main
targets, but it has some obvious drawbacks, such as the inability to tackle the misalignment in temporal, the pollution of background noises, and the difﬁculty of capturing
small but meaningful subjects in videos. To address these
drawbacks, in recent years, researchers have proposed some
rigid-partition-based methods or soft-attention-based methods to instead the direct average operation. These methods
are beneﬁcial to learn more discriminative and diverse local features, resulting in higher performance of video-based
person Re-ID. However, previous methods generally ignore
the role of the global features in whole person recognition
while strengthening the local features. Based on this consideration, Zhang et al. [33] utilize the local afﬁnities with
respect to inference global features to help assign different weights to local features. Although effective, it tends
to ignore inconspicuous yet ﬁne-grained clues. Different

13334

