Adaptive Aggregation Networks for Class-Incremental Learning
Yaoyao Liu1
1
2

Bernt Schiele1

Qianru Sun2

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

School of Computing and Information Systems, Singapore Management University

{yaoyao.liu, schiele}@mpi-inf.mpg.de

Abstract
Class-Incremental Learning (CIL) aims to learn a classification model with the number of classes increasing phaseby-phase. An inherent problem in CIL is the stabilityplasticity dilemma between the learning of old and new
classes, i.e., high-plasticity models easily forget old classes,
but high-stability models are weak to learn new classes.
We alleviate this issue by proposing a novel network architecture called Adaptive Aggregation Networks (AANets)
in which we explicitly build two types of residual blocks at
each residual level (taking ResNet as the baseline architecture): a stable block and a plastic block. We aggregate the
output feature maps from these two blocks and then feed the
results to the next-level blocks. We adapt the aggregation
weights in order to balance these two types of blocks, i.e.,
to balance stability and plasticity, dynamically. We conduct
extensive experiments on three CIL benchmarks: CIFAR100, ImageNet-Subset, and ImageNet, and show that many
existing CIL methods can be straightforwardly incorporated into the architecture of AANets to boost their performances1 .

1. Introduction
AI systems are expected to work in an incremental
manner when the amount of knowledge increases over
time. They should be capable of learning new concepts
while maintaining the ability to recognize previous ones.
However, deep-neural-network-based systems often suffer
from serious forgetting problems (called “catastrophic forgetting”) when they are continuously updated using new
coming data. This is due to two facts: (i) the updates
can override the knowledge acquired from the previous
data [19, 27, 28, 33, 40], and (ii) the model can not replay
the entire previous data to regain the old knowledge.
To encourage solving these problems, [34] defined a
1 Code: https://class-il.mpi-inf.mpg.de/

qianrusun@smu.edu.sg

class-incremental learning (CIL) protocol for image classification where the training data of different classes gradually come phase-by-phase. In each phase, the classifier is
re-trained on new class data, and then evaluated on the test
data of both old and new classes. To prevent trivial algorithms such as storing all old data for replaying, there is a
strict memory budget due to which a tiny set of exemplars
of old classes can be saved in the memory. This memory
constraint causes a serious data imbalance problem between
old and new classes, and indirectly causes the main problem
of CIL – the stability-plasticity dilemma [29]. In particular,
higher plasticity results in the forgetting of old classes [27],
while higher stability weakens the model from learning the
data of new classes (that contain a large number of samples).
Existing CIL works try to balance stability and plasticity using data strategies. For example, as illustrated in Figure 1
(a) and (b), some early methods train their models on the
imbalanced dataset where there is only a small set of exemplars for old classes [23, 34], and recent methods include a
fine-tuning step using a balanced subset of exemplars sampled from all classes [4, 11, 16]. However, these data strategies are still limited in terms of effectiveness. For example,
when using the models trained after 25 phases, LUCIR [16]
and Mnemonics [25] “forget” the initial 50 classes by 30%
and 20%, respectively, on the ImageNet dataset [37].
In this paper, we address the stability-plasticity dilemma
by introducing a novel network architecture called Adaptive
Aggregation Networks (AANets). Taking the ResNet [14]
as an example of baseline architectures, we explicitly build
two residual blocks (at each residual level) in AANets: one
for maintaining the knowledge of old classes (i.e., the stability) and the other for learning new classes (i.e., the plasticity), as shown in Figure 1 (c). We achieve these by allowing
these two blocks to have different levels of learnability, i.e.,
less learnable parameters in the stable block but more in the
plastic one. We apply aggregation weights to the output feature maps of these blocks, sum them up, and pass the result
maps to the next residual level. In this way, we are able
to dynamically balance the usage of these blocks by updat-

2544

