Progressive Unsupervised Learning for Visual Object Tracking
Qiangqiang Wu
Jia Wan
Antoni B. Chan
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
qiangqwu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, jiawan1998@gmail.com, abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract

VOT17/18

0.24

0.22

In this paper, we propose a progressive unsupervised
learning (PUL) framework, which entirely removes the need
for annotated training videos in visual tracking. Specifically, we first learn a background discrimination (BD)
model that effectively distinguishes an object from background in a contrastive learning way. We then employ
the BD model to progressively mine temporal corresponding patches (i.e., patches connected by a track) in sequential frames. As the BD model is imperfect and thus the
mined patch pairs are noisy, we propose a noise-robust
loss function to more effectively learn temporal correspondences from this noisy data. We use the proposed noise robust loss to train backbone networks of Siamese trackers.
Without online fine-tuning or adaptation, our unsupervised
real-time Siamese trackers can outperform state-of-the-art
unsupervised deep trackers and achieve competitive results
to the supervised baselines.

SiamDW

supervised
unsupervised

Ours-ResPUL
0.2

EAO

DSiam
DCFNet

SiamFC
0.18

Ours-AlexPUL

S2Siam
0.16
LUDT
0.14

0.12
0.36

CycleSiam

0.38

UDT

0.4

0.42

0.44

0.46

0.48

0.5

0.52

0.54

Accuracy

Figure 1: Tracking accuracy and EAO obtained by supervised (denoted by
blue color) and unsupervised trackers (red color) on the VOT17/18 dataset.
Without online ﬁne-tuning or adaptation, our unsupervised AlexPUL and
ResPUL trackers outperform state-of-the-art online updating-based unsupervised trackers, meanwhile performing favorably against supervised
deep trackers, which shows the potential of our unsupervised method.

like SiamRPN++ [30] commonly need more labeled video
datasets for training, e.g., using Got-10k [18], LaSOT [12],
Youtube-BB [42]. These supervised deep trackers assume
that a robust tracking model can be learned by using largescale annotated video datasets. However, they usually ignore the fact that annotating such large scale video datasets
can be prohibitively expensive and time-consuming.
Unlabeled videos or images are a fertile source for unsupervised learning, since they are easily collected from online services. The main problem is how to construct a supervisory signal from these sources for learning a feature map
representation that is useful for visual tracking. The supervision in visual tracking generally comes from two aspects:
spatial supervision in a static video frame, and sequential
supervision across multiple frames. Spatial supervision [45]
can be achieved by learning template correspondence in a
single frame or image. The training cost is reduced by using static images, but the learned features lack invariance to
visual changes in sequential frames. On the other hand, sequential supervision is commonly achieved by ﬁnding temporal correspondence in multiple frames. The recent cycle
learning [2, 51] is based on sequential supervision, but the
tracking performance is still limited without online adaptation [53]. To achieve favorable performance, an online updated correlation ﬁlter is required [8]. In this paper, we propose to use both spatial and sequential supervision for un-

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking (VOT) is one of the fundamental
tasks in computer vision, which has gained much attention
in recent years due to its wide usage in many practical applications, such as robotics [37], video surveillance [25] and
eye-tracking applications [24]. Although much progress has
been made on VOT, it is still far from being fully solved due
to the numerous real-world challenges, e.g., background
cluster, rotation, occlusion and illumination variation.
To handle with the above challenges, the existing endto-end trainable deep trackers [62, 65] learn rich feature
representations from large-scale annotated training videos
based on supervised learning. The representative works are
Siamese trackers [29, 30], which learn feature representations in an ofﬂine manner, and achieve favorable performance even without online ﬁne-tuning or adaptation. The
success of Siamese-based trackers demonstrate that the numerous annotated data is the key to feature learning of
deep trackers. For example, the pioneering deep tracker
SiamFC [4] is trained with the ILSVRC [43] dataset, which
contains about 2 million labeled frames. Some extensions

2993

