Sketch, Ground, and Refine: Top-Down Dense Video Captioning
Chaorui Deng∗1,3 , Shizhe Chen∗⋆2 , Da Chen∗3 , Yuan He3 , Qi Wu†1
1
University of Adelaide, 2 INRIA, 3 Alibaba Group
{chaorui.deng,qi.wu01}@adelaide.edu.au, cshizhe@gmail.com, {chen.cd,heyuan.hy}@alibaba-inc.com

Top-down DVC

Abstract
Captioning

The dense video captioning task aims to detect and describe a sequence of events in a video for detailed and coherent storytelling. Previous works mainly adopt a “detectthen-describe” framework, which firstly detects event proposals in the video and then generates descriptions for the
detected events. However, the definitions of events are diverse which could be as simple as a single action or as complex as a set of events, depending on different semantic contexts. Therefore, directly detecting events based on video
information is ill-defined and hurts the coherency and accuracy of generated dense captions. In this work, we reverse
the predominant “detect-then-describe” fashion, proposing
a top-down way to first generate paragraphs from a global
view and then ground each event description to a video segment for detailed refinement. It is formulated as a Sketch,
Ground, and Refine process (SGR). The sketch stage first
generates a coarse-grained multi-sentence paragraph to describe the whole video, where each sentence is treated as an
event and gets localised in the grounding stage. In the refining stage, we improve captioning quality via refinementenhanced training and dual-path cross attention on both
coarse-grained event captions and aligned event segments.
The updated event caption can further adjust its segment
boundaries. Our SGR model outperforms state-of-the-art
methods on ActivityNet Captioning benchmark under traditional and story-oriented dense caption evaluations. Code
will be released at github.com/bearcatt/SGR.

1. Introduction
Video understanding is an important research topic in
computer vision. Thanks to the development of deep learning and large-scale datasets [3, 10], recent video understanding approaches have achieved promising performance
in action recognition [4, 5, 35] and temporal action localisation [15, 25, 41]. However, an obvious limitation of
these approaches is that their predictions are based on a pre∗ Equal contribution, † Corresponding author
⋆ Work done while at the Renmin University of China.

……
Selection

Sketching
Video-level story
<Sentence1> <Sentence2> <Sentence3>

Event proposals

……
Proposing

Grounding
Story-oriented event segments

Refining

Bottom-up DVC

Figure 1. Comparisons between top-down and bottom-up DVC
frameworks. Bottom-up DVC breaks the DVC task into multiple “event captioning” sub-tasks with an event detection process.
While our SGR captions the whole video in a unified fashion and
localises each event afterwards.

defined discrete set of action categories, which lack many
fine-grained details of the video information. In order to
provide more detailed information in the video, the task of
Dense Video Captioning (DVC) [11] aims to discover a sequence of key events in a video and describe them using
a coherent story. Therefore, DVC can benefit many realworld applications such as content-based video retrieval
and recommendation, and has become an important task in
language-based video understanding research.
DVC is a challenging task since the generated event captions are expected to be correct, concise, and coherent in the
context of a video-level story, so as to support video understanding. Most existing methods [11, 13, 33, 43] in this field
adopt a common “detect-then-describe” framework which
solves the problem from a straightforward bottom-up perspective, i.e., first detect a large set of event proposals (even
up to 103 ), then caption each proposal to obtain dense descriptions. However, one obvious issue of this framework is
that the event proposals are independently generated without considering their temporal correlations, thus making the
resultant event captions highly redundant and incoherent.
To address this issue, Mun et al. [18] proposed a streamlined DVC framework that learns a proposal selection mod-

234

