Towards Rolling Shutter Correction and Deblurring in Dynamic Scenes
Zhihang Zhong1,2
Yinqiang Zheng1
Imari Sato2,1
1
2
The University of Tokyo, Japan
National Institute of Informatics, Japan

Figure 1: Joint rolling shutter correction and deblurring (RSCD). Image degradation caused by joint rolling shutter
distortion and motion blur becomes extremely complex, when both ego-motion and object-motion are involved in dynamic
scenes. Existing methods for RSCD such as Mohan et al. [22] are developed for static scenes. We present the first realistic
benchmark dataset (BS-RSCD) and model (JCD) to advance learning-based approaches in this field.

Abstract
Joint rolling shutter correction and deblurring (RSCD)
techniques are critical for the prevalent CMOS cameras.
However, current approaches are still based on conventional energy optimization and are developed for static
scenes. To enable learning-based approaches to address
real-world RSCD problem, we contribute the first dataset,
BS-RSCD, which includes both ego-motion and objectmotion in dynamic scenes. Real distorted and blurry videos
with corresponding ground truth are recorded simultaneously via a beam-splitter-based acquisition system.
Since direct application of existing individual rolling
shutter correction (RSC) or global shutter deblurring
(GSD) methods on RSCD leads to undesirable results due
to inherent flaws in the network architecture, we further
present the first learning-based model (JCD) for RSCD. The
key idea is that we adopt bi-directional warping streams
for displacement compensation, while also preserving the
non-warped deblurring stream for details restoration. The
experimental results demonstrate that JCD achieves stateof-the-art performance on the realistic RSCD dataset (BSRSCD) and the synthetic RSC dataset (Fastec-RS). The

dataset and code are available at https://github.
com/zzh-tech/RSCD ∗ .

1. Introduction
Rolling shutter (RS) CMOS cameras dominate the consumer market, especially the mobile phone market, due
to their largely reduced power consumption, low cost and
compact design [13]. However, if the imaging conditions
are not ideal, video recorded through RS mechanism will
suffer from compound quality issues. Specifically, the RS
distortion (Jello effect) and motion blur become noticeable
when there is a large relative motion between the camera
and the object, especially in poorly illuminated environment
where longer exposure time is required. Joint rolling shutter
correction and deblurring (RSCD) techniques are seldom
explored and are urgently needed for RS-based devices.
Existing works generally treat rolling shutter correction
(RSC) and deblurring as two separate issues. As for RSC
methods [30, 29, 47, 18, 37, 20], they assume by default
∗ Correspondence regarding the dataset should be addressed to Y. Zheng
(yqzheng@ai.u-tokyo.ac.jp).

9219

