Deep RGB-D Saliency Detection with Depth-Sensitive Attention
and Automatic Multi-Modal Fusion
Peng Sun

Wenhu Zhang

Huanyu Wang

Songyuan Li

Xi Li*

College of Computer Science & Technology, Shanghai Institute for Advanced Study, Zhejiang University
{sunpeng1996,wenhuzhang,huanyuhello,leizungjyun,xilizju}@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
RGB-D salient object detection (SOD) is usually formulated as a problem of classification or regression over two
modalities, i.e., RGB and depth. Hence, effective RGBD feature modeling and multi-modal feature fusion both
play a vital role in RGB-D SOD. In this paper, we propose a depth-sensitive RGB feature modeling scheme using the depth-wise geometric prior of salient objects. In
principle, the feature modeling scheme is carried out in a
depth-sensitive attention module, which leads to the RGB
feature enhancement as well as the background distraction
reduction by capturing the depth geometry prior. Moreover, to perform effective multi-modal feature fusion, we
further present an automatic architecture search approach
for RGB-D SOD, which does well in finding out a feasible architecture from our specially designed multi-modal
multi-scale search space. Extensive experiments on seven
standard benchmarks demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed approach against the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed a great development of
RGB-D salient object detection (SOD) due to its diverse
applications, e.g., image retrieval [25, 36], video segmentation [20, 55], person re-identification [62], visual tracking [27, 41]. With the multi-modal input (i.e., RGB and
depth channels), RGB-D SOD aims to localize and segment
the visually salient regions in a scene, and is typically cast
as an image-to-mask mapping problem within an end-toend deep learning pipeline [22, 23, 45, 49].
In RGB-D SOD, depth maps, which provide useful cues
such as spatial structure, 3D layout, and object boundary,
are important complementary information to RGB channels. For the sake of effective learning, there are usually two
key issues to solve for RGB-D SOD: 1) how to fully exploit
the rich depth geometry information for saliency analysis,
* Corresponding Author

Depth Decomposition

Depth

Salient Object

RGB-D Visualization
RGB

Depth-Sensitive Attention

Figure 1. Left: Salient objects are often distributed within different
depth intervals. Right: We decompose the raw depth map into
multiple regions and extract the depth-sensitive RGB features.

and 2) how to carry out the multi-modal feature fusion effectively between RGB and depth features. In this paper, we
focus on building a depth-sensitive SOD model that is capable of learning the RGB-D feature interaction architecture
automatically.
In the recent literature, RGB-D SOD methods usually
treat the depth channel as an auxiliary input channel, which
is directly fed into a convolutional neural network (CNN)
for feature extraction [7, 21, 31, 43, 59]. As a result, they
are incapable of well utilizing the depth prior knowledge
to capture the corresponding geometric layouts of salient
objects. As shown in Fig. 1, salient objects are often distributed within several particular depth intervals, and thus
can be roughly detected by regularly sliding the depth interval window. Inspired by this observation, we have an
intuitive idea that we can extract RGB features w.r.t. depth
for effectively capturing the depth-wise geometric prior on
salient objects while reducing the background distraction
(e.g. cluttered objects or similar texture). With this motivation, we propose to decompose the raw depth map into multiple regions, and each region contains a set of pixels from
the same depth interval. Then, we propose a depth-sensitive
attention module (DSAM) to perform RGB feature extraction in different regions, thereby leading to the RGB feature
enhancement with depth-wise geometric prior.
Furthermore, designing an effective feature interaction
architecture between RGB and depth branches is crucial

1407

