Transformer Tracking

1

Xin Chen1 *, Bin Yan1 *, Jiawen Zhu1 , Dong Wang1 †, Xiaoyun Yang3 and Huchuan Lu1,2
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory 3 Remark AI
{chenxin3131, yan bin, jiawen}@mail.dlut.edu.cn
wdice@dlut.edu.cn, xyang@remarkholdings.com, lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Correlation acts as a critical role in the tracking field,
especially in recent popular Siamese-based trackers. The
correlation operation is a simple fusion manner to consider the similarity between the template and the search region. However, the correlation operation itself is a local
linear matching process, leading to lose semantic information and fall into local optimum easily, which may be the
bottleneck of designing high-accuracy tracking algorithms.
Is there any better feature fusion method than correlation?
To address this issue, inspired by Transformer, this work
presents a novel attention-based feature fusion network,
which effectively combines the template and search region
features solely using attention. Specifically, the proposed
method includes an ego-context augment module based on
self-attention and a cross-feature augment module based on
cross-attention. Finally, we present a Transformer tracking (named TransT) method based on the Siamese-like feature extraction backbone, the designed attention-based fusion mechanism, and the classification and regression head.
Experiments show that our TransT achieves very promising results on six challenging datasets, especially on largescale LaSOT, TrackingNet, and GOT-10k benchmarks. Our
tracker runs at approximatively 50 f ps on GPU. Code
and models are available at https://github.com/chenxindlut/TransT.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is a fundamental task in computer
vision, which aims to predict the position and shape of a
given target in each video frame. It has a wide range of
applications in robot vision, video surveillance, unmanned
driving, and other ﬁelds. The main challenges of tracking
are large occlusion, severe deformation, interference from
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author: Dr. Dong Wang, wdice@dlut.edu.cn

Self-attention

Ground-Truth

Screen Shots

Ours

Ocean-online

Cross-attention

DiMP50

Figure 1. Tracking results of TransT and two state-of-the-art trackers. Our tracker is more robust and accurate in handling various
challenges, such as occlusion, similar object interference, motion
blur.

similar objects, to name a few. Many efforts have been done
in recent years [23, 28], however, designing a high-accuracy
and real-time tracker is still a challenging task.
For most of the popular trackers (such as SiamFC [1],
SiamRPN [22], and ATOM [9]), correlation plays a critical
role in integrating the template or target information into
the regions of interest (ROI). However, the correlation operation itself is a linear matching process and leads to semantic information loss, which limits the tracker to capture
the complicated non-linear interaction between the template
and ROIs. Thus, previous models have to improve the nonlinear representation ability by introducing fashion structures [21, 44, 48], using additional modules [7, 46, 13], designing effective online updaters [2, 47, 10], to name a few.
This naturally introduces an interesting question: is there

8126

