Removing Diffraction Image Artifacts in Under-Display Camera via
Dynamic Skip Connection Network
Ruicheng Feng1 Chongyi Li1 Huaijin Chen2 Shuai Li2 Chen Change Loy1 Jinwei Gu2,3
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Tetras.AI 3 Shanghai Al Laboratory
{ruicheng002, chongyi.li, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
gujinwei@tetras.ai

Our results

UDC images

{huaijin.chen, shuailizju}@gmail.com

(b) Real data

(a) Simulated data

Figure 1. Removing Diffraction Artifacts from Under-Display Camera (UDC) images. The major degradations caused by light diffraction, e.g., flare, blur, and haze, could significantly affect the visual quality of UDC images. Our method effectively restores fine details and
suppresses the diffraction effects of UDC images.

Abstract
Recent development of Under-Display Camera (UDC)
systems provides a true bezel-less and notch-free viewing
experience on smartphones (and TV, laptops, tablets), while
allowing images to be captured from the selfie camera embedded underneath. In a typical UDC system, the microstructure of the semi-transparent organic light-emitting
diode (OLED) pixel array attenuates and diffracts the incident light on the camera, resulting in significant image
quality degradation. Oftentimes, noise, flare, haze, and blur
can be observed in UDC images. In this work, we aim to analyze and tackle the aforementioned degradation problems.
We define a physics-based image formation model to better understand the degradation. In addition, we utilize one
of the world’s first commodity UDC smartphone prototypes
to measure the real-world Point Spread Function (PSF) of
the UDC system, and provide a model-based data synthesis
pipeline to generate realistically degraded images. We specially design a new domain knowledge-enabled Dynamic
Skip Connection Network (DISCNet) to restore the UDC
images. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method
through extensive experiments on both synthetic and real

UDC data. Our physics-based image formation model and
proposed DISCNet can provide foundations for further exploration in UDC image restoration, and even for general
diffraction artifact removal in a broader sense. 1

1. Introduction
The consumer demand for smartphones with bezel-free,
notch-less display has sparked a surge of interest from the
phone manufacturers in a newly-defined imaging system,
Under-Display Camera (UDC). Besides smartphones, UDC
also demonstrates its practical applicability in other scenarios, i.e., for videoconferencing with UDC TV, laptops, or
tablets, enabling more natural gaze focus as they place cameras at the center of the displays [16]. As Figure 2 shows,
a typical UDC system has the camera module placed underneath and closely attached to the semi-transparent Organic Light-Emitting Diode (OLED) display. Although the
display looks partially transparent, the regions where the
light can pass through, i.e. the gaps between the display pixels, are usually in the micrometer scale, which substantially
diffracts the incoming light [23], affecting the light propa1 Codes and data are available at https://jnjaby.github.io/projects/UDC.

662

