Panoptic Segmentation Forecasting
∗

Colin Graber1 Grace Tsai2 Michael Firman2
1
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Gabriel Brostow2,3 Alexander Schwing1
2
Niantic 3 University College London

Abstract
Our goal is to forecast the near future given a set of recent observations. We think this ability to forecast, i.e., to
anticipate, is integral for the success of autonomous agents
which need not only passively analyze an observation but
also must react to it in real-time. Importantly, accurate
forecasting hinges upon the chosen scene decomposition.
We think that superior forecasting can be achieved by decomposing a dynamic scene into individual ‘things’ and
background ‘stuff’. Background ‘stuff’ largely moves because of camera motion, while foreground ‘things’ move
because of both camera and individual object motion. Following this decomposition, we introduce panoptic segmentation forecasting. Panoptic segmentation forecasting opens
up a middle-ground between existing extremes, which either
forecast instance trajectories or predict the appearance of
future image frames. To address this task we develop a twocomponent model: one component learns the dynamics of
the background stuff by anticipating odometry, the other one
anticipates the dynamics of detected things. We establish a
leaderboard for this novel task, and validate a state-of-theart model that outperforms available baselines.

1. Introduction
An intelligent agent must anticipate the outcome of its
movement in order to navigate safely [14, 41]. Said differently, successful autonomous agents need to understand
the dynamics of their observations and forecast likely future
scenarios in order to successfully operate in an evolving environment. However, contemporary work in computer vision largely analyzes observations, i.e., it studies the apparent. For instance, classical semantic segmentation [8, 42]
aims to delineate the observed outline of objects. While understanding an observation is a first seminal step, it is only
part of our job. Analyzing the currently observed frame
means information is out of date by the time we know the
outcome, regardless of the processing time. It is even more
stale by the time an autonomous agent can perform an action. Successful agents therefore need to anticipate the future ‘state’ of the observed scene. An important question,
∗ Work done during an internship at Niantic.

Input Frames

Our Panoptic Segmentation Forecast
Figure 1. We study the novel task of ‘panoptic segmentation forecasting’ and propose a state-of-the-art method that models the
motion of individual ‘thing’ instances separately while modeling
‘stuff’ as purely a function of estimated camera motion.

however, remains open: what is a suitable ‘state’ representation for the future of an observed scene?
Panoptic segmentation recently emerged as a rich representation of a scene. Panoptic segmentation classifies each
pixel as either belonging to a foreground instance, the union
of which is referred to as ‘things,’ or as a background class,
referred to as ‘stuff’ [23, 5]. This decomposition is useful
for forecasting because we expect different dynamics for
each component: ‘stuff’ moves because of the observer’s
motion, while ‘things’ move because of both observer and
object motion. Use of panoptic segmentation is further underlined by the fact that it separates different instances of
objects, each of which we expect to move individually.
Consequently, we propose to study the novel task of
‘panoptic segmentation forecasting’: given a set of observed frames, the goal is to forecast the panoptic segmentation for a set of unobserved frames (Fig. 1). We also propose a first approach to forecasting future panoptic segmentations. In contrast to typical semantic forecasting [44, 52],

12517

