Adversarial Laser Beam: Effective Physical-World Attack to DNNs in a Blink
Ranjie Duan1,2 Xiaofeng Mao2 A. K. Qin1 † Yuefeng Chen2 Shaokai Ye3 Yuan He2 Yun Yang1
1
Swinburne University of Technology, Australia 2 Alibaba Group, China 3 EPFL, Switzerland

Abstract
Though it is well known that the performance of deep
neural networks (DNNs) degrades under certain light conditions, there exists no study on the threats of light beams
emitted from some physical source as adversarial attacker
on DNNs in a real-world scenario. In this work, we show
by simply using a laser beam that DNNs are easily fooled.
To this end, we propose a novel attack method called Adversarial Laser Beam (AdvLB), which enables manipulation
of laser beam’s physical parameters to perform adversarial attack. Experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposed approach in both digital- and physical-settings.
We further empirically analyze the evaluation results and
reveal that the proposed laser beam attack may lead to some
interesting prediction errors of the state-of-the-art DNNs.
We envisage that the proposed AdvLB method enriches the
current family of adversarial attacks and builds the foundation for future robustness studies for light.

1. Introduction
Natural phenomena may play the role of adversarial attackers, e.g. a blinding glare results in a fatal crash of a
Tesla self-driving car. What if a beam of light can adversarially attack a DNN? Further, how about using a beam
of light, specifically the laser beam, as the weapon to perform attacks. If we can do that, with the fastest speed in the
world, the laser beam could achieve the fastest attack with
no doubts. As shown in Figure 1, by using an off-the-shelf
lighting device such as a laser pointer, the attacker can maliciously shoot a laser beam onto the target object to make
the self-driving car fail to recognize target objects correctly.
We regard the attack illustrated in Figure 1 as a new
type of adversarial attack, which is crucial but not yet exploited. Up to now, most researchers study the security of
DNNs by exploring various adversarial attacks in digitalsettings, where input images are added with deliberately
Work done when intern at Alibaba Group, China
Code is available at https://github.com/RjDuan/Advlight
† Correspondence to: A. K. Qin

Figure 1: An example. When the camera of self-driving car
captures object shot by the laser beam, it fails to recognize
”trolleybus” and ”street sign”.
crafted perturbations and then fed to the target DNN model
[23, 10, 6, 3, 18]. However, in physical-world scenarios,
images are typically captured by cameras and then directly
fed to the target models, where attackers cannot directly manipulate the input image. Some recent efforts in developing
physical-world attacks are addressed in [21, 8, 2, 7, 14].
The physical-world adversarial examples typically require
large perturbations, because small perturbations are hard
to be captured by cameras. In addition, the attacking effects of adversarial examples of small perturbations can be
easily mitigated in complex physical-world environments
[21, 9, 7]. Meanwhile, physical-world adversarial examples require high stealthiness to avoid being discovered by
either the victim or defender before performing an attack
successfully. Thus for creating physical-world adversarial
examples, there is always a compromise between stealthiness and adversarial strength.
Most existing physical-world attacks adopt a ”stickerpasting” setting, i.e., the attacker prints adversarial perturbation as a sticker and then pastes it onto the target object [16, 2, 7, 8]. These attacks achieve the stealthiness of
adversaries with extra efforts of designing adversarial perturbation or camouflaging adversarial images and finding
the most effective area in the target object to impose them
[16, 26, 21, 7]. Besides the challenge of stealthiness, the
”sticker-pasting” setting also requires the target object to
be physically accessible by the attacker to paste stickers.

16062

