Efficient deformable shape correspondence via multiscale spectral manifold
wavelets preservation
Ling Hu*1,2 , Qinsong Li∗1 , Shengjun Liu†1,3 , Xinru Liu1
Institute of Engineering Modeling and Scientific Computing, Central South University
2
School of Mathematics and Computational Science, Hunan First Normal University
3
State Key Laboratory of High Performance Manufacturing Complex, Central South University
1

Abstract
The functional map framework has proven to be extremely effective for representing dense correspondences
between deformable shapes. A key step in this framework
is to formulate suitable preservation constraints to encode
the geometric information that must be preserved by the unknown map. For this issue, we construct novel and powerful constraints to determine the functional map, where multiscale spectral manifold wavelets are required to be preserved at each scale correspondingly. Such constraints allow us to extract significantly more information than previous methods, especially those based on descriptor preservation constraints, and strongly ensure the isometric property of the map. In addition, we also propose a remarkable
efficient iterative method to alternatively update the functional maps and pointwise maps. Moreover, when we use
the tight wavelet frames in iterations, the computation of the
functional maps boils down to a simple filtering procedure
with low-pass and various band-pass filters, which avoids
time-consuming solving large systems of linear equations
commonly presented in functional maps. We demonstrate
on a wide variety of experiments with different datasets that
our approach achieves significant improvements both in the
shape correspondence quality and the computing efficiency.

1. Introduction
Finding correspondences between non-rigid shapes is
a fundamental problem in computer graphics, vision and
pattern recognition, with countless applications including
shape comparison, texture transfer and shape interpolation,
just to name a few [37].
Since many real-world deformations are approximately
isometric, finding near isometric maps possesses practical
* Joint first author.
† Corresponding author: shjliu.cg@csu.edu.cn (S.Liu).

Source

Ground-truth

Init

#iter = 1

#iter = 2

Figure 1. Demonstration of our efficient shape correspondence iterative updating. Starting with a noisy functional map between
two isometric deformation shapes, we alternately optimize the
functional maps and the pointwise maps. The pointwise maps are
visualized by color transfer. Note that iterating twice can reach
significant improvements even with a quite noisy initialization and
costs 0.54 seconds for triangle meshes with 16K vertices.

significance in non-rigid shape analysis and it has been well
studied in the last decades. Among extensive strategies
for this task, one of the most influential techniques in recent years is the functional map framework, originally provided by [24] and extended by plenty of fellow-up works
[29, 31, 28, 30]. This framework proposed to determine a
functional map operator, that maps between the spaces of
square-integrable functions on the respective shapes, then
a high-quality pointwise correspondence can be recovered
from the correspondence of special functions. The most attractive property of functional maps is finding correspondence boils down to a quite simple and efficient algebraic
problem.
A key step in the functional map framework is to formulate function preservation constraints to a linear system
of equations. These function preservation constraints typically encode the information (e.g., geometric or appearance) that must be globally preserved by the unknown map.
In isometric shape correspondence, the commonly used
constraints include those aiming at approximately aligning the given descriptor functions and commuting with the
Laplace-Beltrami operators as well [24, 27, 8], or more

14536

