MetaSets: Meta-Learning on Point Sets for Generalizable Representations
Chao Huang∗, Zhangjie Cao∗, Yunbo Wang∗, Jianmin Wang, Mingsheng Long (B)
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, China
{microhhh9,caozhangjie14,yunbo.thu}@gmail.com, {jimwang,mingsheng}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Understanding and reasoning about 3D objects are crucial for AI robots to understand the real world. Recently,
with the success of deep learning in 2D vision tasks [8, 25],
3D deep learning techniques have also obtained state-ofthe-art classification/detection results in both simulated and
real-world datasets of point clouds [20, 22, 38, 19]. However, the high performance of 3D deep learning is mostly
achieved when the training data and testing data come from
the same domain. But in practical applications, the assumption is always violated. For example, we can easily use the
well-annotated CAD models collected from the Internet as
training data [35, 4], but when we directly use the learned
deep networks to classify real objects, we find that the performance decreases dramatically. Since scanning real objects
∗ Equal contribution

90
85
80

Accuracy(%)

Deep learning techniques for point clouds have achieved
strong performance on a range of 3D vision tasks. However,
it is costly to annotate large-scale point sets, making it critical to learn generalizable representations that can transfer
well across different point sets. In this paper, we study a new
problem of 3D Domain Generalization (3DDG) with the goal
to generalize the model to other unseen domains of point
clouds without any access to them in the training process.
It is a challenging problem due to the substantial geometry
shift from simulated to real data, such that most existing 3D
models underperform due to overfitting the complete geometries in the source domain. We propose to tackle this problem
via MetaSets, which meta-learns point cloud representations
from a group of classification tasks on carefully-designed
transformed point sets containing specific geometry priors.
The learned representations are more generalizable to various unseen domains of different geometries. We design two
benchmarks for Sim-to-Real transfer of 3D point clouds. Experimental results show that MetaSets outperforms existing
3D deep learning methods by large margins.

75
70
65

Retrained model on transformed dataset
Original model on transformed dataset
Original model on original dataset
55
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Dropping rate
60

0.4

Figure 1. The geometric domain shift is the key challenge of
3DDG. Top: Domain misalignment can be easily caused by broken
assemblies or missing parts. Bottom: The existing deep networks
learned in the complete point sets underperform in the transformed
point sets with broken assemblies or missing parts. The X-axis
represents the ratio of randomly discarded points for each point set.
Further details of transformed datasets are included in Section 3.2.

using depth cameras or LiDAR sensors are extremely costly,
it is worthwhile to study the Sim-to-Real transfer learning
problem for 3D point clouds.
Under these circumstances, in this paper, we present a
new problem of 3D Domain Generalization (3DDG), which
aims to learn a classification model in source point sets that
can achieve high performance in target point sets that are
not accessible during training. The training and testing data
are from different domains with a large domain shift. In the
case of 3DDG, it is mainly caused by various geometries of
shapes from distant domains, namely the geometry shift. Figure 1 (top) shows an example of geometry shift between the
simulated ModelNet dataset [35] and the real ScanObjectNN
[29] dataset. There exist some misalignments of learned

8863

