DyStaB: Unsupervised Object Segmentation via Dynamic-Static Bootstrapping∗
Yanchao Yang†
Stanford University

Brian Lai†
UCLA Vision Lab

Stefano Soatto
UCLA Vision Lab

yanchaoy@cs.stanford.edu

b4lai@g.ucla.edu

soatto@ucla.edu

Abstract
We describe an unsupervised method to detect and segment portions of images of live scenes that, at some point in
time, are seen moving as a coherent whole, which we refer
to as objects. Our method first partitions the motion field by
minimizing the mutual information between segments. Then,
it uses the segments to learn object models that can be used
for detection in a static image. Static and dynamic models
are represented by deep neural networks trained jointly in a
bootstrapping strategy, which enables extrapolation to previously unseen objects. While the training process requires
motion, the resulting object segmentation network can be
used on either static images or videos at inference time. As
the volume of seen videos grows, more and more objects
are seen moving, priming their detection, which then serves
as a regularizer for new objects, turning our method into
unsupervised continual learning to segment objects. Our
models are compared to the state of the art in both video
object segmentation and salient object detection. In the six
benchmark datasets tested, our models compare favorably
even to those using pixel-level supervision, despite requiring
no manual annotation.

1. Introduction
The ability to segment the visual field into coherently
moving regions is among the traits most broadly shared
among visual animals [2, 17, 18]. Even camouflaged, moving objects are easy to spot (Fig. 1). During early development, humans spend considerable amounts of time interacting with a single moving object before losing interest [4],
which may help prime object models and learn invariances
[59]. In contrast, the mature visual system can learn an object with a few static examples; objects do not need to move
in order to be detected. This suggests using motion as a cue
to bootstrap object models that can be used for detection
in static images, with no need for explicit supervision. Ob∗ Also ArXiv:2008.07012, August 16, 2020
† Equal contributions. Our implementation and trained models are available at: https://github.com/blai88/unsupervised_segmentation

Figure 1. Dynamic-static bootstrapping. (a) A lizard is hard to
detect when still thanks to camouflage (top left). However, it is
easy to see once it moves (bottom left; optical flow visualized using
the inset color wheel). Once learned the lizard, a never-before-seen
sloth (b) can be easily detected in a static image, exploiting the
static model learned from the moving lizard.

jects that have never been seen moving are considered part
of whatever background they are part of, at least until they
move. As time goes by, more and more objects are seen
moving, thus improving one’s ability to detect and segment
objects in static images (Tab. 6). The more objects are bootstrapped in a bottom-up fashion, the easier they are to detect
top-down, priming better motion discrimination, which in
turn results in more accurate object detection. This synergistic loop gradually improves both the diversity of objects that
can be detected and the accuracy of the detection.
We present a method to learn object segmentation using
unlabeled videos, that at test time can be used for both moving objects in videos and static objects in single images. The
method uses a motion segmentation module that performs
temporally consistent region separation. The resulting motion segmentation primes a detector that operates on static
images, and feeds back to the motion segmentation module,
reinforcing it. We call this method Dynamic-Static Bootstrapping, or DyStaB. During training, the dynamic model
minimizes the mutual information between partitions of the
motion field, while enforcing temporal consistency, which
yields a state-of-the-art unsupervised motion segmentation
method. Putative regions, along with their uncertainty approximated during the computation of mutual information
in the dynamic model, are used to train a static model. The

2826

