Learning Multi-Scale Photo Exposure Correction
Mahmoud Afifi1,2∗

Konstantinos G. Derpanis1
1

2

Björn Ommer3

Michael S. Brown1

Samsung AI Centre (SAIC), Toronto, Canada

York University, Canada

3

Heidelberg University, Germany

1. Introduction
The exposure used at capture time directly affects the
overall brightness of the final rendered photograph. Digital
cameras control exposure using three main factors: (i) capture shutter speed, (ii) f-number, which is the ratio of the focal length to the camera aperture diameter, and (iii) the ISO
value to control the amplification factor of the received pixel
signals. In photography, exposure settings are represented
by exposure values (EVs), where each EV refers to different combinations of camera shutter speeds and f-numbers
that result in the same exposure effect—also referred to as
‘equivalent exposures’ in photography.
∗ This work was done while Mahmoud Afifi was an intern at the SAIC.

By Floris van Lint (Flickr: CC BY-NC 2.0)

Underexposure

Capturing photographs with wrong exposures remains a
major source of errors in camera-based imaging. Exposure problems are categorized as either: (i) overexposed,
where the camera exposure was too long, resulting in bright
and washed-out image regions, or (ii) underexposed, where
the exposure was too short, resulting in dark regions. Both
under- and overexposure greatly reduce the contrast and visual appeal of an image. Prior work mainly focuses on underexposed images or general image enhancement. In contrast, our proposed method targets both over- and underexposure errors in photographs. We formulate the exposure
correction problem as two main sub-problems: (i) color enhancement and (ii) detail enhancement. Accordingly, we
propose a coarse-to-fine deep neural network (DNN) model,
trainable in an end-to-end manner, that addresses each subproblem separately. A key aspect of our solution is a new
dataset of over 24,000 images exhibiting the broadest range
of exposure values to date with a corresponding properly
exposed image. Our method achieves results on par with existing state-of-the-art methods on underexposed images and
yields significant improvements for images suffering from
overexposure errors.

Overexposure

Abstract

By J M Ar (Flickr: CC BY-NC-SA 2.0)

Input image

Our result

Figure 1: Photographs with over- and underexposure errors
and the results of our method using a single model for exposure correction. These sample input images are taken from
outside our dataset to demonstrate the generalization of our
trained model.
Digital cameras can adjust the exposure value of captured images for the purpose of varying the brightness levels. This adjustment can be controlled manually by users or
performed automatically in an auto-exposure (AE) mode.
When AE is used, cameras adjust the EV to compensate for
low/high levels of brightness in the captured scene using
through-the-lens (TTL) metering that measures the amount
of light received from the scene [49].
Exposure errors can occur due to several factors, such as
errors in measurements of TTL metering, hard lighting conditions (e.g., very low lighting and backlighting), dramatic
changes in the brightness level of the scene, and errors made
by users in the manual mode. Such exposure errors are introduced early in the capture process and are thus hard to
correct after rendering the final 8-bit image. This is due
to the highly nonlinear operations applied by the camera
image signal processor (ISP) afterwards to render the final
8-bit standard RGB (sRGB) image [31].
Fig. 1 shows typical examples of images with exposure

9157

