Objectron: A Large Scale Dataset of Object-Centric Videos in the Wild with
Pose Annotations
Adel Ahmadyan Liangkai Zhang Artsiom Ablavatski Jianing Wei Matthias Grundmann
Google Research
{ahmadyan, liangkai, artsiom, jianingwei, grundman}@google.com

Figure 1: Example videos in our dataset. Each sample is a video annotated with the object’s 3D bounding box.

Abstract
3D object detection has recently become popular due
to many applications in robotics, augmented reality, autonomy, and image retrieval. We introduce the Objectron
dataset to advance the state of the art in 3D object detection and foster new research and applications, such as 3D
object tracking, view synthesis, and improved 3D shape representation. The dataset contains object-centric short videos
with pose annotations for nine categories and includes 4
million annotated images in 14, 819 annotated videos. We
also propose a new evaluation metric, 3D Intersection over
Union, for 3D object detection. We demonstrate the usefulness of our dataset in 3D object detection and novel
view synthesis tasks by providing baseline models trained
on this dataset. Our dataset and evaluation source code are
available online at Github.com/google-researchdatasets/Objectron.

1. Introduction
The state of the art in machine learning has achieved exceptional accuracy on many computer vision tasks solely by
training models on images. Building upon these successes
and advancing 3D object understanding has great potential
to power a wider range of applications, such as augmented
reality, robotics, autonomy, and image retrieval. Yet, understanding objects in 3D remains a challenging task due to the
lack of large real-world datasets compared to 2D tasks (e.g.,
ImageNet [8], COCO [22], and Open Images [20]). To empower the research community for continued advancement
in 3D object understanding, there is a strong need for the
release of object-centric video datasets, which capture more
of the 3D structure of an object, while matching the data
format used for many down-stream vision tasks (i.e., video
or camera streams), to aid in the training and benchmarking
of machine learning models. The object-centric approach is
consistent with how our brains perceive new objects too. For

7822

