Convolutional Neural Network Pruning with Structural Redundancy Reduction
Zi Wang1 , Chengcheng Li1 , Xiangyang Wang2
1
The University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA
2
Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China
{zwang84,cli42}@vols.utk.edu, mcswxy@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
Convolutional neural network (CNN) pruning has become one of the most successful network compression approaches in recent years. Existing works on network pruning usually focus on removing the least important filters
in the network to achieve compact architectures. In this
study, we claim that identifying structural redundancy plays
a more essential role than finding unimportant filters, theoretically and empirically. We first statistically model the
network pruning problem in a redundancy reduction perspective and find that pruning in the layer(s) with the most
structural redundancy outperforms pruning the least important filters across all layers. Based on this finding, we then
propose a network pruning approach that identifies structural redundancy of a CNN and prunes filters in the selected
layer(s) with the most redundancy. Experiments on various
benchmark network architectures and datasets show that
our proposed approach significantly outperforms the previous state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [22] have developed substantially in recent years and are widely used in
various applications, such as object classification [2, 21],
image synthesis, [8, 42], super-resolution [4], and gameplaying [34, 40]. State-or-the-art performance are achieved
by designing wider and deeper CNNs [41, 13, 18]. However, the over-parameterization problem of CNNs prevents
them from being applied to resource-limited devices, such
as mobile phones and robotics [39, 32]. Many approaches
have been proposed to reduce the computation and storage
cost of CNNs, such as quantization [10], matrix decomposition [48], network pruning [11, 24, 46, 44, 15], and knowledge distillation [16]. Network pruning is one of the most
popular methods and attracts enormous attention.
Generally, network pruning can be categorized into
weight (unstructured) pruning [11] and channel (structured)
pruning [24, 35, 43, 46]. Weight pruning zeros out spe-

cific weights in filters and results in unstructured sparsities.
To accelerate the pruned CNNs, specialized hardware and
software have to be developed [9]. Channel pruning, which
removes the whole convolutional filters, is a more flexible
method without the need for special hardware. As the entire
filters are deleted, a considerable pruning ratio can usually
be achieved with little performance degradation. Many of
the existing channel pruning approaches rely on finding and
pruning the least important filters, or the filters that share the
most similarities with others across all layers [24, 35, 15, 3].
For example, [35] uses the Taylor series to estimate the loss
change after each filter’s removal and prune the filters that
cause minimal training loss change. It has been a common
belief that with a better filter ranking criterion, there is a
better chance to drop the least important filters and get a
compact network with less performance loss.
However, our studies on channel pruning contradict this
common belief. Using statistical modeling to measure the
redundancy in each convolutional layer, we theoretically
show that (in certain cases, even randomly) pruning filters
in the layer with the most redundancy outperforms pruning the least important filters across all layers. To our best
knowledge, this is the first study that theoretically analyzes
the rationale behind network pruning from a redundancy reduction perspective. With this finding, we propose a layeradaptive channel pruning approach based on structural redundancy reduction (SRR), which is achieved by establishing a graph for each convolutional layer of a CNN and using two quantities associated with the graph, i.e., ℓ-covering
number and quotient space size, as the measurement of the
redundancy in each layer. After that, unimportant filters in
the identified layer(s) with the most redundancy, rather than
the least important filters across all layers, are pruned.
We summarize the contribution of this study as follows.
(1) We theoretically analyze network pruning with statistical modeling from a perspective of redundancy reduction.
We find that pruning in the layer(s) with the most redundancy outperforms pruning the least important filters across
all layers. (2) We propose a layer-adaptive channel pruning
approach based on structural redundancy reduction, which

14913

