An Alternative Probabilistic Interpretation of the Huber Loss
Gregory P. Meyer
Uber Advanced Technologies Group
gmeyer@uber.com

Abstract
The Huber loss is a robust loss function used for a wide
range of regression tasks. To utilize the Huber loss, a parameter that controls the transitions from a quadratic function to an absolute value function needs to be selected. We
believe the standard probabilistic interpretation that relates
the Huber loss to the Huber density fails to provide adequate intuition for identifying the transition point. As a result, a hyper-parameter search is often necessary to determine an appropriate value. In this work, we propose an
alternative probabilistic interpretation of the Huber loss,
which relates minimizing the loss to minimizing an upperbound on the Kullback-Leibler divergence between Laplace
distributions, where one distribution represents the noise in
the ground-truth and the other represents the noise in the
prediction. In addition, we show that the parameters of
the Laplace distributions are directly related to the transition point of the Huber loss. We demonstrate, through a
toy problem, that the optimal transition point of the Huber
loss is closely related to the distribution of the noise in the
ground-truth data. As a result, our interpretation provides
an intuitive way to identify well-suited hyper-parameters by
approximating the amount of noise in the data, which we
demonstrate through a case study and experimentation on
the Faster R-CNN and RetinaNet object detectors.

over a half-century ago, and it is still widely used today for
a variety of regression tasks, including 2D object detection
[4, 14, 16, 18], 3D object detection [2, 3, 10, 22], shape and
pose estimation [6, 11, 20], and stereo estimation [1].
A challenge with utilizing the Huber loss in practice is
selecting an appropriate value to transition from a quadratic
error to a linear error. Under certain assumptions, minimizing a loss function can be interpreted as maximizing the
likelihood of yi given xi ,
θ̂ = arg max
θ

1. Introduction

i=0

θ̂ = arg min
θ

N
X
i=0

L(yi − Fθ (xi ))

(1)

and the choice of loss function can be crucial to the performance of the model. The Huber loss is a robust loss function that behaves quadratically for small residuals and linearly for large residuals [9]. The loss function was proposed

i=0

p(yi |xi , θ)

(2)

when p(yi |xi , θ) ∝ exp [−L(yi − Fθ (xi ))]. Therefore, the
estimate θ̂ that minimizes the Huber loss can be interpreted
as the maximum likelihood estimate of θ when p(yi |xi , θ)
is the Huber density [9]. The Huber density can be difficult to interpret; as a result, hyper-parameter search is often
employed to identify a satisfactory transition point for the
Huber loss.
In this work, we propose an alternative probabilistic interpretation of the Huber loss. Our interpretation assumes
yi is a noisy estimate of the true value yi∗ , and we show that
minimizing the Huber loss is equivalent to minimizing an
upper-bound on the Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence,
N
X

A typical problem in machine learning is estimating a
function Fθ that maps from x ∈ Rn to y ∈ R given a set
of training examples D = {xi , yi }N
i=0 . The parameters of
the function θ are often determined by minimizing a loss
function L,

N
Y

D (p(yi∗ |yi )kq(yi∗ |xi , θ))

(3)

when p(yi∗ |yi ) and q(yi∗ |xi , θ) are Laplace distributions and
the scale of the distributions are directly related to the transition point of the Huber loss. For real-world problems, the
value of yi corresponding to xi is often provided by a human annotator; therefore, it is likely to contain some amount
of noise. We believe that approximating the amount of noise
in the ground-truth is a more intuitive way to determine the
transition point for the Huber loss than reasoning about the
Huber density.
In the following sections, we survey the related work
(Section 2), review the Huber loss and maximum likelihood estimation in detail (Section 3), propose our alter-

5261

