OCONet: Image Extrapolation by Object Completion
Richard Strong Bowen1† Huiwen Chang2 Charles Herrmann1†
Piotr Teterwak3† Ce Liu2 Ramin Zabih1,2
1

Cornell Tech

{rsb, cih, rdz}@cs.cornell.edu

2

Google Research

Boston University

{huiwenchang,celiu}@google.com

Abstract
Image extrapolation extends an input image beyond the
originally-captured field of view. Existing methods struggle to extrapolate images with salient objects in the foreground or are limited to very specific objects such as humans, but tend to work well on indoor/outdoor scenes. We
introduce OCONet (Object COmpletion Networks) to extrapolate foreground objects, with an object completion network
conditioned on its class. OCONet uses an encoder-decoder
architecture trained with adversarial loss to predict the object’s texture as well as its extent, represented as a predicted
signed-distance field. An independent step extends the background, and the object is composited on top using the predicted mask. Both qualitative and quantitative results show
that we improve on state-of-the-art image extrapolation results for challenging examples.

1. Introduction
Image extrapolation, which extends pixels beyond image
borders, is an important technique for computational photography. It is related to image interpolation techniques such
as [4,5,6], which also infer missing pixels, and allow users to
change image dimensions/aspect ratios without changing the
content of the original images. Extrapolation, however, is a
much more challenging problem since there is much less information available; while inpainting methods are given the
entire boundary of the missing region, in image extrapolation
we only know one border. This less constrained problem
means the the method needs to extrapolate both textures and
structures in a convincing manner.
Image extrapolation methods include both classical [5, 7,
8, 9, 10] and learning-based approaches [1, 3, 11, 12]. Classical methods often use guide images, for example [13] finds
similar images on the Internet and stitches them together to
expand the input image. This method makes strong assumptions, and is only applicable for pictures taken at locations
such famous landmarks, where a large set of reference im† Work performed while author was at Google Research

3

piotrt@bu.edu

ages are available.
Learning-based approaches for image extrapolation have
only recently emerged, notably including Boundless [1],
Wide-Context [3], Panorama Synthesis [11], and Pluralistic
Image Completion [12]. The success of generative adversarial networks (GAN’s) [14, 15] motivated these methods.
Although similar methods have existed for interpolation for
several years, the difficulty of extrapolation required more
specialized and more powerful generative models.
Despite the recent progress in image extrapolation by
methods such as [1,3] on textural images, the problem is still
far from being solved for objects. While domain-specific
image interpolation exists for a few important classes (e.g.
for people [16]), the generic problem for images with salient
objects remains unsolved.
The complexity of natural scene composition makes it
challenging for a generic encoder-decoder network trained
with adversarial losses to uncover the diverse shapes and
final details of foreground object shapes given an input. It
is easier to model the shape and appearances of each object
class independently, e.g. cars, airplanes, people and dogs, as
suggested by [15].
In this paper we introduce OCONet (Object COmpletion Networks) to address the image extrapolation problem
for a broad set of images with general object classes. Recent advances in high-quality instance segmentation, e.g.
ShapeMask [17], allow us to obtain object class and accurate foreground object shape masks even when only a small
fraction of the object is visible inside the image boundary.
Using this information, we trained a class-conditioned object model to infer both the shape and pixels of foreground
objects, as well as a background model to extrapolate the
background. The completed object is simply composited
on top of the extrapolated background to obtain the final
result. As shown in figure 1, we produce significantly better
results on the object of interest. Extensive quantitative and
qualitative experiments show that our model significantly
outperforms the prior state-of-the-art.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
• We introduce object completion networks – OCONet–

2307

