Attention-guided Image Compression by Deep Reconstruction of
Compressive Sensed Saliency Skeleton
Xi Zhang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Xiaolin Wu†
McMaster Univeristy

zhangxi 19930818@sjtu.edu.cn

xwu@ece.mcmaster.ca

Abstract
We propose a deep learning system for attention-guided
dual-layer image compression (AGDL). In the AGDL compression system, an image is encoded into two layers, a base
layer and an attention-guided refinement layer. Unlike the
existing ROI image compression methods that spend an extra bit budget equally on all pixels in ROI, AGDL employs a
CNN module to predict those pixels on and near a saliency
sketch within ROI that are critical to perceptual quality.
Only the critical pixels are further sampled by compressive
sensing (CS) to form a very compact refinement layer. Another novel CNN method is developed to jointly decode the
two compression layers for a much refined reconstruction,
while strictly satisfying the transmitted CS constraints on
perceptually critical pixels. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed AGDL system advances the state of
the art in perception-aware image compression.

1. Introduction
After decades of intensive research and development,
visual signal compression techniques are approaching the
rate-distortion performance limits. Any further significant
improvements of bandwidth economy in visual communications have to come from smart human vision driven representations. In this direction the methodology of regionof-interest (ROI) image compression emerged about twenty
years ago [7, 31, 3]. ROI compression is to exploit a wellknown property of human vision: a viewer’s attention is
not evenly distributed in all parts of an image. Instead, our
attentions focus on one or few regions of greater interests
than the rest of the image, which pertain to salient foreground object(s). Background regions are delegated to our
peripheral vision and hence have much lesser acuity. Playing this tapering of visual acuity away from ROIs, a ROI
image compression method allocates a much lower bit bud† Corresponding author.

get to encode pixels outside of ROIs than those inside, and
saves a significant number of bits without materially sacrificing visual quality of compressed images.
In this work, we sharpen the existing tool of ROI image compression and propose a deep learning system of
attention-guided dual-layer image compression (AGDL). In
AGDL image compression, an image is encoded into two
layers, a base layer Ib and an attention-guided refinement
layer Ir . The base layer Ib is a conventional compressed
image of low bit rate (high compression), such as those produced by JPEG, JPEG 2000, WebP, BPG, etc. The clarity
of the base layer image just suffices to match the reduced
level of acuity of peripheral vision. It is up to the additional
attention-guided refinement layer Ir to boost the perceptual
quality of ROI(s).
In existing ROI image compression methods, an extra
bit budget is allocated to ROI and it is shared equally by
all pixels in ROI. But on a second reflection, we should be
more discriminating than ROI and spend extra bits only on
pixels that can contribute to perceptual quality after being
refined. Instead of a contiguous region of interest, we introduce a much sparser representation called saliency sketch
to highlight semantically significant structures within ROI.
One step further, we define a so-called critical pixel set
that is the intersection of the saliency sketch and the set
of pixels that have large reconstruction errors. The critical pixel set specifies a skeletal sub-image that needs to
be further sampled and refined. For the saliency-driven
refinement task, we take a more proactive approach than
the straightforward CNN removal of compression artifacts
[26, 15, 49, 44, 16, 14, 56, 58, 52, 54, 13, 17, 9]. In the
AGDL system design, the encoder takes and transmits K
additional samples of the critical pixel set in the form of
compressive sensing (CS). The CS sampling produces novel
critical information for the refinement layer, while having a
very compact encoding of the novel information thanks to
the small size of the critical pixel set.
The proposed AGDL image compression system needs
to solve two key technical problems: 1. Detecting the
saliency sketch and the critical pixels; 2. Refining the base

13354

