Unsupervised Visual Representation Learning by Tracking Patches in Video
Guangting Wang1 Yizhou Zhou1 Chong Luo2 Wenxuan Xie2 Wenjun Zeng2 Zhiwei Xiong1
University of Science and Technology of China1
Microsoft Research Asia2
{flylight, zyz0205}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

{cluo, wenxie, wezeng}@microsoft.com zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Inspired by the fact that human eyes continue to develop
tracking ability in early and middle childhood, we propose
to use tracking as a proxy task for a computer vision system to learn the visual representations. Modelled on the
Catch game played by the children, we design a Catch-thePatch (CtP) game for a 3D-CNN model to learn visual representations that would help with video-related tasks. In
the proposed pretraining framework, we cut an image patch
from a given video and let it scale and move according to
a pre-set trajectory. The proxy task is to estimate the position and size of the image patch in a sequence of video
frames, given only the target bounding box in the first frame.
We discover that using multiple image patches simultaneously brings clear benefits. We further increase the difficulty of the game by randomly making patches invisible.
Extensive experiments on mainstream benchmarks demonstrate the superior performance of CtP against other video
pretraining methods. In addition, CtP-pretrained features
are less sensitive to domain gaps than those trained by a
supervised action recognition task. When both trained on
Kinetics-400, we are pleasantly surprised to find that CtPpretrained representation achieves much higher action classification accuracy than its fully supervised counterpart on
Something-Something dataset.

1. Introduction
During the development of artificial intelligence, we can
always take inspiration from the way human brain learns,
and computer vision is no exception. For instance, the insight behind building the ImageNet dataset was “to give the
algorithms the kind of training data that a child was given
through experiences in both quantity and quality.”1 In this
work, we intend to address the visual representation learning problem in computer vision, so we look for clues from
what developing eyes learn to do in childhood. Our intuition is that once a computer vision system learns what de1 Fei-fei Li’s TED talk ”How we teach computers to understand pictures,” 2005.

Figure 1: Illustration of the Catch-the-Patch game we designed to train a computer vision system. We randomly crop
one or multiple patches from a video clip, let them scale and
move in a smooth way, and then train the neural network to
predict the positions and sizes of the patches in each frame.

veloping eyes are capable of, the visual features it extracts
should contain the most important information needed by
downstream vision tasks.
It is not surprising that the ability to track, or to follow a
moving target, caught our attention. It is not only an important capability of human eyes, but it has also been regarded
as an important technology in computer vision and the basis of video analysis. In this work, however, we do not treat
tracking as an ultimate task. Instead, we want to use it as
a proxy task for a computer vision system to learn feature
representations of visual signals. Here, the visual signals
need to be videos, or moving pictures, instead of static images. Ideally, the learning process does not require human
annotation, or should be self-supervised. Only in this way
can we make full use of the large amount of video data on
the Internet. This falls into an active area of research called
self-supervised video representation learning, which aims
to learn video understanding models [37, 51, 38, 50] without access to human annotation.
The research progress in this area lags far behind a
closely related area called self-supervised image representation learning, where several ground-breaking works [14, 3]
emerged in recent years. A possible reason is that videos
are much larger in size and more redundant in its original

2563

