Interpretable Social Anchors for Human Trajectory Forecasting in Crowds
Parth Kothari, Brian Sifringer, Alexandre Alahi
EPFL VITA lab
CH-1015 Lausanne
parth.kothari@epfl.ch

Abstract
Human trajectory forecasting in crowds, at its core,
is a sequence prediction problem with specific challenges
of capturing inter-sequence dependencies (social interactions) and consequently predicting socially-compliant multimodal distributions. In recent years, neural networkbased methods have been shown to outperform handcrafted methods on distance-based metrics. However, these
data-driven methods still suffer from one crucial limitation:
lack of interpretability. To overcome this limitation, we
leverage the power of discrete choice models to learn interpretable rule-based intents, and subsequently utilise the
expressibility of neural networks to model scene-specific
residual. Extensive experimentation on the interactioncentric benchmark TrajNet++ demonstrates the effectiveness of our proposed architecture to explain its predictions
without compromising the accuracy.

µ

µ

µ

Predicted anchors
Neural network refinement
Final predicted future sequence

1. Introduction

Figure 1: While navigating in crowds, humans display various social phenomena like collision avoidance (from red
trajectory) and leader follower (towards blue trajectory).
We present a model that not only outputs accurate future trajectories but also provides a high-level rationale behind its
predictions, owing to the interpretability of discrete choice
models. (Un)favourable anchors shown in green (red).

Humans naturally navigate through crowds by following
the unspoken rules of social motion such as avoiding collisions or yielding right-of-way. Forecasting human motion
in public places is a challenging, yet crucial task for the success of many applications like deployment of autonomous
navigation systems [1, 2, 16], infrastructure design [29, 34]
and evacuation analysis [24, 65]. Therefore, in the last few
decades, developing models that can understand human social interactions and forecast future trajectories has been an
active and challenging area of research.
Early works designed hand-crafted methods based upon
domain knowledge to forecast human trajectories, either
with physics-based models such as Social Forces [25], or
with pattern-based models such as discrete choice modelling (DCM) [7, 20, 8]. These models, based on domain
knowledge, were successful in showcasing crowd phenomena like collision avoidance and leader-follower type behavior. Moreover, the hand-designed nature of these models
rendered their predictions to be interpretable. However, hu-

man motion in crowds is much more complex and due to
its long-term nature, these first-order methods suffer from
predicting inaccurate trajectories.
Building on the success of recurrent neural networkbased models in learning complex functions and long-term
dependencies, Alahi et al. [4] proposed the first neural
network (NN) based trajectory forecasting model, Social
LSTM, which outperformed the hand-crafted methods on
distance-based metrics. Due to the success of Social LSTM,
neural networks have become the de-facto choice for designing human trajectory models [21, 64, 66, 28, 19]. However, current NN-based trajectory forecasting models suffer
from a significant limitation: lack of interpretability regarding the model’s decision-making process.
In this work, we are interested in combining the forces
of the two paradigms of human trajectory forecasting (see
Fig. 1): the interpretability of the trajectories predicted by
hand-crafted models, in particular discrete choice models

15556

