Self-Supervised Simultaneous Multi-Step Prediction of Road
Dynamics and Cost Map
Elmira Amirloo1 , Mohsen Rohani*1 , Ershad Banijamali1 , Jun Luo1 , Pascal Poupart2
1
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei, Toronto, Canada
2
School of Computer Science, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Canada
{elmira.amirloo,mohsen.rohani,ershad.banijamali1,jun.luo1}@huawei.com, ppoupart@uwaterloo.ca

While supervised learning is widely used for perception modules in conventional autonomous driving solutions,
scalability is hindered by the huge amount of data labeling needed. In contrast, while end-to-end architectures do
not require labeled data and are potentially more scalable,
interpretability is sacrificed. We introduce a novel architecture that is trained in a fully self-supervised fashion for
simultaneous multi-step prediction of space-time cost map
and road dynamics. Our solution replaces the manually
designed cost function for motion planning with a learned
high dimensional cost map that is naturally interpretable
and allows diverse contextual information to be integrated
without manual data labeling. Experiments on real world
driving data show that our solution leads to lower number
of collisions and road violations in long planning horizons
in comparison to baselines, demonstrating the feasibility of
fully self-supervised prediction without sacrificing scalability.

1. Introduction
Conventional autonomous driving (AD) stacks consist of
various modules [30]. A perception component is responsible for detecting objects in the scene and a prediction module for projecting their positions in the future. Based on
their outputs a motion planner generates a desired trajectory
according to a manually speciﬁed cost function [6], which
is in turn executed by a controller. A key advantage of this
approach is the interpretability of the ﬁnal decision. For
example, in case of accident, each component can be investigated individually. However, with different parts designed
and tuned separately, each module is not aware of the errors
made by the other parts. In many cases, there is no clear
way for estimating the model uncertainty and propagating
* The authors contributed equally.

Direct CME Objective

Intention Prediction

Determine Loss

Abstract

Trajectory Prediction

Figure 1. High Dimensional Cost Map Estimation.

it to the system. In addition to massive amount of humanlabelled data required to train the perception components,
the manual design and tuning of the cost function for motion planning tends to limit the system’s ability for dealing
with complex driving scenarios .
As an alternative, several works [2, 7, 34, 5] proposed
driving systems that use raw sensory input to directly produce control commands (i.e., acceleration and steering).
This approach allows full backpropagation and eliminates
the need for a cost function. Since a large quantity of data
can be collected from cars equipped with appropriate sensors and directly used for training without human labelling,
this approach is potentially highly scalable with data and
compute. However, such a monolithic approach lacks internally interpretable components, offers little insight as to
how system faults may arise, and is thus ill-suited for safetycritical real-world deployment.
In this paper, we propose a new approach that allows
meaningful interpretation and avoids manual data labeling and design of cost function. Our approach is centered around a novel architecture for learning-based spacetime Cost Map Estimation (CME). The proposed method is
highly scalable as it can be trained in a fully self-supervised
fashion. Moreover, the space-time cost map has both a
natural interface with motion planner and an interpretable
domain-speciﬁc semantics.
Speciﬁcally, our architecture encodes high dimensional
Occupancy Grid Maps (OGM)s as well as other contextual
information (e.g., drivable area and intersections) and si-

8494

