Prototype-supervised Adversarial Network for Targeted Attack of Deep Hashing
Xunguang Wang1,∗ , Zheng Zhang1,2,∗,† , Baoyuan Wu3,4 , Fumin Shen5,6 , Guangming Lu1
1
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, 2 Peng Cheng Laboratory
3
School of Data Science, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen
4
Secure Computing Lab of Big Data, Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data
5
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, 6 Koala Uran Tech.
{xunguangwang, darrenzz219, wubaoyuan1987, fumin.shen}@gmail.com, luguangm@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Due to its powerful capability of representation learning
and high-efficiency computation, deep hashing has made
significant progress in large-scale image retrieval. However, deep hashing networks are vulnerable to adversarial
examples, which is a practical secure problem but seldom
studied in hashing-based retrieval field. In this paper, we
propose a novel prototype-supervised adversarial network
(ProS-GAN), which formulates a flexible generative architecture for efficient and effective targeted hashing attack.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first generationbased method to attack deep hashing networks. Generally,
our proposed framework consists of three parts, i.e., a PrototypeNet, a generator and a discriminator. Specifically,
the designed PrototypeNet embeds the target label into the
semantic representation and learns the prototype code as
the category-level representative of the target label. Moreover, the semantic representation and the original image
are jointly fed into the generator for flexible targeted attack.
Particularly, the prototype code is adopted to supervise the
generator to construct the targeted adversarial example by
minimizing the Hamming distance between the hash code of
the adversarial example and the prototype code. Furthermore, the generator is against the discriminator to simultaneously encourage the adversarial examples visually realistic and the semantic representation informative. Extensive experiments verify that the proposed framework can efficiently produce adversarial examples with better targeted
attack performance and transferability over state-of-the-art
targeted attack methods of deep hashing.

1. Introduction
With the explosive growth of high-dimensional and
large-scale multimedia data, approximate nearest neighbor
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

(ANN) search [1] has attracted much attention in information retrieval due to its efficiency and effectiveness. As a
solution of ANN, hashing [40] maps high-dimension data
to compact binary codes meanwhile preserving the semantic similarities, yielding significant advantages in storage
cost and retrieval speed. Benefiting from the strong representation ability of deep learning, deep hashing that employs deep neural networks (DNNs) to automatically extract features has achieved great success in learning to hash
[42, 21, 47, 26, 28, 5], and also has been demonstrated its
superior performance than the shallow hashing methods.
Notably, recent studies [38, 12, 20, 29, 6] have recognized that DNNs are usually vulnerable to adversarial examples, which are intentionally perturbed by adding imperceptible noises to original images but can fool the networks
to make incorrect predictions. Deep hashing methods have
achieved encouraging performance on many benchmarks,
while, at the same time, they inevitably inherit the fundamental fragility of DNNs on handling adversarial examples
[44, 2]. This imperceptible malicious attack poses a serious
security threat to the deep hashing-based image retrieval.
For example, when querying with an intentionally perturbed
dog image, a hashing based retrieval system may return violent images. Accordingly, it is necessary to study the adversarial attacks on deep hashing models in order to recognize
their flaws and help solve their security risks.
Currently, many works about adversarial examples have
been studied in image classification, but very few researches
focus on the security of deep hashing based retrieval. Different from the typical classification, hashing aims to learn
the semantic similarity between images, and its final outputs are discrete binary codes instead of categories. Thus,
these attack methods in image classification cannot be directly used or transferred to the deep hashing tasks. Existing adversarial attack methods of deep hashing only include an non-targeted attack method called HAG [44] and
two targeted attack methods called P2P [2] and DHTA [2],
respectively. Notwithstanding, they are verified to be ef-

16357

