Flow-based Kernel Prior with Application to Blind Super-Resolution
Jingyun Liang1

Kai Zhang1,∗
Shuhang Gu1,2
Luc Van Gool1,3
Radu Timofte1
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
2
The University of Sydney, Australia 3 KU Leuven, Belgium

{jinliang, kai.zhang, vangool, timofter}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

shuhanggu@gmail.com

https://github.com/JingyunLiang/FKP

Abstract
Kernel estimation is generally one of the key problems
for blind image super-resolution (SR). Recently, DoubleDIP proposes to model the kernel via a network architecture prior, while KernelGAN employs the deep linear network and several regularization losses to constrain the kernel space. However, they fail to fully exploit the general
SR kernel assumption that anisotropic Gaussian kernels are
sufficient for image SR. To address this issue, this paper
proposes a normalizing flow-based kernel prior (FKP) for
kernel modeling. By learning an invertible mapping between the anisotropic Gaussian kernel distribution and a
tractable latent distribution, FKP can be easily used to replace the kernel modeling modules of Double-DIP and KernelGAN. Specifically, FKP optimizes the kernel in the latent space rather than the network parameter space, which
allows it to generate reasonable kernel initialization, traverse the learned kernel manifold and improve the optimization stability. Extensive experiments on synthetic and realworld images demonstrate that the proposed FKP can significantly improve the kernel estimation accuracy with less
parameters, runtime and memory usage, leading to stateof-the-art blind SR results.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) is a fundamental low-level
vision task whose goal is to recover the high-resolution
(HR) image from the low-resolution (LR) input. With
the development of convolutional neural networks (CNN),
CNN-based methods [10, 19, 25, 30, 38, 47, 56] have been
gaining the popularity in solving image SR. However, most
of existing works assume the blur kernel is fixed and known
(e.g., bicubic downsampling kernel), which tends to result
in a dramatic performance drop in real-world applications.
Hence, blind image SR that aims to deal with unknown blur
∗ Corresponding author.

kernels is becoming an active research topic.
Compared to non-blind SR, blind SR generally needs to
additionally estimate the blur kernel and thus is more illposed. A popular line of work tries to decompose blind
SR into two sub-problems, i.e., kernel estimation and nonblind SR. As a preliminary step of non-blind SR, kernel estimation plays a crucial role. If the estimated kernel deviates from the ground-truth, the HR image reconstructed by the non-blind SR methods would deteriorate seriously [11, 17, 50]. In view of this, this paper focuses on
the SR kernel estimation problem.
Recently, some kernel estimation methods, such as
Double-DIP [15, 39] and KernelGAN [3], have shown
promising results. Specifically, with two deep image priors (DIPs) [44], Double-DIP can be used to jointly optimize the HR image and blur kernel in the parameter space
of untrained encoder-decoder networks by minimizing the
LR image reconstruction error. Although DIP has shown
to be effective for modeling natural images, whether it is
effective to model blur kernel or not remains unclear. The
main reason is that blur kernel usually has a small spatial
size and has its own characteristics that differ from natural images. In [39], a fully-connected network (FCN) is
used to model the kernel prior, which, however, lacks interpretability. With a different framework to Double-DIP,
KernelGAN designs an internal generative adversarial network (GAN) for the LR image on the basis of image patch
recurrence property [16, 35, 57]. It defines the kernel implicitly by a deep linear network, which is optimized by
the GAN loss and five extra regularization losses such as
sparsity loss. Obviously, these two methods do not make
full use of the anisotropic Gaussian kernel prior which has
been demonstrated to be effective enough for real image
SR [11, 40, 50, 54, 55].
In this paper, we propose a flow-based kernel prior (FKP)
for kernel distribution modeling and incorporate it into existing blind SR models. Based on normalizing flow, FKP
consists of several batch normalization layers, permutation
layers and affine coupling layers, which allow the model

10601

