Background-Aware Pooling and Noise-Aware Loss for Weakly-Supervised
Semantic Segmentation
Youngmin Oh
Beomjun Kim
Bumsub Ham∗
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University

Abstract
We address the problem of weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) using bounding box annotations.
Although object bounding boxes are good indicators to
segment corresponding objects, they do not specify object boundaries, making it hard to train convolutional neural networks (CNNs) for semantic segmentation. We ﬁnd
that background regions are perceptually consistent in part
within an image, and this can be leveraged to discriminate
foreground and background regions inside object bounding
boxes. To implement this idea, we propose a novel pooling method, dubbed background-aware pooling (BAP), that
focuses more on aggregating foreground features inside the
bounding boxes using attention maps. This allows to extract high-quality pseudo segmentation labels to train CNNs
for semantic segmentation, but the labels still contain noise
especially at object boundaries. To address this problem,
we also introduce a noise-aware loss (NAL) that makes the
networks less susceptible to incorrect labels. Experimental results demonstrate that learning with our pseudo labels already outperforms state-of-the-art weakly- and semisupervised methods on the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset, and
the NAL further boosts the performance.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is one of the fundamental tasks
in computer vision, and has received a lot of attention over
the last decades. It aims at assigning a semantic label to
each pixel, which can be leveraged to various applications
including scene understanding, autonomous driving, image
editing, and robotics. Supervised methods based on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [5, 40, 47] have achieved
remarkable success in semantic segmentation, but they require lots of training samples with pixel-level labels, which
are extremely labor-intensive to annotate, to train networks.
∗ Corresponding author.
1 For MCG, we compute intersection-over-union (IoU) scores using
pairs of segment proposals and bounding boxes, and choose the best one
for each box.

Input image.

Ground truth.

Ours.

Ours∗ .

GrabCut [48].

MCG1 [44].

WSSL [42].

SDI [27].

Figure 1: Visual comparison of pseudo ground-truth labels. Our
approach generates better segmentation labels than other WSSS
methods using object bounding boxes (WSSL [42] and SDI [27]).
Hand-crafted methods (GrabCut [48] and MCG [44]) fail to segment object boundaries. Ours∗ : Ours with an indication of unreliable regions. Best viewed in color.

Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) has recently been introduced to exploit a weak form of supervisory signals such as image-level labels [11, 14, 22, 28,
32, 56, 60], points [3], scribbles [35, 53, 54], and object bounding boxes [8, 27, 42, 52]. WSSS methods using image-level labels typically leverage class activation
maps (CAMs) [63], obtained from CNNs for image classiﬁcation using global average pooling (GAP), to localize
objects. Since CAMs tend to highlight discriminative parts,
these methods more or less resort to off-the-shelf saliency
detectors [13, 21, 24, 33, 57]. This, however, requires additional pixel-level ground-truth annotations for salient objects. Other approaches attempt to exploit object bounding
boxes. They are easy to annotate compared to pixel-level
labels and provide rich semantics to localize objects. The
object bounding boxes, however, contain a mixture of foreground and background, and do not specify exquisite object
boundaries. To overcome this, recent approaches [8, 27, 31]
use off-the-shelf segmentation methods [44, 48].
We introduce a simple yet effective WSSS method using bounding box annotations. In particular, we investigate two aspects of this problem – How can we generate high-quality but possibly noisy pixel-level labels (i.e., a
pseudo ground truth) from object bounding boxes (Fig. 1)?
How can we train CNNs for semantic segmentation (e.g.,

6913

