Vectorization and Rasterization: Self-Supervised Learning
for Sketch and Handwriting
Ayan Kumar Bhunia1

Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1,3 Yongxin Yang1,3 Timothy M. Hospedales1,2
Tao Xiang1,3 Yi-Zhe Song1,3
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom 2 University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
3
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.
{a.bhunia, p.chowdhury, yongxin.yang, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

Abstract
Self-supervised learning has gained prominence due to
its efficacy at learning powerful representations from unlabelled data that achieve excellent performance on many
challenging downstream tasks. However, supervision-free
pre-text tasks are challenging to design and usually modality specific. Although there is a rich literature of selfsupervised methods for either spatial (such as images) or
temporal data (sound or text) modalities, a common pretext task that benefits both modalities is largely missing. In
this paper, we are interested in defining a self-supervised
pre-text task for sketches and handwriting data. This data
is uniquely characterised by its existence in dual modalities
of rasterized images and vector coordinate sequences. We
address and exploit this dual representation by proposing
two novel cross-modal translation pre-text tasks for selfsupervised feature learning: Vectorization and Rasterization. Vectorization learns to map image space to vector
coordinates and rasterization maps vector coordinates to
image space. We show that our learned encoder modules
benefit both raster-based and vector-based downstream approaches to analysing hand-drawn data. Empirical evidence shows that our novel pre-text tasks surpass existing
single and multi-modal self-supervision methods.

1. Introduction
Deep learning architectures [65, 24] have become the defacto choice for most computer vision applications. However, their success heavily depends on access to large
scale labelled datasets [51] that are both costly and timeconsuming to collect. In order to alleviate the data annotation bottleneck, many unsupervised methods [43, 31, 15,
10, 23] propose to pre-train a good feature representation
from large scale unlabelled data. A common approach is
to define a pre-text task whose labels can be obtained freeof-cost, e.g. colorization [66], jigsaw solving [43], image
rotation prediction [18], etc. The motivation is that a net-

Vectorization
Sketch Vector

Sketch Image

Rasterization
Sketch Vector

Sketch Image

Figure 1. Schematic of our proposed self-supervised method for
sketches. Vectorization drives representation learning for sketch
images; rasterization is the pre-text task for sketch vectors.

work trained to solve such a pre-text task should encode
high-level semantic understanding of the data that can be
used to solve other downstream tasks like classification, retrieval, etc. Apart from traditional object classification, detection or semantic segmentation, self-supervision has been
extended to sub-domains like human pose-estimation [32],
co-part segmentation [27], and depth estimation [19].
In this paper, we propose a self-supervised method for a
class of visual data that is distinctively different than photos:
sketches [65, 55] and handwriting [50] images. Although
sketch and handwriting have been studied as two separate
topics by different communities, there exists an underlying
similarity in how they are captured and represented. More
specifically, they are both recorded as the user’s pen tip
follows a trajectory on the canvas, and rendered as sparse
black and white lines in image space. Both are abstract, in
the sense that the same object or grapheme can be drawn
in many possible ways [57, 22]; while sketch in particular
poses the challenge of variable levels of detail [52] depicted.
Both sketch [62] and handwriting [20] can be represented
in rasterized pixel space, or as a temporal point sequence
[22]. While each modality has its own benefits, we propose a novel self-supervised task that takes advantage of
this dual image/vector space representation. In particular,

5672

