End-to-End Rotation Averaging with Multi-Source Propagation
Luwei Yang1 Heng Li1 Jamal Ahmed Rahim1 Zhaopeng Cui2 * Ping Tan1∗
1 Simon Fraser University 2 State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University
{luweiy, lihengl, jrahim, pingtan}@sfu.ca, zhpcui@zju.edu.cn

Abstract
This paper presents an end-to-end neural network for
multiple rotation averaging in SfM. Due to the manifold
constraint of rotations, conventional methods usually take
two separate steps involving spanning tree based initialization and iterative nonlinear optimization respectively.
These methods can suffer from bad initializations due to the
noisy spanning tree or outliers in input relative rotations.
To handle these problems, we propose to integrate initialization and optimization together in an unified graph neural
network via a novel differentiable multi-source propagation
module. Specifically, our network utilizes the image context
and geometric cues in feature correspondences to reduce
the impact of outliers. Furthermore, unlike the methods that
utilize the spanning tree to initialize orientations according
to a single reference node in a top-down manner, our network initializes orientations according to multiple sources
while utilizing information from all neighbors in a differentiable way. More importantly, our end-to-end formulation
also enables iterative re-weighting of input relative orientations at test time to improve the accuracy of the final estimation by minimizing the impact of outliers. We demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method on two real-world datasets,
achieving state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Multiple Rotation Averaging (MRA) [20, 47, 31, 2]
aims to estimate the absolute orientations R1 , R2 , ...., R𝑛 ∈
𝑆𝑂 (3) for a set of 𝑛 cameras from the measurements of
their relative orientations { e
R𝑖 𝑗 }. It is a fundamental problem in 3D Vision and is important to many applications.
For example, MRA is commonly used in Structure-FromMotion (SfM), especially in global SfM algorithms [8, 24]
to determine camera orientations. MRA is also widely used
in pose graph optimization in visual SLAM [10, 30, 43] or
sensor networks [45, 46].
* Corresponding authors

The code is available at github.com/sfu-gruvi-3dv/msp rot avg.

The MRA problem is commonly formulated on a viewgraph 𝐺 = {𝑉, 𝐸 }, where each vertex represents the unknown absolute orientation and an edge connecting two vertices if their relative orientation is known. Typically, the optimal results {R∗𝑖 } are computed by minimizing the discrepe𝑖 𝑗 } and
ancy between the observed relative orientations {R
∗
the estimated relative orientations from {R𝑖 𝑗 } = {R∗𝑗 R∗−1
𝑖 },
which can be written as:
Õ
e𝑖 𝑗 , R∗𝑖 𝑗 )),
arg min
𝜌(𝑑 ( R
(1)
{R∗𝑖 }

(𝑖, 𝑗) ∈𝐸

where the function 𝑑 defines the distance between two rotation matrices and the 𝜌 is a robust cost function.
There are several challenges in MRA. Firstly, the 3 × 3
rotation matrices form a 3D nonlinear manifold in a 9D linear space. Ignoring this manifold constraint leads to inferior results [27]. However, enforcing the manifold constraint in optimization is non-trivial, which often involves
local linearization by Taylor expansion and iterative optimization [6]. Secondly, due to the non-linear optimization,
many methods [6, 19, 32, 37] often rely on a Shortest Path
Tree (SPT) or a Minimum Spanning Tree (MST) for initialization, which could be imprecise due to noisy input relative orientations, leading to poor initialization and inferior
results. Thirdly, in many real applications, solving MRA
needs to deal with incorrect relative orientations [33], i.e.,
outliers, typically due to feature matching ambiguities. A
robust MRA method, therefore, has to handle all these problems simultaneously.
A neural network approach was recently proposed in
[32]. It utilizes a two-stage neural network architecture in
which the first stage cleans outliers in the view-graph and
builds a SPT to initialize the global orientations and the
second stage further improves this initialization via a finetuning network. However, the whole network is not end-toend trainable, and the separate stages leave a gap between
the initialization and final prediction, which makes the second stage sensitive to the quality of initialization from the
SPT. If the initialization is poor due to the failure of outliers
removal, the second stage normally also fails to refine it and
generate good estimation.

11774

