IBRNet: Learning Multi-View Image-Based Rendering
Qianqian Wang1,2 Zhicheng Wang1 Kyle Genova1,3 Pratul Srinivasan1 Howard Zhou1
Jonathan T. Barron1 Ricardo Martin-Brualla1 Noah Snavely1,2 Thomas Funkhouser1,3
1

Google Research

2

Cornell Tech, Cornell University

Abstract
We present a method that synthesizes novel views of complex scenes by interpolating a sparse set of nearby views.
The core of our method is a network architecture that includes a multilayer perceptron and a ray transformer that
estimates radiance and volume density at continuous 5D
locations (3D spatial locations and 2D viewing directions),
drawing appearance information on the fly from multiple
source views. By drawing on source views at render time,
our method hearkens back to classic work on image-based
rendering (IBR), and allows us to render high-resolution
imagery. Unlike neural scene representation work that optimizes per-scene functions for rendering, we learn a generic
view interpolation function that generalizes to novel scenes.
We render images using classic volume rendering, which is
fully differentiable and allows us to train using only multiview posed images as supervision. Experiments show that
our method outperforms recent novel view synthesis methods that also seek to generalize to novel scenes. Further, if
fine-tuned on each scene, our method is competitive with
state-of-the-art single-scene neural rendering methods.1

1. Introduction
Given a set of posed images of a scene, the goal of novel
view synthesis is to produce photo-realistic images of the
same scene at novel viewpoints. Early work on novel view
synthesis focused on image-based rendering (IBR). Starting
from the pioneering work on view interpolation of Chen
and Williams [6], and proceeding through light field rendering [3, 15, 28], view-dependent texturing [8], and more
modern learning-based methods [17], IBR methods generally operate by warping, resampling, and/or blending source
views to target viewpoints. Such methods can allow for highresolution rendering, but generally require either very dense
input views or explicit proxy geometry, which is difficult to
estimate with high quality leading to artifacts in rendering.
1 https://ibrnet.github.io/

3

Princeton University

More recently, one of the most promising research directions for novel view synthesis is neural scene representations,
which represent scenes as the weights of neural networks.
This research area has seen significant progress through the
use of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [40]. NeRF shows
that multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) combined with positional encoding can be used to represent the continuous 5D
radiance field of a scene, enabling photo-realistic novel view
synthesis on complex real-world scenes. NeRF’s use of continuous scene modeling via MLPs, as opposed to explicit
discretized volumes [56] or multi-plane images [12, 70] allows for more compact representations and scales to larger
viewing volumes.
Although neural scene representations like NeRF can
represent scenes faithfully and compactly, they typically
require a lengthy optimization process for each new scene
before they can synthesize any novel views of that scene,
which limits the value of these methods for many real-world
applications.
In this work, we leverage ideas from both IBR and NeRF
into a new learning-based method that generates a continuous scene radiance field on-the-fly from multiple source
views for rendering novel views. We learn a general view
interpolation function that simultaneously performs density/occlusion/visibility reasoning and color blending while
rendering a ray. This enables our system to operate without any scene-specific optimization or precomputed proxy
geometry.
At the core of our method is a lightweight MLP network
that we call IBRNet, which aggregates information from
source views along a given ray to compute its final color.
For sampled 3D locations along the ray, the network first
fetches latent 2D features, derived from nearby source views,
that encode spatial context. IBRNet then aggregates these
2D features for each sampled location to produce a density
feature that captures information about whether that feature
seems to be on a surface. A ray transformer module then
computes a scalar density value for each sample by considering these density features along the entire ray, enabling
visibility reasoning across larger spatial scales. Separately, a

4690

