Improving Multiple Object Tracking with Single Object Tracking
Linyu Zheng1,2 , Ming Tang1 , Yingying Chen1,2,3 , Guibo Zhu1,2 , Jinqiao Wang1,2,3 , Hanqing Lu1,2
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
ObjectEye Inc., Beijing, China
{linyu.zheng,tangm,yingying.chen,gbzhu,jqwang,luhq}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Multiple object tracking (MOT), which aims to estimate
trajectories of multiple target objects in a video sequence, is
a long-standing problem with many applications in mobile
robotics, autonomous driving, and video surveillance analyses [26]. This problem is challenging because a successful
method needs to not only detect the objects of interest accurately in each frame, but also associate them throughout the
video. Moreover, fast running speeds are always desired.

Input
Image

CenterNet

CNN

Despite considerable similarities between multiple object tracking (MOT) and single object tracking (SOT) tasks,
modern MOT methods have not benefited from the development of SOT ones to achieve satisfactory performance.
The major reason for this situation is that it is inappropriate and inefficient to apply multiple SOT models directly to
the MOT task, although advanced SOT methods are of the
strong discriminative power and can run at fast speeds.
In this paper, we propose a novel and end-to-end trainable MOT architecture that extends CenterNet by adding an
SOT branch for tracking objects in parallel with the existing branch for object detection, allowing the MOT task to
benefit from the strong discriminative power of SOT methods in an effective and efficient way. Unlike most existing
SOT methods which learn to distinguish the target object
from its local backgrounds, the added SOT branch trains
a separate SOT model per target online to distinguish the
target from its surrounding targets, assigning SOT models
the novel discrimination. Moreover, similar to the detection branch, the SOT branch treats objects as points, making
its online learning efficient even if multiple targets are processed simultaneously. Without tricks, the proposed tracker
achieves MOTAs of 0.710 and 0.686, IDF1s of 0.719 and
0.714, on MOT17 and MOT20 benchmarks, respectively,
while running at 16 FPS on MOT17.

Center-Aware
Classification

Backbone
Feature

Scale-Aware
Regression
SOTMOT
Center-Based
SOT Models

Figure 1: The architecture sketch of the proposed SOTMOT which
extends CenterNet by adding a branch for tracking objects. The
whole network can be trained in an end-to-end manner.

In recent years, many state-of-the-art methods [38, 42,
25] address the MOT problem by exploiting two modules:
detection module to locate the objects of interest by bounding boxes in each frame and Re-ID one to associate each
object to one of the existing trajectories. The latest ones,
JDE [36] and FairMOT [45], integrate the Re-ID module
into a single-shot detector and allow the above two modules
to be learned in a shared model, achieving high accuracy
and fast running speed simultaneously. Despite competitive
performance, it seems that they encounter bottlenecks in robust object association, especially in crowded scenes. For
instance, the top method, FairMOTv2, still performs relatively poorly on MOT20 [12], 0.673 in IDF1. Therefore,
it may not be the only choice for MOT to associate same
objects in different frames with the Re-ID technique.
It is well known that there are considerable similarities
between MOT and single object tracking (SOT) tasks. They
both are temporal problem and aim to estimate the trajectories of target objects in videos under the challenges of distracters, occlusions, and so on. In fact, it is no doubt that a
multiple object tracker can be realized with multiple single
ones [9, 52]. On the other hand, although the key issue of
MOT is usually considered as the object association while
that of SOT not, we argue that if the class of the target were
known and a detector could provide high-recall proposals in
the search region of the target, SOT would also be treated

2453

