Motion Representations for Articulated Animation
Aliaksandr Siarohin1∗ , Oliver J. Woodford∗ , Jian Ren2 , Menglei Chai2 and Sergey Tulyakov2
1
DISI, University of Trento, Italy, 2 Snap Inc., Santa Monica, CA
aliaksandr.siarohin@unitn.it, {jren,mchai,stulyakov}@snap.com, ∗ Work done while at Snap Inc.

Abstract
We propose novel motion representations for animating
articulated objects consisting of distinct parts. In a completely unsupervised manner, our method identifies object
parts, tracks them in a driving video, and infers their motions
by considering their principal axes. In contrast to the previous keypoint-based works, our method extracts meaningful
and consistent regions, describing locations, shape, and
pose. The regions correspond to semantically relevant and
distinct object parts, that are more easily detected in frames
of the driving video. To force decoupling of foreground from
background, we model non-object related global motion with
an additional affine transformation. To facilitate animation
and prevent the leakage of the shape of the driving object,
we disentangle shape and pose of objects in the region space.
Our model1 can animate a variety of objects, surpassing previous methods by a large margin on existing benchmarks. We
present a challenging new benchmark with high-resolution
videos and show that the improvement is particularly pronounced when articulated objects are considered, reaching
96.6% user preference vs. the state of the art.

1. Introduction
Animation—bringing static objects to life—has broad
applications across education and entertainment. Animated
characters and objects, such as those in Fig. 1, increase
the creativity and appeal of content, improve the clarity of
material through storytelling, and enhance user experiences.
Until very recently, animation techniques necessary for
achieving such results required a trained professional, specialized hardware, software, and a great deal of effort. Quality results generally still do, but vision and graphics communities have attempted to address some of these limitations
by training data-driven methods [36, 6, 25, 11, 10] on object
classes for which prior knowledge of object shape and pose
can be learned. This, however, requires ground truth pose
and shape data to be available during training.
Recent works have sought to avoid the need for ground

Source

Animated

Figure 1: Our method animates still source images via unsupervised region detection (inset).
truth data through unsupervised motion transfer [39, 27, 28].
Significant progress has been made on several key challenges, including training using image reconstruction as a
loss [39, 27, 28], and disentangling motion from appearance [19]. This has created the potential to animate a broader
range of object categories, without any domain knowledge
or labelled data, requiring only videos of objects in motion
during training [27]. However, two key problems remain
open. The first is how to represent the parts of an articulated
or non-rigid moving object, including their shapes and poses.
The second is given the object parts, how to animate them
using the sequence of motions in a driving video.
Initial attempts used end-to-end frameworks [39, 28] to
first extract unsupervised keypoints [19, 17], then warp a
feature embedding of a source image to align its keypoints
with those of a driving video. Follow on work [27] further
modelled the motion around each keypoint with local, affine
transformations, and introduced a generation module that
both composites warped source image regions and inpaints
occluded regions, to render the final image. This enabled a
variety of creative applications,2 for example needing only
one source face image to generate a near photo-realistic
animation, driven by a video of a different face.
However, the resulting unsupervised keypoints are de-

1 Our source code is publicly available at https://github.com/snapresearch/articulated-animation.

2 E.g. a music video in which images are animated using prior work [27].

13653

