Track, Check, Repeat: An EM Approach to Unsupervised Tracking
Adam W. Harley
Yiming Zuo*
Jing Wen*
Shubhankar Potdar
Ritwick Chaudhry

Ayush Mangal
Katerina Fragkiadaki

Carnegie Mellon University
{aharley, yzuo, jingwen2, smpotdar, rchaudhr, katef}@cs.cmu.edu, amangal@cs.iitr.ac.in

Abstract
We propose an unsupervised method for detecting and
tracking moving objects in 3D, in unlabelled RGB-D videos.
The method begins with classic handcrafted techniques for
segmenting objects using motion cues: we estimate optical flow and camera motion, and conservatively segment
regions that appear to be moving independently of the background. Treating these initial segments as pseudo-labels,
we learn an ensemble of appearance-based 2D and 3D
detectors, under heavy data augmentation. We use this
ensemble to detect new instances of the “moving” type,
even if they are not moving, and add these as new pseudolabels. Our method is an expectation-maximization algorithm, where in the expectation step we fire all modules and
look for agreement among them, and in the maximization
step we re-train the modules to improve this agreement. The
constraint of ensemble agreement helps combat contamination of the generated pseudo-labels (during the E step),
and data augmentation helps the modules generalize to yetunlabelled data (during the M step). We compare against
existing unsupervised object discovery and tracking methods, using challenging videos from CATER and KITTI, and
show strong improvements over the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Humans can detect moving objects and delineate their
approximate extent [54, 15], without ever having been supplied boxes or segmentation masks as supervision. Where
does this remarkable ability come from? Psychology literature points to a variety of perceptual grouping cues, which
make some regions look more object-like than others [25].
These types of objectness cues have long been known in
computer vision literature [1], yet this domain knowledge
has not yet led to powerful self-supervised object detectors.
Work on integrating perceptual grouping cues into computer vision models stretches back decades [51], and still
likely serves as inspiration for many of the design decisions
* Equal contribution.

in modern computer vision architectures related to attention, segmentation, and tracking. Much of the current work
on recognition and tracking is fully-supervised, and relies
on vast pools of human-provided annotations. On the unsupervised side, a variety of deep learning-based methods
have been proposed, which hinge on reconstruction objectives and part-centric, object-centric, or scene-centric bottlenecks in the architecture [38, 9]. These methods are
rapidly advancing, but so far only on toy worlds, made up
of simple 2D or 3D shapes against simple backgrounds – a
far cry from the complexity tackled in older works, based
on perceptual grouping (e.g., [21]).
Classic methods of object discovery, such as centersurround saliency in color or flow [2], are known to be brittle, but they need not be discarded entirely. In this paper,
we propose to mine and exploit the admittedly rare success scenarios of these models, to bootstrap the learning of
something more general. We hypothesize that if the successful vs. unsuccessful runs of the classic algorithms can
be readily identified with automatic techniques, then we can
self-supervise a learning-based module to mimic and outperform the traditional methods. This is a kind of knowledge distillation [30], from traditional models to deep ones.
We propose an optimization algorithm for learning detectors of moving objects, based on expectation maximization [45]. We begin with a motion-based handcrafted detector, tuned to be very conservative (low recall, high precision). We then convert each object proposal into thousands of training examples for learning-based 2D and 3D
detectors, by randomizing properties like color, scale, and
orientation. This forces the learned models to generalize, and allows recall to expand. We then use the ensemble of models to obtain new high-confidence estimates (E
step), repeat the optimization (M step), and iterate. Our
method outperforms not only the traditional methods, which
only work under specific conditions, but also the current
learning-based methods, which only work in toy environments. We demonstrate success in a popular synthetic environment where recent deep models have already been deployed (CLEVR/CATER [34, 24]), and also on the real-

16581

