Context Modeling in 3D Human Pose Estimation: A Unified Perspective
Xiaoxuan Ma1,3∗ , Jiajun Su2∗ , Chunyu Wang4 , Hai Ci1,5 , Yizhou Wang 1
1
Dept. of Computer Science, Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University
2
Center for Data Science, Adv. Inst. of Info. Tech., Peking University
3
Advanced Innovation Center For Future Visual Entertainment (AICFVE), Beijing Film Academy
4
Microsoft Research Asia 5 Deepwise AI Lab
{maxiaoxuan, sujiajun, cihai, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn, chnuwa@microsoft.com

Abstract
Estimating 3D human pose from a single image suffers
from severe ambiguity since multiple 3D joint configurations
may have the same 2D projection. The state-of-the-art methods often rely on context modeling methods such as pictorial
structure model (PSM) or graph neural network (GNN) to
reduce ambiguity. However, there is no study that rigorously
compares them side by side. So we first present a general formula for context modeling in which both PSM and GNN are
its special cases. By comparing the two methods, we found
that the end-to-end training scheme in GNN and the limb
length constraints in PSM are two complementary factors to
improve results. To combine their advantages, we propose
ContextPose based on attention mechanism that allows enforcing soft limb length constraints in a deep network. The
approach effectively reduces the chance of getting absurd
3D pose estimates with incorrect limb lengths and achieves
state-of-the-art results on two benchmark datasets. More
importantly, the introduction of limb length constraints into
deep networks enables the approach to achieve much better
generalization performance.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D human pose estimation has attracted much
attention [5, 21, 23, 31, 35, 42] because it can benefit many
applications such as virtual reality and intelligent video
analysis. The task is more difficult than 2D pose estimation [7, 30, 32] because it needs to estimate relative depth
between body joints which suffers from severe ambiguity.
Psychology experiments [4] show that context plays an important role in resolving ambiguity in human visual system.
Following this idea, body joints can serve as mutual context
* denotes equal contribution.

1.Collection
2

x2, e1,2
3.Update

2.Aggregation

y1 = f(x1, φ(x , e ), φ(x , e ),... )
0

1,0

2

1

1,2

x0, e1,0
0

Figure 1: A general formula of context modeling in the
3D human pose estimation task. To update features of a
particular joint, the approach first collects features from
its contextual joints (defined by the input graph structure),
aggregates the collected features, and uses the features to
update the joint of interest.
to each other in human pose estimation— localizing one
facilitates the localization of the other. For example, elbow
is more likely to be found at a distance from shoulder depending on the length of upper arm. Some work [12] also
explores surrounding environment as context for joints to
further narrow down the space.
The success of CNN in 2D pose estimation [7, 24, 32]
has promoted a shift from model-based 3D pose estimators [9, 19, 29, 37] to discriminative ones [10, 16, 21, 31].
In particular, Martinez et al. [21] propose to estimate 3D
pose from estimated 2D pose by a Fully Connected Network (FCN). It achieves notably smaller error than previous
methods due to its strong capability of fitting large amounts
of data and improved 2D pose estimation accuracy. But it
does not explicitly explore context which may result in poor
results in challenging cases [10].
16238

