Inverse Simulation: Reconstructing Dynamic Geometry
of Clothed Humans via Optimal Control
Jingfan Guo1

Jie Li1

Rahul Narain2

Hyun Soo Park1

1

2

University of Minnesota
Indian Institute of Technology Delhi

Front

Back

(a) Input point cloud

(b) Estimated body

(c) Velocity direction

(d) Force direction

Figure 1: We present an inverse simulation method to reconstruct time-varying geometry of the clothes and the underlying
body. Given a sequence of point clouds (a) capturing a clothed human, we optimize the body states (shape and pose) (b) such
that the generated cloth motion (c, d) via physics simulation is matched to the point clouds. Colors in (c) and (d) illustrate
the instantaneous velocity and contact force directions on the cloth vertices. The vertices not in contact are colored white.

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of inverse cloth
simulation—to estimate shape and time-varying poses of
the underlying body that generates physically plausible
cloth motion, which matches to the point cloud measurements on the clothed humans. A key innovation is to represent the dynamics of the cloth geometry using a dynamical system that is controlled by the body states (shape and
pose). This allows us to express the cloth motion as a resultant of external (skin friction and gravity) and internal
(elasticity) forces. Inspired by the theory of optimal control,
we optimize the body states such that the simulated cloth
motion is matched to the point cloud measurements, and
the analytic gradient of the simulator is back-propagated
to update the body states. We propose a cloth relaxation
scheme to initialize the cloth state, which ensures the physical validity. Our method produces physically plausible and
temporally smooth cloth and body movements that are faithful to the measurements, and shows superior performance
compared to the existing methods. As a byproduct, the stress
and strain that are applied to the body and clothes can be
recovered.

1. Introduction
The clothing worn by a person generates complex timevarying geometry, e.g., wrinkles and folds, as the person
moves. This is a form of secondary motion, arising in response to the body movement due to physical forces exerted by the contact with body surface, gravity, and the fabric’s own material response. This behavior of cloth has been
modeled in computer graphics [5, 10, 32] to produce physically plausible character animation. On the other hand,
computer vision methods have enabled reconstructing the
static geometry of the clothes [1,2,11,16,33,34] that is faithful to the visual measurements of appearance and shape.
However, these approaches lack understanding of physics,
resulting in non-interpretable and unrealistic cloth motion.
This paper studies a problem of inverse cloth simulation—
to estimate the underlying body shape and time-varying
pose that generates physically plausible cloth motion that
matches to the proxy measurements of cloth geometry, e.g.,
time series of point clouds.
Inverse cloth simulation is a fundamentally ill-posed
problem because of the primary function of the clothes, i.e.,
it is designed to cover and protect the body, resulting in
self-occlusion. There exist multiple shape and pose configurations that can match to the given cloth geometry, e.g.,
114698

