Probabilistic 3D Human Shape and Pose Estimation from Multiple
Unconstrained Images in the Wild
Akash Sengupta
University of Cambridge

Ignas Budvytis
University of Cambridge

Roberto Cipolla
University of Cambridge

as2562@cam.ac.uk

ib255@cam.ac.uk

rc10001@cam.ac.uk

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of 3D human body
shape and pose estimation from RGB images. Recent
progress in this field has focused on single images, video
or multi-view images as inputs. In contrast, we propose a
new task: shape and pose estimation from a group of multiple images of a human subject, without constraints on subject pose, camera viewpoint or background conditions between images in the group. Our solution to this task predicts
distributions over SMPL body shape and pose parameters
conditioned on the input images in the group. We probabilistically combine predicted body shape distributions from
each image to obtain a final multi-image shape prediction.
We show that the additional body shape information present
in multi-image input groups improves 3D human shape estimation metrics compared to single-image inputs on the
SSP-3D dataset and a private dataset of tape-measured humans. In addition, predicting distributions over 3D bodies
allows us to quantify pose prediction uncertainty, which is
useful when faced with challenging input images with significant occlusion. Our method demonstrates meaningful
pose uncertainty on the 3DPW dataset and is competitive
with the state-of-the-art in terms of pose estimation metrics.

Figure 1: Example shape and pose predictions from a group
of input images. Probabilistic shape combination results in
a more accurate body shape estimate than both individual
single-image predictions (visualised here from SPIN [27]
and STRAPS [45]) and naively-averaged single-image predictions, as our experiments show in Section 5.

1. Introduction

ground conditions between the images, as illustrated in Figure 1. This task is motivated by the intuition that multiple
images of the same subject should contain additional visual
information about their body shape compared to a single image, regardless of whether the subject’s pose or surrounding
environment change between images. A suitable shape and
pose estimator should leverage this information to improve
shape prediction accuracy over single-image methods.

3D human body shape and pose estimation from RGB
images is a challenging problem with potential applications
in augmented and virtual reality, healthcare and fitness technology and virtual retail. Recent solutions have focused on
three types of inputs: i) single images [7, 48, 19, 27, 28,
57, 36, 45, 38, 41, 50], ii) video [26, 20, 47, 40, 16] with
temporal constraints on pose, camera viewpoint and background conditions and iii) multi-view images [32, 46] with
a fixed subject pose captured from multiple viewpoints. In
contrast, we aim to estimate 3D body shape and pose from
a group of images of the same human subject without any
constraints on the subject’s pose, camera viewpoint or back-

We present a probabilistic body shape and pose estimation method from a group of unconstrained images of the
same subject. Inference occurs in three stages (see Figure
2). First, we predict a proxy representation from each input image in the group, consisting of the subject’s silhouette
and 2D joint location heatmaps, using off-the-shelf segmentation and 2D keypoint detection CNNs [14, 13, 25, 53].
Then, each proxy representation is passed through a 3D
distribution prediction network that outputs a probability
distribution over SMPL [33] body shape and pose parameters conditioned on the input representation. Lastly,
body shape distributions from each input image are prob-

16094

