Deep Texture Recognition via Exploiting Cross-Layer Statistical Self-Similarity∗†‡
Zhile Chen1,† , Feng Li1,† , Yuhui Quan1,∗ , Yong Xu1 and Hui Ji2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
2
Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, 119076, Singapore

cszhilechen@gmail.com, csfengli@mail.scut.edu.cn, csyhquan@scut.edu.cn, yxu@scut.edu.cn and matjh@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
In recent years, convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
have become a prominent tool for texture recognition. The
key of existing CNN-based approaches is aggregating the
convolutional features into a robust yet discriminative description. This paper presents a novel feature aggregation
module called CLASS (Cross-Layer Aggregation of Statistical Self-similarity) for texture recognition. We model the
CNN feature maps across different layers, as a dynamic process which carries the statistical self-similarity (SSS), one
well-known property of texture, from input image along the
network depth dimension. The CLASS module characterizes
the cross-layer SSS using a soft histogram of local differential box-counting dimensions of cross-layer features. The
resulting descriptor encodes both cross-layer dynamics and
local SSS of input image, providing additional discrimination over the often-used global average pooling. Integrating
CLASS into a ResNet backbone, we develop CLASSNet, an
effective deep model for texture recognition, which shows
state-of-the-art performance in the experiments.

1. Introduction
Texture recognition is an important yet challenging problem in computer vision, with a broad spectrum of applications such as material classification [3, 6, 34], terrain recognition [42] and microscopic image analysis [23]. Its importance comes from the ubiquitousness of texture in our visual
world as well as from the primal visual cue provided by texture. One main challenge in texture recognition arises from
the various yet contradicting characteristics of textures [12],
e.g., uniformity/deformability and regularity/randomness.
Such variable internal properties, together with the exter∗ Corresponding author: Yuhui Quan.
† Z. Chen and F. Li carried out the experiments and contributed equally.
‡ This work was supported in part by National Nature Science Foun-

dation of China under Grants 61872151 and 62072188, in part by CCFTencent Open Fund 2020, in part by Science and Technology Program of
Guangdong Province under Grant 2019A050510010.

nal distortions from environments, lead to large variability
in texture images which is difficult to resolve.
In recent years, deep learning with convolutional neural networks (CNNs) has emerged as a universal approach
for texture recognition; see e.g. [8, 15, 23, 28, 42, 44–46].
These approaches address the local variability and distortion of texture by leveraging CNNs for learning effective
image features. However, as demonstrated in [8, 46], typical CNNs with fully-connected (FC) layers are not a good
choice for texture recognition. The reason is, convolutional
feature maps are spatially indexed and the FC layer acting
like a spatial transform does not remove the correlation to
spatial coordinates from its output. As a result, the output of
FC layers may be sensitive to the the transforms in spatial
domain, one main source of variability of textures.
In other words, CNN-based texture recognition requires
a feature aggregation module that can generate a distinct
description from convolutional features which is robust to
spatial transforms. While the robustness to spatial arrangement can be easily achieved by simply accumulating spatial
features, e.g. global average pooling (GAP) [1, 10, 45], the
question is how to ensure and improve the discrimination
during aggregation. Recently, several feature aggregation
schemes for this purpose have been proposed; e.g. Fisher
vector [8] and feature encoding [42, 46]. They aggregate
features based on certain statics of a feature tensor.
In this work, we propose a novel yet effective aggregation module, named CLASS (Cross-Layer Aggregation of
Statistical Self-similarity), for CNN-based texture recognition. It differs from existing work in two aspects: utilization
of cross-layer statistics and explicit exploitation of statistical self-similarity (SSS).

1.1. Motivations and Main Idea
Cross-layer statistics A CNN builds up a hierarchical representation of an image based on a series of convolutional
layers. The feature maps from one layer to the next encode
texture structures from a smaller to a larger scale. If we
treat the generation of feature maps of a texture image along
CNN layers as a dynamic evolution process, its characteris-

5231

