Rethinking Channel Dimensions for Efficient Model Design
Dongyoon Han

Sangdoo Yun

Byeongho Heo

YoungJoon Yoo

NAVER AI Lab

Abstract

to get model expressiveness with sufficient channel dimension at the final feature (see Table 1).

Designing an efficient model within the limited computational cost is challenging. We argue the accuracy of a
lightweight model has been further limited by the design
convention: a stage-wise configuration of the channel dimensions, which looks like a piecewise linear function of the
network stage. In this paper, we study an effective channel
dimension configuration towards better performance than
the convention. To this end, we empirically study how to design a single layer properly by analyzing the rank of the output feature. We then investigate the channel configuration
of a model by searching network architectures concerning
the channel configuration under the computational cost restriction. Based on the investigation, we propose a simple
yet effective channel configuration that can be parameterized by the layer index. As a result, our proposed model
following the channel parameterization achieves remarkable performance on ImageNet classification and transfer
learning tasks including COCO object detection, COCO instance segmentation, and fine-grained classifications. Code
and ImageNet pretrained models are available at https:
//github.com/clovaai/rexnet.

This channel configuration was firstly introduced by MobileNetV2 [46] and became the design convention of configuring channel dimensions in lightweight networks, but
how to adjust the channel dimensions towards the optimal
under the restricted computational cost has not been profoundly studied. As shown in Table 1, even network architecture search (NAS)-based models [54, 3, 19, 49, 51,
50, 38, 6, 7, 30] were designed upon the convention or little more exploration within few options near the configuration [11, 53] and focused on searching building blocks. Take
one step further from the design convention, we hypothesize
that the compact models designed by the conventional channel configuration may be limited in the expressive power
due to mainly focusing on flop-efficiency; there would exist
a more effective configuration over the traditional one.

1. Introduction
Designing a lightweight network architecture is crucial for both researchers and practitioners. Popular networks [47, 15, 20, 46] designed for ImageNet classification
share a similar design convention where a low dimensional
input channel is expanded by a few channel expansion layers towards surpassing the number of classes. Lightweight
models [20, 46, 19, 59, 35, 49, 54, 3, 50] also follow this
configuration but further shrinks some channels for computational efficiency, which leads to the promising tradeoffs between the computational cost and accuracy. In other
words, the degree of channel expansion at layers is quite
different, where earlier layers have a smaller channel dimension; the penultimate layer that largely expands dimension above the number of classes. This is to realize flopefficiency by narrow channel dimensions at earlier layers;

In this paper, we investigate an effective channel configuration of a lightweight network with additional accuracy
gain. Inspired by the works [56, 60], we conjecture the expressiveness of a layer can be estimated by the matrix rank
of the output feature. Technically, we study with the averaged rank computed from the output feature of a bunch of
networks that are randomly generated with random sizes to
reveal the proper range of expansion ratio at an expansion
layer and make a link with a rough design principle. Based
on the principle, we move forward to find out an overall
channel configuration in a network. Specifically, we search
network architectures to identify the channel configuration
yielding a better accuracy over the aforementioned convention. It turns out that the best channel configuration is parameterized as a linear function by the block index in a network. This parameterization is similar to the configuration
used in the works [22, 13], and we reveal the parameterization is also effective in designing a lightweight model.
Based on the investigation, we propose a new model
upon the searched channel parameterization. It turns out that
a simple modification upon MobileNetV2 could show remarkable improvement in performance on ImageNet classification. Only with the new channel configuration, our models outperform the state-of-the-art networks such as Effi1732

