Invisible Perturbations: Physical Adversarial Examples
Exploiting the Rolling Shutter Effect
Athena Sayles∗, Ashish Hooda∗, Mohit Gupta, Rahul Chatterjee, and Earlence Fernandes
University of Wisconsin–Madison
{esayles, hooda, mohitg, chatterjee, earlence}@cs.wisc.edu

Abstract
Physical adversarial examples for camera-based computer vision have so far been achieved through visible artifacts — a sticker on a Stop sign, colorful borders around
eyeglasses or a 3D printed object with a colorful texture.
An implicit assumption here is that the perturbations must
be visible so that a camera can sense them. By contrast,
we contribute a procedure to generate, for the first time,
physical adversarial examples that are invisible to human
eyes. Rather than modifying the victim object with visible
artifacts, we modify light that illuminates the object. We
demonstrate how an attacker can craft a modulated light
signal that adversarially illuminates a scene and causes
targeted misclassifications on a state-of-the-art ImageNet
deep learning model. Concretely, we exploit the radiometric rolling shutter effect in commodity cameras to create
precise striping patterns that appear on images. To human
eyes, it appears like the object is illuminated, but the camera
creates an image with stripes that will cause ML models
to output the attacker-desired classification. We conduct a
range of simulation and physical experiments with LEDs,
demonstrating targeted attack rates up to 84%.

1. Introduction
Recent work has established that deep learning models
are susceptible to adversarial examples — manipulations to
model inputs that are inconspicuous to humans but induce
the models to produce attacker-desired outputs [36, 17, 11].
Early work in this space investigated digital adversarial examples where the attacker can manipulate the input vector,
such as modifying pixel values directly in an image classification task. As deep learning has found increasing application in real-world systems like self-driving cars [26, 15, 31],
UAVs [8, 30], and robots [38], the computer vision community has made great progress in understanding physical
adversarial examples [14, 5, 34, 24, 10] because this attack
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

With Attack Signal

Without Attack Signal

Figure 1: Images as seen by human (without border) and
as captured by camera (in black border) with the attack
signal (left two images) and without (right two images). The
image without the attack signal is classified as coffee mug
(confidence 55%), while the image with the attack signal is
classified as perfume (confidence 70%). The attack is robust
to camera orientation, distance, and ambient lighting.
modality is the most realistic in physical systems.
Existing physical attacks include adding stickers on Stop
signs that make models output Speed limit instead [14],
colorful patterns on eyeglass frames to trick face recognition [34], and 3D-printed objects with specific textures [6].
However, all existing works add artifacts to the object (such
as sticker or color patterns) that are visible to a human. In this
work, we generate adversarial perturbations on real-world
objects that are invisible to human eyes, yet produce misclassifications. Our approach exploits the differences between
human and machine vision to hide adversarial patterns.
We show an invisible physical adversarial example
in Fig. 1, generated by manipulating the light that shines
on the object. The light creates adversarial patterns in the
image that only a camera perceives. In particular, we show
how an attacker can exploit the radiometric rolling shutter
(RS) effect, a phenomenon that exists in rolling shutter cameras that perceive a scene whose illumination changes at
a high frequency. Digital cameras use the rolling shutter
technique to obtain high resolution images at higher rate
and at a cheaper price [3, 27]. Rolling shutter technology
is used in a majority of consumer-grade cameras, such as
cellphones [19], AR glasses [32] and machine vision [1, 2].
Due to the rolling shutter effect, the adversariallyilluminated object results in an image that contains multicolored stripes. We contribute an algorithm for creating a

14666

