Information-Theoretic Segmentation by Inpainting Error Maximization
Pedro Savarese
TTI-Chicago

Sunnie S. Y. Kim
Princeton University

savarese@ttic.edu

suhk@cs.princeton.edu

Michael Maire
University of Chicago

Greg Shakhnarovich
TTI-Chicago

David McAllester
TTI-Chicago

mmaire@uchicago.edu

greg@ttic.edu

mcallester@ttic.edu

Abstract
We study image segmentation from an informationtheoretic perspective, proposing a novel adversarial method
that performs unsupervised segmentation by partitioning
images into maximally independent sets. More specifically,
we group image pixels into foreground and background,
with the goal of minimizing predictability of one set from the
other. An easily computed loss drives a greedy search process to maximize inpainting error over these partitions. Our
method does not involve training deep networks, is computationally cheap, class-agnostic, and even applicable in
isolation to a single unlabeled image. Experiments demonstrate that it achieves a new state-of-the-art in unsupervised
segmentation quality, while being substantially faster and
more general than competing approaches.1

Image

Ground-truth

IEM Result

Inpainted
Foreground

Inpainted
Background

Figure 1. Illustration of our Inpainting Error Maximization (IEM)
framework for completely unsupervised segmentation, applied to
flowers, birds, and cars. Segmentation masks maximize the error
of inpainting foreground given background and vice-versa.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have significantly advanced a
wide range of computer vision capabilities, including image
classification [38, 55, 56, 27], object detection [22, 50, 40],
and semantic segmentation [8, 73]. Nonetheless, neural networks typically require massive amounts of manually labeled training data to achieve state-of-the-art performance.
Applicability to problems in which labeled data is scarce or
expensive to obtain often depends upon the ability to transfer learned representations from related domains.
These limitations have sparked exploration of selfsupervised methods for representation learning, where
an automatically-derived proxy task guides deep network
training. Subsequent supervised fine-tuning on a small labeled dataset adapts the network to the actual task of interest. A common approach to defining proxy tasks involves
predicting one part of the data from another, e.g., geometric
1 Code is available at https://github.com/lolemacs/iem

relationships [18, 45, 21], colorization [39], inpainting [49].
A recent series of advances focuses on learning representations through a contrastive objective [6, 65, 59, 57], and efficiency scaling such systems [25, 11, 24] to achieve parity
with supervised pre-training.
Another class of approaches frames unsupervised learning within a generative modeling context, building upon,
e.g., generative adversarial networks (GANs) [23] or variational autoencoders (VAEs) [36]. Donahue et al. [19,
20] formulate representation learning using a bidirectional
GAN. Deep InfoMax [16] drives unsupervised learning by
maximizing mutual information between encoder inputs
and outputs. InfoGAN [12], which adds a mutual information maximization objective to a GAN, demonstrates that
deep networks can learn to perform image classification
without any supervision—at least for small-scale datasets.
Inspired by this latter result, we focus on the question of
whether more complex tasks, such as image segmentation,
14029

