SG-Net: Spatial Granularity Network for
One-Stage Video Instance Segmentation
Dongfang Liu1∗ , Yiming Cui2 *, Wenbo Tan3 , Yingjie Chen1
1
Purdue University, USA
2
University of Florida, USA
3
Hangzhou Dian Zi University, China
{liu2538,victorchen}@purdue.edu, cuiyiming@ufl.edu, 174060003@hdu.edu.cn

Abstract
Video instance segmentation (VIS) is a new and critical
task in computer vision. To date, top-performing VIS methods extend the two-stage Mask R-CNN by adding a tracking branch, leaving plenty of room for improvement. In
contrast, we approach the VIS task from a new perspective
and propose a one-stage spatial granularity network (SGNet). Compared to the conventional two-stage methods,
SG-Net demonstrates four advantages: 1) Our method has
a one-stage compact architecture and each task head (detection, segmentation, and tracking) is crafted interdependently so they can effectively share features and enjoy the
joint optimization; 2) Our mask prediction is dynamically
performed on the sub-regions of each detected instance,
leading to high-quality masks of fine granularity; 3) Each of
our task predictions avoids using expensive proposal-based
RoI features, resulting in much reduced runtime complexity per instance; 4) Our tracking head models objects’ centerness movements for tracking, which effectively enhances
the tracking robustness to different object appearances. In
evaluation, we present state-of-the-art comparisons on the
YouTube-VIS dataset. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that our compact one-stage method can achieve improved
performance in both accuracy and inference speed. We
hope our SG-Net could serve as a strong and flexible baseline for the VIS task. Our code will be available here1 .

1. Introduction
Video instance segmentation (VIS) is a challenging vision task introduced by [43]. Given a video frame, an algorithm aims to perform the task of detection, segmentation, and tracking of instances simultaneously. The VIS task
holds valuable possibilities for applications which requires
* indicates equal contributions.
1 https://github.com/goodproj13/SG-Net

Figure 1. A detailed comparison with MaskTrack R-CNN. The
large images in the first row are the results of our method. We further zoom in our results and compare against results from MaskTrack R-CNN. We dynamically divide a target instance into subregions based on its bounding box and perform instance segmentation on each sub-region to achieve spatial granularity. Both examples are cropped from the original images for better illustration.

video-level object masks and temporal descriptions such as
augmented reality, video editing, and autonomous driving.
The seminal work, MaskTrack R-CNN [43] follows a
two-stage paradigm as it is extended from Mask R-CNN
[13]. MaskTrack R-CNN first uses region proposal network (RPN) from Faster R-CNN [31] to produce a set
of candidate proposals. Then, regions-of-interests (RoI)
features based on the proposals are cropped out and fed
into each task head to predict bounding boxes, instance
masks, and object trackings respectively. Despite a few
works being proposed recently, the dominant VIS frameworks [11, 16, 19, 25, 26] follow the two-stage paradigm.
However, the two-stage paradigm may encounter a number of issues. First, it is difficult for each sub-task head
(detection, segmentation, and tracking) in the two-stage ap-

9816

