Tackling the Ill-Posedness of Super-Resolution
through Adaptive Target Generation
Younghyun Jo1
1

Seoung Wug Oh2

Yonsei University

2

Peter Vajda3
3

Adobe Research

Abstract
By the one-to-many nature of the super-resolution (SR)
problem, a single low-resolution (LR) image can be mapped
to many high-resolution (HR) images. However, learning
based SR algorithms are trained to map an LR image to the
corresponding ground truth (GT) HR image in the training
dataset. The training loss will increase and penalize the
algorithm when the output does not exactly match the GT
target, even when the outputs are mathematically valid candidates according to the SR framework. This becomes more
problematic for the blind SR, as diverse unknown blur kernels exacerbate the ill-posedness of the problem. To this
end, we propose a fundamentally different approach for the
SR by introducing the concept of the adaptive target. The
adaptive target is generated from the original GT target by
a transformation to match the output of the SR network. The
adaptive target provides an effective way for the SR algorithm to deal with the ill-posed nature of the SR, by providing the algorithm with the flexibility of accepting a variety of
valid solutions. Experimental results show the effectiveness
of our algorithm, especially for improving the perceptual
quality of HR outputs.

1. Introduction
The goal of image super-resolution (SR) is to generate
a high-resolution (HR) image from its corresponding lowresolution (LR) counterpart. To solve this problem, previous state-of-the-art SR methods have focused on finding the underlying relationship between LR and HR patch
pairs in natural images. Some methods exploited internally
found LR-HR patch pairs across scales within a given image
[6, 12], and other methods learned the mapping functions
with the patch pairs from large external images as external
example-based approaches [5, 41, 38].
For most learning-based approaches, training example
pairs are simulated from a large collection of HR images
in a self-supervised manner. Specifically, a LR image ILR
is simulated from a ground truth (GT) HR image IGT as

Seon Joo Kim1
Facebook

Adaptive target
Acceptable
output

LR

SR
net

Downsample with
different kernels
Possible
HRs

Training
data

Figure 1. In (blind) SR, many HR patches can result in the
same LR patch. Restricting the solution of an SR network
to just one from the given ground truth can penalize a totally acceptable output. To tackle this issue, we propose an
adaptive target strategy that generates new targets in order
to relax the restriction on the possible solutions.
follows:
ILR = (IGT ∗ k) ↓s ,

(1)

where k is a blur kernel, ∗ is the convolution operator, and
↓s is the downsampling operator with the scale factor s. The
training set D = {(xi , yi )} consists of the LR input patch xi
from ILR and the HR target patch yi from IGT for the i-th
example. Generally, an SR network f is trained to generate
HR output f (xi ) close to the given target yi by minimizing
a loss function as follows:
X
ℓ(yi , f (xi )),
(2)
i

where ℓ is a pixel reconstruction loss.
The SR problem is under-determined as different HR images can be mapped to the same LR image (Fig. 1). In other
words, the given target yi is not the only solution for the
input xi , as one input LR image can be originated from a
variety of HR images. This becomes more significant when
it comes to the blind SR task where the blur kernel k is unknown and diverse. A variety of unknown kernels makes the

16236

