The Affective Growth of Computer Vision
Norman Makoto Su
David J. Crandall
Luddy School of Informatics, Computing, and Engineering
Indiana University Bloomington
{normsu,djcran}@indiana.edu

Abstract
The success of deep learning has led to intense growth
and interest in computer vision, along with concerns about
its potential impact on society. Yet we know little about
how these changes have affected the people that research
and practice computer vision: we as a community spend so
much effort trying to replicate the abilities of humans, but so
little time considering the impact of this work on ourselves.
In this paper, we report on a study in which we asked computer vision researchers and practitioners to write stories
about emotionally-salient events that happened to them.
Our analysis of over 50 responses found tremendous affective (emotional) strain in the computer vision community. While many describe excitement and success, we found
strikingly frequent feelings of isolation, cynicism, apathy,
and exasperation over the state of the field. This is especially true among people who do not share the unbridled
enthusiasm for normative standards for computer vision research and who do not see themselves as part of the “incrowd.” Our findings suggest that these feelings are closely
tied to the kinds of research and professional practices now
expected in computer vision. We argue that as a community
with significant stature, we need to work towards an inclusive culture that makes transparent and addresses the real
emotional toil of its members.

1. Introduction
By almost any metric, computer vision is in a golden
age. Deep learning has revolutionized nearly every problem in computer vision, achieving results that were unimaginable just a few years ago. As technical barriers have
fallen, the floodgates of interest in computer vision have
opened wide [40]. CVPR 2019 had over 9,000 attendees –
nearly ten times more than CVPR 2009 – and paper submissions were growing exponentially, leading the 2019 Program Chairs to cheekily extrapolate that CVPR 2028 will
surpass 10 billion submissions [5].
Meanwhile, the rest of the world is paying attention

to computer vision. According to Google Scholar, CVPR
is the fifth most impactful publication venue of all journals and conferences in all of science [2], just below The
Lancet and significantly above PNAS. Governments around
the world have announced major investments in AI research
over the next decade [14, 37], and academic grants are increasingly focused on proposals integrating machine learning, sometimes with industry backing [3]. Major tech companies are investing billions of dollars into computer vision
and machine learning [4] and paying eye-popping salaries
to attract top talent [32].
Despite all this apparent success, it is clear that computer vision is facing a number of important challenges.
The thousands of papers published every year in computer
vision – and the popularity of arXiv as an instant publication venue – have made it impossible for any individual to
follow all developments in the field. Peer review processes
are straining under the huge influx of paper submissions and
the limited number of qualified reviewers, leading to acceptance decisions that may often be arbitrary [26]. Faculty
spending time in industry may harm student success [33],
but those staying in academia find it increasingly difficult
to compute against the computational, data, and human resources of industry labs. Researchers in industry enjoy
much of the freedom of academia, but without the formal
protections of tenure [34]. Meanwhile, there is a striking
lack of diversity across gender and race in AI [49].
There is also growing alarm about the ethical consequences of computer vision, from self-driving cars that have
killed people due to perception failures [22], to surveillance
technology that could become a tool of repression [18], to
the exploitation of low-income workers for labeling training
data [50], to face recognition algorithms that exhibit racial
bias [12]. Major datasets that have been the bedrock of computer vision research for a decade have been found to inadvertently include biased, racist, and misogynistic images
and labels, leading the Tiny Images dataset to be formally
retracted [47] and hundreds of thousands of images to be
removed from ImageNet [44].
It is against this backdrop that we, the researchers and
19291

