DeepVideoMVS: Multi-View Stereo on Video
with Recurrent Spatio-Temporal Fusion
Arda Düzçeker1 , Silvano Galliani2 , Christoph Vogel2 , Pablo Speciale2 , Mihai Dusmanu1 , Marc Pollefeys1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
2
Microsoft Mixed Reality & AI Zurich Lab

(a) Groundtruth

(b) No Spatio-temporal Fusion (Backbone Network)
Runtime ~ 30 ms • FPS ~ 34 • Memory = 795 MB

(c) With Spatio-temporal Fusion
Runtime ~ 37 ms • FPS ~ 27 • Memory = 1061 MB

Figure 1: 3D reconstructions of a scene from ScanNet [11]. Extending our stereo backbone with our proposed spatio-temporal fusion module
improves the temporal consistency and accuracy of the predicted depth maps, leading to better reconstructions with negligible computational
overhead. Runtime is per forward pass on an NVIDIA GTX 1080Ti with image size 320 × 256.

Abstract
We propose an online multi-view depth prediction approach on posed video streams, where the scene geometry information computed in the previous time steps is propagated
to the current time step in an efficient and geometrically
plausible way. The backbone of our approach is a real-time
capable, lightweight encoder-decoder that relies on cost volumes computed from pairs of images. We extend it by placing
a ConvLSTM cell at the bottleneck layer, which compresses
an arbitrary amount of past information in its states. The
novelty lies in propagating the hidden state of the cell by
accounting for the viewpoint changes between time steps. At
a given time step, we warp the previous hidden state into the
current camera plane using the previous depth prediction.
Our extension brings only a small overhead of computation time and memory consumption, while improving the
depth predictions significantly. As a result, we outperform
the existing state-of-the-art multi-view stereo methods on
most of the evaluated metrics in hundreds of indoor scenes
while maintaining a real-time performance. Code available:
https://github.com/ardaduz/deep-video-mvs

1. Introduction
Obtaining dense 3D information about the environment
is key for a wide range of applications such as navigation for autonomous vehicles (e.g., robots, drones [44]),
mixed reality [1, 2, 24, 42], 3D modelling and industrial
control. Compared to active depth sensing with LiDAR [41],

time-of-flight [19] or structured-light cameras [13], camerabased passive sensing has the advantage of being energy
and cost efficient, compact in size and operating in a wide
range of conditions [33]. Among passive depth sensing approaches, monocular systems can offer highly mobile, lowmaintenance solutions, while stereo devices often require
baseline sizes that are infeasible for mobile devices [46].
One common denominator of the aforementioned applications is that the data is acquired as a video stream instead
of sparse instances in time, and the depth is often reconstructed for selected keyframes. In this work, we assume
a calibrated camera and known poses between acquisitions
and focus on the dense depth recovery for each keyframe.
Such pose information can, for instance, be obtained through
visual-inertial odometry techniques [6, 40], which are readily available in mobile platforms (e.g. Apple ARKit and
Android ARCore) [20] or mixed reality headsets such as Microsoft HoloLens. The presence of camera poses enables the
computation of triangulation-based metric reconstructions,
as opposed to the popular learning-based single image depth
prediction methods [3,12,14,29,55] that have been extended
to video [39, 50, 52, 58]. Finally, the real-time aspect of the
applications and the potential of an on-device solution, imply
targeting a lightweight online multi-view stereo (MVS) system that is memory and compute efficient. Therefore, similar
to [20, 32], we specifically aim to harness the advantages
of video, with limited variation in viewpoint at consecutive
time steps, instead of pursuing unstructured MVS.
In this work, we present a framework that can extend
many existing MVS methods, such that, when processing

15324

