Generalized Few-Shot Object Detection without Forgetting
Zhibo Fan, Yuchen Ma, Zeming Li, Jian Sun
Megvii Technology
{fanzhibo, mayuchen, lizeming, sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract
11

1. Introduction
Computer vision community has seen significant
progress by applying deep convolutional neural networks
trained from a massive amount of data. However, sufficient
training data is sometimes unavailable due to extensive human labor for annotation, especially for object detection,
and the source data distribution may be long-tailed by nature such that certain object categories only contain limited
examples. These circumstances raise the need to learn under a low-data regime effectively. Inspired by human’s ability to learn new concepts rapidly from a handful of examples, few-shot learning[22, 19, 40, 37, 38, 30, 9, 8, 35, 3, 2,
42] is then proposed to mimic such generalization capability, with extensive research on image classification.
Several recent works[1, 17, 46, 18, 41, 44, 45, 14, 7,
6, 16, 43, 29] have attempted to apply few-shot learning
techniques on instance-level tasks, such as object detection,
where an extra localization task is included and more com-

10

MPSR

9

ours
TFA w/fc
TFA w/cos
FRCN-ft-full

nAP

Recently few-shot object detection is widely adopted to
deal with data-limited situations. While most previous
works merely focus on the performance on few-shot categories, we claim that detecting all classes is crucial as test
samples may contain any instances in realistic applications,
which requires the few-shot detector to learn new concepts
without forgetting. Through analysis on transfer learning
based methods, some neglected but beneficial properties are
utilized to design a simple yet effective few-shot detector,
Retentive R-CNN. It consists of Bias-Balanced RPN to debias the pretrained RPN and Re-detector to find few-shot
class objects without forgetting previous knowledge. Extensive experiments on few-shot detection benchmarks show
that Retentive R-CNN significantly outperforms state-ofthe-art methods on overall performance among all settings
as it can achieve competitive results on few-shot classes
and does not degrade the base class performance at all.
Our approach has demonstrated that the long desired neverforgetting learner is available in object detection.

8

FsDetView

Retentive R-CNN (ours)
transfer learning
meta learning
bAP of pretrained R-CNN

7
6

Meta R-CNN
0

5

10

15

20

bAP

25

30

35

40

45

Figure 1. Performance of previous methods and ours on generalized few-shot objection on MS-COCO[25] under 10-shot settings,
where base class AP and novel class AP are represented by x- and
y-axis respectively. The red dashed line represents the base class
AP of a base class detector. Our method does not degrade the base
class AP while reaching state-of-the-art performance on novel categories.

plicated visual contexts and features encountered, making
few-shot object detection way more challenging. However,
the majority focus merely on the performance of few-shot
categories and ignore the catastrophic forgetting of base
classes, which is not realistic. Unlike image classification,
the capability to detect the joint domain of both classes at
once is even crucial for object detection since samples at
test time may contain instances of both classes, which requires the detector to be computationally efficient and learn
new concepts without catastrophic forgetting. The problem
of detecting objects of both classes is called Generalized
Few-Shot Detection (G-FSD).
A popular stream of few-shot object detection[17, 46, 45,
14, 6] falls under the umbrella of meta-learning by leveraging external exemplars to do a visual search within the image. As their computational complexity is proportional to
the number of categories, these methods become rather slow
or even unavailable when tackling both sets of classes of a
dataset. A promising alternative is transfer learning based

4527

