PANDA: Adapting Pretrained Features for Anomaly Detection and Segmentation
Tal Reiss *, Niv Cohen * , Liron Bergman & Yedid Hoshen
School of Computer Science and Engineering
The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Israel

Abstract
Anomaly detection methods require high-quality features. In recent years, the anomaly detection community
has attempted to obtain better features using advances in
deep self-supervised feature learning. Surprisingly, a very
promising direction, using pre-trained deep features, has
been mostly overlooked. In this paper, we first empirically
establish the perhaps expected, but unreported result, that
combining pre-trained features with simple anomaly detection and segmentation methods convincingly outperforms,
much more complex, state-of-the-art methods.
In order to obtain further performance gains in anomaly
detection, we adapt pre-trained features to the target distribution. Although transfer learning methods are well established in multi-class classification problems, the one-class
classification (OCC) setting is not as well explored. It turns
out that naive adaptation methods, which typically work
well in supervised learning, often result in catastrophic collapse (feature deterioration) and reduce performance in
OCC settings. A popular OCC method, DeepSVDD, advocates using specialized architectures, but this limits the
adaptation performance gain. We propose two methods
for combating collapse: i) a variant of early stopping that
dynamically learns the stopping iteration ii) elastic regularization inspired by continual learning. Our method,
PANDA, outperforms the state-of-the-art in the OCC, outlier exposure and anomaly segmentation settings by large
margins1 .

1. Introduction
Detecting anomalous patterns in data is of key importance in science and industry. In the computational anomaly
detection task, the learner observes a set of training examples. The learner is then tasked to classify novel test samples as normal or anomalous. There are multiple anomaly
detection settings investigated in the literature, corresponding to different training conditions. In this work, we deal
* Equal contribution
1 The code is available at github.com/talreiss/PANDA

with three settings: i) anomaly detection - when only normal images are used for training ii) anomaly segmentation
- detecting all the pixels that contain anomalies, given normal images as input. iii) Outlier Exposure (OE) - where an
external dataset simulating the anomalies is available.
In recent years, deep learning methods have been introduced for anomaly detection, typically extending classical
methods with deep neural networks. Different auxiliary
tasks (e.g. autoencoders or rotation classification) are used
to learn representations of the data, while a great variety of
anomaly criteria are then used to determine if a given sample is normal or anomalous. An important issue for current
methods is the reliance on limited normal training data for
representation learning, which limits the quality of learned
representations. Nearly all state-of-the-art anomaly detection methods rely on self-supervised feature learning - i.e.
using the limited normal training data for learning strong
features. The motivation for this is twofold: i) the fear that
features trained on auxiliary domains will not generalize
well to the target domain. ii) the curiosity to investigate
the top performance achievable without ever looking at any
external dataset (we do not address this question here).
In other parts of computer vision, features pre-trained on
external datasets are often used to improve performance on
tasks trained on new domains - and our reasonable hypothesis is that this should also be the case for image anomaly
detection and segmentation. We present very simple baselines that use pretrained features trained on a large external
data and K-nearest neighbor (kNN) retrieval to significantly
outperform all previous methods on anomaly detection and
segmentation, even on images of distant target domains.
We then tackle the technical challenge of obtaining
stronger performance by further adaptation to the normal
training data. Although feature adaptation has been extensively researched in the multi-class classification setting,
limited work was done in the OCC setting. Unfortunately, it
turns out that feature adaptation for anomaly detection often
suffers from catastrophic collapse - a form of deterioration
of the pre-trained features, where all (including anomalous)
samples, are mapped to the same point. DeepSVDD [23]
proposed to overcome collapse by removing biases from the

2806

