Efficient Object Embedding for Spliced Image Retrieval
Bor-Chun Chen1,2
1

Zuxuan Wu3 *

University of Maryland, College Park

Larry S. Davis1
2

Facebook AI

Ser-Nam Lim2
3

Fudan University

{sirius, lsd}@cs.umd.edu, zxwu@fudan.edu.cn, sernamlim@fb.com

Abstract
Detecting spliced images is one of the emerging challenges in computer vision. Unlike prior methods that focus
on detecting low-level artifacts generated during the manipulation process, we use an image retrieval approach to
tackle this problem. When given a spliced query image, our
goal is to retrieve the original image from a database of
authentic images. To achieve this goal, we propose representing an image by its constituent objects based on the
intuition that the finest granularity of manipulations is oftentimes at the object-level. We introduce a framework, object embeddings for spliced image retrieval (OE-SIR), that
utilizes modern object detectors to localize object regions.
Each region is then embedded and collectively used to represent the image. Further, we propose a student-teacher
training paradigm for learning discriminative embeddings
within object regions to avoid expensive multiple forward
passes. Detailed analysis of the efficacy of different feature
embedding models is also provided in this study. Extensive
experimental results show that the OE-SIR achieves stateof-the-art performance in spliced image retrieval.

1. Introduction
With the proliferation of social media platforms and the
availability of user-friendly image editing software, adversaries can now easily share spliced images on the Internet and reach millions of people with malicious intent to
spread misinformation, disrupt democratic processes, and
commit fraud. The ability to detect such spliced images
is thus an increasingly important research area. Most existing work learns a mapping function between a spliced
image and its corresponding label map, where each pixel
in the map denotes whether the pixel has been modified or
not [6, 28, 59, 76]. However, such training strategies require dense pixel-level annotations, which are expensive to
obtain and thus prevent their abilities to scale. In this pa* Work done during author was in Facebook AI.

(a) Near-Duplicate Retrieval

Eiffel
Tower

(b) Instance Retrieval

(c-1) Spliced Image Retrieval

(c-2)

Figure 1. Three different types of image retrieval tasks. (a) The
traditional image retrieval algorithm tries to retrieve near-duplicate
images using low-level image statistics. (b) Instance retrieval tries
to retrieve the same instance (e.g. building) under different viewpoint, illumination, and occlusion. (c) Spliced image retrieval
(SIR) tries to retrieve authentic images used to create the spliced
query image. Results from SIR contain images with large variation, so it is difficult to learn a single embedding that is suitable
for the SIR task.

per, we formulate splicing detection as an image retrieval
task: given a spliced query image and a large-scale image
database, our goal is to retrieve images in the database that
are authentic versions of the query image. We describe this
as Spliced Image Retrieval (SIR) problem. Once the original images are retrieved, we can then localize the spliced
regions in these images by comparing the query and the retrieved images.
In contrast to traditional image retrieval which usually
focuses on retrieving near-duplicate images or images containing specific instances, SIR focuses on retrieving authentic images that were used to create the query. Figure 1 shows examples of near-duplicate retrieval, instance
retrieval, and SIR. As shown in the figure, SIR faces a
different set of challenges compared to near duplicate or
instance retrieval task. First, the query image may con-

14965

