Residential floor plan recognition and reconstruction
Xiaolei Lv, Shengchu Zhao, Xinyang Yu, Binqiang Zhao
Alibaba Group
{yanjun.lxl, shengchu.sc, xinyang.yu, binqiang.zhao}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Recognition and reconstruction of residential floor plan
drawings are important and challenging in design, decoration, and architectural remodeling fields. An automatic
framework is provided that accurately recognizes the structure, type, and size of the room, and outputs vectorized 3D
reconstruction results. Deep segmentation and detection
neural networks are utilized to extract room structural information. Key points detection network and cluster analysis are utilized to calculate scales of rooms. The vectorization of room information is processed through an iterative optimization-based method. The system significantly increases accuracy and generalization ability, compared with
existing methods. It outperforms other systems in floor plan
segmentation and vectorization process, especially inclined
wall detection.

1. Introduction
Architectural floor plans, scaled drawings of apartments
and building spaces, are utilized to assist users to decorate rooms, design furniture layout and remodel indoor
spaces [14, 22]. Floor plan images, created by specific
professional designers and architects, are rendered from
vector-graphics representation, generated by AutoCAD [1],
Sketchup [7] and HomeStyler [3]. However, after the above
rasterization process, designers cannot modify the structure
of the room and redesign flexibly. Therefore, accurately
recovering vectorized information from pixel images becomes an urgent problem to be solved.
The above-mentioned problems have existed for
decades. The generalization ability of traditional methods is
weak, the whole process is difficult to automate, and a large
amount of manual participation is required. The recognition of floor plans needs to consider various information
as shown in Figure 1, such as room structure, type, symbols, text and scale. In recent years, with the rapid development of deep learning technology, related methods have
made great progress in generalization. However, it is still a
challenging problem to organically integrate various infor-

Figure 1. Pixel (top) and vector (bottom) floor plan image. The
pixel floor plan image (top) contains various information, such as
room structural elements (magenta), text (blue), symbols (cyan),
scales (yellow). The original image comes from HomeStyler [3].

mation and perform accurate vector reconstruction of the
actual physical size.
A novel floor plan recognition and reconstruction system, based on deep learning, is proposed, which combines
the multi-modal information of floor plan images, such as
room structure, type, symbols, text and scale. The system
significantly outperforms existing methods, as shown in Table 1. Furthermore, we propose a dataset containing 7000
annotated images of residential apartments.
Our approach to residential floor plan recognition and
reconstruction includes a number of technical contributions:
• An automatic framework for residential floor plan
recognition and reconstruction that accurately recognizes the structure, type, and size of the room, and outputs vectorized 3D reconstruction results.
• An iterative optimization-based vectorization method
for floor plan images that can accurately extract horizontal, vertical and inclined walls.
• A systematic method for recognizing the scale of floor
plan images that can assist the 3D reconstruction of
real physical size.
• The largest residential floor plan image dataset with

16717

