Multi-View Multi-Person 3D Pose Estimation with Plane Sweep Stereo
Jiahao Lin
Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{jiahao, gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract
Existing approaches for multi-view multi-person 3D
pose estimation explicitly establish cross-view correspondences to group 2D pose detections from multiple camera
views and solve for the 3D pose estimation for each person. Establishing cross-view correspondences is challenging in multi-person scenes, and incorrect correspondences
will lead to sub-optimal performance for the multi-stage
pipeline. In this work, we present our multi-view 3D pose
estimation approach based on plane sweep stereo to jointly
address the cross-view fusion and 3D pose reconstruction
in a single shot. Specifically, we propose to perform depth
regression for each joint of each 2D pose in a target camera view. Cross-view consistency constraints are implicitly enforced by multiple reference camera views via the
plane sweep algorithm to facilitate accurate depth regression. We adopt a coarse-to-fine scheme to first regress the
person-level depth followed by a per-person joint-level relative depth estimation. 3D poses are obtained from a simple back-projection given the estimated depths. We evaluate
our approach on benchmark datasets where it outperforms
previous state-of-the-arts while being remarkably efficient.
Our code is available at the project website. 1

1. Introduction
3D human pose estimation has been an active research
area in the field of computer vision due to its large number
of real-world applications such as human-computer interaction, virtual and augmented reality, camera surveillance,
etc. However, 3D human pose estimation for multiple persons from monocular images is an ill-posed and challenging
problem due to both the loss of depth information and severe occlusions under a single camera viewpoint. On the
other hand, multi-view images captured by multiple cameras provide complementary information of the scene that
can be used to effectively alleviate projective ambiguities.
Unlike its multi-view single person [15, 16, 20, 21, 26]
1 https://github.com/jiahaoLjh/PlaneSweepPose

Reference View 1

Back Projection

Reference View 2

Projection

Figure 1: Our method is based on plane sweep stereo to
regress depths for 2D pose detections. 2D poses are backprojected to successive depth planes and warped to reference views for consistency measurement which is utilized
for depth regression.

counterpart, the fusion of information from multi-view images with multiple persons is more challenging since the
identity of the 2D poses from each camera view is unknown.
Previous works such as [5, 7, 11] address this problem in
three steps. The 2D poses are first estimated for each camera view independently. Subsequently, the 2D poses from
different views that correspond to the same person are identified and grouped together. Finally, the 3D pose of each
person is estimated with triangulation or optimization-based
pictorial structure models using the set of grouped 2D pose
detections from multiple views.
The establishment of cross-view correspondences is critical for multi-view multi-person 3D pose estimation. Traditional methods use either greedy matching approach [11]
for fast inference speed, or optimization-based approach
[5, 7, 8] for better global consistency. Recently, VoxelPose [25] is proposed to jointly solve the challenging crossview matching and 3D pose estimation problems in an
object-detection paradigm. Instead of explicitly searching for 2D pose correspondences, VoxelPose projects the
2D pose heatmaps from multiple views to a common 3D

11886

