Self-Supervised Visibility Learning for Novel View Synthesis
Yujiao Shi 1 , Hongdong Li 1 , Xin Yu 2
1
Australian National University and ACRV 2 University of Technology Sydney
yujiao.shi@anu.edu.au, hongdong.li@anu.edu.au, xin.yu@uts.edu.au

Figure 1: Given a few sparse and unstructured input multi-view images, our goal is to synthesize a novel view from a given target camera pose. Our
method estimates target-view depth and source-view visibility in an end-to-end self-supervised manner. Compared with the previous state-of-the-art, such
as Choi et al. [4] and Riegler and Koltun [24], our method produces superior novel view images of higher quality and with finer details, better conform to
the ground-truth.

Abstract
We address the problem of novel view synthesis (NVS)
from a few sparse source view images. Conventional imagebased rendering methods estimate scene geometry and synthesize novel views in two separate steps. However, erroneous geometry estimation will decrease NVS performance
as view synthesis highly depends on the quality of estimated
scene geometry. In this paper, we propose an end-to-end
NVS framework to eliminate the error propagation issue.
To be specific, we construct a volume under the target view
and design a source-view visibility estimation (SVE) module
to determine the visibility of the target-view voxels in each
source view. Next, we aggregate the visibility of all source
views to achieve a consensus volume. Each voxel in the
consensus volume indicates a surface existence probability.
Then, we present a soft ray-casting (SRC) mechanism to find
the most front surface in the target view (i.e., depth). Specifically, our SRC traverses the consensus volume along viewing rays and then estimates a depth probability distribution.
We then warp and aggregate source view pixels to synthesize a novel view based on the estimated source-view visi-

bility and target-view depth. At last, our network is trained
in an end-to-end self-supervised fashion, thus significantly
alleviating error accumulation in view synthesis. Experimental results demonstrate that our method generates novel
views in higher quality compared to the state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Suppose after taking a few snapshots of a famous sculpture, we wish to look at the sculpture from some other different viewpoints. This task would require us to generate
novel-view images from the captured ones and is generally
referred to as “NVS”. However, compared with previous solutions, our setting is more challenging, because the number of available real views is very limited, and the underlying 3D geometry is not available. Moreover, the occlusion
along target viewing rays and the visibility of target pixels
in source views are hard to infer.
Conventional image-based rendering (IBR) methods [4,
24, 10, 42, 23] first reconstruct a proxy geometry by a multiview stereo (MVS) algorithm [12, 47, 48, 46]. They then
aggregate source views to generate the new view according

9675

