UC2 : Universal Cross-lingual Cross-modal Vision-and-Language Pre-training
Mingyang Zhou1 , Luowei Zhou2 , Shuohang Wang2 , Yu Cheng2 , Linjie Li2 , Zhou Yu1 , Jingjing Liu2
1
University of California, Davis
2
Microsoft Dynamics 365 AI Research
{minzhou, joyu}@ucdavis.edu
{luozhou, shuowa, yu.cheng, lindsey.li, jingjl}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Vision-and-language pre-training has achieved impressive success in learning multimodal representations between vision and language. To generalize this success to
non-English languages, we introduce UC2 , the first machine translation-augmented framework for cross-lingual
cross-modal representation learning. To tackle the scarcity
problem of multilingual captions for image datasets, we
first augment existing English-only datasets with other languages via machine translation (MT). Then we extend
the standard Masked Language Modeling and Image-Text
Matching training objectives to multilingual setting, where
alignment between different languages is captured through
shared visual context (i.e., using image as pivot). To facilitate the learning of a joint embedding space of images
and all languages of interest, we further propose two novel
pre-training tasks, namely Masked Region-to-Token Modeling (MRTM) and Visual Translation Language Modeling
(VTLM), leveraging MT-enhanced translated data. Evaluation on multilingual image-text retrieval and multilingual
visual question answering benchmarks demonstrates that
our proposed framework achieves new state of the art on
diverse non-English benchmarks while maintaining comparable performance to monolingual pre-trained models on
English tasks.

1. Introduction
The world we navigate through is a multimodal and multilingual kaleidoscope. While tremendous success has been
realized in multimodal research with the advent of visionand-language (V+L) pre-training [10, 35, 36, 45, 26], the
majority of current literature is biased towards English. Although English-trained V+L models can be finetuned on
each target language (given that there is sufficient languagespecific data in downstream task), maintaining languagespecific models for every language in the world (6,900+)
is impossible given insurmountable development and main-

Figure 1. A topology comparison between existing work (M3P)
and our proposed UC2 . M3P combines two types of pre-training
tasks and the cross-modal Transformer works only on images and
English captions. Our UC2 builds a cross-lingual cross-modal
Transformer over images and all the other languages.

tenance cost [23]. Naturally, a “Tower of Babel” strategy
starts to gain interest in the community, aiming at building one giant model that can handle all languages, notable
examples including massively multilingual neural machine
translation [1], cross-lingual language model [32], and multilingual multimodal representation learning [18, 24].
Early works on cross-lingual multimodal tasks mainly
focus on machine translation [22, 55, 6, 50, 2] and imagetext retrieval [18, 28, 5, 19, 49]. The goal is to construct a
common embedding space for vision and cross-lingual inputs, and draw visual concepts from images and similar semantics from languages close together in the feature space.
However, due to the scarcity of large-scale training corpora, these models are validated only on small task-specific
datasets, thus scaling and generalizing these models to more
languages is non-trivial.
Recent release of large-scale multimodal datasets [41]
and multilingual corpora (e.g. Wikipedia in 100 languages)
has served as a key impetus to accelerate fast advances in
V+L pre-training [10, 36, 45, 54] and multilingual language
modeling [12, 11, 23], which makes pre-training large-scale
multilingual V+L models possible. A pioneering work is
M3 P [24], which formulates the training process as alternating V+L pre-training between cross-modal monolingual

4155

