Sequential Graph Convolutional Network for Active Learning
Razvan Caramalau1 , Binod Bhattarai1 and Tae-Kyun Kim1,2
1
Imperial College London, UK
2
KAIST, South Korea
{ r.caramalau18, b.bhattarai, tk.kim}@imperial.ac.uk

Labelled/unlabelled images

Abstract
We propose a novel pool-based Active Learning framework constructed on a sequential Graph Convolution Network (GCN). Each images feature from a pool of data represents a node in the graph and the edges encode their similarities. With a small number of randomly sampled images as seed labelled examples, we learn the parameters
of the graph to distinguish labelled vs unlabelled nodes by
minimising the binary cross-entropy loss. GCN performs
message-passing operations between the nodes, and hence,
induces similar representations of the strongly associated
nodes. We exploit these characteristics of GCN to select the
unlabelled examples which are sufficiently different from labelled ones. To this end, we utilise the graph node embeddings and their confidence scores and adapt sampling techniques such as CoreSet and uncertainty-based methods to
query the nodes. We flip the label of newly queried nodes
from unlabelled to labelled, re-train the learner to optimise
the downstream task and the graph to minimise its modified objective. We continue this process within a fixed budget. We evaluate our method on 6 different benchmarks:
4 real image classification, 1 depth-based hand pose estimation and 1 synthetic RGB image classification datasets.
Our method outperforms several competitive baselines such
as VAAL, Learning Loss, CoreSet and attains the new stateof-the-art performance on multiple applications.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has shown great advancements in several
computer vision tasks such as image classification [15, 22]
and 3D Hand Pose Estimation (HPE) [26, 41, 25]. This has
been possible due to the availability of both the powerful
computing infrastructure and the large-scale datasets. Data
annotation is a time-consuming task, needs experts and is
also expensive. This gets even more challenging to some
of the specific domains such as robotics or medical image
analysis. Moreover, while optimizing deep neural network
architectures, a gap is present concerning the representative-

Sequential GCN
Active Learning
Annotate
new sample

Inference

Phase I

Oracle
Phase V

Learner

Unlabelled
features

Phase II

Train

Query sample

Labelled
features

;

Adjacency matrix

Phase IV

GCN
Layer
Phase III

Uncertainty sampling

0.21

0.9

0.93

0.11

0.88

0.89

Unlabelled/labelled
confidence

Figure 1: The diagram outlines the proposed pipeline.
Phase I: Train the learner to minimise the objective of
downstream task from the available annotations, Phase II:
Construct a graph with the representations of images extracted from the learner as vertices and their similarities as
edges, Phase III: Apply GCN layers to minimise binary
cross-entropy between labelled and unlabelled, Phase IV:
Apply uncertainty sampling to select unlabelled examples
to query their labels, Phase V: Annotate the selection, populate the number of labelled examples and repeat the cycle.

ness of the data [4]. To overcome these issues, active learning [10, 20] has been successfully deployed to efficiently
select the most meaningful samples.
Essentially, there are three distinct components in any
Active Learning (AL) framework. These components are
learner, sampler, and annotator. In brief, a learner is a
model trained to minimize the objective of the target task.
The sampler is designed to select the representative unlabelled examples within a fixed budget to deliver the highest
performance. Finally, an annotator labels the queried data
for learner re-training. Based on the relationship between
learner and sampler, AL frameworks can be categorised into
two major groups: task-dependent and task-agnostic. Taskdependents are the ones where the sampler is specially designed for a specific task of the learner. Majority of the
previous works in active learning [8, 10, 1, 38, 6, 11] are

9583

