Shelf-Supervised Mesh Prediction in the Wild
Yufei Ye1
Shubham Tulsiani2
Abhinav Gupta12
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Facebook AI Research
yufeiy2@cs.cmu.edu

{shubhtuls,gabhinav}@fb.com

https://judyye.github.io/ShSMesh/

Figure 1. Given a single image, we predict a mesh with textures (rendered from the predicted view and a novel view). The models can learn
directly from collections of images with only foreground masks, without supervision of mesh templates, multi-view association, camera
poses, semantic annotations, etc.

Abstract
We aim to infer 3D shape and pose of object from a
single image and propose a learning-based approach that
can train from unstructured image collections, supervised
by only segmentation outputs from off-the-shelf recognition
systems (i.e. ‘shelf-supervised’). We first infer a volumetric
representation in a canonical frame, along with the camera pose. We enforce the representation geometrically consistent with both appearance and masks, and also that the
synthesized novel views are indistinguishable from image
collections. The coarse volumetric prediction is then converted to a mesh-based representation, which is further refined in the predicted camera frame. These two steps allow
both shape-pose factorization from image collections and
per-instance reconstruction in finer details. We examine the
method on both synthetic and the real-world datasets and
demonstrate its scalability on 50 categories in the wild, an
order of magnitude more classes than existing works.

1. Introduction
We live in a 3D world where 3D understanding plays a
crucial role in our visual perception. Yet most computer
vision systems in the wild still perform 2D semantic recognition (classification/detection). Why is that? We believe
the key reason is the lack of 3D supervision in the wild.
Most recent advances in 2D recognition have come from
supervised learning but unlike 2D semantic tasks, obtaining
supervision for 3D understanding is still not scalable.
While some recent approaches [10, 49] have attempted
to build supervised 3D counterpart of 2D approaches, the
concerns about scalability still remain. Instead, a more
promising direction is to learn models of single image 3D
reconstruction by minimizing the amount of manual supervision needed. Early approaches in this direction focused
on using multi-view supervision [48, 53]. However, obtaining multiple views of the same objects/scene is still
not easy for the data in the wild. Therefore, recent ap-

8843

