Few-Shot Transformation of Common Actions into Time and Space
Pengwan Yang, Pascal Mettes, Cees G. M. Snoek
University of Amsterdam

Trimmed support videos

Abstract
This paper introduces the task of few-shot common action localization in time and space. Given a few trimmed
support videos containing the same but unknown action, we
strive for spatio-temporal localization of that action in a
long untrimmed query video. We do not require any class
labels, interval bounds, or bounding boxes. To address this
challenging task, we introduce a novel few-shot transformer
architecture with a dedicated encoder-decoder structure optimized for joint commonality learning and localization prediction, without the need for proposals. Experiments on reorganizations of the AVA and UCF101-24 datasets show the
effectiveness of our approach for few-shot common action localization, even when the support videos are noisy. Although
we are not specifically designed for common localization
in time only, we also compare favorably against the fewshot and one-shot state-of-the-art in this setting. Lastly, we
demonstrate that the few-shot transformer is easily extended
to common action localization per pixel.

1. Introduction
The goal of this paper is to localize an action in video
time and space, without the need for class labels, interval
bounds or box annotations. Class-agnostic action proposals, for either temporal, e.g. [13, 25, 32] or spatio-temporal,
e.g., [18, 48, 50] action localization, have the same goal.
However, to be effective they need to generate many proposals and a secondary supervised step to find the best fitting
one. To avoid the need for extensive supervision, Feng et
al. [7] introduced one-shot localization of actions in time
and space. They rely on proposals as well, but rather than using class supervision, a matching model between a trimmed
support video and a long untrimmed video determines the
best proposal. In similar spirit, Yang et al. [45] introduced
common action localization in time. Given a few trimmed
support videos containing the same (unknown) action, they
are able to localize with the aid of proposals an action in
a long untrimmed video. Their setup also avoids the need
for temporal and class annotations. In this work, we extend
upon both [7] and [45] and propose the new task of few-shot

Few-shot transformer

Untrimmed query video

Figure 1: Few-shot common action localization in time
and space. Given a few trimmed support videos sharing a
common action, our proposed few-shot transformer is able to
localize the spatio-temporal tubelet of the common action in
a long untrimmed query video, without requiring the action
class label, or any temporal or spatial annotations.

common action localization in time and space. Our approach
does not require any box annotations or class labels to obtain
the spatio-temporal localization, and neither do we need proposals as in [7, 45]. All we require are a handful of trimmed
videos showing a common unnamed action, see Figure 1.
Our approach to few-shot common action localization is
inspired by the success of transformers [1] in object detection as demonstrated by Carion et al. [3]. Their approach
eliminates the need for proposals and the accompanying
hand-crafted components, while maintaining competitive
performance. Such a proposal-free method avoids the needlein-the-haystack problem with proposals in object detection,
a problem which is even more severe in spatio-temporal
action localization. Further, they exploit the versatile and
powerful relation modeling capability of transformers. This
is naturally suitable for common action localization as well,
where the core challenge is to model the commonality between the few support videos and the single query video. To
that end, we propose a transformer with an encoder-decoder
structure that is adapted for our task of few-shot common
action localization in time and space.

16031

