VarifocalNet: An IoU-aware Dense Object Detector
Haoyang Zhang1 , Ying Wang2 , Feras Dayoub1 , Niko Sünderhauf1
1
Australian Centre for Robotic Vision, Queensland University of Technology
2
University of Queensland
{h202.zhang, feras.dayoub, niko.suenderhauf}@qut.edu.au, ying.wang@uq.edu.au

Abstract
Accurately ranking the vast number of candidate detections is crucial for dense object detectors to achieve high
performance. Prior work uses the classification score or
a combination of classification and predicted localization
scores to rank candidates. However, neither option results in a reliable ranking, thus degrading detection performance. In this paper, we propose to learn an Iou-Aware
Classification Score (IACS) as a joint representation of object presence confidence and localization accuracy. We
show that dense object detectors can achieve a more accurate ranking of candidate detections based on the IACS. We
design a new loss function, named Varifocal Loss, to train
a dense object detector to predict the IACS, and propose
a new star-shaped bounding box feature representation for
IACS prediction and bounding box refinement. Combining
these two new components and a bounding box refinement
branch, we build an IoU-aware dense object detector based
on the FCOS+ATSS architecture, that we call VarifocalNet
or VFNet for short. Extensive experiments on MS COCO
show that our VFNet consistently surpasses the strong baseline by ∼2.0 AP with different backbones. Our best model
VFNet-X-1200 with Res2Net-101-DCN achieves a singlemodel single-scale AP of 55.1 on COCO test-dev, which
is state-of-the-art among various object detectors. Code is
available at: https://github.com/hyz-xmaster/VarifocalNet.

1. Introduction
Modern object detectors, regardless of being a two-stage
method [1–4] or a one-stage method [5–9], usually first
generate a redundant set of bounding boxes with classification scores and then deploy non-maximum suppression
(NMS) to remove duplicated bounding boxes on the same
object. Generally, the classification score is used to rank the
bounding box in NMS [1–4,8]. However, this harms the detection performance, because the classification score is not
always a good estimate of the bounding box localization
accuracy [10] and accurately localized detections with low

Figure 1: An illustration of our method. Instead of learning
to predict the class label (a) for a bounding box, we learn the
IoU-aware classification score (IACS) as its detection score
which merges the object presence confidence and localization accuracy (b). We propose a varifocal loss for training a dense object detector to predict the IACS, and a starshaped bounding box feature representation (the features at
nine yellow sampling points) for IACS prediction. With the
new representation, we refine the initially regressed box (in
red) into a more accurate one (in blue).
classification scores may be mistakenly removed in NMS.
To solve the problem, existing dense object detectors
predict either an additional IoU score [11] or a centerness
score [9] as the localization accuracy estimation, and multiply them by the classification score to rank detections in
NMS. These methods can alleviate the misalignment problem between the classification score and the object localization accuracy. However, they are sub-optimal, because multiplying the two imperfect predictions may lead to a worse
rank basis and we show in Section 3 that the upper bound of
the performance achieved by such methods is limited. Besides, adding an extra network branch to predict the localization score is not an elegant solution and incurs additional
computation burden.

8514

