Scene-Intuitive Agent for Remote Embodied Visual Grounding
Xiangru Lin1
1

Guanbin Li2∗

Yizhou Yu1,3

2
3
The University of Hong Kong
Sun Yat-sen University
Deepwise AI Lab
xrlin2@cs.hku.hk, liguanbin@mail.sysu.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
Humans learn from life events to form intuitions towards the understanding of visual environments and languages.
Envision that you are instructed by a high-level instruction,
“Go to the bathroom in the master bedroom and replace the
blue towel on the left wall”, what would you possibly do
to carry out the task? Intuitively, we comprehend the semantics of the instruction to form an overview of where a
bathroom is and what a blue towel is in mind; then, we
navigate to the target location by consistently matching the
bathroom appearance in mind with the current scene. In
this paper, we present an agent that mimics such human
behaviors. Specifically, we focus on the Remote Embodied Visual Referring Expression in Real Indoor Environments task, called REVERIE, where an agent is asked to
correctly localize a remote target object specified by a concise high-level natural language instruction, and propose
a two-stage training pipeline. In the first stage, we pretrain the agent with two cross-modal alignment sub-tasks,
namely the Scene Grounding task and the Object Grounding
task. The agent learns where to stop in the Scene Grounding task and what to attend to in the Object Grounding
task respectively. Then, to generate action sequences, we
propose a memory-augmented attentive action decoder to
smoothly fuse the pre-trained vision and language representations with the agent’s past memory experiences. Without bells and whistles, experimental results show that our
method outperforms previous state-of-the-art(SOTA) significantly, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Vision and Language tasks, such as Vision-and-Language
Navigation (VLN) [2], Visual Question Answering
∗ Corresponding author is Guanbin Li. This work was supported in
part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China
(No.2020YFC2003902), in part by the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under Grant No.2020B1515020048, in part by the
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No.61976250
and No.U1811463. This work was also sponsored by CCF-Tencent Open
Research Fund.

(VQA) [3, 4] and Referring Expression Comprehension
(REF) [17, 40, 39] etc., have been extensively studied in the
wave of deep neural networks. In particular, VLN [2, 5] is a
challenging task that combines both natural language understanding and visual navigation. Recent works have shown
promising performance and progress. They mainly focus on
designing agents capable of grounding fine-grained natural
language instructions, where detailed information is provided, to find where to stop, for example “Leave the bedroom
and take a left. Take a left down the hallway and walk straight into the bathroom at the end of the hall. Stop in
front of the sink” [10, 23, 37, 36, 34, 18]. However, a practical issue is that fine-grained natural language instructions
are not always available in real life and human-machine interactions are mostly based on high-level instructions such
as “Go to the bathroom at the end of the hallway”. In other words, designing an agent that could perform high-level
natural language interpretation and infer the probable target
location using knowledge of the environments is of more
practical use.
In this paper, we focus on the REVERIE task [30] which
is an example of the above mentioned high-level instruction task. Here, we briefly introduce the settings. Given a
high-level instruction that refers to a remote target object at
a target location within a building, a robot agent spawns at
a starting location in the same building and tries to navigate
closer to the object. The output of the task is a bounding box
encompassing the target object. The success of the task is
evaluated based on explicit object grounding at the correct target location. A straightforward solution is to integrate
SOTA navigation model with SOTA object grounding model. This strategy has proven to be inefficient in [30] and
instead, they proposed an interactive module to enable the
navigation model to work together with the object grounding model. Although the performance is improved, we observe that such method has a key weakness: it is unreasonable to discern high-level instruction by directly borrowing
the fine-grained instruction navigation model that consists
of simple trainable language attention mechanism based on
the fact that the perception of high-level instruction primarily depends on commonsense knowledge prior as well as
past experiences in memory. Therefore, the overall design

7036

