Instant-Teaching: An End-to-End Semi-Supervised
Object Detection Framework
Qiang Zhou,

Chaohui Yu, Zhibin Wang, Qi Qian, Hao Li
Alibaba Group
{jianchong.zq, huakun.ych, zhibin.waz, qi.qian, lihao.lh}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract
Supervised learning based object detection frameworks
demand plenty of laborious manual annotations, which may
not be practical in real applications. Semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) can effectively leverage unlabeled
data to improve the model performance, which is of great
significance for the application of object detection models. In this paper, we revisit SSOD and propose InstantTeaching, a completely end-to-end and effective SSOD
framework, which uses instant pseudo labeling with extended weak-strong data augmentations for teaching during
each training iteration. To alleviate the confirmation bias
problem and improve the quality of pseudo annotations,
we further propose a co-rectify scheme based on InstantTeaching, denoted as Instant-Teaching∗ . Extensive experiments on both MS-COCO and PASCAL VOC datasets substantiate the superiority of our framework. Specifically, our
method surpasses state-of-the-art methods by 4.2 mAP on
MS-COCO when using 2% labeled data. Even with full supervised information of MS-COCO, the proposed method
still outperforms state-of-the-art methods by about 1.0 mAP.
On PASCAL VOC, we can achieve more than 5 mAP improvement by applying VOC07 as labeled data and VOC12
as unlabeled data.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks [24, 43, 19] have significantly improved the performance of diverse computer vision applications, e.g., image classification and object detection. In
order to avoid overfitting and achieve better performance, a
large amount of accurate human-annotated data is needed
to train a deep learning model. However, the assumption
of having a sufficient amount of accurate labeled data for
training may not hold, especially for object detection tasks,
which need annotations with accurate class labels and precise bounding box coordinates. Thus, a natural idea is to
leverage abundant unlabeled data to facilitate learning in the

original task. To relax the dependency of manually labeled
data, a promising approach is called semi-supervised learning (SSL) [8].
SSL has recently received increasing attention from the
community, since it provides effective methods of using unlabeled data to facilitate model learning with limited annotated data. Most of the existing SSL methods focus
on image classification tasks and there are multiple strategies for semi-supervised learning, e.g., self-training [42, 52]
and co-training [5, 35]. Recently, one popular line of research uses consistency losses for semi-supervised learning [27, 37, 25, 48, 34, 41, 49, 51, 4, 3, 44]. They either
adopt ensemble learning algorithms to enforce the predictions of the unlabeled data to be consistent across multiple models, or constrain the model predictions to be invariant to noise. Another popular line of SSL research focuses on more effective data augmentations to improve the
generalization and robustness of the model, in which some
learning-based and more complex data augmentation strategies [3, 51, 10, 4, 44] greatly improve the performance of
SSL on image classification tasks.
Although semi-supervised learning has made great
progress in the field of image classification, there is a
paucity of literature focus on semi-supervised object detection (SSOD). The recently proposed STAC [45] performs
best among existing SSOD methods and outperforms the
supervised model by a large margin, which is of great significance to the research of SSOD. However, we find that
STAC still has some problems. First, its training procedure is complicated and inefficient. Before model training, STAC needs to train a teacher model, and then it uses
the teacher model to pre-generate pseudo annotations of
unlabeled data. Second, during model training, the pregenerated pseudo annotations will no longer be updated,
and the constant label will limit its performance. In this paper, to address the above two problems, we propose a novel
end-to-end SSOD framework, Instant-Teaching, which uses
instant pseudo labeling with extended weak-strong data
augmentations for teaching during each training iteration.
Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1, during each training iter-

4081

