Task Programming: Learning Data Efficient Behavior Representations
Jennifer J. Sun1

Ann Kennedy2
1

Caltech

Eric Zhan1
2

David J. Anderson1

Yisong Yue1

Pietro Perona1

Northwestern University

Code & Project Website: https://sites.google.com/view/task-programming

Abstract
Specialized domain knowledge is often necessary to accurately annotate training sets for in-depth analysis, but
can be burdensome and time-consuming to acquire from domain experts. This issue arises prominently in automated
behavior analysis, in which agent movements or actions of
interest are detected from video tracking data. To reduce
annotation effort, we present TREBA: a method to learn
annotation-sample efficient trajectory embedding for behavior analysis, based on multi-task Base Classiﬁer
self-supervised learn80k annotations
ing. The tasks in our method can be efficiently engineered
by domain experts through a process we call “task programBase Classiﬁer
ming”, which uses programs to explicitly encode
structured
80k annotations
Classiﬁer A
knowledge from domain experts. Total domain781k
expert
effort
annotations
Classiﬁer B
can be reduced by exchanging data annotation80ktime
for
the
annotations +
10 programs
construction of a small number of programmed tasks.
We
evaluate this trade-off using data from behavioral neuroscience, in which specialized domain knowledge is used to
identify behaviors. We present experimental results in three
datasets across two domains: mice and fruit flies. Using
embeddings from TREBA, we reduce annotation burden by
up to a factor of 10 without compromising accuracy compared to state-of-the-art features. Our results thus suggest
that task programming and self-supervision can be an effective way to reduce annotation effort for domain experts.

1. Introduction
Behavioral analysis of one or more agents is a core element in diverse fields of research, including biology [36,
26], autonomous driving [6, 39], sports analytics [42, 43],
and video games [20, 3]. In a typical experimental workflow, the location and pose of agents is first extracted
from each frame of a behavior video, and then labels for
experimenter-defined behaviors of interest are applied on a
frame-by-frame basis based on the pose and movements of
the agents. In addition to reducing human effort, automated
quantification of behavior can lead to more objective, preCorrespondence to jjsun@caltech.edu.

1. Record videos and extract tracking data.

2. Apply behavior classiﬁer for scalability.
Human Annotation
Base Classiﬁer
80k annotations
Classiﬁer A
781k annotations
Classiﬁer B
80k annotations +
10 programs

Classiﬁer
B
+10
programs
+701k
annotations Classiﬁer
Base
Classiﬁer
A

Figure 1. Overview of our approach. Part 1: A typical behavior
study starts with extraction of tracking data from videos. We show
7 keypoints for each mouse, and draw the trajectory of the nose
keypoint. Part 2: Domain experts can either do data annotation
(Classifier A) or task programming (Classifier B) to reduce classifier error. The middle panel shows annotated frames at 30Hz. Colors in the bottom plot represent interpolated performance based on
classifier error at the circular markers (full results in Section 4.3).
The size of the marker represents the error variance.

cise, and scalable measurements compared to manual annotation [1, 10]. However, training behavior detection models
can be data intensive and manual behavior annotation often
requires specialized domain knowledge and high-frequency
temporal labels. As a result, this process of generating training datasets is time-consuming and effort-intensive for experts. Therefore, methods to reduce annotation effort by
domain experts are needed to accelerate behavioral studies.
We study alternative ways for domain experts to improve

2876

