Generating Manga from Illustrations via Mimicking Manga Creation Workflow
Lvmin Zhang
Soochow University / Style2Paints Research
China

Xinrui Wang
The University of Tokyo / Tencent
China

lvminzhang@acm.org

secret wang@outlook.com

Qingnan Fan
Stanford University
United States

Yi Ji
Soochow University
China

Chunping Liu
Soochow University
China

fqnchina@gmail.com

jiyi@suda.edu.cn

cpliu@suda.edu.cn

Abstract
We present a framework to generate manga from digital
illustrations. In professional mange studios, the manga create workflow consists of three key steps: (1) Artists use line
drawings to delineate the structural outlines in manga storyboards. (2) Artists apply several types of regular screentones
to render the shading, occlusion, and object materials. (3)
Artists selectively paste irregular screen textures onto the
canvas to achieve various background layouts or special effects. Motivated by this workflow, we propose a data-driven
framework to convert a digital illustration into three corresponding components: manga line drawing, regular screentone, and irregular screen texture. These components can
be directly composed into manga images and can be further
retouched for more plentiful manga creations. To this end,
we create a large-scale dataset with these three components
annotated by artists in a human-in-the-loop manner. We conduct both perceptual user study and qualitative evaluation of
the generated manga, and observe that our generated image
layers for these three components are practically usable in
the daily works of manga artists. We provide 60 qualitative
results and 15 additional comparisons in the supplementary material. We will make our presented manga dataset
publicly available to assist related applications.

1. Introduction
Generating manga from illustrations (Fig. 1-left) is an
important task in high demand. The expansion of manga
market and the rarity of manga artist have caused many
manga companies to recruit a large number of digital painting or illustration artists and train them as manga creators.
Training an artist to master the unique manga workflow, e.g.,
inking strategy, screentone management, texture applying,

Figure 1. Our framework automatically generate the right highquality manga given the left illustration. Zoom in to see details.

etc., is financially expensive and can often take weeks or
even months. To reduce such training costs and speed up
the producing, many manga companies have began to adopt
techniques that generate manga from generic art forms like
illustrations and digital paintings, so that the costs to train
artists can be saved, and those newly hired digital illustration
artists can be free from learning extra skills and can create
manga directly in their familiar digital illustration working
environments. The software Clip Studio Paints (CSP) [6]
and Adobe After Effects (AE) [1] are typical examples with
many plugins and online tutorials [10, 11, 7, 9, 8] for editing
illustrations to obtain manga manually. The widespread popularity of those tutorials and plugins verifies the significance
of the problem to generate manga from illustrations.
This paper starts with a key observation: the unique visual
appearance of manga comes from the unique manga creation
workflow. As shown in Fig. 2, we verify this observation

5642

