Your “Flamingo” is My “Bird”: Fine-Grained, or Not
Dongliang Chang1 , Kaiyue Pang2 , Yixiao Zheng1 , Zhanyu Ma1∗ , Yi-Zhe Song2 , and Jun Guo1
1
The Pattern Recognition and Intelligent System Laboratory, School of Artificial Intelligence,
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China
2
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom
1
{changdongliang,zhengyixiao,mazhanyu,guojun}@bupt.edu.cn
2
{kaiyue.pang,y.song}@surrey.ac.uk
Abstract

1. Introduction
Fine-grained visual classification (FGVC) was first introduced to the vision community almost two decades ago
* indicates corresponding author.

Phoenicopteri
-formes

Me
Bird

Third person

√
Phoenicopteri
-dae

Phoenicopteridae

You

From coarse to fine

Bird

Whether what you see in Figure 1 is a “flamingo” or a
“bird”, is the question we ask in this paper. While finegrained visual classification (FGVC) strives to arrive at
the former, for the majority of us non-experts just “bird”
would probably suffice. The real question is therefore –
how can we tailor for different fine-grained definitions under divergent levels of expertise. For that, we re-envisage
the traditional setting of FGVC, from single-label classification, to that of top-down traversal of a pre-defined
coarse-to-fine label hierarchy – so that our answer becomes
“bird” ⇒ “Phoenicopteriformes” ⇒ “Phoenicopteridae”
⇒ “flamingo”.
To approach this new problem, we first conduct a comprehensive human study where we confirm that most participants prefer multi-granularity labels, regardless whether
they consider themselves experts. We then discover the
key intuition that: coarse-level label prediction exacerbates
fine-grained feature learning, yet fine-level feature betters
the learning of coarse-level classifier. This discovery enables us to design a very simple albeit surprisingly effective
solution to our new problem, where we (i) leverage levelspecific classification heads to disentangle coarse-level features with fine-grained ones, and (ii) allow finer-grained
features to participate in coarser-grained label predictions,
which in turn helps with better disentanglement. Experiments show that our method achieves superior performance
in the new FGVC setting, and performs better than stateof-the-art on the traditional single-label FGVC problem as
well. Thanks to its simplicity, our method can be easily implemented on top of any existing FGVC frameworks and is
parameter-free.

Flamingo

Flamingo

Figure 1: Definition of what is fine-grained is subjective.
Your “flamingo” is my “bird”.
with the landmark paper of [2]. It brought out a critical
question that was largely overlooked back then – that can
machines match up to humans on recognising objects at
fine-grained level (e.g., a “flamingo” other than a “bird”).
Great strides have been made over the years, starting with
the conventional part-based models [51, 14, 1, 3], to the recent surge of deep models that either explicitly or implicitly tackle part learning with or without strong supervision
[26, 34, 52, 55, 57, 48]. Without exception, the focus has
been on mining fine-grained discriminative features to better classification performances.
In this paper, we too are interested in the fine-grained
rationale at large – yet we do not set out to pursue performance gains, we instead question the very definition
of fine-grained classification itself. In particular, we ask
whether the fine-grained expert labels commonplace to current FGVC datasets indeed convey what end users are accustomed to – i.e., are the “Florida scrub jay”, “Fisker
Karma Sedan 2012”, “Boeing 737-200” are indeed the desired, or would “bird”, “car”, “aircraft” suffice for many –
my “flamingo” can be just your “bird”. The answer is of
course subjective [31], and largely correlates with expert
knowledge – the more you are a bird lover, the more finegrained labels you desire, some might even look for “American flamingo” other than just “flamingo”. The follow-up
question is therefore, how can we tailor for the various sub-

11476

