Generative Hierarchical Features from Synthesizing Images
Yinghao Xu* Yujun Shen* Jiapeng Zhu Ceyuan Yang
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Bolei Zhou

{xy119, sy116, jpzhu, yc019, bzhou}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have recently
advanced image synthesis by learning the underlying distribution of the observed data. However, how the features
learned from solving the task of image generation are
applicable to other vision tasks remains seldom explored.
In this work, we show that learning to synthesize images
can bring remarkable hierarchical visual features that are
generalizable across a wide range of applications. Specifically, we consider the pre-trained StyleGAN generator as
a learned loss function and utilize its layer-wise representation to train a novel hierarchical encoder. The visual
feature produced by our encoder, termed as Generative
Hierarchical Feature (GH-Feat), has strong transferability to both generative and discriminative tasks, including
image editing, image harmonization, image classification,
face verification, landmark detection, and layout prediction.
Extensive qualitative and quantitative experimental results
demonstrate the appealing performance of GH-Feat.1

1. Introduction
Representation learning plays an essential role in the
rise of deep learning. The learned representation is able
to express the variation factors of the complex visual
world. Accordingly, the performance of a deep learning
algorithm highly depends on the features extracted from
the input data. As pointed out by Bengio et al. [4], a good
representation is expected to have the following properties.
First, it should be able to capture multiple configurations
from the input. Second, it should organize the explanatory
factors of the input data as a hierarchy, where more abstract
concepts are at a higher level. Third, it should have strong
transferability, not only from datasets to datasets but also
from tasks to tasks.
Deep neural networks supervisedly trained for image
classification on large-scale datasets (e.g., ImageNet [8] and
Places [66]) have resulted in expressive and discriminative
* denotes equal contribution.
1 Project page is at https://genforce.github.io/ghfeat/.

visual features [46]. However, the developed features are
heavily dependent on the training objective. For example,
prior work has shown that deep features trained for the
object recognition task may mainly focus on the shapes
and parts of the objects while remain invariant to rotation [1, 41], and the deep features from a scene classification
model may focus more on detecting the categorical objects
(e.g., bed for bedroom and sofa for living room) [65].
Thus the discriminative features learned from solving highlevel image classification tasks might not be necessarily
good for other mid-level and low-level tasks, limiting their
transferability [57, 64]. Besides, it remains unknown
how the discriminative features can be used in generative
applications like image editing.
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [17] has recently made great process in synthesizing photo-realistic
images. It considers the image generation task as the
training supervision to learn the underlying distribution of
real data. Through adversarial training, the generator can
capture the multi-level variations underlying the input data
to the most extent, otherwise, the discrepancy between
the real and synthesized data would be spotted by the
discriminator. The recent state-of-the-art StyleGAN [31]
has been shown to encode rich hierarchical semantics in
its layer-wise representations [31, 55, 47]. However, the
generator is primarily designed for image generation and
hence lacks the inference ability of taking an image as the
input and extracting its visual feature, which greatly limits
the applications of GANs to real images.
To solve this problem, a common practice is to introduce
an additional encoder into the two-player game described
in GANs [12, 15, 13, 44]. Nevertheless, existing encoders
typically choose the initial latent space (i.e., the most
abstract level feature) as the target representation space,
omitting the pre-layer information learned by the generator.
On the other hand, the transferability of the representation
from GAN models is not fully verified in the literature.
Most prior work focuses on learning discriminative features
for the high-level image classification task [12, 15, 13] yet
put little effort on other mid-level and low-level downstream
tasks, such as landmark detection and layout prediction.

4432

