Efficient Conditional GAN Transfer with Knowledge Propagation across Classes
Mohamad Shahbazi1 , Zhiwu Huang1 , Danda Pani Paudel1 , Ajad Chhatkuli1 , Luc Van Gool1,2
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 PSI, KU Leuven, Belgium
{mshahbazi, zhiwu.huang, paudel, ajad.chhatkuli, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) have shown
impressive results in both unconditional and conditional image generation. In recent literature, it is shown that pretrained GANs, on a different dataset, can be transferred to
improve the image generation from a small target data. The
same, however, has not been well-studied in the case of conditional GANs (cGANs), which provides new opportunities
for knowledge transfer compared to unconditional setup. In
particular, the new classes may borrow knowledge from the
related old classes, or share knowledge among themselves
to improve the training. This motivates us to study the problem of efficient conditional GAN transfer with knowledge
propagation across classes. To address this problem, we introduce a new GAN transfer method to explicitly propagate
the knowledge from the old classes to the new classes. The
key idea is to enforce the popularly used conditional batch
normalization (BN) to learn the class-specific information
of the new classes from that of the old classes, with implicit
knowledge sharing among the new ones. This allows for
an efficient knowledge propagation from the old classes to
the new ones, with the BN parameters increasing linearly
with the number of new classes. The extensive evaluation
demonstrates the clear superiority of the proposed method
over state-of-the-art competitors for efficient conditional
GAN transfer tasks. The code is available at: https:
//github.com/mshahbazi72/cGANTransfer

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [10, 1] are the
most common models used for image and video generation, showing very promising results both [21] in unconditional [14, 41, 16] and conditional [3, 34, 4] setups.
Learning from limited data is a well-studied problem in
the discriminative setup, where the concept of knowledge
transfer [31] between two different but related tasks [42]
or domains [9] is ubiquitous. In contrast, the literature on
transfer learning for generative adversarial models is fairly
limited. One may find this unexpected, since many popular

knowledge transfer methods in discriminative setup, in turn,
use generative schemes [22, 37]. However, the limited literature is less surprising when the complexity of adversarial
training and the mode collapse are taken into account.
A notable work by Wang et al. [40], first addressed the
problem of training GANs on limited data using a careful
fine-tuning (FT) strategy. Following works [27, 39, 44] are
the variants of [40] that focus on better fine-tuning strategies. On the contrary, Noguchi & Harada [30] proposed
the batch statistics adaptation (BSA) technique, by learning
only the batch normalization parameters on a small target
dataset. As most of the previous works [40, 39, 30] primarily focus on the case of unconditional GANs, we investigate
in a different direction of conditional GANs (cGANs). In
particular, we are interested in producing new classes given
a pre-trained class-conditional cGAN. cGANs are strikingly
interesting due to their capability of handling a large number of classes with a single network. For example, BigGAN [3] can generate images from all 1K classes of ImageNet [8]. In fact, BigGAN is exploited as the pre-trained
network even by the unconditional methods [39, 30]. We
refrain from fine-tuning whenever possible, as we believe
that new classes can be introduced within such powerful
cGANs. Moreover, some powerful pre-trained cGANs, can
potentially be used to add new classes in the lifelong learning [19, 30, 33, 5] fashion, which however is beyond the
focus of our paper.
In this work, we study how new classes with a limited
amount of samples can be added to pre-trained cGANs using knowledge transfer across classes. To do so, inspired by
BSA [30], we aim at learning only the batch normalization
(BN) parameters that generally encode the class-specific information. Our key idea, different from [30], relies on the
assumption that the knowledge between old and new classes
can also be transferred by searching for the similarity between them. Our experimental setup, however, does not allow us to access the old data used for the pre-trained model.
Therefore, the similarity is searched in the conditional space
of the BN parameters, during the training of cGANs. In this
process, we learn the similarity scores explicitly between
old and new classes, and implicitly between new ones. The

12167

