ChallenCap: Monocular 3D Capture of Challenging Human Performances using
Multi-Modal References
Yannan He1 Anqi Pang1 Xin Chen1 Han Liang1 Minye Wu1 Yuexin Ma1,2 Lan Xu1,2
1

2

ShanghaiTech University
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
Abstract

Capturing challenging human motions is critical for numerous applications, but it suffers from complex motion patterns and severe self-occlusion under the monocular setting.
In this paper, we propose ChallenCap — a template-based
approach to capture challenging 3D human motions using
a single RGB camera in a novel learning-and-optimization
framework, with the aid of multi-modal references. We
propose a hybrid motion inference stage with a generation
network, which utilizes a temporal encoder-decoder to extract the motion details from the pair-wise sparse-view reference, as well as a motion discriminator to utilize the unpaired marker-based references to extract specific challenging motion characteristics in a data-driven manner. We further adopt a robust motion optimization stage to increase
the tracking accuracy, by jointly utilizing the learned motion details from the supervised multi-modal references as
well as the reliable motion hints from the input image reference. Extensive experiments on our new challenging motion
dataset demonstrate the effectiveness and robustness of our
approach to capture challenging human motions.

1. Introduction
The past ten years have witnessed a rapid development
of markerless human motion capture [14, 24, 60, 68], which
benefits various applications such as immersive VR/AR experience, sports analysis and interactive entertainment.
Multi-view solutions [60, 40, 29, 12, 30, 63] achieve
high-fidelity results but rely on expensive studio setup
which are difficult to be deployed for daily usage. Recent
learning-based techniques enables robust human attribute
prediction from monocular RGB video [31, 35, 2, 80, 55].
The state-of-the-art monocular human motion capture approaches [22, 75, 74] leverage learnable pose detections [9,
44] and template fitting to achieve space-time coherent results. However, these approaches fail to capture the specific
challenging motions such as yoga or rolling on the floor,

Marker-based Reference
Sparse-view Reference

Image Reference

Figure 1. Our ChallenCap approach achieves robust 3D capture of
challenging human motions from a single RGB video, with the aid
of multi-modal references.

which suffer from extreme poses, complex motion patterns
and severe self-occlusion under the monocular setting.
Capturing such challenging human motions is essential
for many applications such as training and evaluation for
gymnastics, sports and dancing. Currently, optical markerbased solutions like Vicon [66] are widely adopted to capture such challenging professional motions. However, directly utilizing such marker-based reference into markerless
capture is inapplicable since the actor needs to re-perform
the challenging motion which is temporally unsynchronized
to the maker-based capture. Some data-driven human pose
estimation approaches [32, 35] utilize the unpaired reference in an adversarial manner, but they only extract general
motion prior from existing motion capture datasets [28, 43],
which fails to recover the characteristics of specific challenging motion. The recent work [23] inspires to utilize
the markerless multi-view reference in a data-driven manner to provide more robust 3D prior for monocular capture.
However, this method is weakly supervised on the input images instead of the motion itself, leading to dedicated perperformer training. Moreover, researchers pay less attention to combine various references from both marker-based
systems and sparse multi-view systems for monocular challenging motion capture.

11400

