Dense Label Encoding for Boundary Discontinuity Free Rotation Detection
Xue Yang1,2 , Liping Hou4 , Yue Zhou3 , Wentao Wang1 , Junchi Yan1,2,∗
1
Department of CSE, SJTU 2 MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, SJTU
3
Department of EE, SJTU 4 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yangxue-2019-sjtu, sjtu zy, wwt117, yanjunchi}@sjtu.edu.cn, houliping17@mails.ucas.ac.cn

Abstract

in horizental object detectors that do not estimate the exact
rotation while only output the horizontal bounding box.

Rotation detection serves as a fundamental building
block in many visual applications involving aerial image, scene text, and face etc. Differing from the dominant regression-based approaches for orientation estimation, this paper explores a relatively less-studied methodology based on classification. The hope is to inherently
dismiss the boundary discontinuity issue as encountered
by the regression-based detectors. We propose new techniques to push its frontier in two aspects: i) new encoding
mechanism: the design of two Densely Coded Labels (DCL)
for angle classification, to replace the Sparsely Coded Label (SCL) in existing classification-based detectors, leading
to three times training speed increase as empirically observed across benchmarks, further with notable improvement in detection accuracy; ii) loss re-weighting: we propose Angle Distance and Aspect Ratio Sensitive Weighting
(ADARSW), which improves the detection accuracy especially for square-like objects, by making DCL-based detectors sensitive to angular distance and object’s aspect ratio.
Extensive experiments and visual analysis on large-scale
public datasets for aerial images i.e. DOTA, UCAS-AOD,
HRSC2016, as well as scene text dataset ICDAR2015 and
MLT, show the effectiveness of our approach. The source
code is available at DCL and is also integrated in our open
source rotation detection benchmark: RotationDetection.

Many rotation detectors (including those for aerial image [46, 15, 47, 2, 6, 51, 45, 30, 48, 49, 50], scene text [56,
23, 14, 26, 19, 18] and face [34, 13, 33]) are derived based
on the vanilla detection algorithms [10, 32, 31, 5, 20, 21].
Among them, the rotation detection algorithm based on five
parameters ([x, y, h, w, θ]) dominates. Similar to the coordinate regression method in horizontal detection, angle parameter is also predicted by regression. Although gratifying
results have been achieved, there are still some fundamental
flaws in the orientation estimation based on regression. Angle prediction based on regression often introduces boundary discontinuity [51, 30, 48, 49], mainly including periodicity of angle (PoA) and exchangeability of edges (EoE).
The main reason for the former is the bounded periodic nature of the angle parameter, while the latter is related to the
definition of the bounding box. In general, the root cause is
that the ideal predictions are beyond the defined range. Due
to the sharp increase in the loss at the boundary, the regression form of the model at the boundary and non-boundary
can not be consistent. Therefore, the model has to predict the angle in a more complicated form at the boundary,
which increases the burden of the model and also increases
the difficulty of prediction at the boundary. This is fatal for
rotation detection with high precision, especially for objects
with large aspect ratios.

1. Introduction
Rotation detection has recently attracted increasing attention for their important utility across different scenarios,
including aerial images, scene text, and faces etc., which
is relatively less studied compared with the vast literature
∗ Corresponding author is Junchi Yan. This work was partly supported by National Key Research and Development Program of China
(2018AAA0100704), NSFC (61972250, U20B2068 ), and Shanghai Municipal Science and Technology Major Project (2021SHZDZX0102). Xue
Yang is partly supported by Wu Wen Jun Honorary Doctoral Scholarship,
AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University.

Most existing works aim to eliminate the sudden loss increase by adding constraints on the loss function or changing the way of calculation, such as IoU Smooth L1 Loss
[51] and Modulated Loss [30], as shown in Table 1. The advantage is that they can borrow the well developed baselines
from horizontal object detectors and reuse the related techniques to boost the detection performance. However, such
ad-hoc techniques applied on the regression-based detectors
cannot guarantee the full dismiss of boundary discontinuity behavior. To give a more elegant and effective solution, the more recent work called Circular Smooth Label
(CSL) [48, 49] argues to apply angle classification instead
of regression to address PoA. Then, CSL-based method

15819

