DualGraph: A graph-based method for reasoning about label noise
HaiYang Zhang, XiMing Xing, Liang Liu
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
School of Computer Science
{zhhy, ximingxing, liangliu}@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
Unreliable labels derived from large-scale dataset prevent neural networks from fully exploring the data. Existing methods of learning with noisy labels primarily take
noise-cleaning-based and sample-selection-based methods.
However, for numerous studies on account of the above two
views, selected samples cannot take full advantage of all
data points and cannot represent actual distribution of categories, in particular if label annotation is corrupted. In
this paper, we start from a different perspective and propose
a robust learning algorithm called DualGraph, which aims
to capture structural relations among labels at two different
levels with graph neural networks including instance-level
and distribution-level relations. Speciﬁcally, the instancelevel relation utilizes instance similarity characterize sample category, while the distribution-level relation describes
instance similarity distribution from each sample to all
other samples. Since the distribution-level relation is robust to label noise, our network propagates it as supervised signals to reﬁne instance-level similarity. Combining two level relations, we design an end-to-end training
paradigm to counteract noisy labels while generating reliable predictions. We conduct extensive experiments on
the noisy CIFAR-10 dataset, CIFAR-100 dataset, and the
Clothing1M dataset. The results demonstrate the advantageous performance of the proposed method in comparison
to state-of-the-art baselines.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has turned out to be excellent performance
at discovering intricate structures in high-dimensional data
[14], particularly deep convolutional nets have brought
about breakthroughs in processing image classiﬁcation [8],
semantic segmentation [16], and object detection [23].
Most of these tasks require reliable and clean large-scale
datasets to train Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), but it is
time-consuming and expensive to collect such high-quality
datasets like ImageNet [3]. To alleviate this problem, al-

Classiﬁcation

Reasoning

Prediction

Distribution Graph

Aggregate

Sample Similarity
Reconstruct

Difference

Instance Graph

extract sample
features

Embedding
Network

Figure 1. The concept of iterate optimization. Distribution graph
forward propagation instance similarity distribution difference to
reﬁne structural relationships among labels. In the classiﬁcation
phase, we utilize the reconstructed instance graph to generate reliable predictions. The two training processes are executed alternatively.

ternatives such as crowdsourcing [34, 37] and web-crawlers
[5] are available to improve annotation efﬁciency. However, those low-cost approaches introduce low-quality annotations, and these labels are unreliable due to various types
of noise. Meanwhile, DNNs easily ﬁt a random labeling of
the training data [38]. As noisy labels severely degrade the
generalization performance [2, 30] of DNNs, learning from
noisy labels has become a signiﬁcant task.
Existing methods of learning with noisy labels primarily take noise-cleaning-based and sample-selection-based
methods [1, 27]. Noise-cleaning-based methods mainly remove samples with suspicious labels or correct their noisy
labels to corresponding true class [6, 29, 35]. [6] obtains correct label by building the prototype and comparing its similarity with the training data. However, the proposed heuristics algorithms [29, 35] have been criticized
for removing too many instances or keeping mislabeled instances. Sample-selection-based methods aim to identify
true-labeled samples from noisy training data [7, 17, 36].
Co-teaching [7] and Co-teaching+ [36] train models on
small-loss instances. Decoupling [17] and Co-teaching+
[36] introduce the “Disagreement” strategy, where “when
to update” depends on a disagreement between two dif-

9654

