A Second-Order Approach to Learning with Instance-Dependent Label Noise
Zhaowei Zhu† Tongliang Liu§ Yang Liu†
†
Computer Science and Engineering, University of California, Santa Cruz
§
Trustworthy Machine Learning Lab, The University of Sydney
†

{zwzhu,yangliu}@ucsc.edu

Abstract
The presence of label noise often misleads the training
of deep neural networks. Departing from the recent literature which largely assumes the label noise rate is only determined by the true label class, the errors in human-annotated
labels are more likely to be dependent on the difficulty levels of tasks, resulting in settings with instance-dependent
label noise. We first provide evidences that the heterogeneous instance-dependent label noise is effectively downweighting the examples with higher noise rates in a nonuniform way and thus causes imbalances, rendering the
strategy of directly applying methods for class-dependent
label noise questionable. Built on a recent work peer loss
[24], we then propose and study the potentials of a secondorder approach that leverages the estimation of several
covariance terms defined between the instance-dependent
noise rates and the Bayes optimal label. We show that this
set of second-order statistics successfully captures the induced imbalances. We further proceed to show that with
the help of the estimated second-order statistics, we identify a new loss function whose expected risk of a classifier
under instance-dependent label noise is equivalent to a new
problem with only class-dependent label noise. This fact
allows us to apply existing solutions to handle this betterstudied setting. We provide an efficient procedure to estimate these second-order statistics without accessing either ground truth labels or prior knowledge of the noise
rates. Experiments on CIFAR10 and CIFAR100 with synthetic instance-dependent label noise and Clothing1M with
real-world human label noise verify our approach. Our implementation is available at https://github.com/
UCSC-REAL/CAL.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) are powerful in revealing and fitting the relationship between feature X and label Y when a sufficiently large dataset is given. However,
the label Y usually requires costly human efforts for ac-

§

tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au

curate annotations. With limited budgets/efforts, the resulting dataset would be noisy, and the existence of label
noise may mislead DNNs to learn or memorize wrong correlations [10, 11, 35, 38, 47]. To make it worse, the label noise embedded in human annotations is often instancedependent, e.g., some difficult examples are more prone to
be mislabeled [34]. This hidden and imbalanced distribution of noise often has a detrimental effect on the training
outcome [15, 23]. It remains an important and challenging
task to learn with instance-dependent label noise.
Theory-supported works addressing instance-dependent
label noise mostly rely on loss correction, which requires estimating noise rates [40]. Recent work has
also considered the possibility of removing the dependency on estimating noise rates [5]. The proposed solution uses a properly specified regularizer to eliminate
the effect of instance-dependent label noise. The common theme of the above methods is the focus on learning the underlying clean distribution by using certain forms
of first-order statistics of model predictions. In this paper,
we propose a second-order approach with the assistance
of additional second-order statistics and explore how this
information can improve the robustness of learning with
instance-dependent label noise. Our main contributions
summarize as follows.
1. Departing from recent works [5, 24, 27, 29, 32, 40, 42]
which primarily rely on the first-order statistics (i.e. expectation of the models’ predictions) to improve the robustness of loss functions, we propose a novel secondorder approach and emphasize the importance of using
second-order statistics (i.e. several covariance terms)
when dealing with instance-dependent label noise.
2. With the perfect knowledge of the covariance terms defined above, we identify a new loss function that transforms the expected risk of a classifier under instancedependent label noise to a risk with only class-dependent
label noise, which is an easier case and can be handled
well by existing solutions. Based on peer loss [24], we
further show the expected risk of class-dependent noise
is equivalent to an affine transformation of the expected

10113

