TransFill: Reference-guided Image Inpainting by
Merging Multiple Color and Spatial Transformations
Yuqian Zhou1 , Connelly Barnes2 , Eli Shechtman2 , Sohrab Amirghodsi2
1
IFP, UIUC, 2 Adobe Research

Figure 1: Results of our reference-guided inpainting for user-provided images. We show multiple practical applications like
replacing and removing foreground people and objects. Each triad shows the target image with the hole, the source image
used as a reference, and the inpainting result. Our method has strong performance and addresses challenging real-world
issues such as parallax, 90 degree image rotations, and lighting inconsistency between the source and target images.

Abstract

Image inpainting is the task of plausibly restoring missing pixels within a hole region that is to be removed from a
target image. Most existing technologies exploit patch similarities within the image, or leverage large-scale training
data to fill the hole using learned semantic and texture information. However, due to the ill-posed nature of the inpainting task, such methods struggle to complete larger holes
containing complicated scenes. In this paper, we propose
TransFill, a multi-homography transformed fusion method
to fill the hole by referring to another source image that
shares scene contents with the target image. We first align
the source image to the target image by estimating multiple homographies guided by different depth levels. We then
learn to adjust the color and apply a pixel-level warping
to each homography-warped source image to make it more
consistent with the target. Finally, a pixel-level fusion module is learned to selectively merge the different proposals.
Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance on pairs
of images across a variety of wide baselines and color differences, and generalizes to user-provided image pairs.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting is an image restoration task where the
goal is to fill in specific regions of the image while making
the entire image visually realistic. The regions to be filled
are called hole regions, and could contain undesired foreground objects or small distracting elements, or corrupted
regions of the image. Much research has been devoted to
improving image inpainting either by image self-similarity
(e.g. [3]) or deep generative models (e.g. [67, 60, 66]).
Such methods synthesize realistic semantics and textures
by reusing similar patches from non-hole regions or learning from large collections of images, respectively. However,
those methods still struggle in cases when holes are large, or
the expected contents inside hole regions have complicated
semantic layout, texture, or depth.
These problems can be addressed if there happens to be
a second reference image of the same scene that exposes
some desired image content that can be copied to the hole.
This task is referred to as reference-guided image inpainting
in the literature [37], but this topic is less explored. In our
paper, we call the image with the hole indicated for removal
the target image. In general, there could be multiple other
source images used as references. These could be taken
by the photographer for the same scene after objects have
moved or the photographer moved the camera to a different
12266

