Intentonomy: a Dataset and Study towards Human Intent Understanding
Menglin Jia1,2 Zuxuan Wu2,3 Austin Reiter2 Claire Cardie1 Serge Belongie1 Ser-Nam Lim2
1
2
3
Cornell University
Facebook AI
Fudan University

Abstract
An image is worth a thousand words, conveying information that goes beyond the mere visual content therein. In
this paper, we study the intent behind social media images
with an aim to analyze how visual information can facilitate recognition of human intent. Towards this goal, we
introduce an intent dataset, Intentonomy, comprising 14K
images covering a wide range of everyday scenes. These
images are manually annotated with 28 intent categories
derived from a social psychology taxonomy. We then systematically study whether, and to what extent, commonly
used visual information, i.e., object and context, contribute
to human motive understanding. Based on our findings, we
conduct further study to quantify the effect of attending to
object and context classes as well as textual information in
the form of hashtags when training an intent classifier. Our
results quantitatively and qualitatively shed light on how visual and textual information can produce observable effects
when predicting intent.1

1. Introduction
Why do we post images on social media platforms like
Facebook or Instagram? Are we expressing our feelings to
friends and family? Are we seeking to entertain a wide audience? Or is it purely out of habit, or perhaps out of fear
of missing out? Images on social media embody more than
their explicit visual information, and they tend to be persuasive in commercial ads and even manipulative in the context
of political campaigns. Therefore, in the deluge of social
media, understanding the intent behind images is critical,
especially for tasks like fighting fake news and misinformation [16, 32] on social platforms.
However, understanding human intent behind images
from a computer vision point of view is particularly challenging, since it goes beyond standard visual recognition—
predicting a set of stuff and thing categories that physically exist in images such as objects [25, 12, 56, 51, 18]
and scenes [34, 58, 67]. Additionally, it is a psychological
task [41] inherent to human cognition and behavior. It is
1 Intentonomy project page: github.com/kmnp/intentonomy

harmony

harmony

(a)
annoying

(b)
natural
beauty

in love

in love

same class
different classes

Figure 1. Intent behind images: while (b) shows that the visual
motif of holding hands aligns with the common intent of “in love”,
(a) illustrates that similarity based on visual appearance alone often would lead to an incorrect match with respect to intent.

similar in spirit to visual commonsense reasoning [62, 43]
to derive an answer conditioned on the objects and scenes
present in images. In certain cases, intent can be inferred
rather directly from representative objects and scenes. For
example, a couple holding hands or making a heart symbol
clearly have the same motive “in love”(Fig. 1(b)). However,
the mapping from visual cue to intent is not always oneto-one. Fig. 1(a) shows that two images with completely
different contents (a girl facing the ocean vs. a person relaxing on a rocky surface, with face covered) can represent the
same intent (“harmony”). This goes beyond the usual variability (pose, color, illumination, and other nuisances) traditionally addressed in object recognition pipelines [11, 37].
This brings us to the question: are objects and their image
context sufficient for recognizing the intent behind images?
In this paper, we introduce a human intent dataset, Intentonomy, containing 14K images that are manually annotated with 28 intent categories, organized in a hierarchy by psychology experts. To investigate the intangible
and subtle connection between visual content and intent,
we present a systematic study to evaluate how the perfor-

12986

