The Blessings of Unlabeled Background in Untrimmed Videos
Yuan Liu1 Jingyuan Chen1 Zhenfang Chen2
Bing Deng1 Jianqiang Huang1 Hanwang Zhang3
1
Alibaba Group 2 The University of Hong Kong 3 Nanyang Technological University
lhy19930911@gmail.com
dengbing.db@alibaba-inc.com

jingyuanchen91@gmail.com
jianqiang.jqh@gmail.com

zfchen@cs.hku.hk
hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Weakly-supervised Temporal Action Localization
(WTAL) aims to detect the action segments with only
video-level action labels in training. The key challenge is
how to distinguish the action of interest segments from the
background, which is unlabelled even on the video-level.
While previous works treat the background as “curses”,
we consider it as “blessings”. Specifically, we first use
causal analysis to point out that the common localization
errors are due to the unobserved confounder that resides
ubiquitously in visual recognition. Then, we propose a
Temporal Smoothing PCA-based (TS-PCA) deconfounder,
which exploits the unlabelled background to model an
observed substitute for the unobserved confounder, to
remove the confounding effect. Note that the proposed
deconfounder is model-agnostic and non-intrusive, and
hence can be applied in any WTAL method without model
re-designs. Through extensive experiments on four state-ofthe-art WTAL methods, we show that the deconfounder can
improve all of them on the public datasets: THUMOS-14
and ActivityNet-1.31 .

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization aims to locate the start and
end frames of actions of interest in untrimmed videos, e.g.,
C LIFF D IVE and PASS BALL. Weakly-supervised Temporal
Action Localization (WTAL) [21, 35, 37] can train such a
localizer by using only the video-level annotations like “the
video contains C LIFF D IVE”, without specifying its start and
end frames. Therefore, WTAL is especially valuable in the
era of video-sharing social networking service [9], where
billions of videos have only video-level user-generated tags.
Not surprisingly, WTAL has lower performances than
its fully-supervised counterpart [8, 15, 17]. As shown in
Figure 1, any WTAL method would suffer from the three
1 Code is available at https://github.com/liuyuancv/WTAL blessing

Prepare
(Background)

Long Jump
(Approach)

Long Jump
(Jump)

Long Jump
(Land)

Finish
(Background)

MIL-based
Ground-Truth

Snowboarding Snowboarding Snowboarding Snowboarding Snowboarding
(Glide)
(Sprint)
(Crawl)
(Glide)
(Turn)
MIL-based
Ground-Truth

ThrowDiscus
(Accumulate)

ThrowDiscus ThrowDiscus
(Rotate)
(Throw)

Shotput
(Hold)

Shotput
(Slide)

MIL-based
Ground-Truth

Figure 1: Three types of common errors in existing MILbased WTAL models. Top to Bottom: over-completeness,
Incompleteness, Confusion. We argue that the errors are
due to the unobserved confounders that affects the video
(including both foreground and background) and the label
simultaneously.
types of localization errors due to the weak supervision:
1) Over-completeness: the ground-truth is a sub-sequence
of the localization, which contains additional background
frames (Top). 2) Incompleteness: the localization only selects the discriminative sub-sequence of the ground-truth,
i.e., misclassifying foreground into background (Mid). 3)
Class Confusion: the localization misclassifies different actions (Bottom). Prior studies would always blame these errors for the unlabeled background segments, because the
reasons are intuitively sound. For example, if we could
model the background as a special BACKGROUND class, error 1 and error 2 would be mitigated since WTAL knows
what visual cues are background [13, 16]; if we could
exploit the difference between the background and foreground, each action class model would be more discriminative, thanks to the training on more negative background

6176

