Learning Discriminative Prototypes with Dynamic Time Warping
Xiaobin Chang1,2 , Frederick Tung2 , Greg Mori1,2
Simon Fraser University1 , Borealis AI2
xiaobin chang@sfu.ca frederick.tung@borealisai.com mori@cs.sfu.ca

Abstract
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) is widely used for temporal data processing. However, existing methods can neither learn the discriminative prototypes of different classes
nor exploit such prototypes for further analysis. We propose
Discriminative Prototype DTW (DP-DTW), a novel method
to learn class-specific discriminative prototypes for temporal recognition tasks. DP-DTW shows superior performance compared to conventional DTWs on time series classification benchmarks1 . Combined with end-to-end deep
learning, DP-DTW can handle challenging weakly supervised action segmentation problems and achieves state of
the art results on standard benchmarks. Moreover, detailed
reasoning on the input video is enabled by the learned action prototypes. Specifically, an action-based video summarization can be obtained by aligning the input sequence
with action prototypes.

1. Introduction
Temporal data is a common data form and widely exists
in different domains [15], e.g., finance, industrial processes
and video sequences. Analyzing temporal sequences is thus
an important task. However, a significant challenge arises
when comparing two sequences as they are not guaranteed
to be aligned. They can be varied in temporal length and/or
observation speed. Therefore, alignment is essential before comparisons, e.g., computing their discrepancy value.
Naive pre-processing such as interpolation, cyclic repeat extension, place-holder insertion and down-sampling are used
to align sequences with different lengths. These methods
either modify the original data distribution or suffer from
data loss and fail to handle the issue of varied speeds.
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) [30, 2] was proposed
to handle misalignment issues in temporal data. The optimal monotonic alignment between two input sequences is
provided by a dynamic programming procedure. DTW is
1 Code available at https://github.com/BorealisAI/TSCDisc-Proto

thus robust to inputs with varied temporal lengths and observation speeds. The discrepancy value between the two
sequences can then be computed based on the alignment.
With DTW and its discrepancy, a prototype over a set of
sequences can be obtained by averaging. This technique is
known as DTW barycenter averaging (DBA) [27] and enables several tasks, e.g., clustering and classification. However, DBA considers the intra-class samples only and neglects the inter-class ones in learning the class-specific prototypes for time series classification (TSC). Discriminative
prototypes thus fail to be obtained and classification performance is negatively affected.
Besides the conventional multi-class single label TSC
setting [9], we focus on solving the weakly supervised action segmentation problem in video data [21, 3]. Three major challenges are highlighted. First, the video data is captured from realistic scenarios, such as daily activities and
movies. It thus contains sophisticated spatial-temporal dynamics. Secondly, multiple actions are performed sequentially in each video. Last but not least, instead of labelling
the action at each frame, only the action order is provided
as weak supervision. To better handle the complex temporal
structure of video inputs, deep models are widely adopted
to extract frame-wise deep feature representations. However, training deep models with such weak supervision is
not straightforward. Existing methods [29, 12, 6, 22] follow very similar paradigms. Specifically, deep models first
provide the action predictions of each frame. Different algorithms are then proposed to encode the frame-wise predictions with the given action transcript and result in different learning objectives. For example, the dynamic programming procedure of DTW is exploited by D3 TW [6] as its encoding algorithm. To obtain a differentiable DTW loss for
deep learning, a relaxation technique, as in Soft-DTW [8]
can be adopted. No existing work attempts to learn discriminative prototype sequences of different actions nor use
them for action segmentation.
In this paper, we propose a novel DTW method, Discriminative Prototype DTW (DP-DTW), for temporal recognition problems. In the TSC setting, each sequence corresponds to a single class. Instead of averaging the sequences

8395

