ManipulaTHOR: A Framework for Visual Object Manipulation
Kiana Ehsani1,2 Winson Han1 Alvaro Herrasti1 Eli VanderBilt1 Luca Weihs1
Eric Kolve1 Aniruddha Kembhavi1,2 Roozbeh Mottaghi1,2
1
Allen Institute for AI 2 University of Washington
https://ai2thor.allenai.org/manipulathor

Figure 1: We address the problem of visual object manipulation, where the goal is to move an object between two locations
in a scene. Operating in visually rich and complex environments, generalizing to unseen environments and objects, avoiding
collisions with objects and structures in the scene, and visual planning to reach the destination are among the major challenges
of this task. Here, we illustrate a sequence of actions taken a by a virtual robot within the AI2-THOR environment for picking
up a vase from the shelf and stack it on a plate on the countertop.

Abstract
The domain of Embodied AI has recently witnessed substantial progress, particularly in navigating agents within
their environments. These early successes have laid the
building blocks for the community to tackle tasks that
require agents to actively interact with objects in their
environment. Object manipulation is an established research domain within the robotics community and poses
several challenges including manipulator motion, grasping
and long-horizon planning, particularly when dealing with
oft-overlooked practical setups involving visually rich and
complex scenes, manipulation using mobile agents (as opposed to tabletop manipulation), and generalization to unseen environments and objects. We propose a framework
for object manipulation built upon the physics-enabled, visually rich AI2-THOR framework and present a new challenge to the Embodied AI community known as ArmPointNav. This task extends the popular point navigation task [2]
to object manipulation and offers new challenges including
3D obstacle avoidance, manipulating objects in the presence of occlusion, and multi-object manipulation that necessitates long term planning. Popular learning paradigms
that are successful on PointNav challenges show promise,
but leave a large room for improvement.

1. Introduction
Embodied AI, the sub-specialty of artificial intelligence
at the intersection of robotics, computer vision, and natural
language processing continues to gain popularity amongst
researchers within these communities. This has expedited
progress on several fronts – open source simulators are getting faster, more robust, and more realistic via photorealism and sophisticated physics engines, a variety of tasks
are being worked on such as navigation and instruction following, new algorithms and models are inching us towards
more powerful and generalizable models and the recent development of multiple sim-to-real environments with paired
worlds in simulation and real is enabling researchers to
study the challenges of overcoming the domain gap from
virtual to physical spaces. A notable outcome has been the
development of near-perfect pure learning-based Point Navigation [33] agents, far outperforming classical approaches.
Most of the focus and progress in Embodied AI has revolved around the task of navigation – including navigating
to coordinates, to object instances, and to rooms. Navigating around in an environment is a critical means to an end,
not an end in itself. The aspiration of the Embodied AI
community remains the development of embodied agents
that can perform complex tasks in the real world, tasks that

4497

