DeepMetaHandles: Learning Deformation Meta-Handles of 3D Meshes with
Biharmonic Coordinates

1

Minghua Liu1
Minhyuk Sung2
University of California San Diego

Radomir Mech3
Hao Su1
2
3
KAIST
Adobe Research

Figure 1: Learned meta-handles for a single chair. Each column indicates a meta-handle and shows three deformations along the direction
of that meta-handle, with red arrows highlighting the deformed region. Our method learns intuitive and disentangled meta-handles in an
unsupervised fashion, which factorize all the plausible deformations for the shape.

Abstract
We propose DeepMetaHandles, a 3D conditional generative model based on mesh deformation. Given a collection of 3D meshes of a category and their deformation
handles (control points), our method learns a set of metahandles for each shape, which are represented as combinations of the given handles. The disentangled meta-handles
factorize all the plausible deformations of the shape, while
each of them corresponds to an intuitive deformation. A
new deformation can then be generated by sampling the coefficients of the meta-handles in a specific range. We employ biharmonic coordinates as the deformation function,
which can smoothly propagate the control points’ translations to the entire mesh. To avoid learning zero deformation as meta-handles, we incorporate a target-fitting module which deforms the input mesh to match a random target. To enhance deformations’ plausibility, we employ a
soft-rasterizer-based discriminator that projects the meshes
to a 2D space. Our experiments demonstrate the superiority
of the generated deformations as well as the interpretability and consistency of the learned meta-handles. The code
is available at https://github.com/Colin97/
DeepMetaHandles.

1. Introduction
3D Meshes can store sharp edges and smooth surfaces
compactly. However, Learning to generate 3D meshes is

much more challenging than 2D images due to the irregularity of mesh data structures and the difficulty in designing
loss functions to measure geometrical and topological properties. For such reasons, to create new meshes, instead of
generating a mesh from scratch, recent work assumes that
the connectivity structure of geometries is known so that the
creation space is restricted to changing the geometry without altering the structure. For example, [37, 36, 48] create
new shapes by deformations of one template mesh. They,
however, limit the scope of the shape generation to possible
variants of the template mesh. We thus propose a 3D conditional generative model that can take any existing mesh as
input and produce its plausible variants. Our approach integrates a target-driven fitting component and a conditional
generative model. At test time, it allows both deforming
the input shape to fit the given target shape and exploring
plausible variants of the input shape without a target.
Our main design goals are two-fold: improving the plausibility of the output shapes and enhancing the interpretability of the learned latent spaces. To achieve the goals, the key
is to choose a suitable parameterization of deformations.
One option is to follow the recent target-driven deformation
network [39, 9, 46, 35], which parameterizes the deformation as new positions of all the mesh vertices. However,
such a large degree of freedom often results in the loss of
fine-grained geometric details and tends to cause undesirable distortions. Instead of following the above works, we
leverage a classical idea in computational geometry, named

12

