Generalizing to the Open World: Deep Visual Odometry with Online Adaptation
Shunkai Li
Xin Wu
Yingdian Cao
Hongbin Zha
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
PKU-SenseTime Machine Vision Joint Lab
{lishunkai, wuxin1998, yingdianc}@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite learning-based visual odometry (VO) has shown
impressive results in recent years, the pretrained networks
may easily collapse in unseen environments. The large
domain gap between training and testing data makes them
difﬁcult to generalize to new scenes. In this paper, we
propose an online adaptation framework for deep VO with
the assistance of scene-agnostic geometric computations
and Bayesian inference. In contrast to learning-based pose
estimation, our method solves pose from optical flow and
depth while the single-view depth estimation is continuously
improved with new observations by online learned uncertainties. Meanwhile, an online learned photometric uncertainty is used for further depth and pose optimization by
a differentiable Gauss-Newton layer. Our method enables
fast adaptation of deep VO networks to unseen environments in a self-supervised manner. Extensive experiments
including Cityscapes to KITTI and outdoor KITTI to indoor
TUM demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art
generalization ability among self-supervised VO methods.

zha@cis.pku.edu.cn

Pretrained on Cityscapes

Test on KITTI

Pretrained on KITTI

Test on TUM

1. Introduction

Figure 1. In this paper, we focus on the generalization ability to
unseen environments of deep VO. When the test data are different
from the training data, previous methods fail to generalize while
our method still performs well with very small trajectory error.

Estimating camera motion from monocular videos plays
an essential role in many real-world applications, such as
autonomous driving and robotics. This problem is usually
solved by visual odometry (VO) or simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM). Classic SLAM/VO methods [7,
8, 10, 26] perform well in favorable conditions but often fail
in challenging situations (e.g. textureless region, dynamic
object) due to the reliance on low-level features and handcrafted pipeline. Since deep neural networks are able to
extract high-level features and infer end-to-end by learning
from data, many learning-based VO methods [21, 22, 39,
47] have been proposed to break through the limitations
of classic SLAM/VO. Among them, self-supervsied VO
methods are able to jointly learn camera pose, depth and
optical ﬂow by minimizing photometric error [39], which
have shown promising results in recent years.

However, learning-based VO often fails during inference
when the scenes are different from the training data. The
inability of pretrained VO to generalize to unseen environments limits its wide applications [21, 44]. To this end, the
pretrained networks are required to achieve real-time online
adaptation in a self-supervised manner.
As a result, several previous works [3, 21, 44] have been
proposed to mitigate the domain generalization problem
of stereo matching and VO. However, the performance is
still much inferior to classic methods in terms of accuracy
and the pretrained networks suffer from slow convergence.
These methods treat VO as a black-box by learning all
components (pose, depth, optical ﬂow, etc.) but ignore welldeﬁned geometric computations and optimization methods,
which leads to slow convergence during online adaptation.
4321
13184

