Differentiable Patch Selection for Image Recognition
Jean-Baptiste Cordonnier1†∗ Aravindh Mahendran2† Alexey Dosovitskiy2
Dirk Weissenborn2
Jakob Uszkoreit2
Thomas Unterthiner2
2
1
EPFL, Switzerland
Google Research, Brain Team
jean-baptiste.cordonnier@epfl.ch
{aravindhm,adosovitskiy,diwe,usz,unterthiner}@google.com

Abstract
Neural Networks require large amounts of memory and
compute to process high resolution images, even when only
a small part of the image is actually informative for the task
at hand. We propose a method based on a differentiable
Top-K operator to select the most relevant parts of the input
to efficiently process high resolution images. Our method
may be interfaced with any downstream neural network, is
able to aggregate information from different patches in a
flexible way, and allows the whole model to be trained endto-end using backpropagation. We show results for traffic sign recognition, inter-patch relationship reasoning, and
fine-grained recognition without using object/part bounding box annotations during training.

1. Introduction
High-resolution imagery has become ubiquitous nowadays: both consumer devices and specialized sensors routinely capture images and videos with resolution in tens
of megapixels. Processing these high-quality images with
computer vision models remains challenging: analyzing the
images at full resolution can be prohibitively computationally expensive, while simply downsampling them before
processing may remove important fine details and substantially hurt performance. It would be desirable to save compute, while retaining the capability to recognize fine details.
Compute can be saved by exploiting the following property of many practical vision tasks: not all parts of the image
are equally important for finding the answer. Figure 1 shows
examples of tasks where only a small fraction of the full image needs to be processed in detail. Being able to quickly
discard uninformative parts of the image would have several benefits. It would reduce the overall computational and
memory complexity of the model, and the regions of interest could be processed in more detail and by a more power∗ Work done during internship at Google Research.† Equal contribution.

Figure 1: Examples of large images where patch extraction
allows (top-left) to focus on details for fine-grained recognition, (bottom-left) to reason across patches, and (right) to
efficiently capture very localized information.

ful model than otherwise.
Determining which parts of the image to retain and
which to discard is usually nontrivial and highly task dependent. In some applications the solution might be as simple as taking the center crop of the image, but in most cases
relevant regions need to be detected first. For instance, in a
self-driving car setting, it would be permissible to ignore the
sky, but all traffic signs in sight should be correctly identified and must not be ignored. One may formulate this as follows: Given a regular grid of equally sized image patches,
decide for each patch whether to process or discard it. This
decision is however discrete, which makes it unsuitable for
end-to-end learning.
To overcome this limitation, inspired by the work of
Katharopoulos & Fleuret [22], we formulate patch selection as a ranking problem, where per-patch relevance scores
are predicted by a small ConvNet and the Top K scoring patches are selected for downstream processing. We
make this end-to-end trainable with backpropagation using
the perturbed maximum method of Berthet et. al [5]. We
present this as a generic module for patch selection. Our
approach is most effective when the majority of patches in
the image are irrelevant to the target, but the model a priory
12351

