DCT-Mask: Discrete Cosine Transform Mask Representation for
Instance Segmentation
Xing Shen1,2 *, Jirui Yang2 *, Chunbo Wei2 , Bing Deng2 , Jianqiang Huang2 , Xiansheng Hua2
Xiaoliang Cheng1 , Kewei Liang 1†
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Zhejiang University 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
1
2

{shenxingsx,xiaoliangcheng,matlkw}@zju.edu.cn

{jirui.yjr,chunbo.wcb,dengbing.db,jianqiang.hjq,xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Binary grid mask representation is broadly used in instance segmentation. A representative instantiation is Mask
R-CNN which predicts masks on a 28 × 28 binary grid.
Generally, a low-resolution grid is not sufficient to capture the details, while a high-resolution grid dramatically
increases the training complexity. In this paper, we propose
a new mask representation by applying the discrete cosine
transform(DCT) to encode the high-resolution binary grid
mask into a compact vector. Our method, termed DCTMask, could be easily integrated into most pixel-based instance segmentation methods. Without any bells and whistles, DCT-Mask yields significant gains on different frameworks, backbones, datasets, and training schedules. It does
not require any pre-processing or pre-training, and almost
no harm to the running speed. Especially, for higher-quality
annotations and more complex backbones, our method has
a greater improvement. Moreover, we analyze the performance of our method from the perspective of the quality
of mask representation. The main reason why DCT-Mask
works well is that it obtains a high-quality mask representation with low complexity.

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation tasks involve detecting objects
and assigning category labels to pixels. It is the cornerstone of many computer vision tasks, such as autonomous
driving and robot manipulation. Recently, the application of deep convolutional neural networks(CNNs) has
greatly promoted the development of instance segmentation
[21, 23, 16, 15, 17]. Pixel-based method is one of the mainstream methods which generates a bounding box by an object detector and performs pixel mask predicting within a
* These authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.

Ground Truth

28 × 28

Reconstructed

Error

(a) Binary grid mask representation

Ground Truth

128 × 128

Reconstructed

Error

(b) DCT mask representation

Figure 1: Binary grid mask representation vs. DCT
mask representation. The leftmost sub-graph is the ground
truth, the left-middle is the mask representation, the middle
right is the reconstructed mask, the rightmost is the error
between the reconstructed mask and the ground truth.
low-resolution regular grid. But is the low-resolution grid
an ideal choice for mask representation?
As a representative instantiation in instance segmentation, Mask R-CNN [15] first downsamples the binary
ground truth to a 28 × 28 grid and then reconstructs it
through upsampling. As shown in Figure 1(a), the binary
grid mask representation with low resolution is not sufficient to capture detailed features and causes bias during upsampling. To describe this phenomenon more accurately,
we use the metric of Intersection over Union(IoU) between
the reconstructed mask and the ground truth to evaluate the
quality of mask representation. We find that in the COCO
val2017 dataset, the 28 × 28 binary grid achieves only
93.8% IoU. It means even the prediction of the mask branch
is exactly accurate, the reconstructed mask has a 6.2% error.
A higher-quality mask representation may reduce the reconstruction error. It turns out 128 × 128 resolution could
achieve 98% IoU. But experiments show that the mask aver-

8720

