Face Forgery Detection by 3D Decomposition
Xiangyu Zhu1,2∗

Hao Wang1∗
1

2
3
4

Hongyan Fei3

Zhen Lei1,2,4†

Stan Z. Li5

CBSR & NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences

School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing

Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, Hong Kong Institute of Science & Innovation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5

School of Engineering, Westlake University

{xiangyu.zhu,zlei,szli}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

{haowang7308,hongyanfei0420}@gmail.com

Abstract
Detecting digital face manipulation has attracted extensive attention due to fake media’s potential harms to the
public. However, recent advances have been able to reduce
the forgery signals to a low magnitude. Decomposition,
which reversibly decomposes an image into several constituent elements, is a promising way to highlight the hidden
forgery details. In this paper, we consider a face image
as the production of the intervention of the underlying 3D
geometry and the lighting environment, and decompose it
in a computer graphics view. Specifically, by disentangling
the face image into 3D shape, common texture, identity
texture, ambient light, and direct light, we find the devil lies
in the direct light and the identity texture. Based on this
observation, we propose to utilize facial detail, which is the
combination of direct light and identity texture, as the clue
to detect the subtle forgery patterns. Besides, we highlight
the manipulated region with a supervised attention mechanism and introduce a two-stream structure to exploit both
face image and facial detail together as a multi-modality
task. Extensive experiments indicate the effectiveness of
the extra features extracted from the facial detail, and our
method achieves the state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
While earlier seamless face manipulation has amazed the
public broadly, there has been a constant concern about the
potential abuse of relevant techniques. In particular, the
recent DeepFake [18] initiated the widespread public discussion among the potential harmful consequence [58] and
feasible detection solutions of counterfeit facial media [6].
In this work, we are dedicated to detecting the manip∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

Figure 1. In computer graphics, a face image can be decomposed
into direct light, ambient light, 3D geometry, common texture and
identity texture. We find critical clues in direct light and identity
texture, and merge them as the facial detail for forgery detection.

ulation on facial identity and expression, related to the
very popular DeepFakes (DF) [18], Face2Face (F2F) [57],
FaceSwap (FS) [34] and NeuralTextures (NT) [55], which
perform the state-of-the-art face manipulation, making it
extremely tough to reveal the sophisticated counterfeit flaws
from the image view only [46]. This situation stimulates
researchers to shift their attention to extracting forgery evidence from other aspects besides the original RGB image.
Previous work [66, 14, 63, 46] has discovered that the
signals in specific frequency ranges are replaced by particular patterns during manipulation and proposes to detect
forgery by signal decomposition. The assumption is that,
by disentangling the face image, we can find more critical
clues for forgery detection from the constituent elements,
which are overlooked or hard to be forged by the manipulation methods, whose loss function mainly constrains
pixel values. For example, Zhang et al. [66] identify the
unique replications of spectra in the frequency domain due

2929

