Spatially Consistent Representation Learning
Byungseok Roh*

Wuhyun Shin*
Ildoo Kim
Kakao Brain

Sungwoong Kim

{peter.roh, aiden.hsin, ildoo.kim, swkim}@kakaobrain.com

Abstract
Self-supervised learning has been widely used to obtain
transferrable representations from unlabeled images. Especially, recent contrastive learning methods have shown impressive performances on downstream image classification
tasks. While these contrastive methods mainly focus on generating invariant global representations at the image-level
under semantic-preserving transformations, they are prone
to overlook spatial consistency of local representations and
therefore have a limitation in pretraining for localization
tasks such as object detection and instance segmentation.
Moreover, aggressively cropped views used in existing contrastive methods can minimize representation distances between the semantically different regions of a single image.
In this paper, we propose a spatially consistent representation learning algorithm (SCRL) for multi-object and
location-specific tasks. In particular, we devise a novel
self-supervised objective that tries to produce coherent spatial representations of a randomly cropped local region according to geometric translations and zooming operations.
On various downstream localization tasks with benchmark
datasets, the proposed SCRL shows significant performance
improvements over the image-level supervised pretraining as well as the state-of-the-art self-supervised learning
methods. Code is available at https://github.com/
kakaobrain/scrl.

1. Introduction
In computer vision, unsupervised representation learning
from a large amount of unlabeled images has been shown to
be effective in improving the performances of neural networks for unknown downstream tasks, especially with few
labeled data [8, 26]. While conventional generative modeling algorithms are difficult to obtain semantically meaningful representations from high-resolution natural images
due to their focus on low-level details [9, 2], self-supervised
learning algorithms have recently shown promising results
* Equal contribution

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) AP on downstream of COCO detection task w.r.t. the
upstream epochs on ImageNet. We use a ResNet-50-FPN backbone with Faster R-CNN, using default training configuration used
in [42]. Only with 200 epochs of upstream, SCRL outperforms
the ImageNet pre-trained counterpart as well as the state-of-the-art
self-supervised learning methods. (b) AP on COCO detection task
under varied downstream schedules from 0.5× (45k iterations) to
7× (630k iterations). SCRL consistently outperforms random initialization, supervised pretraining, and BYOL in all the training
schedules.

in obtaining semantic representations via the use of proxy
tasks on unsupervised data [10, 30, 22, 12, 28, 16, 3, 41, 1,
14]. Among them, contrastive learning methods with discriminative models have particularly achieved remarkable
performances on most downstream tasks related to image
classification problems [28, 16, 5, 3, 4, 41, 1, 14, 20, 39].
Contrastive self-supervised learning aims to obtain discriminative representations based on the semantically positive and negative image pairs. Specifically, it tries to
produce invariant representations from semantic-preserving
augmentations of the same image while making representations dissimilar from different images. However, most
existing contrastive methods exploit consistent global rep-

1144

