NeuTex: Neural Texture Mapping for Volumetric Neural Rendering
Fanbo Xiang1 , Zexiang Xu2 , Miloš Hašan2 , Yannick Hold-Geoffroy2 , Kalyan Sunkavalli2 , Hao Su1
1
University of California, San Diego 2 Adobe Research

Abstract
Recent work [28, 5] has demonstrated that volumetric
scene representations combined with differentiable volume
rendering can enable photo-realistic rendering for challenging scenes that mesh reconstruction fails on. However, these methods entangle geometry and appearance
in a “black-box” volume that cannot be edited. Instead, we present an approach that explicitly disentangles
geometry—represented as a continuous 3D volume—from
appearance—represented as a continuous 2D texture map.
We achieve this by introducing a 3D-to-2D texture mapping
(or surface parameterization) network into volumetric representations. We constrain this texture mapping network using an additional 2D-to-3D inverse mapping network and
a novel cycle consistency loss to make 3D surface points
map to 2D texture points that map back to the original 3D
points. We demonstrate that this representation can be reconstructed using only multi-view image supervision and
generates high-quality rendering results. More importantly,
by separating geometry and texture, we allow users to edit
appearance by simply editing 2D texture maps.

1. Introduction
Capturing and modeling real scenes from image inputs
is an extensively studied problem in vision and graphics.
One crucial goal of this task is to avoid the tedious process
of manual 3D modeling and directly build a renderable and
editable 3D model that can be used for realistic rendering
in applications like e-commerce, VR and AR. Traditional
3D reconstruction methods [39, 40, 20] usually reconstruct
objects as meshes. Meshes are widely used in rendering
pipelines; they are typically combined with mapped textures
for appearance editing in 3D modeling pipelines.
However, mesh-based reconstruction is particularly challenging and often cannot synthesize highly realistic images
for complex objects. Recently, various neural scene representations have been presented to address this scene acquisition task. Arguably the best visual quality is obtained
Research partially done when F. Xiang was an intern at Adobe Research.

a)

b)

c)

d)

e)

f)

g)

Figure 1. NeuTex is a neural scene representation that represents
geometry as a 3D volume but appearance as a 2D neural texture in
an automatically discovered texture UV space, shown as a cubemap in (e). NeuTex can synthesize highly realistic images (b) that
are very close to the ground-truth (a). Moreover, it enables intuitive surface appearance editing directly in the 2D texture space;
we show an example of this in (c), by using a new texture (f) to
modulate the reconstructed texture. Our discovered texture mapping covers the object surface uniformly, as illustrated in (d), by
rendering the object using a uniform checkerboard texture (g).

by approaches like NeRF [28] and Deep Reflectance Volumes [5] that leverage differentiable volume rendering (ray
marching). However, these volume-based methods do not
(explicitly) reason about the object’s surface and entangle
both geometry and appearance in a volume-encoding neural
network. This does not allow for easy editing—as is possible with a texture mapped mesh—and significantly limits
the practicality of these neural rendering approaches.
Our goal is to make volumetric neural reconstruction
more practical by enabling both realistic image synthesis
and flexible surface appearance editing. To this end, we
present NeuTex—an approach that explicitly disentangles
scene geometry from appearance. NeuTex represents geometry with a volumetric representation (similar to NeRF) but
represents surface appearance using 2D texture maps. This
allows us to leverage differentiable volume rendering to reconstruct the scene from multi-view images, while allowing
for conventional texture-editing operations (see Fig. 1).
As in NeRF [28], we march a ray through each pixel,
regress volume density and radiance (using fully connected
MLPs) at sampled 3D shading points on the ray, accumulate the per-point radiance values to compute the final pixel
color. NeRF uses a single MLP to regress both density and

7119

