Mitigating Face Recognition Bias via Group Adaptive Classifier
Sixue Gong
Xiaoming Liu
Anil K. Jain
Michigan State University, East Lansing MI 48824
{gongsixu, liuxm, jain}@msu.edu
https://github.com/gongsixue/GAC

Adaptive
Layer

Face recognition is known to exhibit bias - subjects in a
certain demographic group can be better recognized than
other groups. This work aims to learn a fair face representation, where faces of every group could be more equally represented. Our proposed group adaptive classifier mitigates
bias by using adaptive convolution kernels and attention
mechanisms on faces based on their demographic attributes.
The adaptive module comprises kernel masks and channelwise attention maps for each demographic group so as to
activate different facial regions for identification, leading to
more discriminative features pertinent to their demographics.
Our introduced automated adaptation strategy determines
whether to apply adaptation to a certain layer by iteratively
computing the dissimilarity among demographic-adaptive
parameters. A new de-biasing loss function is proposed to
mitigate the gap of average intra-class distance between demographic groups. Experiments on face benchmarks (RFW,
LFW, IJB-A, and IJB-C) show that our work is able to mitigate face recognition bias across demographic groups while
maintaining the competitive accuracy.

1. Introduction
Face recognition (FR) systems are known to exhibit discriminatory behaviors against certain demographic
groups [21, 28, 40]. The 2019 NIST Face Recognition Vendor Test [21] shows that all 106 tested FR algorithms exhibit
varying biased performances on gender, race, and age groups
of a mugshot dataset. Deploying biased FR systems to law
enforcement is potentially unethical [11]. Given the implication of automated FR-driven decisions, it is crucial to
develop fair and unbiased FR systems to avoid the negative
societal impact. Note that, differ from the inductive bias
in machine learning [15], we define FR bias as the uneven
recognition performance w.r.t. demographic groups.
State-of-the-art (SOTA) FR algorithms [13, 33, 34, 48, 69,
70] rely on convolutional neural networks (CNNs) trained
on large-scale face datasets. Biases in data are transmitted

N

A

Demographic
Attributes

A

N

A

N

…

Abstract

…

*

×

…A

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Our proposed group adaptive classifier (GAC) auto-

matically chooses between non-adaptive (“N”) and adaptive (“A”)
layer in a multi-layer network, where the latter uses demographicgroup-specific kernel and attention. (b) Compared to the baseline
with the 50-layer ArcFace backbone, GAC improves face verification accuracy in most groups of RFW dataset [72], especially
under-represented groups, leading to mitigated FR bias, e.g., GAC
reduces biasness from 1.11 to 0.60.

to the FR models through network learning. For example, to
minimize the overall loss, a network tends to learn a better
representation for faces in the majority group whose data
dominate the training set, resulting in unequal discriminabilities. However, the imbalanced demographic distribution of
face data is not the only trigger of FR bias. Prior works have
shown that even using a demographic balanced dataset [71]
or training separate classifiers for each group [40], the performance on some groups is still inferior to the others. By
studying non-trainable FR algorithms, [40] introduced the
notion of inherent bias, i.e., certain groups are inherently
more susceptible to errors in face matching.
To tackle the dataset-induced bias, traditional methods
re-weight either the data proportions [6] or cost values [1].
Such methods are limited when applied to large-scale imbalanced datasets. Recent imbalance learning methods focus
on novel objective functions for class-skewed datasets. For
instance, Dong et al. [18] propose a Class Rectification Loss
to incrementally optimize on hard samples of the classes
with under-represented attributes. Alternatively, researchers
strengthen the decision boundary to impede perturbation
from other classes by enforcing margins between hard clusters via adaptive clustering [31], or between rare classes via
Bayesian uncertainty estimates [38]. To adapt the aforementioned methods to racial bias mitigation, Wang et al. [71]

3414

