Joint Negative and Positive Learning for Noisy Labels
Youngdong Kim
Juseung Yun
Hyounguk Shon
School of Electrical Engineering, KAIST, South Korea

Junmo Kim

{ydkim1293, juseung yun, hyounguk.shon, junmo.kim}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Training of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) with
data with noisy labels is known to be a challenge. Based on
the fact that directly providing the label to the data (Positive
Learning; PL) has a risk of allowing CNNs to memorize the
contaminated labels for the case of noisy data, the indirect
learning approach that uses complementary labels (Negative Learning for Noisy Labels; NLNL) has proven to be
highly effective in preventing overfitting to noisy data as it
reduces the risk of providing faulty target. NLNL further
employs a three-stage pipeline to improve convergence. As
a result, filtering noisy data through the NLNL pipeline is
cumbersome, increasing the training cost. In this study, we
propose a novel improvement of NLNL, named Joint Negative and Positive Learning (JNPL), that unifies the filtering pipeline into a single stage. JNPL trains CNN via two
losses, NL+ and PL+, which are improved upon NL and
PL loss functions, respectively. We analyze the fundamental
issue of NL loss function and develop new NL+ loss function producing gradient that enhances the convergence of
noisy data. Furthermore, PL+ loss function is designed
to enable faster convergence to expected-to-be-clean data.
We show that the NL+ and PL+ train CNN simultaneously,
significantly simplifying the pipeline, allowing greater ease
of practical use compared to NLNL. With a simple semisupervised training technique, our method achieves stateof-the-art accuracy for noisy data classification based on
the superior filtering ability.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) have led to
great improvements in many supervised tasks. However,
CNNs’ performance relies heavily on the quality of labels,
and accurately labeling a huge amount of data is expensive and time-consuming. Furthermore, accurate labeling
is done by hand, which can eventually lead to mismatched
labeling. Therefore, the robust training of CNNs with noisy
data is of great practical importance. There are many approaches regarding this issue. For example, there are meth-

ods that design noise-robust loss [4, 3, 29, 18], use two neural networks to select clean labels [6, 33, 30], and utilize
label correction [22, 31]. These existing approaches commonly use the given labels in a direct manner, i.e., “input
image belongs to this label” (Positive Learning; PL). This
behavior carries the risk of providing faulty information to
the CNNs when noisy labels are involved.
Motivated by this reason, Negative Learning for Noisy
Labels; NLNL [12], which is an indirect learning method
for training CNNs, has been proposed recently. Negative
Learning (NL) uses randomly chosen complementary labels and trains the CNN that “input image does not belong
to this complementary label,” reducing the risk of providing
the wrong information because of the high chance of not
selecting a true label as a complementary label. Additionally, NLNL proposed three-stage pipeline for filtering noisy
data from training data (Figure 1 (a)). Each stage is composed of NL → NL while discarding data of low confidence
(Selective NL; SelNL) → PL while only retaining data of
high confidence (Selective PL; SelPL), enabling more convergence after NL. However, the fundamental problem that
NL loss function causes underfitting to the overall training
data still remains. This is the reason that NL requires an
additional sequential step, SelNL. Furthermore, the threestage pipeline for filtering noisy data is quite inefficient, extending the time for training CNNs.
In this study, we propose a novel version of NLNL: Joint
Negative Learning and Positive Learning; JNPL which has
a unified single-stage pipeline for filtering noisy data (Figure 1 (b)). JNPL is composed of two losses to train CNN,
NL+ and PL+ losses, dedicated to filtering noisy data from
training data. Each is developed from NL and PL loss functions, respectively. Firstly, our paper focuses on analyzing
the NL loss function to understand the cause for underfitting. Then we develop a new loss function NL+ that resolves the issue, which produces a gradient appropriate for
convergence on a noisy training dataset. Our study demonstrates the effectiveness of NL+, showing improved convergence across various label noise types and noise rates. Secondly, while we utilize PL to aid in training with noisy data,
PL+ loss function is also newly designed to enable faster

9442

