Im2Vec: Synthesizing Vector Graphics without Vector Supervision
Pradyumna Reddy1
1

Michaël Gharbi2

Michal Lukáč2

University College London

Abstract

1. Introduction
In vector graphics, images are represented as collections
of parametrised shape primitives rather than a regular raster
of pixel values. This makes for a compact, infinitely scalable representation with appearance that may be varied at
need simply by modifying stroke or colour parameters. As
a result, it is favoured by graphic artists and designers.
Unfortunately, creating vector graphics still remains a
difficult task largely limited to manual expert workflows,

Adobe Research

Reconstruction

Input

<path
moveTo (21.83, 31.12)
cubicBezier (2.6, 3.9) (2.4, 9.6) (8.1, 3.8)

.....

Vector graphics are widely used to represent fonts, logos, digital artworks, and graphic designs. But, while a
vast body of work has focused on generative algorithms
for raster images, only a handful of options exists for vector graphics. One can always rasterize the input graphic
and resort to image-based generative approaches, but this
negates the advantages of the vector representation. The
current alternative is to use specialized models that require
explicit supervision on the vector graphics representation
at training time. This is not ideal because large-scale highquality vector-graphics datasets are difficult to obtain. Furthermore, the vector representation for a given design is
not unique, so models that supervise on the vector representation are unnecessarily constrained. Instead, we propose a new neural network that can generate complex vector graphics with varying topologies, and only requires indirect supervision from readily-available raster training images (i.e., with no vector counterparts). To enable this, we
use a differentiable rasterization pipeline that renders the
generated vector shapes and composites them together onto
a raster canvas. We demonstrate our method on a range
of datasets, and provide comparison with state-of-the-art
SVG-VAE and DeepSVG, both of which require explicit vector graphics supervision. Finally, we also demonstrate our
approach on the MNIST dataset, for which no groundtruth
vector representation is available. Source code, datasets
and more results are available at http://geometry.
cs.ucl.ac.uk/projects/2021/Im2Vec/.

2

Niloy J. Mitra1,2

cubicBezier (3.8, 8.2) (3.5, 6.9) (6.1, 8.4)
/>

Generation

Interpolation

Figure 1: We present Im2Vec that can be trained with
only image supervision to produce a latent space for vector
graphics output. The learned space supports reprojection,
sampling (i.e., generation), and interpolation.

because the same irregular structure makes it ill-suited for
today’s convolution-based generative neural architectures.
There is demand for a generative approach suitable for this
domain, but it is not yet well served by research because
of the difficult design requirements. Suitable approaches
should: (i) produce output in vector format; (ii) establish correspondence across elements of the same family;
(iii) support reconstruction, sampling, and interpolation;
(iv) give user control over accuracy versus compactness of
the representation; and finally, (v) be trainable directly using images without the need for vector supervision.
SVG-VAE [24] and DeepSVG [5], the two leading generative algorithms for vector graphics, cast synthesis as a sequence prediction problem, where the graphic is a sequence
of drawing instructions, mimicking how common formats
actually represent vector art. Training these methods therefore requires supervision from ground truth vector graphics
17342

