Omnimatte: Associating Objects and Their Effects in Video
Erika Lu1,2
1

Forrester Cole1
William T. Freeman1
2

Google Research

Tali Dekel1,3
Andrew Zisserman2
Michael Rubinstein1

University of Oxford

3

Weizmann Institute of Science

Frame t1

Frame t2

Frame t1

Frame t2

Frame t1

Frame t2

Input Masks t1

Input Masks t2

Input Mask t1

Input Mask t2

Input Mask t1

Input Mask t2

Output Omnimattes t1

Output Omnimattes t2

Output Omnimatte t1 Output Omnimatte t2

Output Omnimatte t1 Output Omnimatte t2

Figure 1. We pose a novel problem: automatically associating subjects in videos with ‘effects’ related to them in the scene. Given an
input video (top) and rough masks of subjects of interest (middle), our method estimates an omnimatte – an alpha matte and foreground
color that includes the subject itself along with all scene elements associated with it (bottom). The associated elements can be other objects
attached to the subject or moving with it, or complex effects such as shadows, reflections, smoke, or ripples the subject creates in water.

Abstract
Computer vision is increasingly effective at segmenting
objects in images and videos; however, scene effects related to the objects—shadows, reflections, generated smoke,
etc.—are typically overlooked. Identifying such scene effects and associating them with the objects producing them
is important for improving our fundamental understanding
of visual scenes, and can also assist a variety of applications such as removing, duplicating, or enhancing objects in
video. In this work, we take a step towards solving this novel
problem of automatically associating objects with their effects in video. Given an ordinary video and a rough segmentation mask over time of one or more subjects of interest, we estimate an omnimatte for each subject—an alpha
matte and color image that includes the subject along with
all its related time-varying scene elements. Our model is
trained only on the input video in a self-supervised manner,
without any manual labels, and is generic—it produces omnimattes automatically for arbitrary objects and a variety
of effects. We show results on real-world videos containing interactions between different types of subjects (cars,
animals, people) and complex effects, ranging from semitransparent elements such as smoke and reflections, to fully
opaque effects such as objects attached to the subject.1
1 Project page: https://omnimatte.github.io/

1. Introduction
“And first he will see the shadows best, next the reflections of men and other objects in the water, and then the
objects themselves, then he will gaze upon the light of the
moon and the stars and the spangled heaven ... Last of all
he will be able to see the sun.” – Plato
Is it possible to automatically determine all the effects
caused by a subject in a video? Reflect for a moment on the
difficulty of the task: a subject, such as a human wandering through a scene, can cast shadows on the floor and distant walls, and be reflected in windows and other surfaces.
These ‘effects’ are non-local. However, they are correlated
with the subject’s shape, motion and, in the case of reflections, appearance.
Tackling this problem is the objective of this paper. More
specifically, given an input video and (possibly rough) segmentations over time of subjects of interest in the video, we
seek to produce an output opacity matte (alpha matte) for
each subject that includes the subject and their effects in
the scene (Figure 1). We call this the “omnimatte” of the
subject. We additionally produce a color background image
containing the static background elements in the video. We
achieve this by proposing a network and training framework
that is able to automatically determine and segment regions
that are correlated with the given subject (Figure 2). The
model is trained in a self-supervised way only on the in-

4507

