Pseudo Facial Generation with Extreme Poses for Face Recognition
Guoli Wang1 , Jiaqi Ma2 , Qian Zhang3 , Jiwen Lu1, ,* Jie Zhou1
1
Tsinghua University 2 Wuhan University 3 Horizon Robotics
guoli.wang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, jiaqima@whu.edu.cn
qian01.zhang@horizon.ai, {lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Face recognition has achieved a great success in recent
years, it is still challenging to recognize those facial images with extreme poses. Traditional methods consider it
as a domain gap problem. Many of them settle it by generating fake frontal faces from extreme ones, whereas they
are tough to maintain the identity information with high
computational consumption and uncontrolled disturbances.
Our experimental analysis shows a dramatic precision drop
with extreme poses. Meanwhile, those extreme poses just
exist minor visual differences after small rotations. Derived from this insight, we attempt to relieve such a huge
precision drop by making minor changes to the input images without modifying existing discriminators. A novel
lightweight pseudo facial generation is proposed to relieve
the problem of extreme poses without generating any frontal
facial image. It can depict the facial contour information
and make appropriate modifications to preserve the critical identity information. Specifically, the proposed method
reconstructs pseudo profile faces by minimizing the pixelwise differences with original profile faces and maintaining
the identity consistent information from their corresponding
frontal faces simultaneously. The proposed framework can
improve existing discriminators and obtain a great promotion on several benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Face recognition aims to figure out the ground-truth
identity for an unknown facial image. Inspired by the development of deep learning, the performance of face recognition has been improved rapidly [38, 40, 59, 60, 12, 10, 23].
LightCNN [47] is proposed as a superb model for face
recognition recently and reaches new heights on several
benchmark datasets. However, pose variations result in an
unsolved problem in desired real-world applications. As is
shown in Table 1, LightCNN recognizes faces well on the
* Jiwen Lu is the corresponding author.

+90˚

-

=

-

=

+75˚

Figure 1. An illustration of the proposed pseudo facial generation.
From left to right, the input faces, residual faces and pseudo faces
are visualized in sequence. +90◦ and +75◦ faces are respectively
displayed in the first and second lines.

Multi-PIE dataset [13] in the range of ±15◦ and ±45◦ , and
suffers a slight drop in ±60◦ and ±75◦ . But for extreme
poses such as ±90◦ , the recognition rate declines dramatically, where the decrease is up to 35.09%.
Why does the recognition rate drop heavily when it
comes to the extreme profile faces? Deep learning methods
are data-driven and usually extract features with a propensity [3]. Generally speaking, the frontal and profile facial
images lie in diverse domains. Models prefer to learn discriminative features from the dominant domain, and may
fail in the subordinate domain. Both the imbalance of data
distribution and domain gap devote to this aforementioned
phenomenon, and researchers have tried several different
paths to settle it [9]. The existing methods are mainly divided into two categories. One kind of them is to extract
pose invariant embeddings from original faces to maintain
the invariance [4, 30, 42]. The others rotate facial images to
the frontal pose and recognize them directly [43, 52].
For those embedding based methods, metric learning and
multi-view learning are usually applied to obtain pose invariant embedding features. Florian et al. [36] train a CNN
to optimize the desired embeddings directly rather than an
intermediate bottleneck layer. Kan et al. [21] consider the
imbalance of data distribution as large discrepancies between views, and devise several adaptive sub-nets to release

1994

