Neural Splines: Fitting 3D Surfaces
with Infinitely-Wide Neural Networks
Francis Williams1

Matthew Trager1, 2∗
1

Joan Bruna1

Denis Zorin1

New York University, 2 Amazon

francis.williams@nyu.edu, mtrager@cims.nyu.edu, bruna@cims.nyu.edu, dzorin@cs.nyu.edu

Abstract
We present Neural Splines, a technique for 3D surface reconstruction that is based on random feature kernels arising
from infinitely-wide shallow ReLU networks. Our method
achieves state-of-the-art results, outperforming recent neural network-based techniques and widely used Poisson Surface Reconstruction (which, as we demonstrate, can also be
viewed as a type of kernel method). Because our approach
is based on a simple kernel formulation, it is easy to analyze
and can be accelerated by general techniques designed for
kernel-based learning. We provide explicit analytical expressions for our kernel and argue that our formulation can
be seen as a generalization of cubic spline interpolation to
higher dimensions. In particular, the RKHS norm associated
with Neural Splines biases toward smooth interpolants.

1. Introduction
Estimating a 3D surface from a scattered point cloud is
a classical and important problem in computer vision and
computer graphics. In this task, the input is a set of 3D points
sampled from an unknown surface and, possibly, normals
of the surface at those points. The goal is to estimate a
representation of the complete surface from which the input
samples were obtained, for example, a polygonal mesh or an
implicit function. This problem is challenging in practice: It
is inherently ill-posed, since an infinite number of surfaces
can interpolate the data. Furthermore, the input 3D points
are often incomplete and noisy, as they are acquired from
range sensors such as LIDAR, structured light, and laser
scans. Ideally, the recovered surface should not interpolate
noise but preserve key features and surface details.
Many early surface reconstruction techniques consider
a kernel formulation of the surface reconstruction problem, using translation-invariant kernels such as biharmonic
RBFs [9], Gaussian kernels [22], or compactly supported
RBFs [34]. Currently, the most widely used method for
∗ Work done prior to joining Amazon

Figure 1. Neural Splines use points (the white dots) and normals
(the white arrows) as input and estimate a scalar function whose
zero level set (the black lines) corresponds to the reconstructed
surface and whose gradient agrees with the normals.

surface reconstruction is Screened Poisson Surface Reconstruction [31], which solves a variant of the Poisson equation
to find an implicit function whose zero-level set produces
an approximating surface. We show in this paper that this
method can also be viewed as a kernel method for a particular
choice of kernel.
More recently, many papers have used neural networks
to represent an implicit function or a local chart in a
manifold atlas as a means of reconstructing a surface
[44, 19, 26, 3, 24, 40, 42]. These methods can be integrated
into a data-driven learning pipeline or directly applied in the
so called “overfitting” regime, where a massively overparameterized (i.e., more parameters than input points) neural
network is fitted to a single input point cloud as a functional

9949

