4D Panoptic LiDAR Segmentation
Mehmet Aygün1 * Aljos̆a Os̆ep1 * Mark Weber1 Maxim Maximov1
Cyrill Stachniss2 Jens Behley2 Laura Leal-Taixé1
1
Technical University of Munich, Germany 2 University of Bonn, Germany
1

{mehmet.ayguen, aljosa.osep, leal.taixe, mark-cs.weber, maxim.maximov}@tum.de
2

{firstname.lastname}@igg.uni-bonn.de

instances

semantics
semantic segmentation

semantics
panoptic segmentation

multi-object tracking

4D panoptic segmentation

Figure 1: Types of LiDAR-based scene understanding. Semantic and panoptic segmentation assign semantic classes and
determine instances in 3D space. Multi-object tracking encompasses 3D object detection in space, followed by association
over time. 4D panoptic LiDAR segmentation jointly tackles semantic and instance segmentation in 3D space over time.

Abstract
Temporal semantic scene understanding is critical for
self-driving cars or robots operating in dynamic environments. In this paper, we propose 4D panoptic LiDAR segmentation to assign a semantic class and a temporallyconsistent instance ID to a sequence of 3D points. To this
end, we present an approach and a point-centric evaluation metric. Our approach determines a semantic class
for every point while modeling object instances as probability distributions in the 4D spatio-temporal domain. We
process multiple point clouds in parallel and resolve pointto-instance associations, effectively alleviating the need for
explicit temporal data association. Inspired by recent advances in benchmarking of multi-object tracking, we propose to adopt a new evaluation metric that separates the
semantic and point-to-instance association aspects of the
task. With this work, we aim at paving the road for future
developments of temporal LiDAR panoptic perception.

1. Introduction
Spatio-temporal interpretation of raw sensory data is important for autonomous vehicles to understand how to interact with the environment and perceive how trajectories of
moving agents evolve in 3D space and time.
* Authors contributed equally.

In the past, different aspects of dynamic scene understanding such as semantic segmentation [22, 18, 48, 72, 85,
69], object detection [23, 62, 40, 65, 64, 66], instance segmentation [28], and multi-object tracking [43, 8, 53, 10,
76, 61, 58] have been tackled independently. The developments in these fields were largely fueled by the rapid
progress in deep learning-based image [37] and point-set
representation learning [59, 60, 72], together with contributions of large-scale datasets, benchmarks, and unified evaluation metrics [44, 22, 25, 19, 17, 74, 26, 5, 18, 13, 68].
In the pursuit of image-based holistic scene understanding,
recent community efforts have been moving towards convergence of tasks, such as multi-object tracking (MOT) and
segmentation [74, 83], and semantic and instance segmentation, i.e., panoptic segmentation [35]. Recently, panoptic segmentation was extended to the video domain [34].
Here, the dataset, task formalization, and evaluation metrics focused on interpreting short and sparsely labeled video
snippets in 3D (2D image+time) in an offline setting. Autonomous vehicles, however, need to continuously interpret
sensory data and localize objects in a 4D continuum.
Tackling sequence-level LiDAR panoptic segmentation
is a challenging problem, since state-of-the-art methods [72] usually need to downsample even single-scan point
clouds to satisfy the memory constraints. Therefore, the
common approach in (3D) multi-object tracking is detect-

5527

