Glance and Gaze: Inferring Action-aware Points for One-Stage Human-Object
Interaction Detection

1

Xubin Zhong1 Xian Qu1 Changxing Ding1,2∗ Dacheng Tao3
South China University of Technology 2 Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou 3 The University of Sydney

{eexubin, eequxian.scut}@mail.scut.edu.cn, chxding@scut.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Modern human-object interaction (HOI) detection approaches can be divided into one-stage methods and twostage ones. One-stage models are more efficient due to their
straightforward architectures, but the two-stage models are
still advantageous in accuracy. Existing one-stage models usually begin by detecting predefined interaction areas
or points, and then attend to these areas only for interaction prediction; therefore, they lack reasoning steps that
dynamically search for discriminative cues. In this paper,
we propose a novel one-stage method, namely Glance and
Gaze Network (GGNet), which adaptively models a set of
action-aware points (ActPoints) via glance and gaze steps. The glance step quickly determines whether each pixel in the feature maps is an interaction point. The gaze
step leverages feature maps produced by the glance step
to adaptively infer ActPoints around each pixel in a progressive manner. Features of the refined ActPoints are aggregated for interaction prediction. Moreover, we design an
action-aware approach that effectively matches each detected interaction with its associated human-object pair, along
with a novel hard negative attentive loss to improve the optimization of GGNet. All the above operations are conducted
simultaneously and efficiently for all pixels in the feature
maps. Finally, GGNet outperforms state-of-the-art methods by significant margins on both V-COCO and HICODET benchmarks. Code of GGNet is available at https:
//github.com/SherlockHolmes221/GGNet.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection is one of the
fundamental tasks in human-centric scene understanding. It
involves not only detecting persons and objects in an image, but also the interactions (verbs) between each humanobject pair. The output of an HOI detection model can
be represented as a set of triplets in the form of <human
∗ Corresponding author

(a) InteractNet

(b) UnionDet

(c) PPDM

(d) GGNet

Figure 1. Comparisons of interaction area definition. Green boxes or points represent the interaction area for “hold tennis racket”,
while the red ones stand for “hit sports ball”. (a) InteractNet [3]
uses the same human bounding box to represent the interaction
area for all interactions pertaining to the person. (b) UnionDet [1]
adopts the union box of one human-object pair to represent their
interaction area. (c) PPDM [10] leverages the middle point of one
human-object pair to represent their interaction area. (d) GGNet
employs a single set of dynamic points to adaptively capture informative areas for the interaction between each human-object pair.

interaction object>, and each triplet is also referred to as
a single HOI category. For example, there are two HOI categories in Figure 1, i.e. <human hold tennis racket>
and <human hit sports ball>.
According to the order in which object detection and
interaction detection is performed, modern HOI detection
methods can be divided into one-stage and two-stage approaches. Two-stage methods must perform the object detection first and then identify the interactions between
each possible human-object pair. However, because the two stages are separated in this approach, these methods are
usually inefficient. By contrast, one-stage methods can per-

13234

