ClassSR: A General Framework to Accelerate Super-Resolution Networks by
Data Characteristic
Xiangtao Kong1,2
Hengyuan Zhao1
Yu Qiao1,3
Chao Dong1,4 ∗
1
Key Laboratory of Human-Machine Intelligence-Synergy Systems,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shanghai AI Lab, Shanghai, China
4
SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
{xt.kong, hy.zhao1, yu.qiao, chao.dong}@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
We aim at accelerating super-resolution (SR) networks
on large images (2K-8K). The large images are usually decomposed into small sub-images in practical usages. Based
on this processing, we found that different image regions
have different restoration difficulties and can be processed
by networks with different capacities. Intuitively, smooth
areas are easier to super-solve than complex textures. To
utilize this property, we can adopt appropriate SR networks
to process different sub-images after the decomposition. On
this basis, we propose a new solution pipeline – ClassSR
that combines classification and SR in a unified framework.
In particular, it first uses a Class-Module to classify the subimages into different classes according to restoration difficulties, then applies an SR-Module to perform SR for different classes. The Class-Module is a conventional classification network, while the SR-Module is a network container
that consists of the to-be-accelerated SR network and its
simplified versions. We further introduce a new classification method with two losses – Class-Loss and Average-Loss
to produce the classification results. After joint training, a
majority of sub-images will pass through smaller networks,
thus the computational cost can be significantly reduced.
Experiments show that our ClassSR can help most existing
methods (e.g., FSRCNN, CARN, SRResNet, RCAN) save up
to 50% FLOPs on DIV8K datasets. This general framework
can also be applied in other low-level vision tasks.

1. Introduction
Image super-resolution (SR) is a long-studied topic,
which aims to generate a high-resolution visual-pleasing
∗ Corresponding author (e-mail: chao.dong@siat.ac.cn)

ClassSR-FSRCNN: 36.97dB / 256M
(FSRCNN: 36.81dB / 468M)

Simple

Medium

Hard

Figure 1. The SR result (x4) of ClassSR-FSRCNN. The ClassModule classifies the image “0896” (DIV2K) into 56% simple,
20% medium and 24% hard sub-images. Compared with FSRCNN, ClassSR-FSRCNN uses only 55% FLOPs to achieve the
same performance.

image from a low-resolution input. In this paper, we
study how to accelerate SR algorithms on “large” input images, which will be upsampled to at least 2K resolution
(2048×1080). While in real-world usages, the image/video
resolution for smartphones and TV monitors has already
reached 4K (4096 × 2160), or even 8K (7680 × 4320). As
most recent SR algorithms are built on CNNs, the memory and computational cost will grow quadratically with the
input size. Thus it is necessary to decompose input into subimages and continuously accelerate SR algorithms to meet
the requirement of real-time implementation on real images.
Recent works on SR acceleration focus on proposing
light-weight network structures, e.g., from the early FSRCNN [6] to the latest CARN [2], which are detailed in the
Sec. 2. We tackle this problem from a different perspective. Instead of designing a faster model, we propose a new
processing pipeline that could accelerate most SR methods.
Above all, we draw the observation that different image regions require different network complexities (see Sec. 3.1).
For example, the flat area (e.g., sky, land) is naturally easier
to process than textures (e.g., hair, feathers). This indicates

12016

