Capsule Network is Not More Robust than Convolutional Network
Jindong Gu1 , Volker Tresp1 , Han Hu2
University of Munich1
Microsoft Research Asia2
jindong.gu@outlook.com, volker.tresp@siemens.com, hanhu@microsoft.com

Abstract
The Capsule Network is widely believed to be more robust than Convolutional Networks. However, there are no
comprehensive comparisons between these two networks,
and it is also unknown which components in the CapsNet
affect its robustness. In this paper, we first carefully examine the special designs in CapsNet that differ from that of
a ConvNet commonly used for image classification. The
examination reveals five major new/different components
in CapsNet: a transformation process, a dynamic routing layer, a squashing function, a marginal loss other than
cross-entropy loss, and an additional class-conditional reconstruction loss for regularization. Along with these major differences, we conduct comprehensive ablation studies
on three kinds of robustness, including affine transformation, overlapping digits, and semantic representation. The
study reveals that some designs, which are thought critical
to CapsNet, actually can harm its robustness, i.e., the dynamic routing layer and the transformation process, while
others are beneficial for the robustness. Based on these findings, we propose enhanced ConvNets simply by introducing the essential components behind the CapsNet’s success.
The proposed simple ConvNets can achieve better robustness than the CapsNet.

ferences in design between the capsule networks and the
common convolutional networks adopted for image classification. A common convolutional network follows a simple
algorithm flow, using a backbone convolutional network to
extract image features, a global average pooling layer plus a
linear layer to produce the classification logits (or optionally
several fully connected layers [13]), and an N -way SoftMax loss to drive the learning. To be better aligned with
the capsule (vector) representations, the capsule networks
introduce several special components. These components
involve (see Fig. 1 for detailed architectures):
• a non-shared transformation module, in which the primary capsules are transformed to execute votes by
non-shared transformation matrices;
• a dynamic routing layer to automatically group input
capsules to produce output capsules with high agreements in each output capsule;
• a squashing function, which is applied to squash the
capsule vectors such that their lengths distribute in the
range of [0, 1);
• a marginal classification loss to work together with the
squashed capsule representations;
• a class-conditional reconstruction sub-network with a
reconstruction loss, targeting at recovering the original image from the capsule representations. This subnetwork acts as a regularization force, in complementary to the classification loss.

1. Introduction
The Capsule network (CapsNet) [24] was proposed to
address the intrinsic limitations of convolutional networks
(ConvNet) [14], such as the exponential inefficiency and
the lack of robustness to affine transformations. In recent
years, It has been sugested that CapsNets have the potential to surpass the dominant convolutional networks in these
aspects [24, 8, 21, 3, 2, 16]. However, there lack comprehensive comparisons to support this assumption, and even
for some reported improvements, there are no solid ablation studies to figure out which ones of the components in
CapsNets are, in fact, effective.
In this paper, we first carefully examine the major dif-

Unlike previous studies [24, 8] which usually takes CapsNet as a whole to test its robustness, we instead try to study
the effects of each of the above components in their effectiveness on robustness. We consider the three different aspects shown in [24]:
• the robustness to affine transformations,
• the ability to recognizing overlapping digits,
• the semantic representation compactness.

14309

