Natural Adversarial Examples
Dan Hendrycks
UC Berkeley

Kevin Zhao*
University of Washington

Steven Basart*
UChicago

Fox Squirrel

1. Introduction
Research on the ImageNet [10] benchmark has led to
numerous advances in classification [36], object detection
[34], and segmentation [21]. ImageNet classification
improvements are broadly applicable and highly predictive
of improvements on many tasks [35]. Improvements on
ImageNet classification have been so great that some
call ImageNet classifiers “superhuman” [23]. However,
performance is decidedly subhuman when the test distribution does not match the training distribution [26]. The
distribution seen at test-time can include inclement weather
conditions and obscured objects, and it can also include
objects that are anomalous.
Recht et al., 2019 [42] remind us that ImageNet test
* Equal Contribution.

Dragonfly

Manhole Cover (99%)

Photosphere

Jellyfish (99%) Verdigris

Jigsaw Puzzle (99%)

ImageNet-O

We introduce two challenging datasets that reliably
cause machine learning model performance to substantially
degrade. The datasets are collected with a simple adversarial filtration technique to create datasets with limited
spurious cues. Our datasets’ real-world, unmodified examples transfer to various unseen models reliably, demonstrating that computer vision models have shared weaknesses. The first dataset is called I MAGE N ET-A and is
like the ImageNet test set, but it is far more challenging
for existing models. We also curate an adversarial out-ofdistribution detection dataset called I MAGE N ET-O, which
is the first out-of-distribution detection dataset created for
ImageNet models. On I MAGE N ET-A a DenseNet-121 obtains around 2% accuracy, an accuracy drop of approximately 90%, and its out-of-distribution detection performance on I MAGE N ET-O is near random chance levels.
We find that existing data augmentation techniques hardly
boost performance, and using other public training datasets
provides improvements that are limited. However, we find
that improvements to computer vision architectures provide
a promising path towards robust models.

Sea Lion (99%)

ImageNet-A

Abstract

Jacob Steinhardt, Dawn Song
UC Berkeley

Figure 1: Natural adversarial examples from I MAGE N ET-A
and I MAGE N ET-O. The black text is the actual class, and
the red text is a ResNet-50 prediction and its confidence.
I MAGE N ET-A contains images that classifiers should be
able to classify, while I MAGE N ET-O contains anomalies of
unforeseen classes which should result in low-confidence
predictions. ImageNet-1K models do not train on examples from “Photosphere” nor “Verdigris” classes, so these
images are anomalous. Most natural adversarial examples
lead to wrong predictions despite occurring naturally.
examples tend to be simple, clear, close-up images, so that
the current test set may be too easy and may not represent
harder images encountered in the real world. Geirhos et
al., 2020 argue that image classification datasets contain
“spurious cues” or “shortcuts” [16, 2]. For instance, models
may use an image’s background to predict the foreground
object’s class; a cow tends to co-occur with a green pasture,
and even though the background is inessential to the
object’s identity, models may predict “cow” primarily using
the green pasture background cue. When datasets contain
115262

