BASAR:Black-box Attack on Skeletal Action Recognition
Yunfeng Diao1,2∗, Tianjia Shao3†, Yong-Liang Yang4 , Kun Zhou3 , He Wang1‡
1
University of Leeds, UK 2 Southwest Jiaotong University, China
3
State Key Lab of CAD&CG, Zhejiang University, China 4 University of Bath, UK
dyf@my.swjtu.edu.cn, tjshao@zju.edu.cn, y.yang@cs.bath.ac.uk, kunzhou@zju.edu.cn, h.e.wang@leeds.ac.uk

Abstract
Skeletal motion plays a vital role in human activity
recognition as either an independent data source or a complement [33]. The robustness of skeleton-based activity
recognizers has been questioned recently [29, 50], which
shows that they are vulnerable to adversarial attacks when
the full-knowledge of the recognizer is accessible to the attacker. However, this white-box requirement is overly restrictive in most scenarios and the attack is not truly threatening. In this paper, we show that such threats do exist
under black-box settings too. To this end, we propose the
first black-box adversarial attack method BASAR. Through
BASAR, we show that adversarial attack is not only truly
a threat but also can be extremely deceitful, because onmanifold adversarial samples are rather common in skeletal motions, in contrast to the common belief that adversarial samples only exist off-manifold [18]. Through exhaustive evaluation and comparison, we show that BASAR
can deliver successful attacks across models, data, and attack modes. Through harsh perceptual studies, we show
that it achieves effective yet imperceptible attacks. By analyzing the attack on different activity recognizers, BASAR
helps identify the potential causes of their vulnerability and
provides insights on what classifiers are likely to be more
robust against attack.

1. Introduction
Deep learning methods have been proven to be vulnerable to carefully devised data perturbations since first identified in [45]. This causes major concerns especially in safety
and security [1], as the perturbations are imperceptible to
humans but destructive to machine intelligence. Consequently, how to detect and defend attacks has also been investigated [6]. While the attack on static data (e.g. images,
texts, graphs) has been widely studied, the attack on time∗ The research was conducted during the visit to the University of Leeds.
† Corresponding author
‡ https://youtu.be/PjWgwnAkV8g

series data has only been recently explored [23, 16]. In this
paper, we look into a specific yet important type of time
series data, skeletal motions, under adversarial attack.
Skeletal motion is crucial in activity recognition as it increases the robustness by mitigating issues such as lighting,
occlusion, view angles, etc [37]. Therefore, the vulnerability of skeleton-based classifiers under adversarial attack
has recently drawn attention [29, 61, 50]. Albeit identifying a key issue that needs to be addressed, their methods are
essentially white-box methods. The attempt on black-box
attack is via surrogate models, i.e. attack a classifier in a
white-box manner then use the results to attack the target
classifier. While white-box attack requires the full knowledge of the attacked model which is unlikely to be available
in real-world scenarios, black-box attack via surrogate models cannot guarantee success due to its heavy dependence
on the choice of the surrogate model [51]. In this paper, we
propose BASAR, the very first black-box attack method on
skeletal action recognition to our best knowledge.
A skeletal motion has unique features that distinguish
itself from other data under adversarial attack. First, a
skeleton usually has less than 100 Degrees of freedom
(Dofs), much smaller than previously attacked data such
as images/meshes. This low dimensionality leads to lowredundancy [46], restricting possible attacks within small
subspaces. Second, imperceptibility is a prerequisite for any
successful attack, but its evaluation on skeletal motions is
under-explored. Different from the attack where visual imperceptibility has high correlations mainly with the perturbation magnitude (e.g. images), a skeletal motion has dynamics that are well-recognized by human perceptual systems. More specifically, any sparse attack, e.g. on individual joints or individual frames, albeit small would break the
dynamics and therefore be easily perceptible. In contrast,
coordinated attacks on all joints and frames can provide better imperceptibility even when perturbations are relatively
large [50]. As a result, using the perturbation magnitude
alone (as in most existing methods) is not a reliable metric
for skeletal motion. Last but not least, prior methods mainly
assume that adversarial samples are off the data manifold

7597

