Bipartite Graph Network with Adaptive Message Passing
for Unbiased Scene Graph Generation
Rongjie Li1,3,4 Songyang Zhang 1,3,4 Bo Wan 1,5, * Xuming He1,2
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
2
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
3
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
Department of Electrical Engineering(ESAT), KU Leuven
{lirj2, zhangsy, wanbo, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
1

Abstract

Board
Light

Scene graph generation is an important visual understanding task with a broad range of vision applications.
Despite recent tremendous progress, it remains challenging
due to the intrinsic long-tailed class distribution and large
intra-class variation. To address these issues, we introduce
a novel confidence-aware bipartite graph neural network
with adaptive message propagation mechanism for unbiased scene graph generation. In addition, we propose an
efficient bi-level data resampling strategy to alleviate the
imbalanced data distribution problem in training our graph
network. Our approach achieves superior or competitive
performance over previous methods on several challenging
datasets, including Visual Genome, Open Images V4/V6,
demonstrating its effectiveness and generality.

1. Introduction
Scene graph generation, which aims to detect visual objects and their relationships (or triplets: <subject, predicate, object>) in an image, is a fundamental visual understanding task. Such a compact structural scene representation has potential applications in many vision tasks
such as visual question answering [41, 37, 11], image
captioning [54] and image retrieval [14]. Tremendous
progress has been made recently in scene graph generation [20, 50, 23, 59, 53, 22, 40, 3, 8, 60, 39, 27, 45], thanks
to learned visual representations and advances in object detection. However, this task remains particularly challenging due to large variations in visual relationships, extremely
* This work was done when Bo Wan was a master student in ShanghaiTech University.This work was supported by Shanghai NSF Grant
(No. 18ZR1425100). Code is available: https://github.com/
Scarecrow0/BGNN-SGG

Carry
Car

(A) Input Image

Light Board
?

?

Bag
Person
Person
Person

Behind

Car

(B) Propagating connection

Carry

Light

Bag

Carry
Carry

Car
Behind

Person
Person

Car Person

(C) GT Scene Graph

(D) The Upper-bound filtering performance comparison

Figure 1: The illustration of biased scene graph generation and empirical study on Visual Genome. As shown
in (D), the baseline (MSDN [23]) performance is dominated
by the head categories due to the imbalanced data. We estimate an upper-bound performance by ignoring negative
predicate-entity connections during message propagation,
as shown in (B). Its performance (shown in (D)) indicates a
large room for improvement in context modeling.

imbalanced object and relation distribution and lack of sufficient annotations for many categories.
One primary challenge, which causes biased relationship prediction, is the intrinsic long-tail data distribution.
A scene graph model has to simultaneously cope with imbalanced annotations among the head and medium-sized
categories, and few-shot learning in the tail categories.
A naively learned model will be largely dominated by
those few head categories with much degraded performance
for many tail categories (as shown in Fig. 1-D). Early
work [1, 4] on re-balancing data distribution focus on data
111109

