Decoupled Dynamic Filter Networks
Jingkai Zhou12∗ Varun Jampani3 Zhixiong Pi24 Qiong Liu1† Ming-Hsuan Yang235
1

South China University of Technology
4

2

University of California at Merced

Huazhong University of Science and Technology

5

3

Google Research

Yonsei University

Abstract
Convolution is one of the basic building blocks of CNN
architectures. Despite its common use, standard convolution has two main shortcomings: Content-agnostic and
Computation-heavy. Dynamic filters are content-adaptive,
while further increasing the computational overhead.
Depth-wise convolution is a lightweight variant, but it usually leads to a drop in CNN performance or requires a
larger number of channels. In this work, we propose the
Decoupled Dynamic Filter (DDF) that can simultaneously
tackle both of these shortcomings. Inspired by recent advances in attention, DDF decouples a depth-wise dynamic
filter into spatial and channel dynamic filters. This decomposition considerably reduces the number of parameters
and limits computational costs to the same level as depthwise convolution. Meanwhile, we observe a significant
boost in performance when replacing standard convolution
with DDF in classification networks. ResNet50 / 101 get
improved by 1.9% and 1.3% on the top-1 accuracy, while
their computational costs are reduced by nearly half. Experiments on the detection and joint upsampling networks
also demonstrate the superior performance of the DDF upsampling variant (DDF-Up) in comparison with standard
convolution and specialized content-adaptive layers. The
project page with code is available1 .

1. Introduction
Convolution is a fundamental building block of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) that have seen tremendous
success in several computer vision tasks, such as image
classification, semantic segmentation, pose estimation, to
name a few. Thanks to its simple formulation and optimized implementations, convolution has become a de facto
standard to propagate and integrate features across image
pixels. In this work, we aim to alleviate two of its main
shortcomings: Content-agnostic and Computation-heavy.
Content-agnostic. Spatial-invariance is one of the prominent properties of a standard convolution. That is, convolu∗ Work carried out during the visit of J. Zhou and Z. Pi at UC Merced
† Corresponding author
1 https://thefoxofsky.github.io/project_pages/ddf

Figure 1. Comparison between convolution, the dynamic filter,
and DDF. Top: Convolution shares a static filter among pixels
and samples. Medium: The dynamic filter generates one complete
filter for each pixel via a separate branch. Bottom: DDF decouples
the dynamic filter into spatial and channel ones.

tion filters are shared across all the pixels in an image. Consider the sample road scene shown in Figure 1 (top). The
convolution filters are shared across different regions such
as buildings, cars, roads, etc. Given the varied nature of
contents in a scene, a spatially shared filter may not be optimal to capture features across different image regions [52,
42]. In addition, once a CNN is trained, the same convolution filters are used across different images (for instance images taken in daylight and at night). In short, standard convolution filters are content-agnostic and are shared across
images and pixels, leading to sub-optimal feature learning.
Several existing works [23, 48, 42, 57, 49, 45, 22, 11] propose different types of content-adaptive (dynamic) filters for
CNNs. However, these dynamic filters are either computeintensive [57, 23], memory-intensive [42, 22], or specialized processing units [11, 48, 49, 45]. As a result, most
of the existing dynamic filters can not completely replace

6647

