DER: Dynamically Expandable Representation for Class Incremental Learning
Shipeng Yan1,3,4∗ Jiangwei Xie1∗ Xuming He1,2
1
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
2
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
3
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{yanshp, xiejw, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn
Abstract

Joint

We address the problem of class incremental learning,
which is a core step towards achieving adaptive vision intelligence. In particular, we consider the task setting of incremental learning with limited memory and aim to achieve
better stability-plasticity trade-off. To this end, we propose
a novel two-stage learning approach that utilizes a dynamically expandable representation for more effective incremental concept modeling. Specifically, at each incremental
step, we freeze the previously learned representation and
augment it with additional feature dimensions from a new
learnable feature extractor. This enables us to integrate new
visual concepts with retaining learned knowledge. We dynamically expand the representation according to the complexity of novel concepts by introducing a channel-level
mask-based pruning strategy. Moreover, we introduce an
auxiliary loss to encourage the model to learn diverse and
discriminate features for novel concepts. We conduct extensive experiments on the three class incremental learning
benchmarks and our method consistently outperforms other
methods with a large margin.1

1. Introduction
Human can easily accumulate visual knowledge from
past experiences and incrementally learn novel concepts.
Inspired by this, the problem of class incremental learning
aims to design algorithms that can learn novel concepts in
a sequential manner and eventually perform well on all observed classes. Such capability is indispensable for many
real-world applications such as the intelligent robot [31],
face recognition [19] and autonomous driving [25]. However, achieving human-level incremental learning remains
∗ Both authors contributed equally. This work was supported by Shanghai NSF Grant (No. 18ZR1425100)
1 Code is available at https://github.com/Rhyssiyan/DERClassIL.pytorch.

Average Accuracy (%)

78
73

Ours
WA
BiC

68
63

iCaRL

58
53

100

UCIR

RPSNet

PODNet
101

#Parameters(Millions) - log scale

Figure 1: The average incremental accuracy for different
model size. We compare our model with prior methods
(WA[39], BiC[12], RPSNet[26], iCaRL[27], UCIR[12],
PODNet[6]) and the model trained on all the data (Joint)
on the experiment CIFAR100-B0 of 10 steps.

challenging for modern visual recognition systems.
There has been much effort attempting to address the incremental learning in literature [36, 23, 27, 3, 12, 33, 39].
Among them, perhaps the most effective strategy is to keep
a memory buffer that stores part of observed data for the
rehearsal [28, 29] in future. However, due to the limited
size of data memory, such the incremental learning method
still faces several typical challenges in the general continual
learning task. In particular, it requires a model to effectively incorporate novel concepts without forgetting the existing knowledge, which is also known as stability-plasticity
dilemma [9]. In detail, excessive plasticity often causes
large performance degradation of the old categories, referred to as catastrophic forgetting [8]. On the contrary, excessive stability impedes the adaptation of novel concepts.
Most existing works attempt to achieve a trade-off between stability and plasticity by gradually updating data
representation and class decision boundary for increasingly

3014

