Point2Skeleton: Learning Skeletal Representations from Point Clouds
Cheng Lin1 Changjian Li2∗ Yuan Liu1 Nenglun Chen1 Yi-King Choi1 Wenping Wang1,3∗
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 University College London 3 Texas A&M University

Abstract
We introduce Point2Skeleton, an unsupervised method
to learn skeletal representations from point clouds. Existing skeletonization methods are limited to tubular shapes
and the stringent requirement of watertight input, while our
method aims to produce more generalized skeletal representations for complex structures and handle point clouds. Our
key idea is to use the insights of the medial axis transform
(MAT) to capture the intrinsic geometric and topological
natures of the original input points. We first predict a set of
skeletal points by learning a geometric transformation, and
then analyze the connectivity of the skeletal points to form
skeletal mesh structures. Extensive evaluations and comparisons show our method has superior performance and
robustness. The learned skeletal representation will benefit
several unsupervised tasks for point clouds, such as surface
reconstruction and segmentation.

1. Introduction
Generating skeleton-based representations to capture the
underlying shape structures is a classic problem in computer vision and computer graphics. Skeletonization has
been shown to benefit various tasks including shape recognition [4,40], 3D reconstruction [38,43], segmentation [24],
shape matching [34, 36], pose estimation [28, 32], action
recognition [21,33] and animation [5]. Extracting skeletons
of 3D shapes using hand-crafted rules [3, 26, 37] has been
researched for decades. With the recent advances in 3D vision with deep learning, predicting curve skeletons for 3D
shapes using networks [44] is beginning to be studied.
In fact, the existing methods only target a specific category of shapes that can be abstracted appropriately by curve
segments, i.e., shapes composed of tubular parts. Also, generating an internal representation, such as the skeleton, for
a 3D shape heavily relies on watertight surface meshes to
explicitly give inside/outside classification labels and precisely compute certain geometric functions [12, 14]. These
* corresponding authors

Geometric
Transform

Connectivity
Analysis

Skeletal Points

Point Cloud

Skeletal Mesh

Figure 1. We introduce an unsupervised method to learn skeletal
meshes from point clouds. The skeletal meshes contain both 1D
curve segments and 2D surface sheets which can represent underlying structures of various shapes.

restrictions critically limit the applicability of the existing
skeletonization methods. Hence, it is imperative to develop
an effective method for computing a generalized skeletal
representation for an arbitrary 3D shape. Such a skeletonization method should be able to handle general input
beyond the closed surface, such as point clouds with missing parts, in order to significantly extend the utility of skeleton in various computer vision and graphics tasks.
surface
medial axis
radius
maximal circle

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 2. Illustration of the medial axis transformation (MAT) and
the skeletal mesh. (a) The MAT of a 2D shape; (b) the original
MAT of a 3D shape; (c) the skeletal mesh.

We observe that the medial axis transform (MAT), one
of the best known examples of skeletal representation, has
a rigorous mathematical definition for arbitrary shapes, unlike the curve skeleton which is only empirically understood
for tubular objects. Given a 3D shape, the MAT [8] is defined as the set of points in the interior with more than one
closest point on the boundary surface; the MAT encodes the
shape to a lower-dimensional representation with the associated radius function. The examples are shown in Fig. 2.
Despite its simple definition, the MAT is difficult to use

4277

