Learnable Motion Coherence for Correspondence Pruning
Yuan Liu1 Lingjie Liu2 Cheng Lin1 Zhen Dong3 Wenping Wang1,4∗
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 MPI Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus
3
Wuhan University 4 Texas A&M University

Abstract
Motion coherence is an important clue for distinguishing true correspondences from false ones. Modeling motion coherence on sparse putative correspondences is challenging due to their sparsity and uneven distributions. Existing works on motion coherence are sensitive to parameter settings and have difficulty in dealing with complex motion patterns. In this paper, we introduce a network called
Laplacian Motion Coherence Network (LMCNet) to learn
motion coherence property for correspondence pruning. We
propose a novel formulation of fitting coherent motions with
a smooth function on a graph of correspondences and show
that this formulation allows a closed-form solution by graph
Laplacian. This closed-form solution enables us to design
a differentiable layer in a learning framework to capture
global motion coherence from putative correspondences.
The global motion coherence is further combined with local
coherence extracted by another local layer to robustly detect inlier correspondences. Experiments demonstrate that
LMCNet has superior performances to the state of the art in
relative camera pose estimation and correspondences pruning of dynamic scenes1 .

1. Introduction
Estimating correspondences between two images is a
fundamental problem in computer vision tasks such as
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [19], visual localization [45],
image stitching [10] and visual SLAM [32]. A standard
pipeline of correspondence estimation relies on local feature matching to establish a set of putative correspondences,
which contains numerous false correspondences (i.e., outliers). To prevent outliers from affecting downstream tasks,
a correspondence pruning algorithm is usually applied to
select a reliable subset consisting of true correspondences
(i.e., inliers). The most prevalent correspondence pruning
methods are RANSAC [18] and its variants [52, 14, 2, 12],
∗ Corresponding author
1 Code and supplementary material can be found in the project page:
https://liuyuan-pal.github.io/LMCNet/

Plausible epipolar geometric models

...

(a) Putative
correspondences

(b) Geometric model (i)

(c) Geometric model (ii)

LMCNet

(d) Global coherence
fitting

(e) Local consistency
extraction

(f) Inlier probability

Figure 1. Given a set of putative correspondences (a), multiple
plausible epipolar geometries exist, e.g. (b) and (c). However, true
correspondences (c) are usually motion coherent while false ones
(b) are not. In this paper, we design a network called LMCNet to
explicitly utilize the motion coherence of correspondences via a
global coherence fitting (d) and a local consistency extraction (e).
Hence, LMCNet is able to robustly predict their inlier probabilities
(f), where brighter color means higher inlier probability.

which detect true correspondences by finding the largest
subset conforming to a task-specific geometric model such
as epipolar geometry or homography. However, due to large
outlier ratios of putative correspondences, multiple plausible geometric models may exist, which makes it difficult for
RANSAC and its variants to identify the correct geometric
model.
Besides the task-specific geometric model, true correspondences also conform to a more general motion model
called motion coherence, which means that neighboring
pixels share similar motions, while false correspondences
are usually randomly scattered, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a-c).
Motion coherence supplements the task-specific geometric
model and is key to determining true correspondences when
multiple plausible geometric models exist.
To model motion coherence, existing works propose local [5, 29] or global handcrafted rules [23, 22] to find coherent correspondences. However, modeling motion coherence
on sparse correspondences generated by local descriptors is
challenging. First, unlike in tasks of dense correspondence

3237

