PhySG: Inverse Rendering with Spherical Gaussians for
Physics-based Material Editing and Relighting
Kai Zhang∗

Fujun Luan∗

Qianqian Wang

Kavita Bala

Noah Snavely

Cornell University

Abstract
We present PhySG, an end-to-end inverse rendering
pipeline that includes a fully differentiable renderer, and
can reconstruct geometry, materials, and illumination from
scratch from a set of images. Our framework represents
specular BRDFs and environmental illumination using mixtures of spherical Gaussians, and represents geometry as
a signed distance function parameterized as a Multi-Layer
Perceptron. The use of spherical Gaussians allows us to
efficiently solve for approximate light transport, and our
method works on scenes with challenging non-Lambertian
reflectance captured under natural, static illumination. We
demonstrate, with both synthetic and real data, that our reconstructions not only enable rendering of novel viewpoints,
but also physics-based appearance editing of materials and
illumination.

1. Introduction
Vision as inverse graphics has long been an intriguing
concept. Solving inverse rendering problems, i.e., recovering shape, material and lighting from images, has thus
been a long-standing goal. Recently, neural rendering methods [46, 54, 29, 31, 25, 55, 21, 32, 28, 44, 43, 35, 4, 47],
have drawn significant attention due to their remarkable success in a range of problems, including shape reconstruction,
novel view synthesis, non-physically-based relighting, and
surface reflectance map estimation. These neural rendering
methods adopt scene representations that are either physical,
neural, or a mixture of both, along with a neural-networkbased renderer. Methods that reconstruct textures or radiance
fields [25, 54, 31] work well for the task of interpolating
novel views, but do not factorize appearance into lighting
and materials, precluding physically-based appearance manipulation like material editing or relighting.
* Authors contributed equally to this work.
† Project page: https://kai- 46.github.io/PhySG-

website/.

Figure 1: PhySG performs physics-based inverse rendering by
taking as input multi-view images of a static glossy object under
static natural illumination and jointly optimizes for geometry (represented by an SDF), material BRDF and environment maps (both
represented by a mixture of spherical Gaussians), which can then
be used for novel view synthesis, relighting and material editing.

Prior multi-view inverse rendering methods assume
RGBD input [35, 4] or varying illumination across input
images achieved either by co-locating an active flashlight
with moving cameras [7, 8, 40, 30] or capturing objects on
a turntable with a fixed camera [51, 10]. Learning-based
single-view methods that recover shape, illumination, and
material properties have also been proposed [20, 5].
In this work, we tackle the multi-view inverse rendering problem under the challenging setting of normal RGB
input images sharing the same static illumination, without assuming scanned geometry. To this end, we propose
PhySG, an end-to-end physically-based differentiable rendering pipeline to jointly estimate lighting, material, geometry and surface normals from posed multi-view images of
specular objects. In our pipeline, we represent shape using
signed distance functions (SDFs), building on their successful use in recent work [54, 15, 34, 24, 58]. Additionally,
a key component of our framework is our use of spherical Gaussians to approximate lighting and specular BRDFs
allowing for efficient approximate evaluation of light transport [53]. From 2D images alone, our method jointly reconstructs shape, illumination, and materials and allows for

5453

