OSTeC: One-Shot Texture Completion
Baris Gecer, Jiankang Deng, and Stefanos Zafeiriou
Imperial College London, Huawei CBG
{b.gecer, j.deng16, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk
{baris.gecer, jiankangdeng, stefanos.zafeiriou1}@huawei.com

Figure 1: Face frontalization and UV texture completion by our approach. The first row is the input, the second row is the
frontalization result, and the third row is the completed UV texture. The proposed method can produce photo-realistic and
identity-preserved full UV textures even under extreme poses.

Abstract
The last few years have witnessed the great success of
non-linear generative models in synthesizing high-quality
photorealistic face images. Many recent 3D facial texture
reconstruction and pose manipulation from a single image approaches still rely on large and clean face datasets
to train image-to-image Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs). Yet the collection of such a large scale highresolution 3D texture dataset is still very costly and difficult
to maintain age/ethnicity balance. Moreover, regressionbased approaches suffer from generalization to the in-thewild conditions and are unable to fine-tune to a targetimage. In this work, we propose an unsupervised approach
for one-shot 3D facial texture completion that does not require large-scale texture datasets, but rather harnesses the
knowledge stored in 2D face generators. The proposed approach rotates an input image in 3D and fill-in the unseen
regions by reconstructing the rotated image in a 2D face
generator, based on the visible parts. Finally, we stitch the
most visible textures at different angles in the UV imageplane. Further, we frontalize the target image by project-

ing the completed texture into the generator. The qualitative and quantitative experiments demonstrate that the
completed UV textures and frontalized images are of high
quality, resembles the original identity, can be used to train
a texture GAN model for 3DMM fitting and improve poseinvariant face recognition.1

1. Introduction
The problem of 3D face texture completion (as shown in
Fig. 2) refers generally to the problem of recovering near
ear-to-ear visible and non-visible colour from a single image [11] in a “canonical”, deformation-free parameterization of the face surface (usually referred as UV-space). A
very similar problem is that of producing arbitrary face rotations from a single image [51, 5]. Both of the above
problems have important applications in many different domains of face analysis such as pose-invariant face recognition [11, 5], as well developing of 3D Morphable Model
(3DMM) algorithms [6, 19] and creating complete head
1 Project Page: https://github.com/barisgecer/OSTeC

7628

