Spatiotemporal Registration for Event-based Visual Odometry
Daqi Liu
Álvaro Parra
Tat-Jun Chin
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide
{daqi.liu, alvaro.parrabustos, tat-jun.chin}@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract

Spatiotemporal
Registration (STR)

A useful application of event sensing is visual odometry,
especially in settings that require high-temporal resolution.
The state-of-the-art method of contrast maximisation recovers the motion from a batch of events by maximising the
contrast of the image of warped events. However, the cost
scales with image resolution and the temporal resolution
can be limited by the need for large batch sizes to yield sufficient structure in the contrast image1 . In this work, we propose spatiotemporal registration as a compelling technique
for event-based rotational motion estimation. We theoretically justify the approach and establish its fundamental and
practical advantages over contrast maximisation. In particular, spatiotemporal registration also produces feature
tracks as a by-product, which directly supports an efficient
visual odometry pipeline with graph-based optimisation for
motion averaging. The simplicity of our visual odometry
pipeline allows it to process more than 1 M events/second.
We also contribute a new event dataset for visual odometry,
where motion sequences with large velocity variations were
acquired using a high-precision robot arm2 .

1. Introduction
Due to their ability to asynchronously detect intensity
changes, event sensors are well suited for conducting visual
odometry (VO) in applications that require high temporal
resolution [16, 28, 43, 26, 41], e.g., high-agility robotic manipulation, fast manoeuvring aerial vehicles. However, to
fully reap the benefits of event sensing for VO, efficient algorithms are required to process event streams with lowlatency to accurately recover the experienced motion.
An event sensor produces an event stream S = {e},
where each e = (u, t, p) is a tuple containing the 2D image
coordinates u, time stamp t and polarity p associated with
a brightness change that exceeded the preset threshold. In
scenarios where the event camera (i.e., event sensor plus optics and other components) moves in a static environment,

Warp

IWE

STR result

Generation

Spatiotemporal
Contrast

consistency

Maximisation

maximisation

Figure 1. Conceptual difference between contrast maximisation
and spatiotemporal registration for event-based motion estimation.

the events are triggered mainly by the camera motion. The
goal of VO is to recover the camera motion from S.
Many event-based VO methods [47, 35, 20, 34] conduct
“batching”, where small subsets of S are processed incrementally. Each batch E = {ei }N
i=1 ⊂ S is acquired over
a time window T = [α, β], where each ei = (ui , ti , pi ) is
associated with a 3D point in the camera FOV that triggered
ei at time ti ∈ T . The core task is to estimate the relative
motion M between α and β from E. The estimated M is
then subject to the broader VO pipeline (more in Sec. 2).

1.1. Contrast maximisation
A state-of-the-art approach to estimate M from E is contrast maximisation (CM) [19]. Parametrising M by a vector
ω ∈ Ω and letting D = {xj }P
j=1 be the image domain (the
set of pixel coordinates) of the event sensor, each candidate
ω yields the image of warped events (IWE)

1 See supplementary material for demonstration program.

H(xj ; ω) =

2 Dataset: https://github.com/liudaqikk/RobotEvt

N
X
i=1

14937

κδ (xj − f (ui , ti ; ω)),

(1)

