Restore from Restored: Video Restoration with Pseudo Clean Video
Seunghwan Lee1 , Donghyeon Cho2 , Jiwon Kim3 , Tae Hyun Kim*1
seunghwanlee@hanyang.ac.kr, cdh12242@gmail.com, ai.kim@sk.com, taehyunkim@hanyang.ac.kr
1

2

Dept. of Computer Science, Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea
Dept. of Electronic Engineering, Chungnam National University, Daejeon, Korea
3
SKT Vision AI Labs/T-Brain X, Seoul, Korea

Abstract
In this study, we propose a self-supervised video denoising method called “restore-from-restored.” This method
fine-tunes a pre-trained network by using a pseudo clean
video during the test phase. The pseudo clean video is obtained by applying a noisy video to the baseline network.
By adopting a fully convolutional neural network (FCN) as
the baseline, we can improve video denoising performance
without accurate optical flow estimation and registration
steps, in contrast to many conventional video restoration
methods, due to the translation equivariant property of the
FCN. Specifically, the proposed method can take advantage
of plentiful similar patches existing across multiple consecutive frames (i.e., patch-recurrence); these patches can
boost the performance of the baseline network by a large
margin. We analyze the restoration performance of the
fine-tuned video denoising networks with the proposed selfsupervision-based learning algorithm, and demonstrate
that the FCN can utilize recurring patches without requiring accurate registration among adjacent frames. In our
experiments, we apply the proposed method to state-of-theart denoisers and show that our fine-tuned networks achieve
a considerable improvement in denoising performance.

1. Introduction
Video restoration, which aims to recover the high-quality
video frames from the low-quality video, is one of the oldest
research fields in video processing. Video denoising, which
removes noise in the video frames, has been investigated
considerably. However, estimating a clean image from a
corrupted frame is a well-known inverse problem. To solve
such an ill-posed problem, various types of approaches, in* Corresponding author.
Code is available at https://github.com/shlee0/RFRvideo-denoising.

cluding prior model, likelihood model, optimization, and
deep learning techniques, have been introduced.
A common natural image property used for image
restoration is patch-recurrence in which similar patches exist within a single image. Particularly, patch-recurrence has
been considerably studied in single-image super-resolution
(SR) methods [9, 11, 12]. Although these patches can be deformed by camera and/or object motion in a video, patchrecurrence over neighboring video frames is much richer
than that of a single image and can further improve the quality of the restored frames [19, 18]. Moreover, rich patchrecurrence information can greatly help in the fine-tuning
of video restoration networks during the test stage, without
using ground-truth clean images.
Lehtinen et al. [16] proposed single-image denoising
method (noise-to-noise), which allows the training of the
restoration network without ground-truth clean images.
Ehret et al. [7] proposed a frame-to-frame training technique, which extends the noise-to-noise training algorithm
for video restoration; the frame-to-frame training algorithm
can also perform fine-tuning without using the ground-truth
clean video by aligning noisy patches among consecutive
frames using optical flow. However, estimating accurate
optical flow under large displacements, occlusion, and severe degradation (e.g., noise and blur) is a challenging task.
Thus, in this work, we propose a new training algorithm
called “restore-from-restored,” which allows fine-tuning of
pre-trained networks without using the ground-truth clean
video and accurate optical flow for registration.
Our proposed method updates the parameters of pretrained networks using pseudo clean images, which are outputs of the pre-trained baseline networks from noisy input
frames. Our algorithm is simple yet effective for removing
noise in video frames and works particularly well with the
existence of numerous recurring patches. That is, we generate pairs of training images, which are composed of the
pseudo clean video and its noisy versions, to fine-tune the
network. In practice, pixel locations of the same patches in
different video frames vary due to motions, but with the aid

3537

