FSCE: Few-Shot Object Detection via Contrastive Proposal Encoding
Bo Sun1 , Banghuai Li2∗, Shengcai Cai2 , Ye Yuan2 , and Chi Zhang2
1
University of Southern California
2
MEGVII Technology
bos@usc.edu, {libanghuai,caishengcai,yuanye,zhangchi}@megvii.com
Abstract
Emerging interests have been brought to recognize
previously unseen objects given very few training examples, known as few-shot object detection (FSOD). Recent
researches demonstrate that good feature embedding is
the key to reach favorable few-shot learning performance.
We observe object proposals with different Intersection-ofUnion (IoU) scores are analogous to the intra-image augmentation used in contrastive visual representation learning. And we exploit this analogy and incorporate supervised contrastive learning to achieve more robust objects
representations in FSOD. We present Few-Shot object detection via Contrastive proposals Encoding (FSCE), a simple yet effective approach to learning contrastive-aware object proposal encodings that facilitate the classification of
detected objects. We notice the degradation of average precision (AP) for rare objects mainly comes from misclassifying novel instances as confusable classes. And we ease the
misclassification issues by promoting instance level intraclass compactness and inter-class variance via our contrastive proposal encoding loss (CPE loss). Our design
outperforms current state-of-the-art works in any shot and
all data splits, with up to +8.8% on standard benchmark
PASCAL VOC and +2.7% on challenging COCO benchmark. Code is available at: https://github.com/
MegviiDetection/FSCE.

1. Introduction
Development of modern convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [1, 2, 3] give rise to great advances in general object
detection [4, 5, 6]. Deep detectors demand a large amount
of annotated training data to saturate its performance [7, 8].
In few-shot learning scenarios, deep detectors suffer severer over-fitting and the gap between few-shot detection and
general object detection is larger than the corresponding gap
∗ Corresponding author: libanghuai@megvii.com

Figure 1. Conceptualization of our contrastive object proposals encoding. We introduce a score function which measures the semantic similarity between region proposals. Positive proposals (x+ )
refer to region proposals from the same category or the same object. Negative proposals (x− ) refer to proposals from different
categories. We encourage the object encodings to have the property that score(f (x), f (x+ )) >> score(f (x), f (x− )), such that
our contrastively learned object proposals have smaller intra-class
variance and larger inter-class difference

in few-shot image classification [9, 10, 11]. On the contrary,
a child can rapidly comprehend new visual concepts and
recognize objects from a newly learned category given very
few examples. Closing such gap is therefore an important
step towards more successful machine perception [12].
Precedented by few-shot image classification, earlier attempts in few-shot object detection utilize meta-learning
strategy [13, 14, 15]. Meta-learners are trained with an
episode of individual tasks, meta-task samples from common objects (base class) to pair with rare objects (novel
class) to simulate few-shot detection tasks. Recently, the
two-stage fine-tune based approach (TFA) reveals more potential in improving few-shot detection. Baseline TFA [16]
simply freeze all base class trained parameters and fine-tune

7352

