Image-to-image Translation via Hierarchical Style Disentanglement
Xinyang Li1 , Shengchuan Zhang1∗, Jie Hu1 , Liujuan Cao1 , Xiaopeng Hong2,3 , Xudong Mao1 ,
Feiyue Huang4 , Yongjian Wu4 , Rongrong Ji1,3,5
1
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 2 Xi’an Jiaotong University, 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory,
4
Tencent Youtu Lab, 5 Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University,
{imlixinyang, hujie.cpp, xudonmao}@gmail.com, {zsc 2016, caoliujuan, rrji}@xmu.edu.cn,
hongxiaopeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn, {garyhuang,littlekenwu}@tencent.com

Abstract
Recently, image-to-image translation has made significant progress in achieving both multi-label (i.e., translation
conditioned on different labels) and multi-style (i.e., generation with diverse styles) tasks. However, due to the unexplored independence and exclusiveness in the labels, existing endeavors are defeated by involving uncontrolled manipulations to the translation results. In this paper, we propose Hierarchical Style Disentanglement (HiSD) to address
this issue. Specifically, we organize the labels into a hierarchical tree structure, in which independent tags, exclusive
attributes, and disentangled styles are allocated from top to
bottom. Correspondingly, a new translation process is designed to adapt the above structure, in which the styles are
identified for controllable translations. Both qualitative and
quantitative results on the CelebA-HQ dataset verify the
ability of the proposed HiSD. The code has been released
at https://github.com/imlixinyang/HiSD.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep learning based methods have achieved
promising results in image-to-image translation area. Early
works [47, 41, 21, 35] learn a deterministic mapping between two domains, which give rise to two emergent issues:
translating the inputs conditioned on multiple labels, and
generating diverse outputs with multiple styles. The former
is termed the multi-label task, and the latter is termed the
multi-style (or multi-modal) task. For the multi-label task,
methods [5, 11, 20, 38] combine the labels into the translator. For the multi-style task, methods [15, 18, 1, 48] incorporate latent codes drawn from Gaussian noise into the
translator. Recent unified solutions for these tasks can be
classified into two categories. (i). Works [34, 36, 42, 19]
learn the shared style by injecting the style code concate∗ Corresponding Author.

Original Labels

Tags

With_Bangs

Bangs

With_Glasses
Blond_Hair

Glasses

Styles

with
without
with
without
blond

Black_Hair
Brown_Hair

Attributes

Hair color

black
brown

unsupervised

Figure 1: Hierarchical Style Disentanglement. The original labels are organized into independent tags and exclusive
attributes. We aim to disentangle the styles to represent the
clear manifestations in attributes, in an unsupervised way.
nated with the target labels into the generator. The shared
style code does not have an explicit effect on the source image without changed labels, which is shown in Figure 3(a).
(ii). StarGANv2 [6] learns the mixed style by using the target label to index the mapped style code. It continues to
use the hypothesis of StarGAN [5] that an image domain is
the set of images sharing the same labels. The translations
frequently involve unnecessary manipulations like changing
facial identity and affecting background, as shown in Figure 3(b). In addition, they cannot independently learn the
respective styles for bangs, glasses, and hair color. These
uncontrollable translations severely limit their practical use.
We propose a novel framework, called Hierarchical Style
Disentanglement, to solve the above limitations. We notice
the general independence and exclusiveness among most label annotations. For example, in CelebA, original binary
labels ‘With Bangs’ and ‘With Glasses’ are independent,
while ‘Blond Hair’ and ‘Black Hair’ are exclusive. Accordingly, as shown in Figure 1, we organize the original
labels into a hierarchical structure, including independent
tags and exclusive attributes. The tags represent different
accordance of attributes, and every image is relabeled to

8639

