Semantic Scene Completion via Integrating Instances and Scene in-the-Loop
Yingjie Cai1 ,* Xuesong Chen1 ,* Chao Zhang3 , Kwan-Yee Lin1, 2†, Xiaogang Wang1 , Hongsheng Li1,4†
1
CUHK-SenseTime Joint Laboratory, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI 3 Samsung Research Institute China - Beijing (SRC-B)
4
School of CST, Xidian University
caiyingjie@link.cuhk.edu.hk, cedarchen@pku.edu.cn

(b) Depth

(a) RGB
Ceil

Floor

Wall

(d) SSCNet

(c) Ground Truth
Window

Chair

Bed

Sofa

(f) Proposed Method

(e) Sketch
Table

TVs

Furn.

Objects

Figure 1. Visualization of Semantic Scene Completion on NYU Dataset. From left to right: (a) RGB input, (b) depth map, (c) ground
truth of semantic scene completion, (d) results of SSCNet [34], (e) results of Sketch [3], (f) results of the proposed method. Our method
recovers better shape details like the legs of chairs and generates more reasonable results on easy confusing regions like windows and wall
compared with the classic SSC method SSCNet [34], and the state-of-the-art method Sketch [3].

Abstract
Semantic Scene Completion aims at reconstructing a
complete 3D scene with precise voxel-wise semantics from a
single-view depth or RGBD image. It is a crucial but challenging problem for indoor scene understanding. In this
work, we present a novel framework named Scene-InstanceScene Network (SISNet), which takes advantages of both instance and scene level semantic information. Our method
is capable of inferring fine-grained shape details as well as
nearby objects whose semantic categories are easily mixedup. The key insight is that we decouple the instances from
a coarsely completed semantic scene instead of a raw input
image to guide the reconstruction of instances and the overall scene. SISNet conducts iterative scene-to-instance (SI)
and instance-to-scene (IS) semantic completion. Specifically, the SI is able to encode objects’ surrounding context
for effectively decoupling instances from the scene and each
instance could be voxelized into higher resolution to capture finer details. With IS, fine-grained instance information
can be integrated back into the 3D scene and thus leads to
more accurate semantic scene completion. Utilizing such
an iterative mechanism, the scene and instance completion
benefits each other to achieve higher completion accuracy.
* The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
† H. Li and K. Lin are the co-corresponding authors.

Extensively experiments show that our proposed method
consistently outperforms state-of-the-art methods on both
real NYU, NYUCAD and synthetic SUNCG-RGBD datasets.
The code and the supplementary material will be available
at https://github.com/yjcaimeow/SISNet.

1. Introduction
A comprehensive indoor scene understanding in 3D behavior is pivotal for many computer vision tasks, such as
robot navigation, virtual/augmented reality and localization,
to name a few. Semantic Scene Completion (SSC) aims
at reconstructing full voxel-wise semantics of a 3D scene
from a single-view image. However, as the real-world scenarios always have various object shapes/sizes, crowded
placements, and object-to-object occlusions, precisely reconstructing and understanding the semantics of a whole
3D scene from partial observations is of great challenges.
To overcome the incomplete and complex nature of 3D
scene understanding, various 3D scene/instance completion
and segmentation techniques have been proposed in recent
years. Most existing Semantic Scene Completion (SSC)
methods [9, 7, 20, 18, 35, 5, 20, 18, 48, 10, 7, 49, 15] pass
the incomplete scene from view frustum to a neural network. They design complex modules to aggregate multilevel context information to guide the prediction of volumetric occupancy of invisible regions and semantic cate-

324

