Multi-view Depth Estimation using Epipolar Spatio-Temporal Networks
Xiaoxiao Long1 Lingjie Liu2 Wei Li3 Christian Theobalt2 Wenping Wang1,4
1
The University of Hong Kong 2 Max Planck Institute for Informatics
3
Inceptio 4 Texas A&M University

Abstract
We present a novel method for multi-view depth estimation from a single video, which is a critical task in various applications, such as perception, reconstruction and
robot navigation. Although previous learning-based methods have demonstrated compelling results, most works estimate depth maps of individual video frames independently,
without taking into consideration the strong geometric and
temporal coherence among the frames. Moreover, current
state-of-the-art (SOTA) models mostly adopt a fully 3D convolution network for cost regularization and therefore require high computational cost, thus limiting their deployment in real-world applications. Our method achieves temporally coherent depth estimation results by using a novel
Epipolar Spatio-Temporal (EST) transformer to explicitly
associate geometric and temporal correlation with multiple
estimated depth maps. Furthermore, to reduce the computational cost, inspired by recent Mixture-of-Experts models, we design a compact hybrid network consisting of a 2D
context-aware network and a 3D matching network which
learn 2D context information and 3D disparity cues separately. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
achieves higher accuracy in depth estimation and significant speedup than the SOTA methods.

1. Introduction
Multi-view depth estimation aims to recover 3D geometry of given images with known camera parameters, which
is one of fundamental problems in computer vision. Many
applications benefit from the recovered depth, such as autonomous driving [39], augmented reality [18], 3D modeling [13], and image-based rendering [10].
Recently, learning based depth estimation methods,
whether designed for images [9, 23, 17, 42] or videos [22,
46, 37, 29, 27], have achieved great improvements against
their traditional counterparts [45, 31, 1, 15]; however, these
methods, especially for videos, have significant room for
improvement in terms of temporal coherence and computational efficiency.

Independent estimation

Joint estimation

0.3 m

0.3 m

0.0 m

0.0 m

Error map

Estimated depth

Target images

Estimated depth

Error map

Figure 1. Independent estimation vs Joint estimation. Prior works
estimate the depth maps of frames from a video independently despite their temporal coherence, thus the estimated depth maps may
contain inconsistent values for the same region (red circles). Our
model could estimate multiple depth maps jointly utilizing temporal coherence, enabling the estimated depth maps to be consistent.

Temporal coherence. Most of multi-view depth estimation methods [17, 42, 21, 26, 35] are designed for individual images so they are not suitable for temporally coherent
videos. Directly extending the existing methods from images to video sequences causes flickering artifacts. i.e. inconsistent estimated depth maps across consecutive frames,
because they do not take temporal coherence into consideration. As shown in Figure. 1, the independently estimated
depth maps contain inconsistent values. Therefore, it is necessary to jointly estimate depth maps of a video sequence to
produce temporally coherent results.
Existing works on video depth estimation can be divided
into two categories: single-view methods [46, 6, 37, 29, 27]
and multi-view methods [22], according to the input of the
depth estimation network. Recurrent neural units are widely
used in single-view video methods [46, 6, 37, 29] to encode
temporal coherence implicitly. Although the inconsistency
problem is alleviated by incorporating temporal coherence,
these methods still suffer from the ambiguity of depth scale
since depth estimation from a single image is an ill-posed
problem.
Multi-view video methods are advantageous over singleview methods because epipolar geometry information provided by multiple images could be used to avoid depth scale

8258

