Flow Guided Transformable Bottleneck Networks for Motion Retargeting
Jian Ren Menglei Chai

Oliver J. Woodford* Kyle Olszewski
Snap Inc.

Sergey Tulyakov

{jren, mchai, kolszewski, stulyakov}@snap.com

Abstract
Human motion retargeting aims to transfer the motion
of one person in a “driving” video or set of images to
another person. Existing efforts leverage a long training
video from each target person to train a subject-specific
motion transfer model. However, the scalability of such
methods is limited, as each model can only generate videos
for the given target subject, and such training videos are
labor-intensive to acquire and process. Few-shot motion
transfer techniques, which only require one or a few images from a target, have recently drawn considerable attention. Methods addressing this task generally use either
2D or explicit 3D representations to transfer motion, and
in doing so, sacrifice either accurate geometric modeling
or the flexibility of an end-to-end learned representation.
Inspired by the Transformable Bottleneck Network, which
renders novel views and manipulations of rigid objects, we
propose an approach based on an implicit volumetric representation of the image content, which can then be spatially manipulated using volumetric flow fields. We address
the challenging question of how to aggregate information
across different body poses, learning flow fields that allow
for combining content from the appropriate regions of input images of highly non-rigid human subjects performing
complex motions into a single implicit volumetric representation. This allows us to learn our 3D representation solely
from videos of moving people. Armed with both 3D object
understanding and end-to-end learned rendering, this categorically novel representation delivers state-of-the-art image generation quality, as shown by our quantitative and
qualitative evaluations.

1. Introduction
Retargeting human body motion — transferring motion
from a “driving” image or video of one subject (the source)
to another subject (the target), using one or more reference images of the target subject in an arbitrary pose —
* Work done while at Snap Inc.

has received a great deal of attention in recent years, due to
numerous practical and entertaining applications in content
generation [62, 8]. Such applications include transferring
sophisticated athletic techniques or dancing performances
to untrained celebrities for special effects for cinema and
television; creating amusing performances for one’s friends
or acquaintances for sheer entertainment; and creating plausible motion sequences from photos or videos depicting famous and important political figures (including historical
figures who may no longer be alive to perform such actions)
for the creation of plausible full-body “deepfake” videos.
However, retaining the target subject’s identity while rendering them in novel, unseen poses is highly challenging,
and the state-of-the-art is still far from plausible.
Many approaches to this task learn to render a specific
person [1, 7, 8, 13, 20, 26, 49, 64, 63, 66, 67, 73] conditioned on the desired pose. This requires a large number of training frames of that person, and incurs substantial training time that must be repeated per each new subject. By contrast, in the few-shot setting, addressed in this
work, only a few reference images of the target are available, and video generation from those images should be
fast (i.e., requiring no subject-specific training). To overcome the lack of data for a given subject, many other techniques [4, 29, 32, 34, 40, 43, 44, 46] leverage existing human body models [2, 22, 36] to construct an approximate
representation of the subject that can then be manipulated
and rendered. While the 3D nature of these representations often leads to improved performance over their purely
2D counterparts [3, 38, 39, 51, 55], their explicit nature,
which faces the limitations of capturing salient details with
standard human body models, also leads to reduced modeling power and therefore fidelity. Large variations in the
clothing (e.g., dresses or jackets that do not conform to the
body shape), body type, or hair of the source and target subjects, for example, cannot easily be represented with standard models that only represent the body itself.
In this work we attain more flexible and expressive modeling power by exploiting a representation that allows for
3D modeling and manipulation, and yet is fully implicit,
i.e. it can be fully learned, even though we use no explicit

10795

