Soft-IntroVAE: Analyzing and Improving the Introspective Variational
Autoencoder
Tal Daniel
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technion, Haifa, Israel

Aviv Tamar
Department of Electrical Engineering
Technion, Haifa, Israel

taldanielm@campus.techion.ac.il

avivt@technion.ac.il

Abstract
The recently introduced introspective variational autoencoder (IntroVAE) exhibits outstanding image generations, and allows for amortized inference using an image
encoder. The main idea in IntroVAE is to train a VAE adversarially, using the VAE encoder to discriminate between
generated and real data samples. However, the original IntroVAE loss function relied on a particular hinge-loss formulation that is very hard to stabilize in practice, and its
theoretical convergence analysis ignored important terms in
the loss. In this work, we take a step towards better understanding of the IntroVAE model, its practical implementation, and its applications. We propose the Soft-IntroVAE, a
modified IntroVAE that replaces the hinge-loss terms with a
smooth exponential loss on generated samples. This change
significantly improves training stability, and also enables
theoretical analysis of the complete algorithm. Interestingly, we show that the IntroVAE converges to a distribution
that minimizes a sum of KL distance from the data distribution and an entropy term. We discuss the implications of
this result, and demonstrate that it induces competitive image generation and reconstruction. Finally, we describe an
application of Soft-IntroVAE to unsupervised image translation, and demonstrate compelling results. Code and additional information is available on the project website taldatech.github.io/soft-intro-vae-web.

1. Introduction
Two popular approaches for learning deep generative models are generative adversarial training (e.g.,
GANs [14]), and variational inference (e.g., VAEs [33]).
VAEs are known to have a stable training procedure, display
resilience to mode collapse, and enable amortized inference. Moreover, the VAE’s inference module makes them
prominent in many domains, such as learning disentangled
representations [2] and reinforcement learning [17]. GANs,
on the other hand, lack an inference module, but are capa-

ble of generating images of higher quality and are popular
in computer vision applications, but can suffer from training
instability and low sampling diversity [41, 34].
Narrowing the gap between VAEs and GANs has been
the aim of many works, in an attempt to combine the best of
both worlds: building a stable and easy to train generative
model that allows efficient amortized inference and highquality sampling [36, 11, 40, 58, 44]. While progress has
been made, the search for better generative models is an
active research field.
Recently, Huang et al. [25] proposed IntroVAE – a VAE
that is trained adversarially, and demonstrated outstanding
image generation results. A key idea in IntroVAE is introspective discrimination – instead of training a separate discriminator network to discriminate between real and generated samples, as in a GAN, the output of the encoder acts
as the discriminatory signal, based on the Kullback-Leibler
divergence between the approximate posterior of a sample
and the prior latent distribution. Intuitively, this signal can
be understood as making the generated samples less likely,
as their posterior is more distant from the prior.
Importantly, IntroVAE uses a hard margin, m, as a
threshold on the KL divergence for which above it a ‘fake’
sample no longer affects the loss function. This approach
leads to difficult training in practice – the optimization is
very sensitive to the values of m, and extensive tuning is
required to find a good, stable, margin. Theoretically, [25]
proved that IntroVAE converges to the data distribution, but
their analysis ignored several terms in the loss function that
are important for correct operation of the algorithm.
We aim to provide a better understanding of the introspective training paradigm and improve its stability. To
that end, we introduce Soft-IntroVAE (S-IntroVAE) – an
introspective VAE that utilizes the evidence lower bound
(ELBO) as the discriminatory signal, and replaces the hard
margin with a soft threshold function, making it more stable to optimize. This new formulation allows us to analyze
the convergence properties of the complete algorithm, and
provide new insights into introspective VAEs.

4391

