Part-aware Panoptic Segmentation
Daan de Geus1∗ Panagiotis Meletis1∗ Chenyang Lu1 Xiaoxiao Wen2 Gijs Dubbelman1
1
Eindhoven University of Technology 2 University of Amsterdam
{d.c.d.geus, p.c.meletis} @tue.nl
Abstract
In this work, we introduce the new scene understanding task of Part-aware Panoptic Segmentation (PPS), which
aims to understand a scene at multiple levels of abstraction, and unifies the tasks of scene parsing and part parsing.
For this novel task, we provide consistent annotations on
two commonly used datasets: Cityscapes and Pascal VOC.
Moreover, we present a single metric to evaluate PPS, called
Part-aware Panoptic Quality (PartPQ). For this new task,
using the metric and annotations, we set multiple baselines
by merging results of existing state-of-the-art methods for
panoptic segmentation and part segmentation. Finally, we
conduct several experiments that evaluate the importance of
the different levels of abstraction in this single task.

1. Introduction
Humans perceive and understand a scene at multiple levels of abstraction. Concretely, when observing a scene, we
do not only see a single semantic label for each visual entity,
such as person or car. We also distinguish the parts of entities, such as person-leg and car-wheel, and we are able to
group together the parts that belong to a single individual entity. Currently, there is no computer vision task that aims at
simultaneously understanding a scene holistically on both of
these levels of abstraction: scene parsing and part parsing.
Instead, most methods focus on solving a task at a single
level of abstraction. On the one hand, scene parsing aims
to recognize and semantically segment all foreground objects (things) and background classes (stuff ) in an image.
Recently, this task has been formalized as panoptic segmentation [21], for which the goal is to predict 1) a class label
and 2) an instance id for each pixel in an image. This formalization has resulted in a boost in research interest that
advanced the state-of-the-art [5, 20, 27, 42, 44, 49]. On the
other hand, part parsing takes over where scene parsing stops,
as it aims to segment an image based on part-level semantics,
i.e., the parts constituting the scene-level classes. For this
level of abstraction, there is a wide range of different task
∗ Both authors contributed equally.

Semantic Segmentation

Part Segmentation

Instance Segmentation

Instance-aware Part Segmentation

Panoptic Segmentation

Part-aware Panoptic Segmentation

Figure 1. Evolution of scene understanding tasks: from semantic
to panoptic (top to bottom) and from part-agnostic to part-aware
(left to right). Colors indicate scene-level and part-level semantics.
Instance-level boundaries are emphasized with a white contour.

definitions, and resulting methods. Most methods focus on
a single object class and are instance-agnostic, while only
a few are instance-aware [15, 26, 56], or focus on multiple
object classes [41, 57]. A more comprehensive overview of
related work is provided in Section 2.
To come closer to unified perception at multiple levels of
abstraction, this work defines a task that combines scene parsing and part parsing in a single task. This task encompasses
the ability to 1) apply per-pixel scene-level classification, 2)
segment things classes into individual instances, and 3) segment stuff classes or things instances into their respective
parts. We call this task part-aware panoptic segmentation
(PPS); the conceptual differences with existing tasks are visualized in Figure 1. Together with this task, we also define
a metric to evaluate it. This metric, part-aware panoptic
quality (PartPQ), extends the panoptic quality metric [21]
to cover part segmentation performance per detected things
instance or stuff class. More details on the task and metric
can be found in Section 3.
To allow for research on the new task of PPS, we intro-

5485

