Amalgamating Knowledge from Heterogeneous Graph Neural Networks
Yongcheng Jing1 , Yiding Yang2 , Xinchao Wang3,2 , Mingli Song4 , Dacheng Tao1
1
The University of Sydney, 2 Stevens Institute of Technology,
3
National University of Singapore, 4 Zhejiang University
{yjin9495, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au, yyang99@stevens.edu,
xinchao@nus.edu.sg, brooksong@zju.edu.cn

Pool of Pre-trained Teacher Models

Abstract

Teacher GNN (Segmentation)

In this paper, we study a novel knowledge transfer task in
the domain of graph neural networks (GNNs). We strive to
train a multi-talented student GNN, without accessing human annotations, that “amalgamates” knowledge from a
couple of teacher GNNs with heterogeneous architectures
and handling distinct tasks. The student derived in this
way is expected to integrate the expertise from both teachers while maintaining a compact architecture. To this end,
we propose an innovative approach to train a slimmable
GNN that enables learning from teachers with varying feature dimensions. Meanwhile, to explicitly align topological semantics between the student and teachers, we introduce a topological attribution map (TAM) to highlight
the structural saliency in a graph, based on which the student imitates the teachers’ ways of aggregating information from neighbors. Experiments on seven datasets across
various tasks, including multi-label classification and joint
segmentation-classification, demonstrate that the learned
student, with a lightweight architecture, achieves gratifying
results on par with and sometimes even superior to those
of the teachers in their specializations. Our code is publicly available at https://github.com/ycjing/
AmalgamateGNN.PyTorch.

1. Introduction
An increasing number of pre-trained deep neural networks (DNNs) have been generously released online for the
sake of handy reproducibility [49]. As such, reusing these
pre-trained models to alleviate training effort or to enhance
performance, has emerged as a trending research topic in
recent years. The seminal work of Hinton et al. [12], for
instance, first raises Knowledge Distillation, where a pretrained teacher model is utilized to generate soft labels
so as to learn a lightweight student model with competent performance. Following this student-teacher paradigm,
many other distillation-based approaches have been applied

Teacher GNN (Classification)
Knowledge
Amalgamation

Unlabeled Point Cloud

Versatile & Compact
Student GNN

Airplane

Figure 1. Illustrations of amalgamating knowledge from heterogeneous teacher GNN models. “Teacher GNN (Segmentation)” and
“Teacher GNN (Classification)” are pre-trained point cloud part
segmentation and classification models, respectively. Knowledge
amalgamation aims to learn a multi-talented and lightweight student GNN from teacher GNNs without human annotations.

to various domains and have demonstrated promising results [7, 30, 47, 48, 55].
Almost all existing approaches on knowledge transfer
from pre-trained models have been focused on convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which take data in regular domains, like images, as input. Nevertheless, many
other data samples take irregular forms and thereby resort to graph representations, calling for graph neural networks (GNNs). The work of [43], as the first attempt, generalizes knowledge distillation to GNNs, and introduces a
customized approach tailored for irregular data. In spite of
the improved performance, this approach is limited to the
scenario where the student learns from a single teacher, and
meanwhile holds a homogeneous architecture and tackles
the same task as the teacher does.
In this paper, we strive to make one step further towards
knowledge transfer from pre-trained GNNs, by studying a
novel knowledge amalgamation task. Our goal is to train a
multi-talented student GNN, from a couple of pre-trained
teacher GNNs with heterogeneous architectures and specializes in different tasks, for example one working on point
cloud segmentation and the other on classification, as shown
in Fig. 1. We further assume that, in the knowledge amalgamation process, no human annotations are available. The

15709

