SetVAE: Learning Hierarchical Composition for
Generative Modeling of Set-Structured Data
Jinwoo Kim*

Jaehoon Yoo* Juho Lee
KAIST

Seunghoon Hong

{jinwoo-kim, wogns98, juholee, seunghoon.hong}@kaist.ac.kr

Sample 1

Abstract
Generative modeling of set-structured data, such as
point clouds, requires reasoning over local and global
structures at various scales. However, adopting multi-scale
frameworks for ordinary sequential data to a set-structured
data is nontrivial as it should be invariant to the permutation of its elements. In this paper, we propose SetVAE,
a hierarchical variational autoencoder for sets. Motivated
by recent progress in set encoding, we build SetVAE upon
attentive modules that first partition the set and project
the partition back to the original cardinality. Exploiting
this module, our hierarchical VAE learns latent variables
at multiple scales, capturing coarse-to-fine dependency of
the set elements while achieving permutation invariance.
We evaluate our model on point cloud generation task and
achieve competitive performance to the prior arts with substantially smaller model capacity. We qualitatively demonstrate that our model generalizes to unseen set sizes and
learns interesting subset relations without supervision. Our
implementation is available at https://github.com/
jw9730/setvae.

1. Introduction
There have been increasing demands in machine learning
for handling set-structured data (i.e., a group of unordered
instances). Examples of set-structured data include object
bounding boxes [19, 2], point clouds [1, 18], support sets
in the meta-learning [6], etc. While initial research mainly
focused on building neural network architectures to encode
sets [32, 17], generative models for sets have recently grown
popular [33, 16, 25, 30, 31].
A generative model for set-structured data should verify
the two essential requirements: (i) exchangeability, meaning that a probability of a set instance is invariant to its
elements’ ordering, and (ii) handling variable cardinality,
meaning that a model should flexibly process sets with variable cardinalities. These requirements pose a unique chal* Equal contribution

Sample 2

Sample 3

Level 1

Level 2

Level 3

Figure 1: Color-coded attention learned by SetVAE encoder
for three data instances of ShapeNet Airplane [3]. Level 1
shows attention at the most coarse scale. Level 2 and 3 show
attention at more fine-scales.

lenge in set generative modeling, as they prevent the adaptation of standard generative models for sequences or images [7, 12, 28, 27]. For instance, typical operations in these
models, such as convolution or recurrent operations, exploit
implicit ordering of elements (e.g., adjacency), thus breaking the exchangeability. Several works circumvented this
issue by imposing heuristic ordering [10, 5, 8, 22]. However, when applied to set-structured data, any ordering assumed by a model imposes an unnecessary inductive bias
that might harm the generalization ability.
There are several existing works satisfying these requirements. Edwards et al., [4] proposed a simple generative
model encoding sets into latent variables, while other approaches build upon various generative models, such as
generative adversarial networks [18, 25], flow-based models [30, 13], and energy-based models [31]. All these works
define valid generative models for set-structured data, but
with some limitations. To achieve exchangeability, many
approaches process set elements independently [18, 30],

15059

