Partition-Guided GANs
Mohammadreza Armandpour* 1 , Ali Sadeghian∗2 , Chunyuan Li 3 , Mingyuan Zhou 4
1
2
Texas A&M University
University of Florida
3
4
Microsoft Research
The University of Texas at Austin
armand@stat.tamu.edu, asadeghian@ufl.edu, chunyl@microsoft.com, mzhou@utexas.edu

Real

Abstract
Despite the success of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs), their training suffers from several well-known problems, including mode collapse and difficulties learning a
disconnected set of manifolds. In this paper, we break down
the challenging task of learning complex high dimensional
distributions, supporting diverse data samples, to simpler
sub-tasks. Our solution relies on designing a partitioner that
breaks the space into smaller regions, each having a simpler distribution, and training a different generator for each
partition. This is done in an unsupervised manner without
requiring any labels. We formulate two desired criteria for
the space partitioner that aid the training of our mixture of
generators: 1) to produce connected partitions and 2) provide a proxy of distance between partitions and data samples,
along with a direction for reducing that distance. These criteria are developed to avoid producing samples from places
with non-existent data density, and also facilitate training by
providing additional direction to the generators. We develop
theoretical constraints for a space partitioner to satisfy the
above criteria. Guided by our theoretical analysis, we design
an effective neural architecture for the space partitioner that
empirically assures these conditions. Experimental results
on various standard benchmarks show that the proposed
unsupervised model outperforms several recent methods.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [20] have gained
remarkable success in learning the underlying distribution
of observed samples. However, their training is still unstable
and challenging, especially when the data distribution of
interest is multimodal. This is particularly important due to
both empirical and theoretical evidence that suggests real
data also conforms to such distributions [57, 71].
Improving the vanilla GAN, both in terms of training
stability and generating high fidelity images, has been the
* Authors contributed equally.

Generated

(a) Partition 13
Real

Generated

(c) Partition 69

Real

Generated

(b) Partition 47
Real

Generated

(d) Partition 85

Figure 1: Examples of unsupervised partitioning and their corresponding real/generated samples on the CIFAR-10 dataset.

subject of great interest in the machine learning literature [1,
13, 21, 47, 50, 52, 54, 61, 66, 79]. One of the main problems
is mode collapse, where the generator fails to capture the
full diversity of the data. Another problem, which hasn’t
been fully explored, is the mode connecting problem [36,
70]. As we explain in detail in Section 2, this phenomenon
occurs when the GAN generates samples from parts of the
space where the true data is non-existent, caused by using
a continuous generator to approximate a distribution with
disconnected support. Moreover, GANs are also known
to be hard to train due to the unreliable gradient provided
by the discriminator.
Our solution to alleviate the aforementioned problems is
introducing an unsupervised space partitioner and training
a different generator for each partition. Figure 1 illustrates
real and generated samples from several inferred partitions.

5099

