Pose Recognition with Cascade Transformers
Ke Li* 1 , Shijie Wang* 2 , Xiang Zhang* 2 , Yifan Xu3 , Weijian Xu3 , Zhuowen Tu3
1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
3
University of California San Diego, San Diego, USA
{keliictcas, wang98thu, zx1239856}@gmail.com, {yix081, wex041, ztu}@ucsd.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we present a regression-based pose recognition method using cascade Transformers. One way to categorize the existing approaches in this domain is to separate them into 1). heatmap-based and 2). regressionbased. In general, heatmap-based methods achieve higher
accuracy but are subject to various heuristic designs (not
end-to-end mostly), whereas regression-based approaches
attain relatively lower accuracy but they have less intermediate non-differentiable steps. Here we utilize the encoderdecoder structure in Transformers to perform regressionbased person and keypoint detection that is general-purpose
and requires less heuristic design compared with the existing approaches. We demonstrate the keypoint hypothesis (query) refinement process across different self-attention
layers to reveal the recursive self-attention mechanism in
Transformers. In the experiments, we report competitive results for pose recognition when compared with the competing regression-based methods.

1. Introduction
We tackle the 2D human pose recognition problem
[19, 1, 32, 22] where keypoints (e.g. head, shoulders, knees,
etc.) for multiple people in an RGB image are to be detected
and localized. This is an important problem in computer vision that can be adopted in a variety of downstream tasks including tracking, security, animation, human-computer interaction, computer games, and robotics.
There has been a steady progress in 2D human pose
recognition [1, 32, 36, 22, 17, 2, 25, 29, 24, 6, 5, 28, 41, 23]
with systems becoming increasingly practical without a
strong constraint (e.g. present multiple people of varying
size). However, pose recognition is a challenging problem
* indicates equal contribution.

Code: https://github.com/mlpc-ucsd/PRTR.
Work performed during internships of K. Li, S.Wang, and X. Zhang
with UC San Diego.

CNN
Transformer
Encoder
●●●

Learned
Queries

1st decoder
layer

2nd decoder
layer

3rd decoder
layer

●●●

Figure 1: Illustration of the gradual refinement for the
keypoints across different Transformer decoder layers.
Through the decoding process, PRTR predicts keypoints
with increasing confidence and decreasing spatial deviation
to ground truth, transforming image-ignorant queries to final predictions.
that remains unsolved. The difficulty lies in various aspects
such as large pose/shape variation, inter-person and self occlusion, large appearance variation, and background clutter.
For multiple people in an input image [19], the task of
pose recognition is to localize the human keypoints (17 in
the experiments) for the individual persons. This can be
achieved by a two-stage process in which individual persons are detected first, followed by keypoint detection from
the detected image region/patch; this is called a top-down
process [28]. An alternative strategy is called a bottom-up
process where human keypoints are detected directly from
the image without an explicit object detection stage [6]. A
discussion about the top-down and bottom-up approaches
can be found in [6].
Another way to divide the existing literature in pose
recognition is based on the choice of using heatmap or
regression. Heatmap-based approaches [37, 28] perform
dense keypoint detection followed by subsequent processes

1944

