VaB-AL: Incorporating Class Imbalance and Difficulty
with Variational Bayes for Active Learning
Jongwon Choi1∗ , Kwang Moo Yi2∗ , Jihoon Kim3 , Jinho Choo3 ,
Byoungjip Kim3 , Jinyeop Chang3 , Youngjune Gwon3 , Hyung Jin Chang4
1

Chung-Ang University, South Korea
3
Samsung SDS, South Korea

2

4

University of British Columbia, Canada
University of Birmingham, United Kingdom

choijw@cau.ac.kr, kmyi@cs.ubc.ca, h.j.chang@bham.ac.uk
{jihoon00.kim, jinho12.choo, bjip.kim, jinyeop.chang, gyj.gwon}@samsung.com

Dominant Class (Plane)

Abstract

0.09

0.04

0.97
0.9
0.92

0.91

Active Learning for discriminative models has largely
been studied with the focus on individual samples, with less
emphasis on how classes are distributed or which classes
are hard to deal with. In this work, we show that this is
harmful. We propose a method based on the Bayes’ rule,
that can naturally incorporate class imbalance into the Active Learning framework. We derive that three terms should
be considered together when estimating the probability of a
classifier making a mistake for a given sample; i) probability
of mislabelling a class, ii) likelihood of the data given a predicted class, and iii) the prior probability on the abundance
of a predicted class. Implementing these terms requires a
generative model and an intractable likelihood estimation.
Therefore, we train a Variational Auto Encoder (VAE) for
this purpose. To further tie the VAE with the classifier and
facilitate VAE training, we use the classifiers’ deep feature
representations as input to the VAE. By considering all three
probabilities, among them, especially the data imbalance,
we can substantially improve the potential of existing methods under limited data budget. We show that our method
can be applied to classification tasks on multiple different
datasets – including one that is a real-world dataset with
heavy data imbalance – significantly outperforming the state
of the art.

1. Introduction
Active learning focuses on efficient labelling of data and
has drawn much interest lately [38,41,48], due to deep learning being attempted at new domains, such as biomedical
imaging [3, 16] and industrial imaging [27, 49], where ac* These authors contributed equally to this work.

0.7
0.84

𝑦 (Plane) = 𝑦ො (Plane)

𝑦 (Plane) = 𝑦ො (Plane)

Rare Classes

0.91

0.62

0.04

0.06

0.24

0.38

0.28

0.01

𝑦 (Cat) ≠ 𝑦ො (Dog)

Proposed

DBAL

𝑦 (Ship) ≠ 𝑦ො (Plane)

CoreSet

Max. Entropy

Figure 1. Class matters – We show an example where existing
methods fail to identify important samples to put into the updated
training set. We show the importance metrics given by various
methods – DBAL [10], CoreSet [38], Max. Entropy [45], and our
method – for selected images when the dataset is dominated by
plane images. We further show below each image, the ground-truth
class y and the predicted class yb. Because of the data imbalance,
existing methods heavily favour the plane class, even when the
results are correct, as seen on the left. And for rare classes in the
right column, they fail to recognise that the samples are important,
which leads to the improved performance. On the other hand, our
method correctly identifies them as important, by considering also
the class difficulty and the class prior.

quiring data can be costly [39]. Even for cases where data
is not scarce, the effective usage of data may reduce training time, therefore the computational cost, including carbon
foot-prints required to train each model. There have been
various studies based on semi-supervised [7, 21] and unsupervised [37, 46] learning schemes to improve the training
efficiency of data. However, with limited labelling budget,
the performance of the studies are significantly worse to the

6749

