BoxInst: High-Performance Instance Segmentation with Box Annotations
Zhi Tian,

Chunhua Shen,*

Xinlong Wang,

Hao Chen

The University of Adelaide, Australia

Figure 1: Some qualitative results of BoxInst with the ResNet-101 based model achieving 33.0% mask AP on COCO val2017. The
model is trained without any mask annotations and can infer at 17 FPS on a V100 GPU. Best viewed on screen.

Abstract
We present a high-performance method that can achieve
mask-level instance segmentation with only bounding-box
annotations for training. While this setting has been studied
in the literature, here we show significantly stronger performance with a simple design (e.g., dramatically improving
previous best reported mask AP of 21.1% [13] to 31.6%
on the COCO dataset). Our core idea is to redesign the loss
of learning masks in instance segmentation, with no modification to the segmentation network itself. The new loss
functions can supervise the mask training without relying
on mask annotations. This is made possible with two loss
terms, namely, 1) a surrogate term that minimizes the discrepancy between the projections of the ground-truth box
and the predicted mask; 2) a pairwise loss that can exploit
the prior that proximal pixels with similar colors are very
likely to have the same category label.
Experiments demonstrate that the redesigned mask loss
can yield surprisingly high-quality instance masks with only
box annotations. For example, without using any mask annotations, with a ResNet-101 backbone and 3× training
* Corresponding author.

schedule, we achieve 33.2% mask AP on COCO test-dev
split (vs. 39.1% of the fully supervised counterpart). Our excellent experiment results on COCO and Pascal VOC indicate that our method dramatically narrows the performance
gap between weakly and fully supervised instance segmentation.
Code is available at: https://git.io/AdelaiDet

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation requires the algorithm to predict
the pixel-wise masks and categories of instances of interest,
and is one of the most fundamental tasks in computer vision.
The performance of instance segmentation has been significantly advanced by a number of recent successful methods [5, 6, 11, 15, 28, 30, 31]. These methods have almost
made the previously much more challenging instance segmentation task be as simple and fast as bounding-box object
detection. For example, built on the detector FCOS [29],
CondInst [28] only adds very compact dynamic mask heads
to predict instance masks, and thus only introduces less than
10% computation time, compared to FCOS. Instance segmentation is able to provide more accurate and ﬁner mask-

5443

