Pedestrian and Ego-vehicle Trajectory Prediction from Monocular Camera
Lukáš Neumann
Visual Recognition Group
Faculty of Electrical Engineering
Czech Technical University in Prague

Andrea Vedaldi
Visual Geometry Group
Department of Engineering Science
University of Oxford

neumalu1@fel.cvut.cz

vedaldi@robots.ox.ac.uk

ego-motion
prediction

viewpoint
normalization

trajectory
prediction

project to
future frame

Figure 1: By inferring current and predicting future ego-motion, we can “subtract” vehicle movement to create a normalized
view of the pedestrian as if it was captured by a static camera, allowing to observe and predict the intrinsic pedestrian trajectory.

Abstract
Predicting future pedestrian trajectory is a crucial component of autonomous driving systems, as recognizing critical situations based only on current pedestrian position
may come too late for any meaningful corrective action (e.g.
breaking) to take place. In this paper, we propose a new
method to predict future position of pedestrians, with respect
to a predicted future position of the ego-vehicle, thus giving a assistive/autonomous driving system sufficient time to
respond. The method explicitly disentangles actual movement of pedestrians in real world from the ego-motion of the
vehicle, using a future pose prediction network trained in
self-supervised fashion, which allows the method to observe
and predict the intrinsic pedestrian motion in a normalised
view, that captures the same real-world location across multiple frames.
The method is evaluated on two public datasets, where
it achieves state-of-the-art results in pedestrian trajectory
prediction from an on-board camera.

1. Introduction
Predicting the future behavior of objects in images and
videos is of considerable importance in applications, especially in areas such as robotics or automotive systems. For

example, predicting future trajectory of pedestrians is a crucial component of autonomous and assistive driving systems,
as recognizing critical situations only based on the current
pedestrian position (e.g. a child at the margin of the road)
may come too late for any meaningful corrective action (e.g.
breaking) to be effective. For any such prediction algorithm
to be widely adopted, however, it is crucial that its sensing
hardware requirements are as low as possible. This is the
reason why methods based on a single camera mounted on
the vehicle — also known as first-person view monocular
methods — are raising a lot of attention [2, 5, 10, 11, 26, 28].
Pedestrian trajectory prediction has been extensively studied in a static or a bird-eye view camera setup [1, 12, 18, 23],
but these methods typically fail in dynamic scenes captured
by an on-board camera due to constantly changing camera
viewpoint, occlusions and other scene dynamics. Moreover,
these methods typically rely on discovering pedestrian motion patterns to infer future trajectory, which is not possible
in the context of on-board videos, where the movement of
the car, not the pedestrian movement, is the main observed
effect: even a pedestrian who stands still appears in different
image position in every frame, creating an apparent motion
in the 2D pixel space.
In this paper, we thus propose a method1 that explicitly
1 The source code is available at https : / / gitlab . com /
lukeN86/pedFutureTracking

10204

