Practical Single-Image Super-Resolution Using Look-Up Table
Younghyun Jo

Seon Joo Kim

Yonsei University

Abstract

29

RRDB
CARN-M

1. Introduction
The goal of single-image super-resolution (SR) is to
generate high-resolution (HR) results with sufficient highfrequency details from the corresponding low-resolution
(LR) input image. Interpolation based methods were dominant early on, where the missing pixel values were estimated by the weighted average of the nearby pixels with
known values. Some examples of the interpolation based
approach include bilinear, bicubic [19], and Lanczos. The
methods are intuitive and fast, however, they hardly restore
missing details as the same interpolation weights are applied regardless of the image structure. As a result, the results of interpolation based SR look overly blurry.
To create HR images with better quality, diverse approaches have been proposed. Example based methods
exploit a database of LR-HR image patch pairs generated
from a number of external training images [3, 11, 10],

28

PSNR (dB)

A number of super-resolution (SR) algorithms from interpolation to deep neural networks (DNN) have emerged to
restore or create missing details of the input low-resolution
image. As mobile devices and display hardware develops,
the demand for practical SR technology has increased. Current state-of-the-art SR methods are based on DNNs for better quality. However, they are feasible when executed by
using a parallel computing module (e.g. GPUs), and have
been difficult to apply to general uses such as end-user software, smartphones, and televisions. To this end, we propose
an efficient and practical approach for the SR by adopting
look-up table (LUT). We train a deep SR network with a
small receptive field and transfer the output values of the
learned deep model to the LUT. At test time, we retrieve
the precomputed HR output values from the LUT for query
LR input pixels. The proposed method can be performed
very quickly because it does not require a large number of
floating point operations. Experimental results show the efficiency and the effectiveness of our method. Especially, our
method runs faster while showing better quality compared
to bicubic interpolation.

Ours-S
Ours-F
Ours-V

27
26

FSRCNN
A+
Zeyde et al.
ANR

NE+LLE

Bicubic
Bilinear

25
Nearest
24
1

10

100

1000

10000

100000

Runtime (ms)

Figure 1. PSNR comparison on Set14 testset for ×4 SR
and runtime is measured for generating 1280 × 720 output image on a Samsung Galaxy S7 smartphone (except for
sparse coding based methods). We compare our method
with several interpolation based methods (square), sparse
coding based methods (triangle), and deep learning based
methods (circle). Our methods show faster or comparable
runtime compared to bicubic interpolation while achieving
much better PSNR quality.

or exploit self-similarity from a test image itself [12, 47].
One downside is that searching for the nearest neighbor
patch is time consuming [5]. Sparse coding based methods [48, 50, 42, 43], which learn a compact representation
of the patches, have also been popular and showed promising results. However, computing the sparse representation
of the input patch requires a high computational cost.
As deep learning showed powerfulness in various computer vision tasks, attempts to use deep neural networks
(DNN) for SR exploded [8, 20, 9, 22, 26, 2, 13, 53, 52,
44, 25, 36, 31, 33]. They achieve state-of-the-art SR performance in terms of peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), however, it comes with a number of multiplication operations
from numerous convolutional layers. Therefore, a special
parallel computing device such as graphic processing units
(GPU) or tensor processing units (TPU) is essential to handle high computational complexity and memory consumption. The DNN based solutions are difficult to apply in practice without the special hardware, and this is one of the ma-

691

