Image Change Captioning by Learning from an Auxiliary Task
Mehrdad Hosseinzadeh1 and Yang Wang1,2
University of Manitoba1 , Huawei Technologies Canada2
{mehrdad, ywang}@cs.umanitoba.ca

Abstract
We tackle the challenging task of image change captioning. The goal is to describe the subtle difference between
two very similar images by generating a sentence caption.
While the recent methods mainly focus on proposing new
model architectures for this problem, we instead focus on
an alternative training scheme. Inspired by the success of
multi-task learning, we formulate a training scheme that
uses an auxiliary task to improve the training of the change
captioning network. We argue that the task of composed
query image retrieval is a natural choice as the auxiliary
task. Given two almost similar images as the input, the
primary network generates a caption describing the fine
change between those two images. Next, the auxiliary network is provided with the generated caption and one of
those two images. It then tries to pick the second image
among a set of candidates. This forces the primary network to generate detailed and precise captions via having
an extra supervision loss by the auxiliary network. Furthermore, we propose a new scheme for selecting a negative set
of candidates for the retrieval task that can effectively improve the performance. We show that the proposed training
strategy performs well on the task of change captioning on
benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Change is an inevitable part of a dynamic environment.
There has been much attention in the community for a variety of change detection tasks [10, 27, 28, 13, 22, 23, 31].
While localizing the change has been the cornerstone of
these works, it requires a deeper level of understanding to be
able to semantically refer to the change. From a user’s perspective, describing (captioning) the change between two
images provides a more meaningful way of understanding
the difference between images. The task of change captioning aims to describe the change between two images by
generating a detailed sentence about the change of objects
in these images. Note that in this task, we are only interested in changes at the object level (e.g. changes in terms of

What's the difference between these two images?

“ The big green shiny
cube in front of the
big purple object
became purple. ”

Figure 1: (Best viewed in color) Given two very similar images, the goal of change captioning is to describe the subtle
difference between these two images. The difference can
be in terms of objects’ color, texture, position, addition or
removal, etc.

object color, position, etc), i.e. we do not want to generate
captions for changes in terms of viewpoints, light condition,
etc. Some early works [13, 22, 23] in this area assume that
there is always an object change between a pair of input images. This assumption does not always hold in a real-world
application. In many cases, no object has been changed between the two images. Instead, it is only the viewpoint that
is different (e.g. a moving robot can see a scene from two
different viewpoints and should be able to distinguish that
it is the same scene observed from different angles/lighting
conditions). To address this limitation, recent work [25]
proposes the task of robust changing captioning where not
all pairs of images exhibit a change – some pairs can be
distractors with similar scenes from different viewpoints.

2725

