Anomaly Detection in Video via Self-Supervised and Multi-Task Learning
Mariana-Iuliana Georgescu1,3 , Antonio Bărbălău1 , Radu Tudor Ionescu1,3 , Fahad Shahbaz Khan2 ,
Marius Popescu1,3 , Mubarak Shah4
1
University of Bucharest, Romania, 2 MBZ University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi
3
SecurifAI, Romania, 4 University of Central Florida, Orlando, FL
Abstract
Anomaly detection in video is a challenging computer vision problem. Due to the lack of anomalous events at training time, anomaly detection requires the design of learning methods without full supervision. In this paper, we
approach anomalous event detection in video through selfsupervised and multi-task learning at the object level. We
first utilize a pre-trained detector to detect objects. Then,
we train a 3D convolutional neural network to produce discriminative anomaly-specific information by jointly learning multiple proxy tasks: three self-supervised and one
based on knowledge distillation. The self-supervised tasks
are: (i) discrimination of forward/backward moving objects (arrow of time), (ii) discrimination of objects in consecutive/intermittent frames (motion irregularity) and (iii)
reconstruction of object-specific appearance information.
The knowledge distillation task takes into account both
classification and detection information, generating large
prediction discrepancies between teacher and student models when anomalies occur. To the best of our knowledge,
we are the first to approach anomalous event detection in
video as a multi-task learning problem, integrating multiple self-supervised and knowledge distillation proxy tasks
in a single architecture. Our lightweight architecture outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on three benchmarks:
Avenue, ShanghaiTech and UCSD Ped2. Additionally, we
perform an ablation study demonstrating the importance of
integrating self-supervised learning and normality-specific
distillation in a multi-task learning setting.

1. Introduction
In recent years, a growing interest has been dedicated to
the task of detecting anomalous events in video [8, 9, 10,
13, 17, 19, 20, 24, 30, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 49, 51, 55, 57,
61, 62, 63]. An anomalous event is commonly defined as an
unfamiliar or unexpected event in a given context. For example, a person crossing the road can be viewed as anomalous if the event does not happen on the crosswalk. This
example shows that context plays a key role in the definition of anomalous events and, consequently, in the problem

formulation. Indeed, the reliance on context, coupled with
the large variety of unexpected events, makes it extremely
difficult to collect anomalous events for training. Hence,
the anomaly detection problem is typically regarded as an
outlier detection task. Then, a normality model is fit on
normal training data, labeling events that deviate from the
model as anomalous. Without being able to employ standard supervision, researchers have proposed alternative approaches ranging from distance-based [17, 19, 37, 38, 40,
44, 45, 46, 47, 50, 52, 59] and reconstruction-based strategies [5, 13, 14, 27, 29, 31, 34, 36, 41, 51, 53] to probabilistic
[1, 2, 4, 12, 16, 21, 32, 33, 58] and change detection methods [7, 18, 28, 35].
In lieu of learning to discriminate directly between normal and anomalous events, related methods approach a different yet connected task. For example, in the pioneering
work of Liu et al. [27], a neural network learns to predict
future video frames. During inference, an event is labeled
as anomalous if the predicted future frame exhibits a high
reconstruction error. Although the state-of-the-art methods attain impressive results, addressing anomaly detection
through a single proxy task is suboptimal, since the proxy
task is not well aligned with anomaly detection. For instance, a car stopped in a pedestrian area should be labeled
as an anomaly, yet the car is trivial to reconstruct in a future
frame (since it is standing still). We therefore propose to
perform anomaly detection by training a model jointly on
multiple proxy tasks. Following a series of recent methods
[9, 10, 17, 61], we also employ an object detector, subsequently performing anomaly detection at the object level.
However, these recent methods take into account a single
proxy task. Different from [9, 10, 17, 61], we propose a
novel anomaly detection approach that jointly learns a set
of multiple proxy tasks through a single object-centric architecture.
As discussed above, we devise an object-centric approach comprising a 3D convolutional neural network
(CNN) that jointly learns the following proxy tasks: (i)
predicting the arrow of time (discriminating between forward and backward moving objects), (ii) predicting the irregularity of motion (discriminating between objects cap-

12742

