3D-to-2D Distillation for Indoor Scene Parsing
Zhengzhe Liu1 Xiaojuan Qi2∗ Chi-Wing Fu1∗
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 The University of Hong Kong
{zzliu,cwfu}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

xjqi@eee.hku.edu.hk

Abstract
CNN

2D

Indoor scene semantic parsing from RGB images is very
challenging due to occlusions, object distortion, and viewpoint variations. Going beyond prior works that leverage geometry information, typically paired depth maps, we present
a new approach, a 3D-to-2D distillation framework, that
enables us to leverage 3D features extracted from largescale 3D data repositories (e.g., ScanNet-v2) to enhance
2D features extracted from RGB images. Our work has
three novel contributions. First, we distill 3D knowledge
from a pretrained 3D network to supervise a 2D network
to learn simulated 3D features from 2D features during the
training, so the 2D network can infer without requiring 3D
data. Second, we design a two-stage dimension normalization scheme to calibrate the 2D and 3D features for better
integration. Third, we design a semantic-aware adversarial
training model to extend our framework for training with unpaired 3D data. Extensive experiments on various datasets,
ScanNet-V2, S3DIS, and NYU-v2, demonstrate the superiority of our approach. Also, experimental results show that our
3D-to-2D distillation improves the model generalization.

1. Introduction
Indoor scene parsing from images plays an important role
in many applications such as robot navigation and augmented
reality. Though a considerable amount of advancements
have been obtained with convolutional neural networks, this
task is still very challenging, since the task inherently suffers
from various issues, including distorted object shapes, severe
occlusions, viewpoint variations, and scale ambiguities.
One approach to address the issues is to leverage auxiliary
geometric information to obtain structured information that
complements the RGB input. For the auxiliary input, existing
methods typically employ the depth map that associates with
the input RGB image. However, earlier methods [15, 11,
6, 37, 41, 47, 10] require the availability of the depth map
*: Corresponding authors

(a)

…

training

3D NN

training
& inference

3D data repository

CNN

2D

(b)

Figure 1. Compared with extracting features solely from the input
image (a) for semantic parsing, our new approach (b) efficiently
distills 3D features learned from a large-scale 3D data repository to
train the 2D CNN to learn to enhance its features for better semantic
parsing. Our framework needs point cloud inputs only in training
but not in testing, and the point cloud can be paired or unpaired.

inputs not only in the training but also in the testing. As a
result, they have limited applicability to general situations,
in which depth is not available. This is in contrast to the
ubiquity of 2D images, which can be readily obtained by the
many photo-taking devices around us.
To get rid of the constraint, several methods [50, 58, 54,
59, 22] propose to predict a depth map from the RGB input,
then leverage the predicted depth to boost the scene parsing
performance. However, depth prediction from a single image
is already a very challenging task on its own. Hence, the
performance of these methods largely depends on the quality
of the predicted depth. Also, the additional depth prediction
raises the overall complexity of the network.
Besides the above issues, a common limitation of the prior
works is that they only explore the depth map as the auxiliary
geometry cue. Yet, a depth map can only give a partial view
of a 3D scene, so issues like occlusions and viewpoint variations are severe. Further, they all require paired RGB-depth
data in training. So, they are limited for use on datasets with

4464

