Learning to Predict Visual Attributes in the Wild
Khoi Pham1 *

Kushal Kafle2
Zhe Lin2
Zhihong Ding2
Scott Cohen2
Quan Tran2
Abhinav Shrivastava1
1
2
University of Maryland, College Park
Adobe Research

1

{khoi,abhinav}@cs.umd.edu

2

{kkafle, zlin, zhding, scohen, qtran}@adobe.com

Abstract
Visual attributes constitute a large portion of information contained in a scene. Objects can be described using
a wide variety of attributes which portray their visual appearance (color, texture), geometry (shape, size, posture),
and other intrinsic properties (state, action). Existing work
is mostly limited to study of attribute prediction in specific
domains. In this paper, we introduce a large-scale in-thewild visual attribute prediction dataset consisting of over
927K attribute annotations for over 260K object instances.
Formally, object attribute prediction is a multi-label classification problem where all attributes that apply to an object must be predicted. Our dataset poses significant challenges to existing methods due to large number of attributes,
label sparsity, data imbalance, and object occlusion. To
this end, we propose several techniques that systematically
tackle these challenges, including a base model that utilizes both low- and high-level CNN features with multihop attention, reweighting and resampling techniques, a
novel negative label expansion scheme, and a novel supervised attribute-aware contrastive learning algorithm. Using these techniques, we achieve near 3.7 mAP and 5.7
overall F1 points improvement over the current state of the
art. Further details about the VAW dataset can be found at
https://vawdataset.com/

1. Introduction
Learning to predict visual attributes of objects is one of
the most important problems in computer vision and image
understanding. Grounding objects with their correct visual
attribute plays a central role in a variety of computer vision
tasks, such as image retrieval and search [32], tagging, referring expression [35], visual question answering (VQA)
[4, 33], and image captioning [7].
While several existing works address attribute prediction, they are limited in many ways. Objects in a visual
* A portion of this work was done during Khoi Pham’s internship at
Adobe Research.

✔

✔

Positive
Brown, Wooden,
Curved, Clean

Positive
Pink, Leaning,
Floral

✘

✘

Negative
White, Metallic,
Square

Table

Unlabeled ?
Large, Flat,
Painted, Indoors...

Negative
Yellow, Held,
Dried

Flower

✔

✔

Positive
Yellow, Round,
Ceramic, Full

Positive
Brown, Yellow,
Colorful

✘

✘

Negative
White, Square,
Glass, Empty

Plate

Unlabeled ?
Red, Colorful,
Shallow, Dirty, ...

Unlabeled ?
Bright, Cut, Light
Red, Patterned, ...

Negative
Chocolate,
Circular, Burnt

Cookie

Unlabeled ?
White, Dark, Big
Frosted, ...

Figure 1. Example annotations in our dataset. Each possible
attribute-object category pair is annotated with at least 50 examples consisting of explicit positive and negative labels.

scene can be described using a vast number of attributes,
many of which can exist independently of each other. Due
to the variety of possible object and attribute combinations,
it is a daunting task to curate a large-scale visual attribute
prediction dataset. Existing works have largely ignored
large-scale visual attribute prediction in-the-wild and have
instead focused only on domain-specific attributes [19, 43],
datasets consisting of very small number of attribute-object
pairs [51], or are rife with label noise, ambiguity and label sparsity [38]. Similarly, while attributes can form an
important part of related tasks such as VQA, captioning, referring expression, these works do not address the unique
challenges of attribute prediction. Existing work also fails
to address the issue of partial labels, where only a small subset of all possible attributes are annotated. Partial labels and
the lack of explicit negative labels make it challenging to
train or evaluate models for large-scale attribute prediction.
To address these problems, we propose a new large-scale visual attribute prediction dataset for images in the wild that
includes both positive and negative annotations.
Our dataset, called visual attributes in the wild (VAW),
consists of over 927K explicitly labeled positive and negative attribute annotations applied to over 260K object instances (with 620 unique attributes and 2,260 unique ob-

13018

