Noise-resistant Deep Metric Learning with Ranking-based Instance Selection
Chang Liu1 , Han Yu1 , Boyang Li1* , Zhiqi Shen1* , Zhanning Gao2* ,
Peiran Ren2 , Xuansong Xie2 , Lizhen Cui3,4 , Chunyan Miao1*
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University (NTU), Singapore
2
Alibaba Group, Hangzhou, China 3 School of Software, Shandong University (SDU), Jinan, China
4
Joint SDU-NTU Centre for Artificial Intelligence Research (C-FAIR), SDU, Jinan, China
*{boyang.li, zqshen}@ntu.edu.sg, zhanning.gzn@alibaba-inc.com, ascymiao@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
The existence of noisy labels in real-world data negatively impacts the performance of deep learning models. Although much research effort has been devoted to improving
robustness to noisy labels in classification tasks, the problem of noisy labels in deep metric learning (DML) remains
open. In this paper, we propose a noise-resistant training
technique for DML, which we name Probabilistic Rankingbased Instance Selection with Memory (PRISM). PRISM
identifies noisy data in a minibatch using average similarity
against image features extracted by several previous versions of the neural network. These features are stored in
and retrieved from a memory bank. To alleviate the high
computational cost brought by the memory bank, we introduce an acceleration method that replaces individual data
points with the class centers. In extensive comparisons with
12 existing approaches under both synthetic and real-world
label noise, PRISM demonstrates superior performance of
up to 6.06% in Precision@1.

1. Introduction
Commonly resulting from human annotation errors or
imperfect automated data collection, noisy labels in training
data degrade the predictive performance of models trained
on them [11, 47, 16]. Manual inspection and correction of
labels are labour-intensive and hence scale poorly to large
datasets. Therefore, training techniques that are robust to
incorrect labels in training data play an important role in
real-world applications of machine learning.
To date, most works on noise-resistant neural networks
[11, 17, 31, 52, 47, 48, 16] focus on image classification.
Little research effort has been devoted to noise-resistant
deep metric learning (DML). The goal of DML is to learn a
distance metric that maps similar pairs of data points close
together and dissimilar pairs far apart, based on a predefined

notion for similarity. DML finds diverse applications such
as image retrieval [18, 10, 33], landmark identification [49],
and self-supervised learning [25].
Pair-based loss functions encourages DML networks to
distinguish a similar pair of data points from one or more
dissimilar pairs. Large batch sizes often lead to improved
performance [6, 46, 5], as larger batches are more likely
to contain informative examples. Pushing the idea of large
batches to an extreme, [46] collects all positive and negative
data samples from a memory bank. However, in the presence of substantial noise, indiscriminate use of all samples
could lower performance. Alternatively, [26] uses learnable
class centers to replace individual data samples in order to
reduce computational complexity. Nonetheless, the cluster
centers can also be sensitive to outliers and label noise.
We propose a noise-resistant deep metric learning algorithm, Probabilistic Ranking-based Instance Selection with
Memory (PRISM), which works with both the memory bank
approach and the class-center approach. PRISM computes
the probability that a label is clean based on the similarities
between the data point and other data points using features
extracted during the last several training iterations. This
may be seen as modeling the posterior probability of the
data label. For data points with high probability, we extract their features and insert them into the memory bank,
which is used in subsequent model updates. In addition, we
develop a smooth top-R (sTRM) trick to adjust the threshold for noisy data identification as well as an acceleration
technique that replaces individual data points with the class
centers in the probability calculation.
We perform extensive empirical evaluations on both synthetic and real datasets. Inspired by the the “noise cluster”
phenomenon observed from real-world data, we introduce
the Small Cluster noise model to mimic open-set noise in
real data. Experimental results show that PRISM achieves
superior performance compared to 12 existing DML and
noise-resistant training techniques under symmetric noise,
Small Cluster noise, and real noise. In addition, the accel-

6811

