Body2Hands: Learning to Infer 3D Hands
from Conversational Gesture Body Dynamics
Evonne Ng1,2

Shiry Ginosar1
1

?

UC Berkeley

Trevor Darrell1
2

Hanbyul Joo2

Facebook AI Research

?

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Hand gestures are vital for conveying non-verbal information. (a) Our work considers how a speaker’s upper body alone can
facilitate the inference of their hand gestures. (b) From a temporal stack of the speaker’s 3D body poses (top), we predict corresponding
hands (bottom). (c) Body2Hands outputs a sequence of 3D hand poses in the form of an articulated 3D hand model. Project page:
http://people.eecs.berkeley.edu/˜evonne_ng/projects/body2hands/

Abstract
We propose a novel learned deep prior of body motion
for 3D hand shape synthesis and estimation in the domain of
conversational gestures. Our model builds upon the insight
that body motion and hand gestures are strongly correlated
in non-verbal communication settings. We formulate the
learning of this prior as a prediction task of 3D hand shape
over time given body motion input alone. Trained with
3D pose estimations obtained from a large-scale dataset of
internet videos, our hand prediction model produces convincing 3D hand gestures given only the 3D motion of the
speaker’s arms as input. We demonstrate the efficacy of our
method on hand gesture synthesis from body motion input,
and as a strong body prior for single-view image-based 3D
hand pose estimation. We demonstrate that our method outperforms previous state-of-the-art approaches and can generalize beyond the monologue-based training data to multiperson conversations.

1. Introduction
When we communicate, we convey nonverbal signals
with our body and hands [38]. In particular, subtle nuances can be conveyed by performing specific conversational hand gestures, as the human hand is richly expres-

sive with many degrees of joint freedom. This primordial
form of communication is deeply ingrained in human nature. From early infancy, human babies pay extra attention
to their own and others’ hands [46] and subsequently learn
to convey their needs via hand and finger gestures long before they speak. Endowing machines with the ability to perceive and use conversational hand gestures is therefore an
essential step towards teaching them to effectively interact
with humans.
However, learning the intricacies of conversational hand
gestures requires vast amounts of data. While previous
approaches attempted rule-based [4] and data-driven [23]
methods, a learning based method from large swaths of data
would allow for both modeling the fine-grained details of
hand motion as well as generalization beyond the training
set. Unfortunately, there are many challenges in capturing
conversational hand gestures in realistic settings. These include the elaborate motions of fingers, the relatively small
size of the hand with respect to the body, and frequent self
occlusions. Such challenges make capturing the motion of
human hands difficult, even for industry-level multi-camera,
optical-marker-based motion capture systems [16, 29]. Embodied 3D hand motion capture datasets in realistic conversational scenarios are therefore extremely rare.
In this paper, we propose an approach for learning conversational hand gestures on a large-scale dataset of in-the111865

