COMPLETER: Incomplete Multi-view Clustering via Contrastive Prediction
Yijie Lin1 , Yuanbiao Gou1 , Zitao Liu2 , Boyun Li1 , Jiancheng Lv1 , Xi Peng1∗
1
College of Computer Science, Sichuan University, China.
2
TAL Education Group, China.
{linyijie.gm,gouyuanbiao,zitao.jerry.liu,liboyun.gm,pengx.gm}@gmail.com; lvjiancheng@scu.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we study two challenging problems in incomplete multi-view clustering analysis, namely, i) how to
learn an informative and consistent representation among
different views without the help of labels and ii) how to recover the missing views from data. To this end, we propose
a novel objective that incorporates representation learning
and data recovery into a unified framework from the view
of information theory. To be specific, the informative and
consistent representation is learned by maximizing the mutual information across different views through contrastive
learning, and the missing views are recovered by minimizing the conditional entropy of different views through dual
prediction. To the best of our knowledge, this could be the
first work to provide a theoretical framework that unifies the
consistent representation learning and cross-view data recovery. Extensive experimental results show the proposed
method remarkably outperforms 10 competitive multi-view
clustering methods on four challenging datasets. The code
is available at https://pengxi.me.

1. Introduction
In the real world, multi-view data, which often exhibit
heterogeneous properties, is collected from diverse sensors
or obtained from various feature extractors. As one of the
most important unsupervised multi-view methods, multiview clustering (MVC) aims to separate data points into different clusters in an unsupervised fashion [11, 17, 20, 29, 40,
54]. To achieve the end, the key is exploring the consistency
across different views so that a common/shared representation is learned [5, 12, 14, 21, 33, 47]. Behind the consistency
learning, the implicit assumption is that the views are complete, i.e., all data points will present in all possible views.
In practice, however, some views of data points might be
missing due to the complexity in data collection and transmission, leading to so-called incomplete multi-view prob∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. Our basic observation and theoretical results from the
perspective of information theory. In the figure, the solid and dotted rectangles denote the information contained in view 1 (X1 ) and
view 2 (X2 ), respectively. In mathematical, the mutual information I(Z1 , Z2 ) (grey area) quantifies the amount of information
shared by Z1 and Z2 , where Z1 and Z2 are the representations
of X1 and X2 , respectively. To learn consistent representations,
it is encouraged to maximize I(Z1 , Z2 ). In addition, minimizing the conditional entropy H(Zi |Zj ) (blue area) will encourage
the recovery of missing view because Zi is fully determined by
Zj if and only if the conditional entropy H(Zi |Zj ) = 0, where
i = 1, j = 2 or i = 2, j = 1. Subtly, on the one hand,
the maximization of I(Z1 , Z2 ) could increase the amount of the
shared information, thus the data recoverability could be benefited,
i.e., it is easier to recover one view from the other. On the other
hand, as H(Zi |Zj ) quantifies the amount of information of Zi
conditioned on Zj , the minimization of H(Zi |Zj ) will encourage to discard the inconsistent information across-views, and thus
the consistency could be further improved. With the above observation, cross-view consistency and data recovery are treated as
two sides of one coin under the above unified information theory
framework.

lem (IMP). For example, in online meetings, some video
frames might lose the visual or audio signal due to the
breakdown of sensors. To solve IMP, some incomplete
multi-view clustering algorithms (IMC) have been proposed
by employing numerous data recovery methods to complete the missing data, e.g., matrix factorization based methods [10, 22, 35, 46, 53] and generative adversarial networks
based methods [16, 41, 45]. These works have attempted
to overcome the following two challenges: i) how to learn
informative and consistent representations across different
views? and ii) how to eliminate the influence of the miss-

11174

