Learning Better Visual Dialog Agents with Pretrained Visual-Linguistic
Representation
Tao Tu1 , Qing Ping2, *, Govindarajan Thattai2 , Gokhan Tur2 , Prem Natarajan2
1
National Taiwan University
2
Amazon Alexa AI
ttaoREtw@gmail.com, {pingqing,thattg,gokhatur,premknat}@amazon.com

Abstract
GuessWhat?! is a visual dialog guessing game which incorporates a Questioner agent that generates a sequence
of questions, while an Oracle agent answers the respective questions about a target object in an image. Based
on this dialog history between the Questioner and the Oracle, a Guesser agent makes a final guess of the target object. While previous work has focused on dialogue policy optimization and visual-linguistic information fusion,
most work learns the vision-linguistic encoding for the three
agents solely on the GuessWhat?! dataset without shared
and prior knowledge of vision-linguistic representation. To
bridge these gaps, this paper proposes new Oracle, Guesser
and Questioner models that take advantage of a pretrained
vision-linguistic model, VilBERT. For Oracle model, we
introduce a two-way background/target fusion mechanism
to understand both intra and inter-object questions. For
Guesser model, we introduce a state-estimator that best utilizes VilBERT’s strength in single-turn referring expression
comprehension. For the Questioner, we share the stateestimator from pretrained Guesser with Questioner to guide
the question generator. Experimental results show that our
proposed models outperform state-of-the-art models significantly by 7%, 10%, 12% for Oracle, Guesser and End-toEnd Questioner respectively.

1. Introduction
Multi-modal dialog tasks have gained increasing popularity in recent years such as GuessWhat?! [8], GuessWhich?! [5], VisDial [7], VDQG [16], vision-and-language
navigation R2R [3], ImageChat [27], Alfred [25] and so
on. Multi-modal dialog tasks are challenging as the models
need to perform high-level image understanding and visual
grounding, and such visual grounding should be properly
combined with understanding and tracking of multi-turn di* Corresponding author

Figure 1: Example of the GuessWhat?! dataset

alogues in the meanwhile.
The GuessWhat?! dataset is a challenging dataset for a
two-player game, where one player will ask a sequence of
binary questions and make a final guess for an object in an
image designated by another player. The first player performs two sub-tasks, namely as a Questioner to ask questions, and as a Guesser to make the final guess. The second player serves as the Oracle to give Yes/No answer to
first player’s questions. An example of the GuessWhat?!
game can be seen in Figure-1. The GuessWhat?! game is
a good test-bed for such multi-modal tasks such as VQA,
referring expression comprehension and generation, and it
is also organized in a multi-turn multi-agent dialog. This
paper focuses on the three agents for the two players in the
GuessWhat?! dataset, namely the Oracle model, Guesser
model and the Questioner model.
The Oracle task can be considered as an object-aware
Visual Question Answering task (VQA), where the inputs
are an image, a question, and a pre-defined target object,
and the output is an answer of Yes/No/NA depending on
whether the question matches the target object. The baseline Oracle model [8] encodes the target object with only
category and spatial information but no visual information, which may be insufficient for answering more complex
questions about color, shape, relation, actions of an object.
To bridge this gap, we introduce VilBERT-Oracle, which
takes advantage of the VilBERT model’s ability to achieve
state-of-the-art performance on VQA tasks [17, 18]. We
also introduce a two-way background/target fusion mechanism on top of the VilBERT encoder to learn how to predict

5622

