FlowStep3D: Model Unrolling for Self-Supervised Scene Flow Estimation
Yair Kittenplon1
Yonina C. Eldar2
Dan Raviv1
1
2
Tel Aviv University
Weizmann Institute of Science
{yairk@mai1, darav@tauex}.tau.ac.il

yonina.eldar@weizmann.ac.il

Abstract
Estimating the 3D motion of points in a scene, known
as scene flow, is a core problem in computer vision. Traditional learning-based methods designed to learn end-toend 3D flow often suffer from poor generalization. Here
we present a recurrent architecture that learns a single step
of an unrolled iterative alignment procedure for refining
scene flow predictions. Inspired by classical algorithms, we
demonstrate iterative convergence toward the solution using strong regularization. The proposed method can handle sizeable temporal deformations and suggests a slimmer architecture than competitive all-to-all correlation approaches. Trained on FlyingThings3D synthetic data only,
our network successfully generalizes to real scans, outperforming all existing methods by a large margin on the KITTI
self-supervised benchmark.1

1. Introduction
Understanding motion is fundamental to many applications in a variety of fields, such as human-computer interaction, robotics, and autonomous driving. The information
absorbed within a temporal window is not only a collection
of images or a representation of an outcome, but also a description of a process.
Decades ago, computer vision tackled the task of motion estimation, searching for a flow between two images
[3, 7, 14, 22, 41]. One significant leap forward in understanding the motion of a scene, defined as scene flow, is
the presence of 3D geometry. It liberates us from considering color as the main correspondence feature and allows
examining the structure itself to understand the motion. Axiomatic concepts of rigidity [2, 6] provided fast and accurate results, but once piece-wise movements [9, 10, 39] or
non-rigidity [1, 15, 23] was allowed, scene flow estimation
problem became ill-posed and unfortunately hard to solve.
The rise of artificial intelligence [19] gives hope that
solving the 3D flow estimation problem is possible using
1 https://github.com/yairkit/flowstep3d

Figure 1. Model unrolling. Top: source (green) and target
(blue) input point clouds sampled from the KITTI [27] scene-flow
dataset. Middle: illustration of our FlowStep3D architecture unrolled for K iterations. Bottom: source warped over the predicted
flow at each iteration toward the static target at inference time.

a network architecture. Indeed, in the last few years, an improvement in different learning-based methods [12, 21, 31,
37, 43] has been seen, outperforming those that relied on
optimization. More importantly, these learned models are
fast and robust.
Scene flow estimation is an integral component in the
autonomous driving industry, where LiDAR data is used
for the perception of the environment. However, LiDAR
sensors suffer from sparseness, directly affecting deeplearning flow algorithms that require knowledge of the objects’ spatio-temporal neighborhood. In other words, once
the structures do not heavily overlap, the process fails. In an
attempt to solve this limitation, we recently have seen allto-all mechanisms both for images [36] and geometry [31].
However, these methods consume large amounts of memory and tend to produce outliers, as now nearby points can
be aligned with inconsistent temporal positions.
In this work, we focus on the scene flow problem, where

4114

