Multi-Modal Relational Graph for Cross-Modal Video Moment Retrieval
Yawen Zeng1 , Da Cao1∗ , Xiaochi Wei2 , Meng Liu3 , Zhou Zhao4 , Zheng Qin1∗
1
Hunan University, 2 Baidu Inc., 3 Shandong Jianzhu University, 4 Zhejiang University
{yawenzeng11, caoda0721, mengliu.sdu}@gmail.com
weixiaochi@baidu.com, zhaozhou@zju.edu.cn, zqin@hnu.edu.cn

Abstract
Given an untrimmed video and a query sentence, crossmodal video moment retrieval aims to rank a video moment
from pre-segmented video moment candidates that best
matches the query sentence. Pioneering work typically
learns the representations of the textual and visual content
separately and then obtains the interactions or alignments
between different modalities. However, the task of crossmodal video moment retrieval is not yet thoroughly addressed as it needs to further identify the fine-grained
differences of video moment candidates with high repeatability and similarity. Moveover, the relation among objects
in both video and sentence is intuitive and efficient for
understanding semantics but is rarely considered.
Toward this end, we contribute a multi-modal relational
graph to capture the interactions among objects from
the visual and textual content to identify the differences
among similar video moment candidates. Specifically,
we first introduce a visual relational graph and a textual
relational graph to form relation-aware representations
via message propagation. Thereafter, a multi-task pretraining is designed to capture domain-specific knowledge
about objects and relations, enhancing the structured visual
representation after explicitly defined relation. Finally, the
graph matching and boundary regression are employed to
perform the cross-modal retrieval. We conduct extensive
experiments on two datasets about daily activities and
cooking activities, demonstrating significant improvements
over state-of-the-art solutions.

1. Introduction
Entering the era of information explosion, individuals
spend more time in seeking their desired information and
the video is not an exception. However, traditional video
retrieval methods are specifically designed for whole video
retrieval and are not suitable for more fine-grained video
∗ Corresponding authors.

UntrimmedVideo

......
MultiͲscalepreͲsegmentedvideomomentcandidates

(a) Video moment candidates with high similarity

Querysentence:Theperson puts abookinabag.

(b) Interactions of limited objects

Figure 1: Challenges in cross-modal video moment retrieval. Fig.1a reveals the difficulty of retrieving desired
video moment from candidates with high similarity, while
Fig.1b exhibits the difficulty of modeling the spatialtemporal interactions of objects.
moment retrieval scenario. To alleviate people’s expectation
of quickly retrieving a desired video moment, the task of
cross-modal video moment retrieval [1, 8] is proposed. In
particular, given an untrimmed video and a query sentence,
the task of cross-modal video moment retrieval aims to
extract a video moment from the untrimmed video that best
matches the query.
In fact, a great effort has been made to address the
cross-modal video moment retrieval issue. Existing work
mostly relies on multi-scale pre-segmented video moment
candidates via the sliding window strategy, and then
retrieves a suitable video moment from them [36]. Similar
to the cross-modal retrieval task [2], the cross-modal video
moment retrieval needs to understand and stitch text-video
semantics. The typical method is to extract the global [5]
and local [3, 17] information of the sentence and video first,
then leverage attention mechanism [21, 22, 24] and semantic matching [34] to fuse modalities, and finally rank video
moment candidates based on the learned representation. As

2215

