Cluster, Split, Fuse, and Update: Meta-Learning for Open Compound Domain
Adaptive Semantic Segmentation
Rui Gong 1 , Yuhua Chen 1 , Danda Pani Paudel 1 , Yawei Li 1 , Ajad Chhatkuli 1 ,
Wen Li 3 , Dengxin Dai 1 , Luc Van Gool 1,2
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, 2 VISICS, KU Leuven, 3 UESTC
{gongr, yuhua.chen, paudel, yawei.li, ajad.chhatkuli, dai, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch,
liwenbnu@gmail.com

Abstract
Open compound domain adaptation (OCDA) is a domain adaptation setting, where target domain is modeled as
a compound of multiple unknown homogeneous domains,
which brings the advantage of improved generalization to
unseen domains. In this work, we propose a principled
meta-learning based approach to OCDA for semantic segmentation, MOCDA, by modeling the unlabeled target domain continuously. Our approach consists of four key steps.
First, we cluster target domain into multiple sub-target domains by image styles, extracted in an unsupervised manner. Then, different sub-target domains are split into independent branches, for which batch normalization parameters are learnt to treat them independently. A meta-learner
is thereafter deployed to learn to fuse sub-target domainspecific predictions, conditioned upon the style code. Meanwhile, we learn to online update the model by modelagnostic meta-learning (MAML) algorithm, thus to further
improve generalization. We validate the benefits of our approach by extensive experiments on synthetic-to-real knowledge transfer benchmark, where we achieve the state-of-theart performance in both compound and open domains.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation with minimal supervision is one
of the most sought-after goals of image understanding [23,
56]. Unfortunately, the learned understanding in one domain does not generalize to the images from other domains [4]. In such cases, domain adaptation aims at transferring the shared knowledge across different but related
domains [41], i.e., source and target, using the unlabeled
images from the target. When the target domain images
are collected in mixed, continually varying, and even unseen conditions, understanding images invites the problem
of open compound domain adaptation [35].

(a) Traditional Domain Adaptation

(c) Fuse

(b) Cluster/Split

(d) Update

Figure 1: (a) The traditional unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) vs. (b,c,d) the proposed meta-based open compound domain adaptation (MOCDA). Unlike the traditional
UDA, MOCDA treats target as a compound of multiple unknown sub-domains. These sub-domains are discovered
and processed using the cluster and the split module (b).
The fuse module (c) then combines the sub-domain splits
as basis (dash lines). On open domains, MOCDA adapts
through online update during inference (blue arrow) in (d).
Meta-learning serves in the fuse and the update module.
The Open Compound Domain Adaptation (OCDA)
treats the target as a compound of multiple unknown subdomains. Such assumption has been shown to be very
promising by Liu et al. [35] for many practical settings of
image classifications. However, the method developed in
[35] does not fully exploit the same assumption for the task
of image segmentation. 1 In this work, we show that the
1 OCDA [35] does not fully exploit the domain information for seg-

8344

