Polarimetric Normal Stereo
Yoshiki Fukao Ryo Kawahara Shohei Nobuhara Ko Nishino
Graduate School of Informatics, Kyoto Univesity
https://vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp/

Abstract
We introduce a novel method for recovering per-pixel
surface normals from a pair of polarization cameras. Unlike past methods that use polarimetric observations as auxiliary features for correspondence matching, we fully integrate them in cost volume construction and filtering to directly recover per-pixel surface normals, not as byproducts
of recovered disparities. Our key idea is to introduce a polarimetric cost volume of distance defined on the polarimetric observations and the polarization state computed from
the surface normal. We adapt a belief propagation algorithm to filter this cost volume. The filtering algorithm simultaneously estimates the disparities and surface normals
as separate entities, while effectively denoising the original noisy polarimetric observations of a quad-Bayer polarization camera. In addition, in contrast to past methods, we model polarimetric light reflection of mesoscopic
surface roughness, which is essential to account for its
illumination-dependency. We demonstrate the effectiveness
of our method on a number of complex, real objects. Our
method offers a simple and detailed 3D sensing capability
for complex, non-Lambertian surfaces.

1. Introduction
Stereo reconstruction has been a long-standing research
topic in computer vision since its inception. Binocular
stereo, in particular, has been studied in depth and has been
deployed in a wide range of applications. Its simple passive setup which requires minimal calibration, maintenance,
and cost has made it a reliable choice for 3D sensing. Even
when alternative methods with higher precision are available, binocular stereo is often favored for its dense per-pixel
depth that comes with relatively low cost for computation.
Stereo, however, is inherently limited by its underlying
reconstruction process, namely matching and triangulation.
Correspondence matching fundamentally requires viewindependent appearance (color constancy), which translates
to limited applicability in terms of target surface materials.
Despite the large body of work including those that train

deep neural networks to establish matching metrics, departing from this Lambertian surface requirement remains challenging. Triangulating the resulting correspondences also
only recovers surface depth. For most cases, due to the
fragility of this matching and triangulation, spatial regularization and quantization are employed. As a result, the
geometry recovered by stereo, albeit useful for many applications, is often a crude measurement of the true surface.
Can we make stereo, in particular, simple binocular
stereo recover detailed geometry of real-world surfaces that
are composed of arbitrary materials? Can we match nonLambertian surface points, but recover the geometry without relying solely on their geometric triangulation? In this
paper, we show that we can achieve these by exploiting polarization of light reflected from real-world surfaces.
Catapulted by the introduction of quad-Bayer polarization cameras, polarization cues have started to see adoption
in a wide range of computer vision methods. Geometry reconstruction is no exception (see Sec. 2). These past methods, however, use polarization as auxiliary cues for matching and proceeds with regular triangulation of depth. Surface normals are only computed from the recovered depth.
That is, they are byproducts of the depth and not measurements of the actual surface normals. They also ignore
the complex polarimetric reflection properties and assume
purely Lambertian or mirror reflection, which ostracizes a
broad range of real-world materials and lighting conditions.
In this paper, we show that we can establish surface point
correspondences in a polarimetric stereo pair and recover
per-pixel surface normals from the two polarimetric observations. We also integrate a full polarimetric BRDF model
to handle complex lighting-dependent polarimetric reflection. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first to
show that surface normals can be directly, not as a byproduct of depth, recovered from binocular polarimetric stereo
for a wide range of surfaces from matte, glossy, to mirrored.
Our key idea is to formulate simultaneous estimation of
per-pixel depth-independent normal and albedo as RGBpolarimetric cost volume filtering. In addition to a regular RGB cost volume as a function of pixel disparities, we
also construct a polarimetric cost volume that stores Stokes

682

