Abstract Spatial-Temporal Reasoning via Probabilistic Abduction and Execution
Chi Zhang‹
Baoxiong Jia‹
Song-Chun Zhu
Yixin Zhu
UCLA Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning, and Autonomy
{chi.zhang,baoxiongjia}@ucla.edu, sczhu@stat.ucla.edu, yixin.zhu@ucla.edu

Abstract
Spatial-temporal reasoning is a challenging task in
Artificial Intelligence (AI) due to its demanding but unique
nature: a theoretic requirement on representing and reasoning based on spatial-temporal knowledge in mind, and
an applied requirement on a high-level cognitive system capable of navigating and acting in space and time. Recent
works have focused on an abstract reasoning task of this
kind—Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM). Despite the
encouraging progress on RPM that achieves human-level
performance in terms of accuracy, modern approaches have
neither a treatment of human-like reasoning on generalization, nor a potential to generate answers. To fill in this gap,
we propose a neuro-symbolic Probabilistic Abduction and
Execution (PrAE) learner; central to the PrAE learner is
the process of probabilistic abduction and execution on a
probabilistic scene representation, akin to the mental manipulation of objects. Specifically, we disentangle perception and reasoning from a monolithic model. The neural
visual perception frontend predicts objects’ attributes, later
aggregated by a scene inference engine to produce a probabilistic scene representation. In the symbolic logical reasoning backend, the PrAE learner uses the representation
to abduce the hidden rules. An answer is predicted by executing the rules on the probabilistic representation. The entire system is trained end-to-end in an analysis-by-synthesis
manner without any visual attribute annotations. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that the PrAE learner improves
cross-configuration generalization and is capable of rendering an answer, in contrast to prior works that merely
make a categorical choice from candidates.

1. Introduction
While “thinking in pictures” [13], i.e., spatial-temporal
reasoning, is effortless and instantaneous for humans, this
significant ability has proven to be particularly challeng‹ indicates equal contribution.

ing for current machine vision systems [27]. With the
promising results [13] that show the very ability is strongly
correlated with one’s logical induction performance and
a crucial factor for the intellectual history of technology
development, recent computational studies on the problem focus on an abstract reasoning task relying heavily
on “thinking in pictures”—Raven’s Progressive Matrices
(RPM) [3, 24, 51, 52]. In this task, a subject is asked to
pick a correct answer that best fits an incomplete figure matrix to satisfy the hidden governing rules. The ability to
solve RPM-like problems is believed to be critical for generating and conceptualizing solutions to multi-step problems,
which requires mental manipulation of given images over
a time-ordered sequence of spatial transformations. Such
a task is also believed to be characteristic of relational and
analogical reasoning and an indicator of one’s fluid intelligence [6, 18, 26, 55].
State-of-the-art algorithms incorporating a contrasting
mechanism and perceptual inference [17, 72] have achieved
decent performance in terms of accuracy. Nevertheless,
along with the improved accuracy from deep models come
critiques on its transparency, interpretability, generalization,
and difficulty to incorporate knowledge. Without explicitly distinguishing perception and reasoning, existing methods use a monolithic model to learn correlation, sacrificing
transparency and interpretability in exchange for improved
performance [17, 20, 53, 59, 70, 72, 75]. Furthermore, as
shown in experiments, deep models nearly always overfit to
the training regime and cannot properly generalize. Such a
finding is consistent with Fodor [11] and Marcus’s [43, 44]
hypothesis that human-level systematic generalizability is
hardly compatible with classic neural networks; Marcus
postulates that a neuro-symbolic architecture should be recruited for human-level generalization [7, 8, 9, 41, 42, 66].
Another defect of prior methods is the lack of top-down
and bottom-up reasoning [72]: Human reasoning applies
a generative process to abduce rules and execute them to
synthesize a possible solution in mind, and discriminatively
selects the most similar answer from choices [19]. This bidirectional reasoning is in stark contrast to discriminativeonly models, solely capable of making a categorical choice.

9736

