Training Generative Adversarial Networks in One Stage
Chengchao Shen1 , Youtan Yin1 , Xinchao Wang2,5 , Xubin Li3 , Jie Song1,4,* , Mingli Song1
1
Zhejiang University, 2 National University of Singapore, 3 Alibaba Group,
4
Zhejiang Lab, 5 Stevens Institute of Technology
{chengchaoshen,youtanyin,sjie,brooksong}@zju.edu.cn,
xinchao@nus.edu.sg,lxb204722@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) have demonstrated unprecedented success in various image generation
tasks. The 𝒢
encouraging results, however,
come at the price
𝒟
𝒟 during which the genof a cumbersome training𝒢 process,
erator and discriminator are alternately updated in two
stages. In this paper, we investigate a general training
scheme that enables training GANs efficiently in only one
stage. Based 𝒢
on the adversarial losses
𝒟 of the generator and
𝒟 GANs𝒢 into two classes, Symdiscriminator, we categorize
metric GANs and Asymmetric GANs, and introduce a novel
gradient decomposition method to unify the two, allowing
us to train both classes in one stage and hence alleviate
the training effort. We also computationally analyze the efficiency of the proposed method, and empirically demonstrate that, the𝒢 proposed method yields
𝒟 a solid 1.5× accel𝒢
𝒟
eration across various
datasets and network architectures.
Furthermore, we show that the proposed method is readily
applicable to other adversarial-training scenarios, such as
data-free knowledge distillation. The code is available at
https://github.com/zju-vipa/OSGAN .

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs), since their introduction in [17], have produced unprecedentedly impressive results on various image generation tasks. Thanks to
the adversarial nature of the two key components, generator and discriminator, the synthesized images delivered by
GANs turn out visually appealing and in many cases indistinguishable from real ones. Recently, many variants of
GANs have introduced and focused on different aspects of
the design, including image quality [30, 6, 12], training stability [43, 74, 46] and diversity [8, 68, 40]. Apart from
generating images as the end goal, GANs have also been
applied to other tasks, such as data-free knowledge distilla* Corresponding author

Two-Stage GANs (Vanilla GANs):
Real
Fake

𝒢

Stage1: Fix 𝒢, Update 𝒟

𝒟
Real
Fake

𝒢

Stage 2: Fix 𝒟, Update 𝒢

One-Stage GANs:

𝒟
Real
Fake

𝒢

𝒟

Update 𝒢 and 𝒟 simultaneously

Figure 1: Comparison of the conventional Two-Stage GAN
training scheme (TSGANs) and the proposed One-Stage
strategy (OSGANs). The former one relies on alternately
freezing the generator and the discriminant, while the latter
trains both simultaneously.
tion [44, 13, 60, 71] and domain adaption [14, 56].
The promising results delivered by GANs, however,
come at the price of a burdensome training process. As
shown in the upper row of Fig. 1, existing GANs rely on a
time-consuming two-stage training process, which we term
as Two-Stage GANs (TSGANs). In the first stage, fake images synthesized by the generator, together with the real
ones, are fed into the discriminator for training; during this
process, the discriminator is updated but the generator is
fixed. In the second stage, the discriminator delivers the
gradients derived from the loss function to the generator,
during which the generator is updated but the discriminator
is fixed. Within each adversarial round, therefore, both the
generator and the discriminator carry out the feed-forward
step for two times, while the discriminator implements a
backward-propagation step for another two times, which,

3350

