Isometric Multi-Shape Matching
Maolin Gao1
1

Zorah Lähner1,3

Johan Thunberg2

Technical University of Munich

2

Daniel Cremers1

Halmstad University

3

Florian Bernard1

University of Siegen

P1 P2⊤
P1
P2

P3
P4

Figure 1. Left: We present a novel approach for isometric multi-shape matching based on matching each shape to a (virtual) universe
shape (shown semi-transparent). Our formulation represents point-to-point correspondences between shapes i and j as the composition
of the shape-to-universe permutation matrix Pi and the universe-to-shape permutation matrix PjT . By doing so, the pairwise matchings
Pij = Pi Pj⊤ are by construction cycle-consistent. Middle: Our formulation successfully solves isometric multi-matching of partial
shapes. Right: Due to the cycle-consistency we can use our correspondences to faithfully transfer textures across a shape collection.

Abstract
Finding correspondences between shapes is a fundamental problem in computer vision and graphics, which is relevant for many applications, including 3D reconstruction,
object tracking, and style transfer. The vast majority of correspondence methods aim to find a solution between pairs
of shapes, even if multiple instances of the same class are
available. While isometries are often studied in shape correspondence problems, they have not been considered explicitly in the multi-matching setting. This paper closes
this gap by proposing a novel optimisation formulation for
isometric multi-shape matching. We present a suitable optimisation algorithm for solving our formulation and provide a convergence and complexity analysis. Our algorithm
obtains multi-matchings that are by construction provably
cycle-consistent. We demonstrate the superior performance
of our method on various datasets and set the new state-ofthe-art in isometric multi-shape matching.

1. Introduction
The identification of correspondences between 3D
shapes, also known as the shape matching problem, is a
longstanding challenge in visual computing. Correspon-

dence problems have a high relevance due to their plethora
of applications, including 3D reconstruction, deformable
object tracking, style transfer, shape analysis, or general
data canonicalisation, e.g. to facilitate learning by establishing a common vector space representation.
There are certain problem formulations that cover
generic correspondence problems involving different types
of data and varying application scenarios. One example is the widely-studied quadratic assignment problem
(QAP) [36]. Due to its NP-hardness [53], reasonably large
QAPs cannot be solved satisfactorily in most settings. However, contrary to bringing generic objects (e.g. graphs) into
correspondence, when considering 3D shapes it is possible
to exploit particular structural properties in order to effectively solve the shape matching problem.
For example, it has been demonstrated that explicitly
modelling the low-dimensional structure of shape matching
problems often allows to find global optima for a wide range
of shape matching formulations [5]. It was also shown that
learning suitable feature representations from shapes improves the matching performance drastically compared to
using hand-crafted features [40].
Moreover, when assuming (near)-isometries between
shapes, efficient and powerful spectral approaches can be
leveraged for shape matching [51]. Isometries describe

14183

