NExT-QA: Next Phase of Question-Answering to Explaining Temporal Actions
Junbin Xiao, Xindi Shang, Angela Yao, Tat-Seng Chua
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{junbin,shangxin,ayao,chuats}@comp.nus.edu.sg

-How did the lady help the toddler who fell at
the end? Pick toddler up.

How
(12%)

-What was the lady doing before the toddler
in red fell off the stone? Look after boy.

Previous/
Next
(16%)

Lady runs to toddler

Toddler is crying

-How did the lady react after the toddler in red
fell off the stone? Ran to pick toddler up.
-What was the boy doing when the toddler fell
backwards from the stone? Went onto stone.

Lady picks toddler up

-Did the toddler in red cry in the video? Yes.
-Where was this video taken? Park.
-How many kids are shown in the video? Two.
-What is this video about? Family holiday.

Present
(13%)
Binary
(7%)
Location
(5%)
Count
(4%)
Other
(7%)

Questions

Actions in videos are often not independent but rather
related with causal and temporal relationships [3]. For example, in the video in Figure 1, a toddler cries because he
falls, and a lady runs to the toddler in order to pick him up.
Recognizing the objects “toddler”, “lady” and describing
the independent action contents like “a toddler is crying”
and “a lady picks the toddler up” in a video are now possible
with advanced neural network models [14, 28, 63]. Yet being able to reason about their causal and temporal relations
and answer natural language questions (e.g., “Why is the
toddler crying?”, “How did the lady react after the toddler
fell?”), which lies at the core of human intelligence [39],
remains a great challenge for computational models and is
also much less explored by existing video understanding
tasks [22, 37, 49, 52, 56].
In this work, we study causal and temporal action rea-

Why
(36%)

Descriptive (23%)

1. Introduction

-Why was the toddler in red crying at the end
of the video? Fell backwards.

Temporal (29%)

We introduce NExT-QA, a rigorously designed video
question answering (VideoQA) benchmark to advance video
understanding from describing to explaining the temporal actions. Based on the dataset, we set up multi-choice
and open-ended QA tasks targeting causal action reasoning, temporal action reasoning, and common scene comprehension. Through extensive analysis of baselines and established VideoQA techniques, we find that top-performing
methods excel at shallow scene descriptions but are weak
in causal and temporal action reasoning. Furthermore,
the models that are effective on multi-choice QA, when
adapted to open-ended QA, still struggle in generalizing
the answers. This raises doubt on the ability of these models to reason and highlights possibilities for improvement.
With detailed results for different question types and heuristic observations for future works, we hope NExT-QA will
guide the next generation of VQA research to go beyond
superficial description towards a deeper understanding of
videos. (The dataset and related resources are available at
https://github.com/doc-doc/NExT-QA.git)

Toddler fall backwards

Causal (48%)

Abstract

Figure 1: NExT-QA is a question answering benchmark targeting the explanation of video contents. It challenges QA
models to reason about causal and temporal actions and understand the rich object interactions in daily activities.
soning in video question answering (VideoQA) and contribute NExT-QA, a benchmark to foster the Next generation of VQA models to Explain Temporal actions. NExTQA contains 5,440 videos and about 52K manually annotated question-answer pairs grouped into causal, temporal
and descriptive questions. An overview of the typical questions and their distributions are found in Figure 1. To embody the reasoning challenges and provide effective diagnostics for video QA models, we set up two tasks at different difficulty levels. At the first level, multi-choice QA
provides five candidate answers for each question and requires the models to pick out the correct one. At the second
level, open-ended QA requires the models to generate the
answers in short phrases with cues only from the videos and
the questions (i.e., no candidate options).
Using NExT-QA, we evaluate several state-of-the-art
(SOTA) video QA techniques [9, 11, 18, 19, 23, 26]. While
the top-performing methods achieve compelling results on
commonly descriptive questions, their performances on
causal and temporal questions are far from satisfactory. Furthermore, when adapting the models that are effective on

9777

