Unsupervised Hyperbolic Representation Learning
via Message Passing Auto-Encoders
Jiwoong Park*1
1

Junho Cho*1

ASRI, Dept. of ECE., Seoul National University

Hyung Jin Chang2
2

Jin Young Choi1

School of Computer Science, University of Birmingham

{ptywoong,junhocho,jychoi}@snu.ac.kr, h.j.chang@bham.ac.uk

Abstract
Most of the existing literature regarding hyperbolic embedding concentrate upon supervised learning, whereas the
use of unsupervised hyperbolic embedding is less well explored. In this paper, we analyze how unsupervised tasks
can benefit from learned representations in hyperbolic
space. To explore how well the hierarchical structure of unlabeled data can be represented in hyperbolic spaces, we
design a novel hyperbolic message passing auto-encoder
whose overall auto-encoding is performed in hyperbolic
space. The proposed model conducts auto-encoding the
networks via fully utilizing hyperbolic geometry in message passing. Through extensive quantitative and qualitative analyses, we validate the properties and benefits of the
unsupervised hyperbolic representations. Codes are available at https://github.com/junhocho/HGCAE.

1. Introduction
A fundamental problem of machine learning is learning
useful representations from high-dimensional data. There
are many supervised representation learning methods that
achieve good performances for downstream tasks [25, 22,
30, 60] on several data domains such as images and graphs.
In recent years, with the success of deep learning, various
large-scale real-world datasets have been collated [25, 24,
56, 49]. However, the larger these datasets and the closer
they are to the real world, the expense and effort required to
label the data increases proportionally. Thus, unsupervised
representation learning is an increasingly viable approach
to extract useful representation from real-world datasets.
Recently, many works [39, 40, 11, 16, 5, 1, 19] utilize
hyperbolic geometry [23] to learn representations by understanding the underlying nature of the data domains. It is well
known that complex networks contain latent hierarchies between large groups and the divided subgroups of nodes and
* equally contributed.

can be approximated as trees that grow exponentially with
their depth [23]. Based on this fact, previous works which
involve graphs [3, 38, 39, 40, 11, 36] showed the effectiveness of learning representation using hyperbolic spaces (a
continuous version of trees) where distances increase exponentially when moving away from the origin. More recently,
works [5, 27, 1] have been conducted which learn more
powerful representations via conducting message passing
(graph convolution) [12, 22, 54] in hyperbolic spaces.
In addition, it has been successfully shown that grafting
hyperbolic geometry onto computer vision tasks is promising [19]. They observed a high degree of hyperbolicity
[10] in the activations of image datasets obtained from pretrained convolutional networks. Also, it has been shown
that the hyperbolic distance between learned embeddings
and the origin of the Poincaré ball could be considered as a
measurement of the model’s confidence. Using these analyses, [19] added a single layer of hyperbolic neural networks
[11] to deep convolutional networks and showed the benefits of hyperbolic embeddings on few-shot learning and person re-identification. Another work [28] also demonstrated
the suitability of hyperbolic embeddings on zero-shot learning. However, most of the existing hyperbolic representation learning works [19, 28, 5, 27, 1] mainly focus on a supervised setting, and the effect of hyperbolic geometry on
unsupervised representation learning has not been explored
deeply so far [32, 15, 36].
In this paper, we explore the benefits of hyperbolic geometry to carry out unsupervised representation learning
upon various data domains. Our motivation is to learn highquality node embeddings of the graphs that are hierarchical
and tree-like without supervision via considering the geometry of the embedding space. To do so, we present a novel
hyperbolic graph convolutional auto-encoder (HGCAE) by
combining hyperbolic geometry and message passing [12].
Every layer of HGCAE performs message passing in the hyperbolic space and its corresponding tangent space where
curvature values can be trained. This is primarily in contrast to the Poincaré variational auto-encoder (P-VAE) [32]
whose latent space is the Poincaré ball and conducts mes-

5516

