NeRF in the Wild: Neural Radiance Fields for Unconstrained Photo Collections

Ricardo Martin-Brualla∗, Noha Radwan∗, Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi∗,
Jonathan T. Barron, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Daniel Duckworth
Google Research
{rmbrualla, noharadwan, msajjadi, barron, adosovitskiy, duckworthd}@google.com

Abstract
We present a learning-based method for synthesizing
novel views of complex scenes using only unstructured collections of in-the-wild photographs. We build on Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF), which uses the weights of a multilayer perceptron to model the density and color of a scene
as a function of 3D coordinates. While NeRF works well on
images of static subjects captured under controlled settings,
it is incapable of modeling many ubiquitous, real-world
phenomena in uncontrolled images, such as variable illumination or transient occluders. We introduce a series of
extensions to NeRF to address these issues, thereby enabling
accurate reconstructions from unstructured image collections taken from the internet. We apply our system, dubbed
NeRF-W, to internet photo collections of famous landmarks,
and demonstrate temporally consistent novel view renderings that are significantly closer to photorealism than the
prior state of the art.

1. Introduction
Synthesizing novel views of a scene from a sparse set
of captured images is a long-standing problem in computer
vision, and a prerequisite to many AR and VR applications.
Though classic techniques have addressed this problem using
structure-from-motion [11] or image-based rendering [30],
this field has recently seen significant progress due to neural
rendering techniques — learning-based modules embedded
within a 3D geometric context, and trained to reconstruct
observed images. The Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) approach [25] models the radiance field and density of a scene
with the weights of a neural network. Volume rendering is
then used to synthesize new views, demonstrating a heretofore unprecedented level of fidelity on a range of challenging
scenes. However, NeRF has only been demonstrated to work
∗ Denotes equal contribution.

(a) Photos

(b) Renderings

Figure 1: Given only an internet photo collection (a), our method
is able to render novel views with variable illumination (b). Photos
by Flickr users dbowie78, vasnic64, punch / CC BY.

well in controlled settings: the scene is captured within a
short time frame during which lighting effects remain constant, and all content in the scene is static. As we will
demonstrate, NeRF’s performance degrades significantly
when presented with moving objects or variable illumination. This limitation prohibits direct application of NeRF to
large-scale in-the-wild scenarios, where input images may
be taken hours or years apart, and may contain pedestrians
and vehicles moving through them.
The central limitation of NeRF that we address here is its
assumption that the world is geometrically, materially, and
photometrically static — that the density and radiance of
the world is constant. NeRF therefore requires that any two
photographs taken at the same position and orientation must
be identical. This assumption is severely violated in many
real-world datasets, such as large-scale internet photo collections of tourist landmarks. Two photographers may stand in
the same location and photograph the same landmark, but
in the time between those two photographs the world can
change significantly: cars and people may move, construction may begin or end, seasons and weather may change,
the sun may move through the sky, etc. Even two photos

7210

