SuperMix: Supervising the Mixing Data Augmentation
Ali Dabouei, Sobhan Soleymani, Fariborz Taherkhani, Nasser M. Nasrabadi
West Virginia University
{ad0046, ssoleyma, ft0009}@mix.wvu.edu, nasser.nasrabadi@mail.wvu.edu

Abstract
This paper presents a supervised mixing augmentation
method termed SuperMix, which exploits the salient regions
within input images to construct mixed training samples.
SuperMix is designed to obtain mixed images rich in visual
features and complying with realistic image priors. To enhance the efficiency of the algorithm, we develop a variant
of the Newton iterative method, 65× faster than gradient
descent on this problem. We validate the effectiveness of SuperMix through extensive evaluations and ablation studies
on two tasks of object classification and knowledge distillation. On the classification task, SuperMix provides comparable performance to the advanced augmentation methods, such as AutoAugment and RandAugment. In particular, combining SuperMix with RandAugment achieves
78.2% top-1 accuracy on ImageNet with ResNet50. On the
distillation task, solely classifying images mixed using the
teacher’s knowledge achieves comparable performance to
the state-of-the-art distillation methods. Furthermore, on
average, incorporating mixed images into the distillation
objective improves the performance by 3.4% and 3.1% on
CIFAR-100 and ImageNet, respectively. The code is available at https://github.com/alldbi/SuperMix.

1. Introduction
Despite the revolutionary performance of deep neural
networks (DNNs), they easily overfit when the training set
is qualitatively or quantitatively deficient [27, 33]. Quality
of the data can be interpreted as how well the data is expressive of the true distribution of inputs in the underlying
task. This helps the model to learn discriminative patterns
likely to occur at inference time. Quantity of the data, on the
other hand, allows the model to observe discriminative patterns from different views and generalize the task-specific
notions according to the major factors of variation in the input domain. Although analytical analysis of such important
properties of the data has remained arduous [16], empirical
evaluations on training deep models often highlight a common observation: incorporating more data leads to a better

Figure 1: SuperMix combines salient regions in input images to construct unseen data for training.
generalization [25, 13]. Hence, data augmentation has become a fundamental component of the training paradigms,
aiming to enlarge the training set by transforming images in
the given dataset.
Conventional image data augmentation involves combinations of context-preserving transformations, such as horizontal flip, crop, scale, color manipulation, and cut out [17,
12, 9]. Recently, notable efforts have been devoted to improving the augmentation, e.g., by automating the search for
the optimal augmentation policies [4, 20, 5]. The majority
of these methods have focused on transforming single images, while ignoring the potentially very useful combination
of multiple images for augmentation. To address this shortcoming, several studies have considered combining multiple images to construct novel images [18, 22, 34, 32, 29].
However, these methods either mix images blindly and disregard the salient regions [34, 11, 32, 29] or do not scale to
large-scale problems [18]. Furthermore, the current mixing
functions are not expressive enough and often suppresses
visual patterns by averaging or covering features in one image with the trivial features in another image. The corresponding pseudo labels are also not accurate and constrain
the training performance [11].
This paper presents a mixing augmentation approach
termed SuperMix, which exploits the salient regions of input images to construct more advantageous mixed data. The
supervision for this purpose can be obtained from the target
model itself, i.e., self-training [26, 30, 23, 19, 2, 31], or

13794

