SSN: Soft Shadow Network for Image Compositing
Yichen Sheng
Purdue University

(a) object cutouts (2D masks)

Jianming Zhang
Adobe Research

Bedrich Benes
Purdue University

(b) soft shadows generated by our SNN from the image-based light map above

Figure 1: Our Soft Shadow Network (SSN) produces convincing soft shadows given an object cutout mask and a user-specified environment lighting map. (a) shows the object cutouts for this demo, including different object categories and image types, e.g. sketch, picture,
vector arts. In (b), we show the soft shadow effects generated by our SSN. The changing lighting map used for these examples is shown at
the corner of (b). The generated shadows have realistic shade details near the object-ground contact points and enhance image compositing
3D effect. More animated results can be found on our project page (https://shengcn.github.io/SSN).

Abstract
We introduce an interactive Soft Shadow Network (SSN)
to generates controllable soft shadows for image compositing. SSN takes a 2D object mask as input and thus is agnostic to image types such as painting and vector art. An
environment light map is used to control the shadow’s characteristics, such as angle and softness. SSN employs an
Ambient Occlusion Prediction module to predict an intermediate ambient occlusion map, which can be further refined by the user to provides geometric cues to modulate
the shadow generation. To train our model, we design an
efficient pipeline to produce diverse soft shadow training
data using 3D object models. In addition, we propose an
inverse shadow map representation to improve model training. We demonstrate that our model produces realistic soft
shadows in real-time. Our user studies show that the generated shadows are often indistinguishable from shadows
calculated by a physics-based renderer and users can easily use SSN through an interactive application to generate
specific shadow effects in minutes.

1. Introduction
Image compositing is an essential and powerful means
for image creation, where elements from different sources
are put together to create a new image. One of the challenging tasks for image compositing is shadow synthesis.

Manually creating a convincing shadow for a 2D object
cutout requires a significant amount of expertise and effort,
because the shadow generation process involves a complex
interaction between the object geometry and light sources,
especially for area lights and soft shadows.
Our work eases the creation of soft shadows for 2D object cutouts and provides full controllability to modify the
shadow’s characteristics. The soft shadow generation requires 3D shape information of the object, which is not
available for 2D image compositing. However, the strong
3D shape and pose priors of common objects may provide
the essential 3D information for soft shadow generation.
We introduce the Soft Shadow Network (SSN), a deep
neural network framework that generates a soft shadow for
a 2D object cutout and an input image-based environmental
light map. The input of SSN is an object mask. It is agnostic to image types such as painting, cartoons, or vector arts.
User control is provided through the image-based environment light map, which can capture complex light configurations. Fig. 1 show animated shadows predicted by SSN for
objects of various shapes in different image types. SSN produces smooth transitions with the changing light maps and
realistic shade details on the shadow map, especially near
the object-ground contact points.
SSN is composed of an Ambient Occlusion Prediction
(AOP) module and a Shadow Rendering (SR) module.
Given the object mask, the AOP module predicts an ambient occlusion (AO) map on the ground shadow receiver,

4380

