HistoGAN:
Controlling Colors of GAN-Generated and Real Images via Color Histograms
Mahmoud Afifi

Marcus A. Brubaker

Michael S. Brown

York University
{mafifi,mab,mbrown}@eecs.yorku.ca

Daniel Chodusov Flickr-CC BY-ND 2.0

Gertrud K. Flickr-CC BY-NC-SA 2.0

Carl Dunn Flickr-CC BY-NC-SA 2.0

Target colors

Histograms

GAN-generated images based on specified histogram feature

Input image

Auto-recolored input image without the need to manually specify target histogram

Figure 1: HistoGAN is a generative adversarial network (GAN) that learns to manipulate image colors based on histogram
features. Top: GAN-generated images with color distributions controlled via target histogram features (left column). Bottom:
Results of ReHistoGAN, an extension of HistoGAN to recolor real images, using sampled target histograms.

Abstract
While generative adversarial networks (GANs) can successfully produce high-quality images, they can be challenging to control. Simplifying GAN-based image generation is critical for their adoption in graphic design and
artistic work. This goal has led to significant interest in
methods that can intuitively control the appearance of images generated by GANs. In this paper, we present HistoGAN, a color histogram-based method for controlling
GAN-generated images’ colors. We focus on color histograms as they provide an intuitive way to describe image color while remaining decoupled from domain-specific
semantics. Specifically, we introduce an effective modification of the recent StyleGAN architecture [31] to control
the colors of GAN-generated images specified by a target
color histogram feature. We then describe how to expand
HistoGAN to recolor real images. For image recoloring,
we jointly train an encoder network along with HistoGAN.
The recoloring model, ReHistoGAN, is an unsupervised ap-

proach trained to encourage the network to keep the original image’s content while changing the colors based on the
given target histogram. We show that this histogram-based
approach offers a better way to control GAN-generated and
real images’ colors while producing more compelling results compared to existing alternative strategies.

1. Motivation and Related Work
Color histograms are an expressive and convenient representation of an image’s color content. Color histograms
are routinely used by conventional color transfer methods
(e.g., [18, 40, 46, 56]). These color transfer methods aim to
manipulate the colors in an input image to match those of a
target image, such that the images share a similar “look and
feel”. In the color transfer literature, there are various forms
of color histograms used to represent the color distribution
of an image, such as a direct 3D histogram [18, 46, 56], 2D
histogram [4, 6, 10, 11], color palette [7, 12, 58] or color

7941

