Informative and Consistent Correspondence Mining for
Cross-Domain Weakly Supervised Object Detection
∗

†

Luwei Hou 1,3 , Yu Zhang*†3 , Kui Fu1 , Jia Li 1,2
1
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, School of
Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China 3 SenseTime Research
{houluwei,zhangyu1}@sensetime.com

{kuifu,jiali}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
Cross-domain weakly supervised object detection aims
to adapt object-level knowledge from a fully labeled source
domain dataset (i.e., with object bounding boxes) to train
object detectors for target domains that are weakly labeled
(i.e., with image-level tags). Instead of domain-level distribution matching, as popularly adopted in the literature, we
propose to learn pixel-wise cross-domain correspondences
for more precise knowledge transfer. It is realized through
a novel cross-domain co-attention scheme trained as region
competition. In this scheme, the cross-domain correspondence module seeks for informative features on the target
domain image, which if warped to the source domain image, could best explain its annotations. Meanwhile, a collaborative mask generator competes to mask out the relevant target image region to make the remaining features
uninformative. Such competitive learning strives to correlate the full foreground in cross-domain image pairs, revealing the accurate object extent in target domain. To alleviate the ambiguity of inter-domain correspondence learning,
a domain-cycle consistency regularizer is further proposed
to leverage the more reliable intra-domain correspondence.
The proposed approach achieves consistent improvements
over existing approaches by a considerable margin, demonstrated by the experiments on various datasets.

1. Introduction
With decades of efforts made in improving feature representations [7, 20, 13], learning architectures [9, 28, 36]
and large-scale datasets [8, 31, 23], performance of modern
object detectors has been raised to a brand new level. Never∗ Equal contribution. Part of this work is done during Luwei’s internship
with SenseTime Research.
† Correspondence should be addressed to Jia Li (jiali@buaa.edu.cn) and
Yu Zhang (zhangyulb@gmail.com).

...

Person

Bicycle

Source Domain

...
(a)

(b)
Target Domain

Tag: Person, Bicycle

Figure 1. Motivation of the proposed approach to address crossdomain object detection. (a) Conventional approaches project images from different domains into a unified feature space such that
a domain classifier cannot easily separate them. (b) Assuming the
target domain is weakly labeled, we explicitly establish pixel-wise
correspondence among the semantic regions of cross-domain images and form semantic clusters in feature space for accurate, localized domain transfer. Best viewed in color.

theless, generalizing existing detection models to novel unseen domains still remains an issue, as the models are often
biased to dataset-specific patterns rather than data-invariant
“common knowledge”. It often takes huge efforts to collect
the well-annotated training data of the novel target domains
from scratch to feed the data-hungry modern architectures.
Recently this issue is addressed via unsupervised domain adaptation [3, 10], that transfers task knowledge from
a richly annotated source domain to poorly annotated target domains. Yet, domain discrepancy lie in various frequency patterns [45], visual styles [21] and class distributions [40], making it nontrivial to align knowledge transfer
to the desired task objective. Heuristic strategies (e.g. adaptive weighting [48, 42, 18], foreground mining [14, 43, 2],
self-supervision [30, 19]) were proposed to guide the domain transfer to focus more on detecting foreground objects. However, with the lack of direct knowledge about the

9929

