Coarse-Fine Networks for Temporal Activity Detection in Videos
Kumara Kahatapitiya and Michael S. Ryoo
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11794, USA
{kkahatapitiy,mryoo}@cs.stonybrook.edu

In this paper, we introduce Coarse-Fine Networks, a twostream architecture which benefits from different abstractions
of temporal resolution to learn better video representations
for long-term motion. Traditional Video models process inputs at one (or few) fixed temporal resolution without any
dynamic frame selection. However, we argue that, processing multiple temporal resolutions of the input and doing so
dynamically by learning to estimate the importance of each
frame can largely improve video representations, specially in
the domain of temporal activity localization. To this end, we
propose (1) ‘Grid Pool’, a learned temporal downsampling
layer to extract coarse features, and, (2) ‘Multi-stage Fusion’, a spatio-temporal attention mechanism to fuse a finegrained context with the coarse features. We show that our
method outperforms the state-of-the-arts for action detection
in public datasets including Charades with a significantly reduced compute and memory footprint. The code is available
at https://github.com/kkahatapitiya/Coarse-Fine-Networks.

1. Introduction
Learning to represent videos is important. It requires embedding both spatial and temporal information in a sequence
of frames, often implemented with 3D convolutions. Leaning to build good video representations is crucial for various
vision tasks including action classification, video object segmentation, and complex human activity recognition as well
as temporal localization of such activities.
One of the main challenges in video representation learning is in capturing long-term motion from a continuous video.
In order for a convolutional neural network to abstract longterm motion information across many frames, a large number
of (spatio-)temporal conv. layers (or such layers with large
kernels) are necessary, requiring many parameters. This,
combined with the difficulty in obtaining large-scale annotated videos and increased computation time, makes the
learning of the video representation very challenging for
non-atomic activities. This is even more challenging for temporal activity detection (i.e., localization), as the activities
may very often temporally overlap. A mechanism to reliably
and efficiently capture various motion in videos is necessary.
Use of frame striding or temporal pooling (i.e., lowering
the frame rate) has been a successful strategy to cover a

Multi-stage Fusion

Grid Pool

Abstract

T

T
T'
Fine-to-Coarse correspondence

T

Most informative frame selection
Grid Pool

Grid Unpool

Coarse Stream
T
Input clip
HW

T

T

T

Temporal
location

T

T

Pred. on
T frames

Multi-stage
Fusion

T'

H,W

T
C

Pred. on
T' frames
Fine Stream

T'

T'

T'

T' Drop at
inference

Figure 1. Coarse-Fine Networks process information at two different temporal resolutions. The Coarse stream learns to sample
the most informative frame locations through a learnable downsampling operation: Grid Pool, whereas the Fine stream process
the entire temporal duration of the input to extract a fine-grained
context. The connections in-between the two streams: Multi-stage
Fusion, provide multiple abstraction-levels of the fine-grained context, calibrated to the temporal locations of the coarse frames. For
Charades dataset [29], we configure our network to use T = 64,
′
T = 128 and α = 1/4.

larger time interval without increasing the number of model
parameters. Since such striding loses fine details of frame
changes, it was often paired with another CNN tower taking
an input with a higher frame rate, forming a two-stream (or
multi-stream) CNN architecture as was done in SlowFast [6]
and AssembleNet [25]. These models confirmed the benefits
of frame striding as well as multi-stream architectures to
combine representations with multiple temporal resolutions.
However, although using temporal striding (with a multistream multi-resolution architecture) allows the model to
more easily process long-term motion, they are limited as it
ignores ‘importance’ of each frame. Informativeness of each
frame is different. It is often unnecessary and redundant
to feed almost identical frames as an input to the model
when there is no/little motion in video frames. On the other
hand, if a human in the video is displaying a rapid motion,
taking all such frames into consideration is desired. Uniform
temporal striding or pooling is incapable of such dynamic
frame selection.
In this paper, we propose (1) a new approach that allows
a learnable dynamic selection of temporal frames within
the model, as well as (2) a method to fuse such sampled
(i.e., temporally ‘coarse’) representations with conventional,

8385

