SceneGen: Learning to Generate Realistic Traffic Scenes
Shuhan Tan1,2 * Kelvin Wong1,3∗ Shenlong Wang1,3
Sivabalan Manivasagam1,3 Mengye Ren1,3 Raquel Urtasun1,3
1
Uber Advanced Technologies Group 2 Sun Yat-Sen University 3 University of Toronto
tanshh@mail2.sysu.edu.cn

{kelvinwong,slwang,manivasagam,mren,urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract
We consider the problem of generating realistic traffic
scenes automatically. Existing methods typically insert actors into the scene according to a set of hand-crafted heuristics and are limited in their ability to model the true complexity and diversity of real traffic scenes, thus inducing a
content gap between synthesized traffic scenes versus real
ones. As a result, existing simulators lack the fidelity necessary to train and test self-driving vehicles. To address this
limitation, we present SceneGen—a neural autoregressive
model of traffic scenes that eschews the need for rules and
heuristics. In particular, given the ego-vehicle state and a
high definition map of surrounding area, SceneGen inserts
actors of various classes into the scene and synthesizes their
sizes, orientations, and velocities. We demonstrate on two
large-scale datasets SceneGen’s ability to faithfully model
distributions of real traffic scenes. Moreover, we show that
SceneGen coupled with sensor simulation can be used to
train perception models that generalize to the real world.

1. Introduction
The ability to simulate realistic traffic scenarios is an
important milestone on the path towards safe and scalable
self-driving. It enables us to build rich virtual environments
in which we can improve our self-driving vehicles (SDVs)
and verify their safety and performance [9, 31, 32, 53].
This goal, however, is challenging to achieve. As a first
step, most large-scale self-driving programs simulate prerecorded scenarios captured in the real world [32] or employ teams of test engineers to design new scenarios [9, 31].
Although this approach can yield realistic simulations, it is
ultimately not scalable. This motivates the search for a way
to generate realistic traffic scenarios automatically.
More concretely, we are interested in generating the layout of actors in a traffic scene given the SDV’s current
state and a high definition map (HD map) of the surround* Indicates equal contribution. Work done at Uber ATG.

Figure 1: Given the SDV’s state and an HD map, SceneGen
autoregressively inserts actors onto the map to compose a
realistic traffic scene. The ego SDV is shown in red; vehicles in blue; pedestrians in orange; and bicyclists in green.
ing area. We call this task traffic scene generation (see
Fig. 1). Here, each actor is parameterized by a class label,
a bird’s eye view bounding box, and a velocity vector. Our
lightweight scene parameterization is popular among existing self-driving simulation stacks and can be readily used in
downstream modules; e.g., to simulate LiDAR [9, 10, 32].
A popular approach to traffic scene generation is to use
procedural models to insert actors into the scene according to a set of rules [55, 31, 9, 37]. These rules encode
reasonable heuristics such as “pedestrians should stay on
the sidewalk” or “vehicles should drive along lane centerlines”, and their parameters can be manually tuned to give
reasonable results. Still, these simplistic heuristics cannot
fully capture the complexity and diversity of real world
traffic scenes, thus inducing a content gap between synthesized traffic scenes and real ones [26]. Moreover, this
approach requires significant time and expertise to design
good heuristics and tune their parameters.
To address these issues, recent methods use machine
learning techniques to automatically tune model parame-

892

