Permuted AdaIN: Reducing the Bias Towards
Global Statistics in Image Classification
Oren Nuriel Sagie Benaim Lior Wolf
Tel Aviv University

Abstract
Recent work has shown that convolutional neural network classifiers overly rely on texture at the expense of
shape cues. We make a similar but different distinction
between shape and local image cues, on the one hand, and
global image statistics, on the other. Our method, called
Permuted Adaptive Instance Normalization (pAdaIN), reduces the representation of global statistics in the hidden
layers of image classifiers. pAdaIN samples a random permutation π that rearranges the samples in a given batch.
Adaptive Instance Normalization (AdaIN) is then applied
between the activations of each (non-permuted) sample i
and the corresponding activations of the sample π(i), thus
swapping statistics between the samples of the batch. Since
the global image statistics are distorted, this swapping procedure causes the network to rely on cues, such as shape or
texture. By choosing the random permutation with probability p and the identity permutation otherwise, one can control
the effect’s strength.
With the correct choice of p, fixed apriori for all experiments and selected without considering test data, our method
consistently outperforms baselines in multiple settings. In image classification, our method improves on both CIFAR100
and ImageNet using multiple architectures. In the setting
of robustness, our method improves on both ImageNet-C
and Cifar-100-C for multiple architectures. In the setting of
domain adaptation and domain generalization, our method
achieves state of the art results on the transfer learning task
from GTAV to Cityscapes and on the PACS benchmark.

1. Introduction
One of the early successes of computer vision was a face
recognition system by Sakai et al. [33] that employed a
simple neural network classifier. As it turns out, the network
was relying on global image statistics, namely the average
brightness, to perform recognition.
In this work, we demonstrate that removing the reliance
on global image statistics improves classification results in
modern networks. To mitigate the effect of the global statis-

tics, a deliberate mismatch between the activations of a layer
and its accumulated statistics is created. By normalizing
with unmatched statistics, the distribution of activation values becomes unreliable as a source for label information.
While changing the global statistics of an image to another
was explored in the context of generation [13, 21], we show
that it is also useful in a variety of discriminative settings.
Our work is similar in spirit but different in conclusion
from recent work [4, 15, 19, 35, 42, 47] that has identified
a bias toward texture at the expense of shape. Such recent
methods can often improve the performance of the image
classifier on the test set and have been shown to dramatically
increase the accuracy of the classifier on shifted image domains, in which image transformations change the image
statistics but leave most of the shape unchanged.
In our work, we also show classification and domain generalization improvements. However, we demonstrate that the
increase in classification performance occurs simultaneously
for both category-based image recognition and texture recognition. This suggests that while the texture is often defined
as local image statistics, becoming invariant to global image
statistics improves both shape and texture recognition.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method in a number of settings. First, we demonstrate how classification
performance improves when adding our permutation-based
regularization. Our method improves accuracy on both CIFAR100 and ImageNet on multiple architectures trained in
a vanilla fashion. Second, we train a linear classifier on
top of a pre-trained image-classification network’s representation layer and show that the accuracy of texture classification peaks exactly when the image classification results
are maximized. We show that when this happens, the network’s representation of shape does not deteriorate. Next, we
demonstrate that our method can reduce the adverse effect of
domain shift, by testing it in the setting of domain adaptation
and more broadly in domain generalization. Our method
achieves state of the art results on the domain adaptation
from GTA5 to Cityscapes semantic segmentation and on the
PACS dataset. Lastly, we show that our method allows for a
greater robustness when handling corrupted images, where
our method is superior to all baseline methods. In the setting

9482

