ArtEmis: Affective Language for Visual Art
Panos Achlioptas1

Kilichbek Haydarov3

Maks Ovsjanikov2

kilichbek.haydarov@kaust.edu.sa
maks@lix.polytechnique.fr
3,1
Leonidas Guibas1
Mohamed Elhoseiny

panos@cs.stanford.edu

guibas@cs.stanford.edu

mohamed.elhoseiny@kaust.edu.sa

1 Stanford University
2 LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris
3 King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)

Abstract
We present a novel large-scale dataset and accompanying machine learning models aimed at providing a detailed understanding of the interplay between visual content, its emotional effect, and explanations for the latter in
language. In contrast to most existing annotation datasets
in computer vision, we focus on the affective experience
triggered by visual artworks and ask the annotators to indicate the dominant emotion they feel for a given image
and, crucially, to also provide a grounded verbal explanation for their emotion choice. As we demonstrate below, this
leads to a rich set of signals for both the objective content
and the affective impact of an image, creating associations
with abstract concepts (e.g., “freedom” or “love”), or references that go beyond what is directly visible, including
visual similes and metaphors, or subjective references to
personal experiences. We focus on visual art (e.g., paintings, artistic photographs) as it is a prime example of imagery created to elicit emotional responses from its viewers.
Our dataset, termed ArtEmis, contains 455K emotion attributions and explanations from humans, on 80K artworks
from WikiArt. Building on this data, we train and demonstrate a series of captioning systems capable of expressing
and explaining emotions from visual stimuli. Remarkably,
the captions produced by these systems often succeed in reflecting the semantic and abstract content of the image, going well beyond systems trained on existing datasets. The
collected dataset and developed methods are available at
https://artemisdataset.org.

1. Introduction
Emotions are among the most pervasive aspects of human experience. While emotions are not themselves lin-

guistic constructs, the most robust and permanent access
we have to them is through language [44]. In this work,
we focus on collecting and analyzing at scale language that
explains emotions generated by observing visual artworks.
Specifically, we seek to better understand the link between
the visual properties of an artwork, the possibly subjective
affective experience that it produces, and the way such emotions are explained via language. Building on this data and
recent machine learning approaches, we also design and test
neural-based speakers that aim to emulate human emotional
responses to visual art and provide associated explanations.

Why visual art? We focus on visual artworks for two reasons. First and foremost because art is often created with the
intent of provoking emotional reactions from its viewers. In
the words of Leo Tolstoy,“art is a human activity consisting
in that one human consciously hands on to others feelings
they have lived through, and that other people are infected
by these feelings, and also experience them” [55]. Second,
artworks, and abstract forms of art in particular, often defy
simple explanations and might not have a single, easilyidentifiable subject or label. Therefore, an affective response may require a more detailed analysis integrating the
image content as well as its effect on the viewer. This is unlike most natural images that are commonly labeled through
purely objective content-based labeling mechanisms capturing the objects or actions they include [14, 13]. Instead, by
focusing on art, we aim to initiate a more nuanced perceptual image understanding which, downstream, can also be
applied to richer understanding of ordinary images.
We begin this effort by introducing a large-scale dataset
termed ArtEmis [Art Emotions] that associates human emotions with artworks and contains explanations in natural language of the rationale behind each triggered emotion.
111569

