Sketch2Model: View-Aware 3D Modeling from Single Free-Hand Sketches
Song-Hai Zhang* Yuan-Chen Guo Qing-Wen Gu
BNRist, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing
shz@tsinghua.edu.cn, guoyc19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, gqw17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We investigate the problem of generating 3D meshes
from single free-hand sketches, aiming at fast 3D modeling
for novice users. It can be regarded as a single-view reconstruction problem, but with unique challenges, brought
by the variation and conciseness of sketches. Ambiguities in
poorly-drawn sketches could make it hard to determine how
the sketched object is posed. In this paper, we address the
importance of viewpoint specification for overcoming such
ambiguities, and propose a novel view-aware generation
approach. By explicitly conditioning the generation process on a given viewpoint, our method can generate plausible shapes automatically with predicted viewpoints, or with
specified viewpoints to help users better express their intentions. Extensive evaluations on various datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of our view-aware design in solving
sketch ambiguities and improving reconstruction quality.

1. Introduction
Sketch-based 3D modeling has been studied for decades,
intended to free people from the tedious and timeconsuming modeling process. With the widespread usage of
portable touch screens and emergence of VR/AR technologies, the need of 3D content creation for novice users is increasing [37]. However, existing sketch-based 3D modeling
techniques either require precise line-drawings from multiple views or simply retrieve from existing models, both failing to provide easy-to-use interface and customizability at
the same time. We aim at fast and intuitive 3D modeling
for people without professional drawing skills, and investigate the problem of mesh generation from a single freehand sketch. It is in general a single-view reconstruction
problem, but has its unique challenges due to the characteristics of free-hand sketches. Unlike real images, free-hand
sketches can be poorly-drawn with drastic simplifications
and geometric distortions, and lack important visual cues
like textures or shading. This makes it difficult, sometimes
* corresponding author.

airplane
front or top?

car
left or right?

table
front or top?

Figure 1. Ambiguities in free-hand sketches. It could be hard to
determine how the sketched object is posed.

even impossible, for algorithms to understand sketches correctly. One tricky scenario results from the “camera-shape
ambiguity” [21], as shown in Fig. 1. Subjectivity of sketch
creation could lead to different explanation of the same
sketch, like which side being the front of the car (left). Furthermore, a recent study shows that existing single-view reconstruction approaches mainly rely on the recognition of
input images, rather than actually performing geometry reconstruction. Therefore, they can be hard to generalize to
unseen data and perform worse on hand-drawn sketches,
which are created with barely any constraint, showing more
diverse in appearance.
Recall how human cognitive system works for the task
of 3D reconstruction. Human relies on visual memory and
visual rules to recover 3D geometry from imagery [28]. Visual memory contains priors gained from daily life, like
what an object of a certain class might look like, while
visual rules act like a regularizer, requiring that an object
should match what it looks like from a certain viewpoint.
When seeing a sketch, we search our visual memory and
try to find a solution that also obeys visual rules. However,
this search process may not go well when (1) we could not
figure out how the sketched object is posed, thus finding difficulty applying visual rules; (2) multiple solutions exist due
to the ambiguity of the sketch. Both problems result from
the lack of details in sketches, and we address that viewpoint specification can be essential to the above problems.
If we are told which viewpoint the object is sketched from,
search space can be easily reduced, which lowers search
difficulty and may eliminate ambiguities.

6012

