Square Root Bundle Adjustment for Large-Scale Reconstruction
Nikolaus Demmel

Christiane Sommer
Daniel Cremers
Technical University of Munich

Vladyslav Usenko

{nikolaus.demmel,c.sommer,cremers,vlad.usenko}@tum.de

Abstract
We propose a new formulation for the bundle adjustment
problem which relies on nullspace marginalization of landmark variables by QR decomposition. Our approach, which
we call square root bundle adjustment, is algebraically
equivalent to the commonly used Schur complement trick,
improves the numeric stability of computations, and allows
for solving large-scale bundle adjustment problems with
single-precision floating-point numbers. We show in realworld experiments with the BAL datasets that even in single
precision the proposed solver achieves on average equally
accurate solutions compared to Schur complement solvers
using double precision. It runs significantly faster, but can
require larger amounts of memory on dense problems. The
proposed formulation relies on simple linear algebra operations and opens the way for efficient implementations
of bundle adjustment on hardware platforms optimized for
single-precision linear algebra processing.

1. Introduction
Bundle adjustment (BA) is a core component of many
3D reconstruction algorithms and structure-from-motion
(SfM) pipelines. It is one of the classical computer vision problems and has been investigated by researchers for
more than six decades [7]. While different formulations exist, the underlying question is always the same: given a
set of approximate point (landmark) positions that are observed from a number of cameras in different poses, what
are the actual landmark positions and camera poses? One
can already compute accurate 3D positions with only a few
images; however, with more available images we will get
a more complete reconstruction. With the emergence of
large-scale internet photo collections has come the need to
solve bundle adjustment on a large scale, i.e., for thousands
of images and hundreds of thousands of landmarks. This
This work was supported by the Munich Center for Machine Learning, by the ERC Advanced Grant SIMULACRON and by the DFG project
CR 250/20-1 “Splitting Methods for 3D Reconstruction and SLAM.”

Figure 1: Optimized 3D reconstruction of the largest venice
BAL dataset with 1778 cameras, around one million landmarks, and five million observations. For this
√ problem, the
proposed square root bundle adjustment ( BA) solver is
42% faster than the best competing method at reaching a
cost tolerance of 1%.

requires scalable solutions that are still efficient for large
problems and do not run into memory or runtime issues.
Modern BA solvers usually rely on the Schur complement (SC) trick that computes the normal equations of the
original BA problem and then breaks them down into two
smaller subproblems, namely (1) the solution for camera
poses and (2) finding optimal landmark positions. This
results in the drastically smaller reduced camera system
(RCS), which is also better-conditioned [2] than the original normal equations. The use of the Schur complement has
become the de facto standard for solving large-scale bundle
adjustment and is hardly ever questioned.
In this work, we challenge the widely accepted assump-

11723

