MaxUp: Lightweight Adversarial Training with Data Augmentation Improves
Neural Network Training
Chengyue Gong, Tongzheng Ren, Mao Ye, Qiang Liu
University of Texas, Austin
{cygong, tongzheng, my21, lqiang}@cs.utexas.edu

Abstract
We propose MaxUp, a simple and effective technique
for improving the generalization performance of machine
learning models, especially deep neural networks. The idea
is to generate a set of augmented data with some random
perturbations or transforms, and minimize the maximum,
or worst case loss over the augmented data. By doing so,
we implicitly introduce a smoothness or robustness regularization against the random perturbations, and hence improve the generation performance. For example, in the case
of Gaussian perturbation, MaxUp is asymptotically equivalent to using the gradient norm of the loss as a penalty to
encourage smoothness. We test MaxUp on a range of tasks,
including image classification, 3D point cloud classification, and adversarial certification, on which MaxUp consistently outperforms the baseline methods, without introducing substantial computational overhead. In particular,
we improve ImageNet classification from the top-1 accuracy
85.5% without extra data to 85.8%.

1. Introduction
A central theme of machine learning is to alleviate the
issue of over-fitting and improve the generalization performance on testing data. This is often achieved by leveraging
important prior knowledge of the models and data of interest. For example, the regularization-based methods introduce penalty on the complexity of the model, which often
amount to enforcing certain smoothness properties. Data
augmentation techniques, on the other hand, leverage important invariance properties of the data (such as the shift
and rotation invariance of images) to improve the performance. Novel approaches that exploit important knowledge
of the models and data hold the potential of substantially
improving the performance of machine learning systems.
We propose MaxUp, a simple yet powerful training
method to improve the generalization performance and alleviate the over-fitting issue. Different from standard methods

that minimize the average risk on the observed data, MaxUp
generates a set of random perturbations or transforms of
each observed data point, and minimizes the average risk
of the worst augmented data of each data point. This allows us to enforce robustness against the random perturbations and transforms, and hence improve the generalization
performance. MaxUp can easily leverage arbitrary state-ofthe-art data augmentation schemes [e.g. 5, 6, 8, 26, 33] and
substantially improves over them by minimizing the worst
(instead of average) risks on the augmented data, without
adding significant computational ahead.
Theoretically, in the case of Gaussian perturbation, we
show that MaxUp effectively introduces a gradient-norm
regularization term that serves to encourage the smoothness
of the loss function, which does not appear in standard data
augmentation methods that minimize the average risk.
MaxUp can be viewed as a “lightweight” variant of
adversarial training against adversarial input perturbations
[e.g. 16, 24], but is mainly designed to improve the generalization on the clean data, instead of robustness on perturbed data (although MaxUp does also increase the adversarial robustness in Gaussian adversarial certification as
we shown in our experiments (Section 4.3)). In addition,
compared with standard adversarial training methods such
as projected gradient descent (PGD) [16], MaxUp is much
simpler and computationally much faster, and can be easily
adapted to increase various robustness defined by the corresponding data augmentation schemes.
We test MaxUp on several challenging tasks: image
classification, point cloud classification, certified defense
against adversarial examples [4], and language modeling
(see Appendix). We find that MaxUp can leverage different state-of-the-art data augmentation methods and boost
their performance to achieve new state-of-the-art on a range
of tasks, datasets, and neural architectures. In particular,
we set up strong results on ImageNet classification without extra data, which improves the 85.5% top-1 accuracy of
[28] to 85.8%. For the adversarial certification task, we find
Maxup allows us to train better certified robust classifiers
than prior arts such as the PGD-based method by [18].

2474

