Invertible Denoising Network: A Light Solution for Real Noise Removal
Yang Liu1,2 , Zhenyue Qin1∗, Saeed Anwar1,2 , Pan Ji3 , Dongwoo Kim4 , Sabrina Caldwell1 , Tom Gedeon1
Australian National University1 , Data61-CSIRO2 , OPPO US Research3 , GSAI POSTECH4

Abstract
Invertible networks have various benefits for image denoising since they are lightweight, information-lossless, and
memory-saving during back-propagation. However, applying invertible models to remove noise is challenging because the input is noisy, and the reversed output is clean,
following two different distributions. We propose an invertible denoising network, InvDN, to address this challenge.
InvDN transforms the noisy input into a low-resolution
clean image and a latent representation containing noise.
To discard noise and restore the clean image, InvDN replaces the noisy latent representation with another one sampled from a prior distribution during reversion. The denoising performance of InvDN is better than all the existing
competitive models, achieving a new state-of-the-art result
for the SIDD dataset while enjoying less run time. Moreover, the size of InvDN is far smaller, only having 4.2% of
the number of parameters compared to the most recently
proposed DANet. Further, via manipulating the noisy latent representation, InvDN is also able to generate noise
more similar to the original one. Our code is available at:
https://github.com/Yang-Liu1082/InvDN.git.

1. Introduction
Image denoising aims to restore clean images from noisy
observations. Traditional approaches model denoising as a
maximum a posteriori (MAP) optimization problem, with
assumptions on the distribution of noise [38, 57, 12], and
natural image priors [16, 39, 47]. Although these algorithms achieve satisfactory performance on removing synthetic noise, their effectiveness on real-world noise is compromised since their assumptions deviate from those in
real-world scenarios. Recently, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have achieved superior denoising performance [53, 54]. These CNNs learn the features of images
from a large number of clean and noisy image pairs. However, since real noise is very complex, to achieve better denoising accuracy, CNN denoising models have become in∗ Corresponding authors: Zhenyue Qin (zhenyue.qin@anu.edu.au) and
Yang Liu (yang.liu3@anu.edu.au).

Noisy

CBDNet [24]

RIDNet [5]

VDN [50]

DANet [51]

InvDN (Ours)

Figure 1: A real noisy image from the SIDD [2] dataset.
Compared with RIDNet [5] and DANet [51], InvDN does
not over-smooth. In addition, in comparison with all the
other methods, InvDN restores more crisp edges and produces fewer artifacts. The examples are best viewed in color
on a high-resolution display with zooming in.

creasingly large and complicated [50, 51, 52]. Thus, although some methods can achieve very impressive denoising results, they may not be practical in realistic scenarios
such as deploying the model on edge equipment like smartphones and motion sensing devices.
Currently, a substantial amount of research has been
devoted to developing neural networks that are invertible [18, 41, 25, 9]. For image denoising, invertible networks are advantageous from the following three aspects:
(1) the model is light, as encoding and decoding use the
same parameters; (2) they preserve details of the input data
since invertible networks are information-lossless [36]; (3)
they save memory during back-propagation because they
use a constant amount of memory to compute gradients, regardless of the depth of the network [23]. Hence, invertible models are suitable for small devices like smartphones.
We thus study employing invertible networks to address the
problem of image denoising. However, applying such networks to remove noise is non-trivial. The original inputs

13365

