Monocular Real-time Full Body Capture with Inter-part Correlations
Yuxiao Zhou1
1

Marc Habermann2,3

Ikhsanul Habibie2,3

BNRist and School of Software, Tsinghua University

2

Ayush Tewari2,3

Christian Theobalt2,3

Max Planck Institute for Informatics

3

Feng Xu1 *

Saarland Informatics Campus

Abstract
We present the first method for real-time full body capture that estimates shape and motion of body and hands together with a dynamic 3D face model from a single color
image. Our approach uses a new neural network architecture that exploits correlations between body and hands at
high computational efficiency. Unlike previous works, our
approach is jointly trained on multiple datasets focusing
on hand, body or face separately, without requiring data
where all the parts are annotated at the same time, which
is much more difficult to create at sufficient variety. The
possibility of such multi-dataset training enables superior
generalization ability. In contrast to earlier monocular full
body methods, our approach captures more expressive 3D
face geometry and color by estimating the shape, expression, albedo and illumination parameters of a statistical
face model. Our method achieves competitive accuracy on
public benchmarks, while being significantly faster and providing more complete face reconstructions.

1. Introduction
Human motion capture from a single color image is
an important and widely studied topic in computer vision.
Most solutions are unable to capture local motions of hands
and faces together with full body motions. This renders
them unsuitable for a variety of applications, e.g. AR, VR,
or tele-presence, where capturing full human body pose
and shape, including hands and face, is highly important.
In these applications, monocular approaches should ideally recover the full body pose (including facial expression) as well as a render-ready dense surface which contains person-specific information, such as facial identity and
body shape. Moreover, they should run at real-time framerates. Much progress has been made on relevant subtasks,
i.e. body pose estimation [33, 31, 45, 40], hand pose estimation [78, 42, 80], and face capture [14, 61, 60, 53, 81]. How* This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of
China 2018YFA0704000, the NSFC (No.61822111, 61727808), Beijing
Natural Science Foundation (JQ19015), and the ERC Consolidator Grant
4DRepLy (770784). Feng Xu is the corresponding author.

Figure 1: We present the first real-time monocular approach
that jointly captures shape and pose of body and hands together with facial geometry and color. Top: results on inthe-wild sequences. Bottom: real-time demo. Our approach
predicts facial color while the body color is set manually.
ever, joint full body capture, let alone in real-time, is still
an open problem. Several recent works [9, 68, 28, 46, 38]
have demonstrated promising results on capturing the full
body. Nevertheless, they either only recover sparse 2D keypoints [38, 28], require specific training data [9, 28] where
body, hands, and face are annotated altogether which is
expensive to collect, or cannot achieve real-time performance [9, 68, 46, 38].
We therefore introduce the first real-time monocular approach that estimates: 1) 2D and 3D keypoint positions
of body and hands; 2) 3D joint angles and shape parameters of body and hands; and 3) shape, expression,
albedo, and illumination parameters of a 3D morphable face
model [61, 14]. To recover the dense mesh, we use the SMPLH model [49] for body and hands surface, and replace its
face area with a more expressive face model.
To achieve real-time performance without the loss of accuracy, we rigorously design our new network architecture
to exploit inter-part correlations by streaming body features
into the hand pose estimation branch. Specifically, the subnetwork for hand keypoint detection takes in two sources

4811

