From Points to Multi-Object 3D Reconstruction
Francis Engelmann1,†
1

Input image

Konstantinos Rematas2
2

RWTH Aachen University

3D Bounding Boxes

Bastian Leibe1

Voxels

Vittorio Ferrari2

Google Research

Point clouds

CAD models

Figure 1: We propose a single-stage model for realistic multi-object 3D reconstruction from a single RGB image. The model detects object
center-points and performs reconstruction by jointly estimating 9-DoF bounding boxes and representation-agnostic 3D shape exemplars.

Abstract
We propose a method to detect and reconstruct multiple 3D objects from a single RGB image. The key idea is
to optimize for detection, alignment and shape jointly over
all objects in the RGB image, while focusing on realistic
and physically plausible reconstructions. To this end, we
propose a key-point detector that localizes objects as center points and directly predicts all object properties, including 9-DoF bounding boxes and 3D shapes – all in a
single forward pass. The proposed method formulates 3D
shape reconstruction as a shape selection problem, i.e. it
selects among exemplar shapes from a given database. This
makes it agnostic to shape representations, which enables a
lightweight reconstruction of realistic and visually-pleasing
shapes based on CAD-models, while the training objective
is formulated around point clouds and voxel representations. A collision-loss promotes non-intersecting objects,
further increasing the reconstruction realism. Given the
RGB image, the presented approach performs lightweight
reconstruction in a single-stage, it is real-time capable, fully
differentiable and end-to-end trainable. Our experiments
compare multiple approaches for 9-DoF bounding box estimation, evaluate the novel shape-selection mechanism and
compare to recent methods in terms of 3D bounding box
estimation and 3D shape reconstruction quality.

† Work performed during internship at Google Research, Zurich.

1. Introduction
Extracting 3D information from a single image has multiple applications in computer vision, robotics and scene understanding, specifically on mobile AR/VR devices. Thus,
this field has gained great momentum in the computer vision
community [10, 23, 31, 36, 46]. 3D information can come
in many forms: 3D bounding boxes, point clouds, meshes,
voxels or distance fields. The choice of the representation
often depends on the task. In this paper, we aim to extract
all the above information in an efficient and scalable way,
all from just a single view and in a single pass.
Recent methods [10, 23] perform multi-object reconstruction by independently processing detections from
state-of-the-art object detectors [15, 24] or jointly predict
multiple objects in a dense voxel grid [36], which can be
computationally expensive due to scalability issues. Instead, inspired by CenterNet [51], a framework for accurate
and efficient 2D object detection, we propose to use a keypoint detector to localize objects as sparse center-points and
directly predict 9-DoF bounding boxes and shapes jointly
for all objects in the scene. The CenterNet architecture is
modular and can easily be extended to solve varying tasks
such as 2D detection, 3D detection, human body pose estimation and tracking [47, 50]. In this paper, we argue for
a complete and coherent 3D reconstruction of multiple objects using CenterNet where each pixel votes for a class label, a 3D bounding box, and a 3D shape exemplar to place
objects into the world coordinate frame.

4588

