Permute, Quantize, and Fine-tune: Efficient Compression of Neural Networks
Julieta Martinez∗,1 Jashan Shewakramani∗,1,2 Ting Wei Liu∗,1,2
Ioan Andrei Bârsan1,3 Wenyuan Zeng1,3 Raquel Urtasun1,3
1

Uber Advanced Technologies Group

2

University of Waterloo

3

University of Toronto

{julieta,jashan,tingwei.liu,andreib,wenyuan,urtasun}@uber.com

Abstract
Compressing large neural networks is an important step
for their deployment in resource-constrained computational
platforms. In this context, vector quantization is an appealing framework that expresses multiple parameters using a
single code, and has recently achieved state-of-the-art network compression on a range of core vision and natural
language processing tasks. Key to the success of vector
quantization is deciding which parameter groups should be
compressed together. Previous work has relied on heuristics
that group the spatial dimension of individual convolutional
filters, but a general solution remains unaddressed. This is
desirable for pointwise convolutions (which dominate modern architectures), linear layers (which have no notion of
spatial dimension), and convolutions (when more than one
filter is compressed to the same codeword). In this paper
we make the observation that the weights of two adjacent
layers can be permuted while expressing the same function.
We then establish a connection to rate-distortion theory and
search for permutations that result in networks that are easier to compress. Finally, we rely on an annealed quantization
algorithm to better compress the network and achieve higher
final accuracy. We show results on image classification, object detection, and segmentation, reducing the gap with the
uncompressed model by 40 to 70% w.r.t. the current state
of the art. All our experiments can be reproduced using the
code at https://github.com/uber-research/
permute-quantize-finetune.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art approaches to many computer vision
tasks are currently based on deep neural networks. These
networks often have large memory and computational requirements, limiting the range of hardware platforms on
which they can operate. This poses a challenge for applications such as virtual reality and robotics, which naturally
rely on mobile and low-power computational platforms for
large-scale deployment. At the same time, these networks

are often overparameterized [5], which implies that it is possible to compress them – thereby reducing their memory and
computation demands – without much loss in accuracy.
Scalar quantization is a popular approach to network
compression where each network parameter is compressed
individually, thereby limiting the achievable compression
rates. To address this limitation, a recent line of work has
focused on vector quantization (VQ) [13, 47, 54], which
compresses multiple parameters into a single code. Conspicuously, these approaches have recently achieved state-of-theart compression-to-accuracy ratios on core computer vision
and natural language processing tasks [10, 48].
A key advantage of VQ is that it can naturally exploit
redundancies among groups of network parameters, for example, by grouping the spatial dimensions of convolutional
filters in a single vector to achieve high compression rates.
However, finding which network parameters should be compressed jointly can be challenging; for instance, there is no
notion of spatial dimension in fully connected layers, and it
is not clear how vectors should be formed when the vector
size is larger than a single convolutional filter – which is
always true for pointwise convolutions. Current approaches
either employ clustering (e.g., k-means) using the order of
the weights as obtained by the network [13, 47, 54], which is
suboptimal, or search for groups of parameters that, when
compressed jointly, minimize the reconstruction error of the
network activations [10, 48, 54], which is hard to optimize.
In this paper, we formalize the notion of redundancy
among parameter groups using concepts from rate-distortion
theory, and leverage this analysis to search for permutations
of the network weights that yield functionally equivalent, yet
easier-to-quantize networks. The result is Permute, Quantize, and Fine-tune (PQF), an efficient algorithm that first
searches for permutations, codes and codebooks that minimize the reconstruction error of the network weights, and
then uses gradient-based optimization to recover the accuracy of the uncompressed network. Our main contributions
can be summarized as follows:
1. We study the invariance of neural networks under permutation of their weights, focusing on constraints in-

15699

