Towards More Flexible and Accurate Object Tracking with Natural Language:
Algorithms and Benchmark
Xiao Wang1 *, Xiujun Shu2,1∗ , Zhipeng Zhang3 , Bo Jiang4 , Yaowei Wang1 , Yonghong Tian1,5 , Feng Wu1,6
1
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
2
School of Electronic and Computer Engineering, Peking University, Shenzhen, China
3
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
School of Computer Science and Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, China
5
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
6
University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, China
https://sites.google.com/view/langtrackbenchmark/

Abstract
Tracking by natural language specification is a new rising research topic that aims at locating the target object in
the video sequence based on its language description. Compared with traditional bounding box (BBox) based tracking,
this setting guides object tracking with high-level semantic information, addresses the ambiguity of BBox, and links
local and global search organically together. Those benefits may bring more flexible, robust and accurate tracking performance in practical scenarios. However, existing natural language initialized trackers are developed and
compared on benchmark datasets proposed for trackingby-BBox, which can’t reflect the true power of trackingby-language. In this work, we propose a new benchmark
specifically dedicated to the tracking-by-language, including a large scale dataset, strong and diverse baseline methods. Specifically, we collect 2k video sequences (contains
a total of 1,244,340 frames, 663 words) and split 1300/700
for the train/testing respectively. We densely annotate one
sentence in English and corresponding bounding boxes of
the target object for each video. We also introduce two new
challenges into TNL2K for the object tracking task, i.e., adversarial samples and modality switch. A strong baseline
method based on an adaptive local-global-search scheme
is proposed for future works to compare. We believe this
benchmark will greatly boost related researches on natural
language guided tracking.

* The first two authors contribute equally to this work.
Yaowei
Wang is the corresponding author. Email: {wangx03, shuxj, wangyw,
tianyh}@pcl.ac.cn, zhangzhipeng2017@ia.ac.cn, jiangbo@ahu.edu.cn,
fengwu@ustc.edu.cn.

1. Introduction
Single object tracking is one of the most important tasks
in computer vision and it has been widely used in many
applications such as video surveillance, robotics, and autonomous vehicles. Usually, they initialize the target object
in the first frame with a bounding box (BBox), as shown in
Fig. 1 (a), and adjust the BBox along with the movement of
the target object. Most of the existing single object trackers [20–22, 53, 55, 66] are developed based on this setting1 ,
and many benchmark datasets [15, 23, 37, 42, 50, 57, 58] are
proposed for this task.
Although these trackers have been adopted in many applications, however, the setting of tracking-by-BBox still
suffers from the following issues. (1) The target object in
the first frame with a BBox is inconvenient to initialize in
practical scenarios. In another word, the initialization limits
the wide applications of existing BBox initialized trackers.
(2) The initialized BBox may be not optimal for the representation of target object which may lead to ambiguity. As
shown in Fig. 1 (a), the tracker may be confused to track
the bike or lower body of the pedestrian. Similar views can
also be found in [17, 36, 54, 64]. (3) Current BBox-based
trackers may perform poorly when facing abrupt appearance variation of the target object, like face/cloth changing
or species variation in Fig. 1 (b). Because the appearance
feature initialized in the first frame and the object in the
tracking procedure are vastly different. Only one sample
initialized in the first frame is not enough to handle these
challenging scenarios. These observations all inspire us to
begin to think about how can we conduct tracking in a more
applicable and accurate way?
1 https : / / github . com / wangxiao5791509 / Single _
Object_Tracking_Paper_List

113763

