Semantic Audio-Visual Navigation
Changan Chen1,2 Ziad Al-Halah1 Kristen Grauman1,2
1
UT Austin 2 Facebook AI Research

Abstract
4

No sound

Recent work on audio-visual navigation assumes a
constantly-sounding target and restricts the role of audio
to signaling the target’s position. We introduce semantic
audio-visual navigation, where objects in the environment
make sounds consistent with their semantic meaning (e.g.,
toilet flushing, door creaking) and acoustic events are sporadic or short in duration. We propose a transformer-based
model to tackle this new semantic AudioGoal task, incorporating an inferred goal descriptor that captures both spatial
and semantic properties of the target. Our model’s persistent multimodal memory enables it to reach the goal even
long after the acoustic event stops. In support of the new
task, we also expand the SoundSpaces audio simulations
to provide semantically grounded sounds for an array of
objects in Matterport3D. Our method strongly outperforms
existing audio-visual navigation methods by learning to associate semantic, acoustic, and visual cues.1

1. Introduction
An autonomous agent interacts with its environment in a
continuous loop of action and perception. The agent needs
to reason intelligently about all the senses available to it
(sight, hearing, proprioception, touch) to select the proper
sequence of actions in order to achieve its task. For example, a service robot of the future may need to locate and
fetch an object for a user, go empty the dishwasher when
it stops running, or travel to the front hall upon hearing a
guest begin speaking there.
Towards such applications, recent progress in visual navigation builds agents that use egocentric vision to travel to a
designated point in an unfamiliar environment [23, 38, 42,
10], search for a specified object [44, 9, 37, 8], or explore
and map a new space [35, 34, 13, 10, 15, 10, 36]. Limited new work further explores expanding the sensory suite
of the navigating agent to include hearing as well. In particular, the AudioGoal challenge [11] requires an agent to
navigate to a sounding target (e.g., a ringing phone) using
audio for key directional and distance cues [11, 19, 12].
1 Project page: http://vision.cs.utexas.edu/projects/
semantic-audio-visual-navigation

3

No sound

Sink

Sink

Found

Bathroom

Water dripping

2

Sink or Shower?
Straight ahead
4

3

Water dripping

1

?
2

To my right
1

Figure 1: Semantic audio-visual navigation in 3D environments: an agent must navigate to a sounding object. Since
the sound may stop while the agent searches for the object,
the agent is incentivized to learn the association between
how objects look and sound, and to build contextual models for where different semantic sounds are more likely to
occur (e.g., water dripping in the bathroom).

While exciting first steps, existing audio-visual navigation work has two key limitations. First, prior work assumes
the target object constantly makes a steady repeating sound
(e.g., alarm chirping, phone ringing). While important, this
corresponds to a narrow set of targets; in real-world scenarios, an object may emit a sound only briefly or start and
stop dynamically. Second, in current models explored in realistic 3D environment simulators, the sound emitting target
has neither a visual embodiment nor any semantic context.
Rather, target sound sources are placed arbitrarily in the environment and without relation to the semantics of the scene
and objects. As a result, the role of audio is limited to providing a beacon of sound announcing where the object is.
In light of these limitations, we introduce a novel task:
semantic audio-visual navigation. In this task, the agent
must navigate to an object situated contextually in an environment that only makes sound for a certain period of time.
Semantic audio-visual navigation widens the set of realworld scenarios to include acoustic events of short temporal
duration that are semantically grounded in the environment.
It offers new learning challenges. The agent must learn not
only how to associate sounds with visual objects, but also
115516

