Camera-Space Hand Mesh Recovery via Semantic Aggregation
and Adaptive 2D-1D Registration
Xingyu Chen1 * Yufeng Liu1,3 Chongyang Ma1 Jianlong Chang2 Huayan Wang1
Tian Chen1
Xiaoyan Guo1
Pengfei Wan1
Wen Zheng1
1
2
Y-tech, Kuaishou Technology
Huawei Cloud & AI
3
SEU-ALLEN Joint Center, Institute for Brain and Intelligence, Southeast University, China.

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed significant progress in 3D
hand mesh recovery. Nevertheless, because of the intrinsic
2D-to-3D ambiguity, recovering camera-space 3D information from a single RGB image remains challenging. To
tackle this problem, we divide camera-space mesh recovery
into two sub-tasks, i.e., root-relative mesh recovery and
root recovery. First, joint landmarks and silhouette are
extracted from a single input image to provide 2D cues for
the 3D tasks. In the root-relative mesh recovery task, we
exploit semantic relations among joints to generate a 3D
mesh from the extracted 2D cues. Such generated 3D mesh
coordinates are expressed relative to a root position, i.e.,
wrist of the hand. In the root recovery task, the root position
is registered to the camera space by aligning the generated
3D mesh back to 2D cues, thereby completing cameraspace 3D mesh recovery. Our pipeline is novel in that (1)
it explicitly makes use of known semantic relations among
joints and (2) it exploits 1D projections of the silhouette
and mesh to achieve robust registration. Extensive experiments on popular datasets such as FreiHAND, RHD, and
Human3.6M demonstrate that our approach achieves stateof-the-art performance on both root-relative mesh recovery
and root recovery. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/SeanChenxy/HandMesh.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D mesh recovery has attracted tremendous
attention due to its extensive applications in AR/VR, human–machine interaction, etc. The task is to estimate 3D
locations of mesh vertices from a single RGB image. It is
particularly challenging owing to highly articulated structures, 2D-to-3D ambiguity, and self-occlusion. Significant
efforts have been made recently for accurate 2D-to-3D
* Corresponding author, chenxingyu@kuaishou.com

x
z

y

z

y

z

y

z

y

z

y

x

x

x

x

Figure 1. Qualitative results of the proposed CMR. We show
silhouette, 2D pose, projection of mesh, side-view mesh, cameraspace mesh and pose (unit: meter). The red rectangles indicate the
camera. Our method is robust enough to handle cases of occlusion,
truncation, and challenging poses.

reconstruction, including [16, 17, 20, 21, 23, 27, 30, 31, 32,
33, 36, 39], to name a few.
Most of the aforementioned methods [6, 9, 16, 20, 21, 22,
27, 40, 43] have difficulty in predicting absolute cameraspace coordinates. Instead, they define a root (i.e., wrist
of the hand) and estimate root-relative coordinates of the
3D mesh. In this aspect, these methods cannot be applied
to many high-level tasks, e.g., hand-object interaction, that
requires camera-space mesh information. To this end, we
propose to jointly solve root-relative mesh recovery and root
recovery by integrating these two sub-tasks into a unified
framework, thereby bridging the gap between root-relative
predictions and camera-space estimation.
RGB images consist of 2D patterns that are indirect cues
of the underlying 3D structure. Therefore, 2D cues have
long been leveraged to assist 3D tasks. For example, 2D

13274

