Learning Asynchronous and Sparse Human-Object Interaction in Videos
Romero Morais∗ , Vuong Le, Svetha Venkatesh, Truyen Tran
Applied Artificial Intelligence Institute, Deakin University, Australia
{ralmeidabaratad,vuong.le,svetha.venkatesh,truyen.tran}@deakin.edu.au

Figure 1: An example of human-object interaction activity, where a person takes some medicine and interacts with two
objects. Human (circles) and object (triangles) entities have independent lives throughout the video (upper three rows).
Although videos are captured in regular timing (lower rows), the dynamics of human activities and object affordances evolve
sparsely and asynchronously with respect to each other (colored segments). They also affect each other (blue curved arrows).
These characteristics of human-object interactions are the main modeling goals of this work.

Abstract
Human activities can be learned from video. With
effective modeling it is possible to discover not only
the action labels but also the temporal structure
of the activities, such as the progression of the
sub-activities.
Automatically recognizing such structure from raw video signal is a new capability that
promises authentic modeling and successful recognition
of human-object interactions. Toward this goal, we introduce Asynchronous-Sparse Interaction Graph Networks
(ASSIGN), a recurrent graph network that is able to automatically detect the structure of interaction events associated with entities in a video scene. ASSIGN pioneers learning of autonomous behavior of video entities including their
dynamic structure and their interaction with the coexisting
neighbors. Entities’ lives in our model are asynchronous to
those of others therefore more flexible in adapting to complex scenarios. Their interactions are sparse in time hence
more faithful to the true underlying nature and more robust in inference and learning. ASSIGN is tested on humanobject interaction recognition and shows superior performance in segmenting and labeling of human sub-activities
and object affordances from raw videos. The native ability of ASSIGN in discovering temporal structure also eliminates the dependence on external segmentation that was
previously mandatory for this task.

1. Introduction
Human activities are strongly connected to the surrounding environment and the objects in it. The interactions between human and object entities observed in videos are a
fundamental clue toward a deep understanding of human
behavior and the surrounding world [8]. This capability is
reflected in the human-object interaction (HOI) recognition
task, in which human sub-activities (such as drinking) and
object affordances (such as drinkable) are segmented and
recognized from a video by analyzing the interactive relations between entities (Fig. 1). These relations naturally
form a spatio-temporal graph where entities (humans or objects) and their dynamic interactions evolve throughout the
activity. Although entities can be detected and tracked from
video, it is challenging to build a graph model that can automatically discover the temporal structure of activities and
natively reflect the complex and intricate nature of these interactions.
Currently available approaches applied conditional random fields [14, 17, 18] and graph neural networks [6, 30] to
model the spatio-temporal entity interaction graph. These
models assume knowledge of the temporal structure of the
video and are limited to the task of assigning activity and
affordance labels to the segments.
Rather than this cascaded approach, we exploit the fact
that structure and content of events are tightly coupled and
may support each other toward the optimal solution in a

16041

