Track to Detect and Segment: An Online Multi-Object Tracker
Jialian Wu1 , Jiale Cao2 , Liangchen Song1 , Yu Wang3 , Ming Yang3 , Junsong Yuan1
1

SUNY Buffalo

2

3

TJU

Horizon Robotics

Abstract
Learnable Networks

Forward

Re-ID Embeddings

D: Detection Layer T: Tracking-related Layer

1. Introduction
Advanced online multi-object tracking methods follow
two major paradigms: tracking-by-detection [5, 38, 27, 52,
30, 49] and joint detection and tracking [26, 63, 1, 29, 45, 25,
43, 44]. The tracking-by-detection (TBD) paradigm treats
detection and tracking as two independent tasks (Fig. 1 (a)).
It usually applies an off-the-shelf object detector to produce
detections and employs another separate network for data
association. The TBD system is inefficient and not optimized
end-to-end due to the two-stage processing. To address this
problem, recent solutions favor a joint detection and tracking
(JDT) paradigm that simultaneously performs detection and
tracking in a single forward-pass (Fig. 1 (b)).
The JDT methods, however, are confronted with two issues: (i) Although in most JDT works [29, 45, 25, 50] the
backbone network is shared, detection is usually performed
standalone without exploring tracking cues. We argue that
detection is the cornerstone for a stable and consistent tracklet, and in turn tracking cues shall help detection, especially
in tough scenarios like partial occlusion and motion blur. (ii)
As studied by [9] and our experiment (Tab. 1b), common reID tracking loss [45, 25, 32, 51] is not that compatible with
detection loss in jointly training a single backbone network,
which could even hurt detection performance to some extent.

backbone

D

T

Tracked Objects

Input image

backbone

backbone

Input image

backbone

Detected Objects

T
T

missed

missed

Data Association

Data Association

Previous Features

D

Enhance

D

Data Association

Most online multi-object trackers perform object detection stand-alone in a neural net without any input from
tracking. In this paper, we present a new online joint
detection and tracking model, TraDeS (TRAck to DEtect
and Segment), exploiting tracking clues to assist detection
end-to-end. TraDeS infers object tracking offset by a cost
volume, which is used to propagate previous object features for improving current object detection and segmentation. Effectiveness and superiority of TraDeS are shown
on 4 datasets, including MOT (2D tracking), nuScenes (3D
tracking), MOTS and Youtube-VIS (instance segmentation
tracking). Project page: https://jialianwu.com/
projects/TraDeS.html.

Tracking Offsets

Input image

detected

(a) Tracking-by-Detection

(b) Recent Joint
Detection and Tracking

(c) TraDeS (Ours)

Figure 1. Comparison of different online MOT pipelines. Our
method follows the joint detection and tracking (JDT) paradigm.
Different from most JDT methods, the proposed TraDeS tracker
deeply couples tracking and detection within an end-to-end and unified framework, where the motion clue from tracking is exploited
to enhance detection or segmentation (omitted in the figure).

The reason is that re-ID focuses on intra-class variance, but
detection aims to enlarge inter-class difference and minimize
intra-class variance.
In this paper, we propose a new online joint detection and
tracking model, coined as TraDeS (TRAck to DEtect and
Segment). In TraDeS, each point on the feature map represents either an object center or a background region, similar
as in CenterNet [64]. TraDeS addresses the above two issues by tightly incorporating tracking into detection as well
as a dedicatedly designed re-ID learning scheme. Specifically, we propose a cost volume based association (CVA)
module and a motion-guided feature warper (MFW) module,
respectively. The CVA extracts point-wise re-ID embedding
features by the backbone to construct a cost volume that
stores matching similarities between the embedding pairs in
two frames. Then, we infer the tracking offsets from the cost
volume, which are the spatio-temporal displacements of all
the points, i.e., potential object centers, in two frames. The
tracking offsets together with the embeddings are utilized to
conduct a simple two-round long-term data association. Afterwards, the MFW takes the tracking offsets as motion cues
to propagate object features from the previous frames to the
current one. Finally, the propagated feature and the current
feature are aggregated to derive detection and segmentation.
In the CVA module, the cost volume is employed to su-

12352

