KeypointDeformer: Unsupervised 3D Keypoint Discovery for Shape Control
Tomas Jakab1,4∗ , Richard Tucker4 , Ameesh Makadia4 , Jiajun Wu3 , Noah Snavely4 , Angjoo Kanazawa2,4
1
University of Oxford, 2 UC Berkeley, 3 Stanford University, 4 Google Research

Figure 1: Controlling shape deformation with unsupervised 3D keypoints. We discover unsupervised 3D keypoints that allow for
intuitive control of an object’s shape. This figure shows individual steps of interactive control. The red arrows illustrate the direction in which
the keypoints are manipulated. Note that the resulting deformations are localized and object parts are deformed in an intuitive manner—e.g.,
moving keypoints at the tip of the wings backward moves the wings backwards—all while preserving the details of the original shape.

Abstract
We introduce KeypointDeformer, a novel unsupervised
method for shape control through automatically discovered
3D keypoints. We cast this as the problem of aligning a
source 3D object to a target 3D object from the same object category. Our method analyzes the difference between
the shapes of the two objects by comparing their latent
representations. This latent representation is in the form
of 3D keypoints that are learned in an unsupervised way.
The difference between the 3D keypoints of the source and
the target objects then informs the shape deformation algorithm that deforms the source object into the target object.
The whole model is learned end-to-end and simultaneously
discovers 3D keypoints while learning to use them for deforming object shapes. Our approach produces intuitive
and semantically consistent control of shape deformations.
Moreover, our discovered 3D keypoints are consistent across
object category instances despite large shape variations.
As our method is unsupervised, it can be readily deployed
to new object categories without requiring annotations
for 3D keypoints and deformations. Project page: http:
//tomasjakab.github.io/KeypointDeformer .

1. Introduction
Given the vast number of 3D shapes available on the
Internet, providing users with intuitive and simple interfaces
for semantically manipulating objects while preserving their
key shape properties has a wide variety of applications in
AI-assisted 3D content creation. In this paper, we propose
to automatically discover intuitive and semantically meaningful control points for interactive editing, enabling detailpreserving shape deformation for object categories.
Specifically, we identify 3D keypoints as an intuitive and
simple interface for shape editing. Keypoints are sparse
3D points that are semantically consistent across an object
category. We propose a learning framework for unsupervised
discovery of such keypoints and a deformation model that
uses the keypoints to deform a shape while preserving local
shape detail. We call our model KeypointDeformer.
Figure 1 describes the inference-time use case of KeypointDeformer. Given a novel shape, KeypointDeformer
predicts 3D keypoints on the surface. If a user manipulates a
keypoint on a chair leg upwards, the entire leg is deformed
in the same direction (bottom). Our approach optionally
enables the use of a categorical deformation prior on these
* Work done while interning at Google Research.

12783

