GANmut: Learning Interpretable Conditional Space for Gamut of Emotions
Stefano d’Apolito1 , Danda Pani Paudel1 , Zhiwu Huang1 , Andrés Romero1 , Luc Van Gool1,2
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich, Switzerland 2 PSI, KU Leuven, Belgium
dstefano@alumni.ethz.ch

{paudel, zhiwu.huang, roandres, vangool}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Humans can communicate emotions through a plethora
of facial expressions, each with its own intensity, nuances
and ambiguities. The generation of such variety by means
of conditional GANs is limited to the expressions encoded in
the used label system. These limitations are caused either
due to burdensome labelling demand or the confounded label space. On the other hand, learning from inexpensive
and intuitive basic categorical emotion labels leads to limited emotion variability. In this paper, we propose a novel
GAN-based framework that learns an expressive and interpretable conditional space (usable as a label space) of emotions, instead of conditioning on handcrafted labels. Our
framework only uses the categorical labels of basic emotions to learn jointly the conditional space as well as emotion manipulation. Such learning can benefit from the image variability within discrete labels, especially when the
intrinsic labels reside beyond the discrete space of the defined. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed framework, by allowing us to control and generate a gamut of complex and compound emotions while using only the basic categorical emotion labels during training. Our source code is available at https://github.
com/stefanodapolito/GANmut.

1. Introduction
Facial expressions undoubtedly play a major role in the
non-verbal communication of human emotions. However,
the relationship between what is felt and the corresponding expression is complex, and not yet fully understood.
When an emotion is externalized by facial muscle movements, sometimes even different emotions lead to the same
expression [1, 11]. This is merely the beginning of the many
issues in understanding human emotions. Therefore, modelling human emotions is a century-long ongoing topic of
study [30, 28, 11, 31, 17, 16, 18, 29]. In this process, several psychological models for emotion representation have
been proposed, with no clear consensus among psychologists. At this point, one may wonder, what if we could

leverage machine learning for emotion modelling instead?
Existing emotion models rely upon psychologists, who
individually have limited observations and personal biases.
Machines, on the other hand, can potentially observe many
more images of the diverse emotions. The key question that
motivates us, maybe a little beyond the scope of this paper,
is, how can we make machines model emotions in a way
that is also interpretable to humans?
Before proceeding further, we first discuss the current issues we perceive. If a categorical model, such as basic emotions [10, 20, 27], is used to understand the lab controlled
posed expressions, there is almost no need for a new emotion model1 . On the contrary, understanding spontaneous
expressions challenges even the human experts2 . One can
only expect a further deterioration of agreement if spontaneous expressions are annotated by non-experts. Therefore,
it seems hopeless to collect large-scale data relying upon the
categorical emotion model and its corresponding labels.
Several other emotion models also do exist [32]. Among
these, the most commonly used are compound emotions [8],
Valance-Arousal (VA) [31], and Action Units (AUs) [9].
These models, although not thoroughly studied, can be only
suspected to pose more problems due to not being intuitive to non-experts. In this regard, the categorical emotion
model is arguably the most intuitive one, as well as the most
inexpensive means of collecting the data [3]. This leaves us
with the necessity of developing a learning algorithm that
can learn from imperfect emotion labels. With a slight twist,
we ponder whether it is possible to learn the emotional label space itself, which can be tractably (or with meaningful
interpretation) mapped to the available imperfect labels.
A major source of confusion in labeling is the discretization of labels, while emotions themselves are continuous
(basic emotions as a psychological model are outdated [1]).
Such discretization lacks two main aspects: intensity and
fusion. For example, anger can be of different intensities,
which may be expressed in sadness or fear [13]. More
specifically, the hidden intensity and the intermediate emotions must be discovered to make the best use of the categor1 Recognition accuracy on constrained CK+ [21] datasets is ≈ 100%.
2 AffectNet [22] reports an agreement of only 60.7% between experts.

568

