Temporal Action Segmentation from Timestamp Supervision
Zhe Li, Yazan Abu Farha, Juergen Gall
University of Bonn, Germany
s6zeliii@uni-bonn.de, {abufarha,gall}@iai.uni-bonn.de

Abstract
Temporal action segmentation approaches have been
very successful recently. However, annotating videos with
frame-wise labels to train such models is very expensive and
time consuming. While weakly supervised methods trained
using only ordered action lists require less annotation effort, the performance is still worse than fully supervised
approaches. In this paper, we propose to use timestamp supervision for the temporal action segmentation task. Timestamps require a comparable annotation effort to weakly
supervised approaches, and yet provide a more supervisory
signal. To demonstrate the effectiveness of timestamp supervision, we propose an approach to train a segmentation
model using only timestamps annotations. Our approach
uses the model output and the annotated timestamps to generate frame-wise labels by detecting the action changes. We
further introduce a confidence loss that forces the predicted
probabilities to monotonically decrease as the distance to
the timestamps increases. This ensures that all and not only
the most distinctive frames of an action are learned during
training. The evaluation on four datasets shows that models trained with timestamps annotations achieve comparable performance to the fully supervised approaches.

1. Introduction
Analyzing and understanding video content is very important for many applications, such as surveillance or intelligent advertisement. Recently, several approaches have
been very successful in analyzing and segmenting activities
in videos [20, 24, 1, 29, 41]. Despite the success of the previous approaches, they rely on fully annotated videos where
the start and end frames of each action are annotated.
This level of supervision, however, is very time consuming and hard to obtain. Furthermore, as the boundaries between action segments are usually ambiguous, this might
result in inconsistencies between annotations obtained from
different annotators. To alleviate these problems, many researchers start exploring weaker levels of supervision in the
form of transcripts [3, 35, 25] or even sets [34, 11, 26]. For

Figure 1. For fully supervised action segmentation, each frame in
the training videos is annotated with an action label (top). This
process is time-consuming since it requires an accurate annotation
of the start and end frame of each action. To reduce the annotation
effort, we propose to use timestamps as supervision (bottom). In
this case, only one arbitrary frame needs to be annotated for each
action and the annotators do not need to search for the start and
end frames, which is the most time-consuming annotation part.

transcript-level supervision, the videos are annotated with
an ordered list of actions occurring in the video without the
starting and ending time of each action. Whereas for the
set-level supervision, only the set of actions are provided
without any information regarding the order or how many
times each action occurs in the videos.
While transcript-level and set-level supervision significantly reduce the annotation effort, the performance is not
satisfying and there is still a gap compared to fully supervised approaches. In this paper, inspired by the recently introduced timestamp supervision for action recognition [31],
we propose to use timestamp supervision for the action
segmentation task to address the limitations of the current
weakly supervised approaches. For timestamp supervision,
only one frame is annotated from each action segment as illustrated in Fig. 1. Such timestamps annotations can be obtained with comparable effort to transcripts, and yet it provides more supervision. Besides the ordered list of actions
occurring in the video, timestamps annotations give partial information about the location of the action segments,
which can be utilized to further improve the performance.
18365

