Fingerspelling Detection in American Sign Language
Bowen Shi1 , Diane Brentari2 , Greg Shakhnarovich1 , Karen Livescu1
1
Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago, USA 2 University of Chicago, USA
{bshi,greg,klivescu}@ttic.edu

dbrentari@uchicago.edu

Figure 1: Fingerspelling detection and recognition in video of American Sign Language. The goal of detection is to find intervals corresponding to fingerspelling (here indicated by open/close parentheses), and the goal of recognition is to transcribe
each of those intervals into letter sequences. Our focus in this paper is on detection that enables accurate recognition. In this
example (with downsampled frames), the fingerspelled words are PIRATES and PATRICK, shown along with their canonical
handshapes aligned roughly with the most-canonical corresponding frames. Non-fingerspelled signs are labeled with their
glosses. The English translation is “Moving furtively, pirates steal the boy Patrick.”

Abstract
Fingerspelling, in which words are signed letter by letter, is an important component of American Sign Language.
Most previous work on automatic fingerspelling recognition has assumed that the boundaries of fingerspelling regions in signing videos are known beforehand. In this paper, we consider the task of fingerspelling detection in raw,
untrimmed sign language videos. This is an important step
towards building real-world fingerspelling recognition systems. We propose a benchmark and a suite of evaluation
metrics, some of which reflect the effect of detection on the
downstream fingerspelling recognition task. In addition, we
propose a new model that learns to detect fingerspelling
via multi-task training, incorporating pose estimation and
fingerspelling recognition (transcription) along with detection, and compare this model to several alternatives. The
model outperforms all alternative approaches across all
metrics, establishing a state of the art on the benchmark.

1. Introduction
Sign languages, such as American Sign Language
(ASL), are natural languages expressed via movements of
the hands, face, and upper body. Automatic processing of
sign languages would assist communication between deaf
and hearing individuals, but involves a number of challenges. There is no standard written form for sign languages. Automatic transcription of sign language into a
written language such as English is in general a translation
task. In addition, sign language gestures are often coarticu-

lated and do not appear in their canonical forms [22, 25].
In this paper, we focus on fingerspelling (Figure 1), a
component of sign language in which words are signed
letter by letter, with a distinct handshape or trajectory
corresponding to each letter in the alphabet of a written language (e.g., the English alphabet for ASL fingerspelling). Fingerspelling is used for multiple purposes, including for words that do not have their own signs (such as
many proper nouns, technical terms, and abbreviations) [39]
but also sometimes for emphasis or expediency. Fingerspelling accounts for 12% to 35% of ASL, where it is
used more than in other sign languages [40]. As important content words are commonly fingerspelled, automatic
fingerspelling recognition can enable practical tasks such as
search and retrieval in ASL media.
Compared to translation between a sign language and a
written language, fingerspelling recognition involves transcription into a restricted set of symbols, with a monotonic alignment with the written form. Linguistically, fingerspelling is distinct from other elements of ASL, such
as lexical signs and classifiers [23, 3], so fingerspelling is
likely to benefit from a separate model. The role that fingerspelling transcription is likely to play in ASL to English
translation is similar to that of transliteration in written language translation [10]. For all of these reasons, we believe
that even as more general ASL processing methods are developed, it will continue to be beneficial to have dedicated
fingerspelling detection and recognition modules.
Fingerspelling recognition has been widely studied [42,
16, 44, 37, 26, 45]. However, in most prior work, it is
assumed that the input sequence contains fingerspelling
only, sometimes extracted from longer sequences of sign14166

