Adaptive Class Suppression Loss for Long-Tail Object Detection
Tong Wang1,2 , Yousong Zhu1,3 , Chaoyang Zhao1 , Wei Zeng4,5 , Jinqiao Wang1,2,6 , Ming Tang1
1

National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, Institute of Automation,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing, China
3
ObjectEye Inc., Beijing, China
4
Peking University, Beijing, China
5
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
6
NEXWISE Co., Ltd., Guangzhou, China
{tong.wang,yousong.zhu,chaoyang.zhao,jqwang,tangm}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn
weizeng@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
To address the problem of long-tail distribution for the
large vocabulary object detection task, existing methods
usually divide the whole categories into several groups and
treat each group with different strategies. These methods
bring the following two problems. One is the training inconsistency between adjacent categories of similar sizes,
and the other is that the learned model is lack of discrimination for tail categories which are semantically similar
to some of the head categories. In this paper, we devise
a novel Adaptive Class Suppression Loss (ACSL) to effectively tackle the above problems and improve the detection
performance of tail categories. Specifically, we introduce
a statistic-free perspective to analyze the long-tail distribution, breaking the limitation of manual grouping. According
to this perspective, our ACSL adjusts the suppression gradients for each sample of each class adaptively, ensuring
the training consistency and boosting the discrimination for
rare categories. Extensive experiments on long-tail datasets
LVIS and Open Images show that the our ACSL achieves
5.18% and 5.2% improvements with ResNet50-FPN, and
sets a new state of the art. Code and models are available
at https://github.com/CASIA-IVA-Lab/ACSL.

1. Introduction
With the advent of deep Convolutional Neural Network,
researchers have achieved significant progress on object detection task. Many efforts have been paid to refresh the

Border line

Training inconsistency
between adjacent categories

Long Tail
Head

Lack of
discriminative power

12: Sunglasses

1171: Eye mask

Figure 1: The label distribution of LVIS [11] dataset. The x-axis
represents the sorted category index of LVIS. The y-axis is the
image number of each category.

record on classic benchmarks like PASCAL VOC [9] and
MS COCO [21]. However, these benchmarks usually have
limited quantities of classes and exhibit relatively balanced
category distribution. Whereas, in real-world scenarios,
data usually comes with a long-tail distribution. A few head
classes (frequent classes) contribute most of the training
samples, while the huge number of tail classes (rare classes)
are under-represented in data. Such extremely imbalanced
class distribution proposes new challenges for researchers.
An intuitive solution is to re-balance the data distribution
by re-sampling technique [12, 7, 28, 23]. By over-sampling

3103

