NeuralHumanFVV: Real-Time Neural Volumetric Human Performance
Rendering using RGB Cameras
Xin Suo1 Yuheng Jiang1 Pei Lin 1 Yingliang Zhang2 Minye Wu 1 Kaiwen Guo3 Lan Xu1,4
1

2
3
ShanghaiTech University
Dgene
Google
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging

Abstract
4D reconstruction and rendering of human activities is
critical for immersive VR/AR experience. Recent advances
still fail to recover fine geometry and texture results with
the level of detail present in the input images from sparse
multi-view RGB cameras. In this paper, we propose NeuralHumanFVV, a real-time neural human performance capture
and rendering system to generate both high-quality geometry and photo-realistic texture of human activities in arbitrary novel views. We propose a neural geometry generation scheme with a hierarchical sampling strategy for
real-time implicit geometry inference, as well as a novel
neural blending scheme to generate high resolution (e.g.,
1k) and photo-realistic texture results in the novel views.
Furthermore, we adopt neural normal blending to enhance
geometry details and formulate our neural geometry and
texture rendering into a multi-task learning framework. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach to achieve high-quality geometry and photo-realistic
free view-point reconstruction for challenging human performances.

1. Introduction
The rise of virtual and augmented reality (VR and AR) to
present information in an immersive way has increased the
demand of the 4D (3D spatial plus 1D time) content generation. Further reconstructing human activities and providing photo-realistic rendering from a free viewpoint conveniently evolves as a cutting-edge yet bottleneck technique.
Early solutions [27, 28, 58, 9] require pre-scanned templates or two to four orders of magnitude more time than is
available for daily usages such as immersive tele-presence.
Recently, volumetric approaches have enabled real-time
human performance reconstruction and eliminated the reliance of a pre-scanned template model, by leveraging the
RGBD sensors and modern GPUs. The high-end solutions [12, 11, 23, 68] rely on multi-view studio setup to

Figure 1. Our NeuralHumanFVV achieves real-time and photorealistic reconstruction results of human performance in novel
views, using only 6 RGB cameras.

achieve high-fidelity reconstruction and rendering in a novel
view but are expensive and difficult to be deployed, while
the low-end approaches [39, 53, 66, 72, 55] adopt the most
handy monocular setup with a temporal fusion pipeline [40]
but suffer from inherent self-occlusion constraint. Moreover, these approaches above rely on depth cameras which
are not as cheap and ubiquitous as color cameras.
The recent learning-based techniques enable robust human attribute reconstruction [35, 48, 73, 29] using only
RGB input. In particular, the approaches PIFu [48] and
PIFuHD [49] utilize pixel-aligned implicit function to reconstruct clothed humans with fine geometry details, while
MonoPort [29] further enables real-time inference in a novel
view. However, these methods fail to generate compelling
photo-realistic texture due to the reliance of implicit texture
representation. On the other hand, neural rendering techniques [32, 7, 64, 38, 25, 46] bring huge potential for photorealistic novel view synthesis. However, existing solutions
rely on per-scene training or are hard to achieve real-time
performance due to the heavy network and the complicated
3D representation. Moreover, few researchers explore to
combine volumetric geometry modeling and photo-realistic
novel view synthesis of human performance in a data-driven
manner simultaneously, especially under the light-weight
multi-RGB and real-time setting.
In this paper, we attack the above challenges and present

6226

