Learning Salient Boundary Feature for Anchor-free
Temporal Action Localization
Chuming Lin∗1 , Chengming Xu∗2 , Donghao Luo1 , Yabiao Wang1 , Ying Tai1 ,
Chengjie Wang1 , Jilin Li1 , Feiyue Huang1 , Yanwei Fu2
1
Youtu Lab, Tencent, 2 Fudan University, China
{chuminglin, michaelluo, caseywang, yingtai, jasoncjwang, jerolinli, garyhuang}@tencent.com
{cmxu18, yanweifu}@fudan.edu.cn

Abstract
Temporal action localization is an important yet challenging task in video understanding. Typically, such a task
aims at inferring both the action category and localization
of the start and end frame for each action instance in
a long, untrimmed video. While most current models
achieve good results by using pre-defined anchors and
numerous actionness, such methods could be bothered
with both large number of outputs and heavy tuning of
locations and sizes corresponding to different anchors.
Instead, anchor-free methods is lighter, getting rid of
redundant hyper-parameters, but gains few attention.
In this paper, we propose the first purely anchor-free
temporal localization method, which is both efficient
and effective. Our model includes (i) an end-to-end
trainable basic predictor, (ii) a saliency-based refinement
module to gather more valuable boundary features for
each proposal with a novel boundary pooling, and (iii)
several consistency constraints to make sure our model
can find the accurate boundary given arbitrary proposals. Extensive experiments show that our method beats
all anchor-based and actionness-guided methods with
a remarkable margin on THUMOS14, achieving stateof-the-art results, and comparable ones on ActivityNet
v1.3. Code is available at https://github.com/
TencentYoutuResearch / ActionDetection AFSD.

1. Introduction
Recently, with the progress of technology, a dramatically
increasing number of videos have been stored and accessible from various daily activities. Temporal Action Lo∗ indicates equal contributions. This work was done when Chengming
Xu was an intern at Tencent Youtu Lab. Yanwei Fu is the corresponding
author.

video

⋯

⋯
action: throw

feature

“throw”

adjust
“throw”
“throw”
“throw”

extra classifier

“throw”

Actionness

Anchor

Anchor-free

Anchor-based

Figure 1. Compared with actionness and anchor-based methods,
anchor-free method is more efficient and flexible to produce fewer
proposals without any extra classifier and pre-defined anchors.

calization (TAL), as a fundamental aspect of video understanding, thus plays an important role in real life, extending
in several practical applications such as video analysis and
summarization, human interaction, etc. Compared with action recognition that takes medium-range videos as input
and only requires class labels as prediction, TAL is aimed
at not only classifying every activity instance in each video,
but also looking for the accurate temporal locations of them.
Current TAL models mainly focus on learning actionness of each frame [20, 18, 17, 26, 27, 24] or adjustment of
pre-defined anchors [38, 23, 22], named actionness-guided
methods and anchor-based methods, as shown in Fig. 1.
In spite of reasonable good results on benchmark datasets,
such methods are still limited to the following points: (1)
Both methods will produce a bunch of redundant proposals.
For example, given a video with T frames, we have to produce O(T 2 ) and C ·T proposals for the “actionness-guided”
BSN [20], and “anchor-based” R-C3D [38], individually.
Here C is the number of pre-defined anchors. These proposals lead to prohibitive computational cost in both calcu-

3320

