Rotation Coordinate Descent for Fast Globally Optimal Rotation Averaging
Álvaro Parra1

*

*

Shin-Fang Chng1
Tat-Jun Chin1
Anders Eriksson2
Ian Reid1
1
School of Computer Science, The University of Adelaide
2
School of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering, University of Queensland

Abstract
Under mild conditions on the noise level of the measurements, rotation averaging satisfies strong duality, which enables global solutions to be obtained via semidefinite programming (SDP) relaxation. However, generic solvers for
SDP are rather slow in practice, even on rotation averaging instances of moderate size, thus developing specialised
algorithms is vital. In this paper, we present a fast algorithm that achieves global optimality called rotation coordinate descent (RCD). Unlike block coordinate descent
(BCD) which solves SDP by updating the semidefinite matrix in a row-by-row fashion, RCD directly maintains and
updates all valid rotations throughout the iterations. This
obviates the need to store a large dense semidefinite matrix.
We mathematically prove the convergence of our algorithm
and empirically show its superior efficiency over state-ofthe-art global methods on a variety of problem configurations. Maintaining valid rotations also facilitates incorporating local optimisation routines for further speed-ups.
Moreover, our algorithm is simple to implement 1 .

(a) Camera graph

Figure 1. (a) Input camera graph from Orebro Castle [25] with
n = 761 views and 116, 589 connections (relative rotations; grey
lines). The initial absolute rotations (represented as black arrows)
were randomly chosen. For visualisation, the ground truth positions were used to locate the cameras (red points). (b) Globally
optimal absolute rotations computed from our RCD algorithm in
1.96 s (Shonan averaging [9] required 54.62 s on the same input).
Note the alignment of the arrows along the path of the camera (the
reconstructed point cloud is also plotted for visualisation).

The input to rotation averaging is a set of noisy relative
rotations {R̃ij }, where each R̃ij is a measurement of the
orientation difference between cameras i and j which overlap in view. From the relative rotations, rotation averaging
aims to recover the absolute rotations {Ri }ni=1 which represent the orientations of the cameras. In the ideal case where
there is no noise in the relative rotations {Rij },

1. Introduction
Rotation averaging, a.k.a. multiple rotation averaging [17] or SO(3) synchronisation [4], is the problem of
estimating absolute rotations (orientations w.r.t. a common
coordinate system) from a set of relative rotation measurements. In vision and robotics, rotation averaging plays a
crucial role in SfM [21, 25, 24, 8, 7, 20, 43, 36] and visual
SLAM [5, 29, 33, 26, 19], in particular for initialising bundle adjustment. Fig. 1 illustrates the result of rotation averaging. With the increase in the size of SfM problems and
continued emphasis on real-time visual SLAM, developing
efficient rotation averaging algorithms is an active research
area. In particular, real-world applications often give rise to
problem instances with thousands of cameras.
* equal contribution
1 Source code is available at https://github.com/sfchng/

(b) Result

Rij = Rj RiT .

(1)

The input relative rotations {R̃ij } define a camera graph
G = (V, E), where V = {1, . . . , n} is the set of cameras,
and (i, j) ∈ E is an edge in G if the relative rotation R̃ij between cameras i and j is measured. We assume a connected
undirected graph G, hence only R̃ij with i < j needs to be
considered. See Fig. 1(a) for an example camera graph.
Rotation averaging is usually posed as a nonlinear optimisation problem with nonconvex domain
X
min
d(Rj RiT , R̃ij )p ,
(2)
R1 ,...,Rn ∈SO(3)

(i,j)∈E

where d : SO(3) × SO(3) 7→ R is a distance function
that measures the deviation from the identity (1) based on
measured and estimated quantities. For example,
dchordal (R, S) = kR − SkF ,

Rotation_Coordinate_Descent.

4298

(3)

