Learnable Companding Quantization for Accurate Low-bit Neural Networks
Kohei Yamamoto
Oki Electric Industry Co., Ltd.
yamamoto833@oki.com

Abstract
Quantizing deep neural networks is an effective method
for reducing memory consumption and improving inference
speed, and is thus useful for implementation in resourceconstrained devices. However, it is still hard for extremely
low-bit models to achieve accuracy comparable with that
of full-precision models. To address this issue, we propose
learnable companding quantization (LCQ) as a novel nonuniform quantization method for 2-, 3-, and 4-bit models.
LCQ jointly optimizes model weights and learnable companding functions that can flexibly and non-uniformly control the quantization levels of weights and activations. We
also present a new weight normalization technique that allows more stable training for quantization. Experimental
results show that LCQ outperforms conventional state-ofthe-art methods and narrows the gap between quantized
and full-precision models for image classification and object detection tasks. Notably, the 2-bit ResNet-50 model on
ImageNet achieves top-1 accuracy of 75.1% and reduces
the gap to 1.7%, allowing LCQ to further exploit the potential of non-uniform quantization.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been successfully
applied to image-based tasks such as image classification
and object detection, but their implementation in resourceconstrained mobile or edge devices remains difficult, owing to the large number of required multiply–accumulate
(MAC) operations and parameters. To mitigate this problem, various techniques for compressing DNNs while maintaining performance have been proposed, such as pruning [9], knowledge distillation [15], low-rank approximation [10], and network quantization [16]. Among these,
network quantization is important as a way to effectively
improve both memory consumption and inference speed.
However, network quantization is known to degrade performance of the original model in proportion to the amount of
bit-width reduction.
In network quantization, the weights or activations of
DNNs are typically discretized by a quantization function.

Quantized distribution

Weight/Activation distribution

Non-uniform quantization

Clipping to [-1,1]

Compressing

Rounding

Expanding

Learnable companding

Figure 1: An overview of the proposed method. Our
non-uniform quantizer quantizes weights or activations with
four functions, those for clipping, compressing, rounding,
and expanding. In particular, a composite function consisting of those except for the clipping function is generally
called the companding function. We formulate the companding function in a learnable form with a set of parameters Θ and jointly optimize it with clipping parameter α and
the other parameters in the model.
Although the quantization function is not differentiable, a
straight-through estimator (STE) [1] can be used to approximate the gradient calculation for backpropagation. Quantization functions are divided into two types: uniform and
non-uniform quantization, in which input values are respectively linearly and nonlinearly discretized. Because the
weight or activation distribution is empirically dissimilar to
the uniform distribution, non-uniform quantization can be
expected to further reduce quantization and prediction errors than can uniform quantization via proper optimization.
For example, previous works on non-uniform quantization
have attempted to use fixed and logarithmic quantization
levels [16,22] or learnable quantization levels that minimize
quantization errors [30].
However, it is not easy to estimate effective quantization levels accurately, especially in low-bit models, where
accuracy is often inferior to that of uniform quantization
methods. This paper thus aims to exploit the potential of
non-uniform quantizers and further bridge the accuracy gap

5029

