Neural Descent for Visual 3D Human Pose and Shape
Andrei Zanfir Eduard Gabriel Bazavan Mihai Zanfir
William T. Freeman Rahul Sukthankar Cristian Sminchisescu
Google Research
{andreiz, egbazavan, mihaiz, wfreeman, sukthankar, sminchisescu}@google.com

Abstract
We present deep neural network methodology to reconstruct the 3d pose and shape of people, including hand gestures and facial expression, given an input RGB image. We
rely on a recently introduced, expressive full body statistical 3d human model, GHUM, trained end-to-end, and learn
to reconstruct its pose and shape state in a self-supervised
regime. Central to our methodology, is a learning to learn
and optimize approach, referred to as HUman Neural Descent (HUND), which avoids both second-order differentiation when training the model parameters, and expensive state
gradient descent in order to accurately minimize a semantic
differentiable rendering loss at test time. Instead, we rely
on novel recurrent stages to update the pose and shape parameters such that not only losses are minimized effectively,
but the process is meta-regularized in order to ensure endprogress. HUND’s symmetry between training and testing
makes it the first 3d human sensing architecture to natively
support different operating regimes including self-supervised
ones. In diverse tests, we show that HUND achieves very
competitive results in datasets like H3.6M and 3DPW, as
well as good quality 3d reconstructions for complex imagery
collected in-the-wild.

1. Introduction
Automatic 3d human sensing from images and video
would be a key, transformative enabler in areas as diverse as
clothing virtual apparel try-on, fitness, personal well-being,
health or rehabilitation, AR and VR for improved communication or collaboration, self-driving systems with emphasis
to urban scenarios, special effects, human-computer interaction or gaming, among others. Applications in shopping,
telepresence or fitness would increase human engagement
and stimulate collaboration, communication, and the economy, during a lock-down.
The rapid progress in 3D human sensing has recently

relied on volumetric statistical human body models [24, 43]
and supervised training. Most, if not all, state of the art
architectures for predicting 2d, e.g., body keypoints [5] or 3d,
e.g., body joints, kinematic pose and shape [30, 48, 16, 19,
36, 8, 17, 20, 2, 44, 18, 40, 15, 29, 45, 49, 33, 37, 27, 26, 14]
rely, ab initio, at their learning core, on complete supervision.
For 2d methods this primarily enters as keypoint or semantic
segmentation annotations by humans, but for complex 3D
articulated structures human annotation is both impractical
and inaccurate. Hence for most methods, supervision comes
in the form of synchronous 2d and 3d ground truth, mostly
available in motion capture datasets like Human3.6M [13]
and more recently also 3DPW [41].
Supervision-types aside, the other key ingredient of any
successful system is the interplay between 3d initialization
using neural networks and non-linear optimization (refinement) based on losses computed over image primitives like
keypoints, silhouettes, or body part semantic segmentation
maps. No existing feedforward system, particularly a monocular one, achieves both plausible 3d reconstruction and
veridical image alignment1 without non-linear optimization –
a key component whose effectiveness for 3d pose estimation
has been long since demonstrated [34, 35].
The challenge faced by applying non-linear optimization
in high-dimensional problems like 3d human pose and shape
estimation stems from its complexity. On one hand, firstorder model state updates are relatively inefficient for very
ill-conditioned problems like monocular 3d human pose
estimation where Hessian condition numbers in the 10−3
are typical [34]. Consequently, many iterations are usually
necessary for good results, even when BFGS approximations are used. On the other hand, nonlinear output state
optimization is difficult to integrate as part of parameter
learning, since correct back-propagation would require potentially complex, computationally expensive second-order
1 To be understood in the classical model-based vision sense of best
fitting the model predictions to implicitly or explicitly-associated image
primitives (or landmarks), within modeling accuracy.

114484

