Student-Teacher Learning from Clean Inputs to Noisy Inputs
Guanzhe Hong, Zhiyuan Mao, Xiaojun Lin, Stanley H. Chan
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana USA
{hong288, mao114, linx, stanchan}@purdue.edu

Abstract
Feature-based student-teacher learning, a training
method that encourages the student’s hidden features to
mimic those of the teacher network, is empirically successful in transferring the knowledge from a pre-trained teacher
network to the student network. Furthermore, recent empirical results demonstrate that, the teacher’s features can
boost the student network’s generalization even when the
student’s input sample is corrupted by noise. However,
there is a lack of theoretical insights into why and when
this method of transferring knowledge can be successful between such heterogeneous tasks. We analyze this method
theoretically using deep linear networks, and experimentally using nonlinear networks. We identify three vital factors to the success of the method: (1) whether the student
is trained to zero training loss; (2) how knowledgeable the
teacher is on the clean-input problem; (3) how the teacher
decomposes its knowledge in its hidden features. Lack of
proper control in any of the three factors leads to failure of
the student-teacher learning method.

1. Introduction
1.1. What is student-teacher learning?
Student-teacher learning is a form of supervised learning
that uses a well-trained teacher network to train a student
network for various low-level and high-level vision tasks.
Inspired by the knowledge distillation work of Hinton et al.
[14], Romero et al. [24] started a major line of experimental work demonstrating the utility of feature-based studentteacher training [1, 7, 9, 13, 15, 17, 19, 20, 26–28, 31–33].
Figure 1 shows an illustration of the scheme. Suppose
that we want to perform classification (or regression) where
the input image is corrupted by noise. In student-teacher
learning, the teacher is a model trained to classify clean
images. We assume that the teacher’s prediction quality
is acceptable, and the features extracted by the teacher are
meaningful. However, the teacher cannot handle noisy images because it has never seen one before. Student-teacher

Figure 1. The student-teacher training loss, computed by measuring the difference between the hidden features of the student and
the teacher networks. During training, the input signal to the student network is the noisy version of the teacher’s.

learning says that, given a pair of clean-noisy input, we can
train a student by forcing the noisy features extracted by
the student to be similar to those clean features extracted
by the teacher, via a loss term known as the student-teacher
loss. In some sense, the training scheme forces the student
network to adjust its weights so that the features are “denoised”. During testing, we drop the teacher and use the
student for inference.
The success of student-teacher learning from clean inputs to corrupted inputs has been demonstrated in recent papers, including classification with noisy input [9], low-light
denoising [7], and image dehazing [15]. However, on the
theory side, there is very little analysis of why and when the
hidden features of the teacher can boost the generalization
power of the student. Most of the explanations in the experimental papers boil down to stating that the hidden features
contain rich and abstract information about the task which
the teacher solves, which could be difficult for the student
network to discover on its own.
In this paper, we provide the first insights into the mechanism of feature-based student teacher learning from clean
inputs to noisy inputs, for classification and regression
112075

