Asymmetric Gained Deep Image Compression With Continuous Rate
Adaptation
Ze Cui1 , Jing Wang1 , Shangyin Gao1 , Tiansheng Guo1 , Yihui Feng1 , Bo Bai1
1
Huawei Technologies, Beijing, China
{cuize1, wangjing215, gaoshangyin, guotiansheng1, f engyihui, baibo3} @huawei.com

With the development of deep learning techniques, the
combination of deep learning with image compression has
drawn lots of attention. Recently, learned image compression methods had exceeded their classical counterparts in
terms of rate-distortion performance. However, continuous
rate adaptation remains an open question. Some learned
image compression methods use multiple networks for multiple rates, while others use one single model at the expense of computational complexity increase and performance degradation. In this paper, we propose a continuously rate adjustable learned image compression framework, Asymmetric Gained Variational Autoencoder (AGVAE). AG-VAE utilizes a pair of gain units to achieve discrete rate adaptation in one single model with a negligible additional computation. Then, by using exponential interpolation, continuous rate adaptation is achieved without
compromising performance. Besides, we propose the asymmetric Gaussian entropy model for more accurate entropy
estimation. Exhaustive experiments show that our method
achieves comparable quantitative performance with SOTA
learned image compression methods and better qualitative
performance than classical image codecs. In the ablation
study, we confirm the usefulness and superiority of gain
units and the asymmetric Gaussian entropy model.

1. Introduction
Image compression is one of the most fundamental and
valuable problems in image processing and computer vision. In the last decades, many researchers have worked
for the development and optimization of the classical image
compression codecs, such as JPEG [32], JPEG2000 [27]
and BPG [8]. To remove redundancy within images, basic
modules of the classical codes, including transform coding,
entropy coding and quantization, have been sophistically
designed and applied. Since these modules are artificially
designed and optimized separately, it is not easy to obtain

Encoder

Gain

Q

𝑠 𝑙

bit stream

AE
Reconstruction

Decoder

AD

Asymmetry
Gaussian

Input Image

Abstract

Inverse
Gain

Figure 1. AG-VAE framework. We achieve rate adaptation by inserting a gain unit after encoder and an inverse gain unit before
decoder. The bit rate could be adjusted continuously with the
change of the gain vector index s and the interpolation coefficient
l. The asymmetric Gaussian entropy model estimates entropy of
the gained and quantized latent representation accurately.

an optimal solution for different evaluation indicators.
Recently, deep learning has achieved significant breakthroughs in various learning problems such as image classification, object detection. Thanks to variational autoencoder (VAE) and scalar quantization assumption [5, 4, 6,
25, 28, 1], end-to-end learned image compression framework also has derived significant interests. With the optimization of entropy estimation modules [7, 20, 16] and autoencoder network structure [26, 3, 17, 19, 31, 42, 18, 9], the
VAE-based image compression methods have achieved better rate-distortion (R-D) performance than the classical image compression codecs on common metrics, such as Peak
Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) and Multi-Scale-Structural
Similarity Index measure (MS-SSIM) [33].
Some VAE-based image compression methods need to
train multiple fixed-rate models to realize rate adaption,
each model for one rate. Therefore, the training cost and
memory requirement increase dramatically with the growth
and refinement of the desired rate range. Instead of using
multiply models, some other methods achieve the rate adaptation using one single model. The RNN-based schemes
[29, 30, 13] encode the input image progressively, but they
suffer from bad R-D performance. The conditional autoen-

10532

