Structured Multi-Level Interaction Network for Video Moment Localization
via Language Query
Hao Wang1 , Zheng-Jun Zha1∗ , Liang Li2 , Dong Liu1 , Jiebo Luo3
1
2

University of Science and Technology of China,

Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 3 University of Rochester

whqaz@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhazj,dongeliu}@ustc.edu.cn, liang.li@ict.ac.cn, jluo@cs.rochester.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of localizing a specific moment
described by a natural language query. Existing works interact the query with either video frame or moment proposal, and neglect the inherent structure of moment construction for both cross-modal understanding and video
content comprehension, which are the two crucial challenges for this task. In this paper, we disentangle the activity moment into boundary and content. Based on the
explored moment structure, we propose a novel Structured
Multi-level Interaction Network (SMIN) to tackle this problem through multi-levels of cross-modal interaction coupled
with content-boundary-moment interaction. In particular,
for cross-modal interaction, we interact the sentence-level
query with the whole moment while interacting the wordlevel query with content and boundary, as in a coarseto-fine manner. For content-boundary-moment interaction,
we capture the insightful relations between boundary, content, and the whole moment proposal. Through multi-level
interactions, the model obtains robust cross-modal representation for accurate moment localization. Extensive experiments conducted on three benchmarks (i.e., CharadesSTA, ActivityNet-Captions, and TACoS) demonstrate the
proposed approach outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

Figure 1. (a): An example of video moment localization queried
by a natural language sentence. (b): Existing approaches simply
conduct vision-language interaction at frame-level or proposallevel. (c): Our method first fuses the sentence with the video
frame as a coarse-grained cross-modal interaction. Then we conduct fine-grained vision-language interaction between words and
boundary/content of a moment proposal. Meanwhile, we conduct
structured moment interaction to explore the relations between
boundary, content, and the moment. (Best viewed in color)

1. Introduction
With the wide popularity of online videos, automatically understanding and analyzing the video content has
drawn increasing attention. Recently, due to the limitation of the pre-defined action categories and the flexibility
of using a natural language sentence for describing the activity in videos, video moment localization is proposed in
the works [1, 7]. Its aim is to localize a temporary segment
from an untrimmed video, containing the activity described
* Corresponding author.

by the given language query.
For this task, there are two key challenges: (1) crossmodal understanding between the language query and complicated video content, and (2) elaborate video content comprehension for localizing the target moment in videos with
complex backgrounds. Existing works locate the moment
by interacting the query with either video frame representation [4, 5, 6, 10, 12, 16, 33, 42, 45], or moment proposal
representation [1, 7, 9, 19, 20, 43, 44]. For vision-language
interaction, these works neglect the inherent structure of

7026

