Wasserstein Barycenter for Multi-Source Domain Adaptation
Eduardo Fernandes Montesuma
Universidade Federal do Ceará
Fortaleza, Brazil

Fred Maurice Ngolè Mboula
Université Paris-Saclay, Institut LIST, CEA
F-91120 Palaiseau, France

eduardomontesuma@alu.ufc.br

fred-maurice.ngole-mboula@cea.fr

Abstract
Multi-source domain adaptation is a key technique that
allows a model to be trained on data coming from various
probability distribution. To overcome the challenges posed
by this learning scenario, we propose a method for constructing an intermediate domain between sources and target domain, the Wasserstein Barycenter Transport (WBT).
This method relies on the barycenter on Wasserstein spaces
for aggregating the source probability distributions. Once
the sources have been aggregated, they are transported to
the target domain using standard Optimal Transport for Domain Adaptation framework. Additionally, we revisit previous single-source domain adaptation tasks in the context
of multi-source scenario. In particular, we apply our algorithm to object and face recognition datasets. Moreover,
to diversify the range of applications, we also examine the
tasks of music genre recognition and music-speech discrimination. The experiments show that our method has similar
performance with the existing state-of-the-art.

1. Introduction
Standard data-driven algorithms are based upon the hypothesis that training and test data follows the same probability distribution. When this assumption does not hold,
a case also known as distributional shift, these algorithms
may suffer from performance degradation. In this case,
many predictive models need to be re-trained on the new
data, ignoring previous knowledge.
There are various examples of distributional shift
in areas of application of machine learning, such
as image [22][23][27], natural language [3][2], and
speech [15][24] processing. This has been known in the
literature as transfer learning.
Transfer learning may be further categorized according to the nature of distributional shift. First, the features
distribution change between training and test sets, that is
Ps (X) 6= Pt (X). This case is commonly referred as domain adaptation [17]. Additionally, the shift may also occur

on the labels distribution Ps (Y ) 6= Pt (Y ), or in the conditional distribution Ps (Y |X) 6= Pt (Y |X). These cases are
known respectively as target and conditional shift.
In this paper, a focus is given to unsupervised domain
adaptation. Hence, we refer to training and test data as coming from different domains, respectively a source Ds and
target domain Dt . According to [17], the goal of unsupervised domain adaptation is to help the learning of a predictive model on Dt , using knowledge learned in Ds , without
using any labels in the target domain.
In addition, as first remarked by [3], the distance between probability distributions play an important role on the
model’s performance on the target domain. This inspired
various algorithms to explore statistical divergence minimization strategies for domain adaptation. In particular, as
presented in the seminal works of [4], optimal transport can
be used to do so.
Optimal transport is a mathematical theory that was originally devised in the context of transportation of masses under least effort [26]. Since there is a natural association between masses and probability distributions, optimal transport is suited for devising transformations that match different distributions. This theory has two contributions to
domain adaptation: the definition of a transport map T that
matches Ps and Pt , and the definition of a notion of distance
between distributions, the Wasserstein distance.
Among the contributions of optimal transport to domain
adaptation, the Wasserstein distance is of particular interest
in this work. Indeed, it metrizes the space of probability
distributions, hence geometric concepts such as the idea of
barycenters can be extended to this space [1]. This latter
notion is particularly useful for the Multi-Source Domain
Adaptation (MSDA) setting.
The multi-source case in domain adaptation corresponds
to when one has access to data coming from various domains {Dsk }N
k=1 . This case is challenging because one
needs to minimize the distance from each Psk to Pt jointly.
In the following, we provide our contributions, the intuition
for our algorithm, and the paper structure.
Contributions. Our contributions are twofold: (1) we pro-

16785

