Categorical Depth Distribution Network for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Cody Reading Ali Harakeh Julia Chae Steven L. Waslander
University of Toronto Robotics Institute
{cody.reading, nayoung.chae}@mail.utoronto.ca, ali.harakeh@utoronto.ca, stevenw@utias.utoronto.ca

Abstract
Monocular 3D object detection is a key problem for
autonomous vehicles, as it provides a solution with simple configuration compared to typical multi-sensor systems.
The main challenge in monocular 3D detection lies in accurately predicting object depth, which must be inferred from
object and scene cues due to the lack of direct range measurement. Many methods attempt to directly estimate depth
to assist in 3D detection, but show limited performance as a
result of depth inaccuracy. Our proposed solution, Categorical Depth Distribution Network (CaDDN), uses a predicted
categorical depth distribution for each pixel to project rich
contextual feature information to the appropriate depth interval in 3D space. We then use the computationally efficient bird’s-eye-view projection and single-stage detector to
produce the final output detections. We design CaDDN as a
fully differentiable end-to-end approach for joint depth estimation and object detection. We validate our approach on
the KITTI 3D object detection benchmark, where we rank
1st among published monocular methods. We also provide
the first monocular 3D detection results on the newly released Waymo Open Dataset. We provide a code release for
CaDDN which is made available.

1. Introduction
Perception in 3D space is a key component in fields such
as autonomous vehicles and robotics, enabling systems to
understand their environment and react accordingly. LiDAR [21, 50, 51] and stereo [46, 45, 28, 11] sensors have
a long history of use for 3D perception tasks, showing excellent results on 3D object detection benchmarks such as
the KITTI 3D object detection benchmark [16] due to their
ability to generate precise 3D measurements.
Monocular based 3D perception has been pursued simultaneously, motivated by the potential for a low-cost, easyto-deploy solution with a single camera [9, 40, 5, 22]. Performance on the same 3D object detection benchmarks lags
significantly relative to LiDAR and stereo methods, due to
the loss of depth information when scene information is projected onto the image plane.

Figure 1. (a) Input image. (b) Without depth distribution supervision, BEV features from CaDDN suffer from smearing effects.
(c) Depth distribution supervision encourages BEV features from
CaDDN to encode meaningful depth confidence, in which objects
can be accurately detected.

To combat this effect, monocular object detection methods [13, 36, 37, 59] often learn depth explicitly, by training a monocular depth estimation network in a separate
stage. However, depth estimates are consumed directly in
the 3D object detection stage without an understanding of
depth confidence, leading to networks that tend to be overconfident in depth predictions. Over-confidence in depth is
particularly an issue at long range [59], leading to poor localization. Further, depth estimation is separated from 3D
detection during the training phase, preventing depth map
estimates from being optimized for the detection task.
Depth information in image data can also be learned implicitly, by directly transforming features from images to
3D space and finally to bird’s-eye-view (BEV) grids [48,
44]. Implicit methods, however, tend to suffer from feature smearing, wherein similar image features can exist at
multiple locations in the projected space. Feature smearing
increases the difficulty of localizing objects in the scene.
To resolve the identified issues, we propose a monocular
3D object detection method, CaDDN, that enables accurate
3D detection by learning categorical depth distributions. By

8555

