LASR: Learning Articulated Shape Reconstruction from a Monocular Video
∗

Gengshan Yang1 , Deqing Sun2 , Varun Jampani2 , Daniel Vlasic2 , Forrester Cole2 , Huiwen Chang2 ,
Deva Ramanan1 , William T. Freeman2 , and Ce Liu2
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Google Research

t=20

t=40

t=60

t=80

t=4

t=8

t=12

t=16

0°

60°
LASR (Ours)

UMR-horse

A-CSM (camel template)

LASR (Ours)

SMALify horse

PIFuHD

SMPLify-X

VIBE

Figure 1. Top: Sample input video frames and articulated shapes recovered by our method (LASR). Bottom: Comparison with existing
methods, where the input to each method (either video or image) is denoted at the top left, and the shape template being used is denoted
at the bottom right of each result. Many existing approaches on nonrigid shape reconstruction heavily rely on category-specific 3D shape
templates, such as SMPL for human [33, 35] and SMAL for quadrupeds [6, 58]. In contrast, LASR jointly recovers the object shape,
articulation, and camera parameters from a monocular video without using category-specific shape templates. By relying on generic shape
and motion priors, LASR applies to a wider range of nonrigid shapes and yields high-fidelity 3D reconstructions: It recovers both humps
of the camel, which are missing from other methods. It also recovers the silk ribbon of the dancer (as denoted by the blue box), which
confuses SMPLify-X and VIBE as the right arm. Please refer to video results on our project page.

Abstract
Remarkable progress has been made in 3D reconstruction of rigid structures from a video or a collection of images. However, it is still challenging to reconstruct nonrigid
structures from RGB inputs, due to its under-constrained
nature. While template-based approaches, such as parametric shape models, have achieved great success in modeling the “closed world” of known object categories, they
cannot well handle the “open-world” of novel object categories or outlier shapes. In this work, we introduce a
template-free approach to learn 3D shapes from a single video. It adopts an analysis-by-synthesis strategy that
forward-renders object silhouette, optical flow, and pixel
values to compare with video observations, which generates
gradients to adjust the camera, shape and motion parameters. Without using a category-specific shape template, our
method faithfully reconstructs nonrigid 3D structures from
videos of human, animals, and objects of unknown classes.
Our code is available at lasr-google.github.io.

∗ Work done in an internship at Google.

1. Introduction
Perceiving and modeling the geometry and dynamics of
3D entities is an open research problem in computer vision
and has numerous applications. One fundamental challenge
is the under-constrained nature of the problem: from limited 2D image measurements, there exist multiple interpretations of the geometry and motion of the 3D world.
A recent and promising trend for addressing this challenge is exploiting data priors, which have proven quite successful for high-level vision tasks, such as image classification and object detection [13, 31]. However, in contrast to
high-level vision tasks, it is often costly to obtain 3D annotations for real-world entities. For example, SMPL [33]
is learned from thousands of registered 3D scans of human.
SMAL [58] is learned from scans of animal toys and a manually rigged mesh model. It involves nontrivial efforts to
collect such data for an arbitrary object category. Therefore, existing methods often fail to capture objects of novel
or unknown classes, and hallucinate an average 3D structure
based on the category shape prior, as shown in Fig. 1.
Interestingly, remarkable progress has been made in the
field of SLAM and structure-from-motion without relying

15980

