Tuning IR-cut Filter for Illumination-aware Spectral Reconstruction from RGB
Bo Sun1 Junchi Yan2 Xiao Zhou3 Yinqiang Zheng4∗
1
2
University of Southern California, USA
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3
4
Anhui Normal University, China
The University of Tokyo, Japan

Abstract
To reconstruct spectral signals from multi-channel observations, in particular trichromatic RGBs, has recently
emerged as a promising alternative to traditional scanningbased spectral imager. It has been proven that the reconstruction accuracy relies heavily on the spectral response
of the RGB camera in use. To improve accuracy, datadriven algorithms have been proposed to retrieve the best
response curves of existing RGB cameras, or even to design brand new three-channel response curves. Instead, this
paper explores the filter-array based color imaging mechanism of existing RGB cameras, and proposes to design the
IR-cut filter properly for improved spectral recovery, which
stands out as an in-between solution with better trade-off
between reconstruction accuracy and implementation complexity. We further propose a deep learning based spectral reconstruction method, which allows to recover the illumination spectrum as well. Experiment results with both
synthetic and real images under daylight illumination have
shown the benefits of our IR-cut filter tuning method and
our illumination-aware spectral reconstruction method.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging (HSI) records detailed spectral information of scene surfaces. It has become an emerging
scientific tool in a variety of fields, e.g. seed viability estimation [1], wound healing analysis [2], non-contact forensic science [3] and thin-film imaging [4]. However, hyperspectral acquisition systems are usually scanning based, and
remain slow in capture speed [5, 6], computational algorithms are therefore in demand to conquer the limitations of
conventional hyperspectral imagers.
Recently, methods recovering spectra from a single RGB
image have been trend-setting and promising [7, 8], dictionary based approaches and deep convolutional neural
∗ Corresponding author (yqzheng@ai.u-tokyo.ac.jp).

Figure 1. Infrared (IR) blocking mechanism of commodity digital
color cameras. An IR-cut filter (b) is usually placed in front of the
color sensor (a), which can be easily removed. After removing the
IR-cut filter, the silicon based sensor can perceive infrared light
(c). By measuring the transmittance of the IR-cut filters from different camera makers (d), it is found that the cut-off wavelength
can vary a lot, which might affect spectral reconstruction from
RGB. Inspired by this mechanism, we propose to design the IR-cut
filter in the first place for better and stable spectral upsampling.

networks (CNN) have shown their efficacy in hurdling
the non-linear mapping from RGB values to the spectra
[9, 10, 11, 12]. It has been proven that the spectral reconstruction accuracy relies heavily on the spectral response of
the RGB camera in use [8]. Inspired by this key observation, data-driven algorithms have been proposed to retrieve
the best camera spectral sensitivity (CSS) curves of existing RGB cameras [13], or even to design brand new threechannel response curves [14].
However, filter set selection methods [8, 13] can only select
from existing CSS databases, and we question the appropriateness of selecting from CSS of commercial cameras
designed for human color perception for spectral upsampling. As shown in Fig.1 (d), some IR-cut filters embedded in commercial RGB cameras tend to cut off a lot of
energy beyond 650nm, which will definitely undermine the
efforts in [9, 13, 8] to reconstruct spectra in the 420∼720nm
visible range from RGB. In particular, the algorithms have
to guess the spectral distribution in the 650∼720nm range
on the basis of the observations in the 420∼650nm range,

84

