Conditional Bures Metric for Domain Adaptation
You-Wei Luo1 Chuan-Xian Ren1,2∗
1
School of Mathematics, Sun Yat-Sen University, China
2
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
luoyw28@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, rchuanx@mail.sysu.edu.cn

Abstract
As a vital problem in classification-oriented transfer, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) has attracted
widespread attention in recent years. Previous UDA methods assume the marginal distributions of different domains
are shifted while ignoring the discriminant information in
the label distributions. This leads to classification performance degeneration in real applications. In this work, we
focus on the conditional distribution shift problem which
is of great concern to current conditional invariant models. We aim to seek a kernel covariance embedding for conditional distribution which remains yet unexplored. Theoretically, we propose the Conditional Kernel Bures (CKB)
metric for characterizing conditional distribution discrepancy, and derive an empirical estimation for the CKB metric
without introducing the implicit kernel feature map. It provides an interpretable approach to understand the knowledge transfer mechanism. The established consistency theory of the empirical estimation provides a theoretical guarantee for convergence. A conditional distribution matching
network is proposed to learn the conditional invariant and
discriminative features for UDA. Extensive experiments and
analysis show the superiority of our proposed model.

1. Introduction
Large-scale data with sufficient annotations are vital
sources of machine learning. However, the data collected from the real-world scenarios are usually unlabeled and
the manual annotations are expensive. Recent advances in
transfer learning yields plenty of methods for dealing with
the shortage of labeled data. These methods aim to transfer
the knowledge on a labeled source domain to a target domain with few or no annotations, such setting is also known
as domain adaptation [27].
The most common assumption in Unsupervised Domain
Adaptation (UDA) is that the labeled source domain and
∗ Corresponding Author.

Cls. 1 Cls. 2

Marginal Metric

Source

e.g., MMD

Target

PX
PXs  PXt

Marginal Embedding

After Adaptation
Conditional Embedding
PX |Y


PXs |Y  PXt |Y

Before Adaptation

Conditional Metric
e.g., CKB

Figure 1. Illustration of the conditional shift problem. Previous
metrics that only consider the marginal distribution discrepancy
may lead to a misaligned conditional distribution, i.e., the red circle region. On the bottom, the class-level alignment is achieved by
exploiting the conditional distribution embedding metric.

unlabeled target domain have the same feature spaces, but
s
different marginal distributions [27], i.e., X s = X t , PX
6=
t
PX . This assumption is also called covariate shift [29] and
sample selection bias [35]. Ben-David et al. [2] give a theoretical insight into the domain adaptation problem, they
show that the risk of the target domain is mainly bounded by
the risk of the source domain and the discrepancy between
distributions of two domains. Inspired by this theory, many
methods are proposed to mitigate the discrepancy between
feature distributions of the source and target domains, e.g.,
explicit discrepancy minimization via Maximum Mean Discrepancy (MMD) [13, 21], domain invariant feature learning [26], Optimal Transport (OT) based feature matching
[7, 20, 37], manifold based feature alignment [10], statistical moment matching [21, 32] and adversarial domain adaptation [9]. These methods are proved to be effective in minimizing the marginal discrepancy and alleviating the domain
shift problem. However, this assumption may lead to the
omission of discriminant information in the label distributions, which is described in Figure 1. Recent advancements
[19, 22, 24] show that the adaptation models will be more
discriminative on the target domain if the target label information (e.g., pseudo labels) is explored carefully.
Extended from the marginal shift assumption, the con-

13989

