MeGA-CDA: Memory Guided Attention for Category-Aware
Unsupervised Domain Adaptive Object Detection
Vibashan VS1 * † , Vikram Gupta2 * , Poojan Oza1 * , Vishwanath A. Sindagi1 * ,
Vishal M. Patel1
1
Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA
2

Mercedes-Benz Research and Development India

{vvishnu2,poza2,vishwanathsindagi,vpatel36}@jhu.edu,vikram.gupta@daimler.com

Abstract
Existing approaches for unsupervised domain adaptive object detection perform feature alignment via adversarial training. While these methods achieve reasonable improvements in performance, they typically perform
category-agnostic domain alignment, thereby resulting in
negative transfer of features. To overcome this issue, in
this work, we attempt to incorporate category information
into the domain adaptation process by proposing Memory
Guided Attention for Category-Aware Domain Adaptation
(MeGA-CDA). The proposed method consists of employing
category-wise discriminators to ensure category-aware feature alignment for learning domain-invariant discriminative features. However, since the category information is
not available for the target samples, we propose to generate memory-guided category-specific attention maps which
are then used to route the features appropriately to the corresponding category discriminator. The proposed method is
evaluated on several benchmark datasets and is shown to
outperform existing approaches.

1. Introduction
Object detectors [49, 11, 15, 14, 28, 38] are a critical
part in the inference pipeline of several applications like
autonomous navigation, video surveillance, image analysis
etc. Due to this, object detection has received signiﬁcant
interest from the research community. Recent works like
[15, 28, 38] have achieved exceedingly good performance
on several benchmark datasets [9, 8, 13, 27]. However,
these approaches suffer from severe degradation of performance when evaluated on images that are sampled from a
different distribution as compared to that of training images.
Such scenarios are encountered frequently in the real world.
* Equal contribution
† Work performed during internship at Mercedes-Benz Research and

Development India

Source domain

Target domain

Class A

Class B

Global Domain
Adaptation

Category-Aware +
Global Domain
Adaptation

Global Domain Adaptation

Category-Aware Domain Adaptation

Figure 1. Performing global domain adaptation alone results in potential negative transfer of features. To mitigate this issue, we employ additional category-aware adaptation.

For example, consider the case of self-driving cars where
the detectors are typically trained on datasets obtained from
one particular city or environmental condition (belonging to
source domain) and are expected to be deployed in different city or environment (belonging to target domain). Due
to this, it is crucial to develop approaches that enable better
generalization of detectors.
One approach to address this issue is through unsupervised domain adaptation [6, 44, 40], where the goal is to
utilize labeled source domain data and unlabeled target domain data to adapt object detector and improve the performance on the unlabeled target domain data. To address
this issue, typically these methods attempt to learn domaininvariant features by performing feature alignment between
the source and target images. Based on the theoretical insights that minimizing the divergence between the domains
reduces the upper-bound error on the target domain [4], they
achieve the feature alignment through adversarial training.
Although these approaches result in considerable improvements, they perform the domain alignment in a categoryagnostic way. That is, they match the global marginal distributions of the two domains without considering the category information. This may lead to cases where the target domain samples are incorrectly aligned with the source-

4516

