M3DSSD: Monocular 3D Single Stage Object Detector
Shujie Luo1 Hang Dai3∗ Ling Shao3,4 Yong Ding2∗
1
College of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University
2
School of Micro-Nano Electronics, Zhejiang University
3
Mohamed bin Zayed University of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
4
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Abu Dhabi, UAE
*Corresponding authors{hang.dai@mbzuai.ac.ae, dingy@vlsi.zju.edu.cn}.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a Monocular 3D Single Stage
object Detector (M3DSSD) with feature alignment and
asymmetric non-local attention. Current anchor-based
monocular 3D object detection methods suffer from feature mismatching. To overcome this, we propose a twostep feature alignment approach. In the first step, the shape
alignment is performed to enable the receptive field of the
feature map to focus on the pre-defined anchors with high
confidence scores. In the second step, the center alignment is used to align the features at 2D/3D centers. Further, it is often difficult to learn global information and
capture long-range relationships, which are important for
the depth prediction of objects. Therefore, we propose
a novel asymmetric non-local attention block with multiscale sampling to extract depth-wise features. The proposed M3DSSD achieves significantly better performance
than the monocular 3D object detection methods on the
KITTI dataset, in both 3D object detection and bird’s eye
view tasks. The code is released at https://github.
com/mumianyuxin/M3DSSD.

1. Introduction
Three-dimensional (3D) object detection enables a machine to sense its surrounding environment by detecting the
location and category of objects around it. Therefore, 3D
object detection plays a crucial role in systems that interact with the real world, such as autonomous vehicles and
robots. The goal of 3D object detection is to generate 3D
Bounding Boxes (BBoxes) parameterized by size, location,
and orientation to locate the detected objects. Most existing methods rely heavily on LiDAR [28, 32, 35, 34, 33],
because LiDAR can generate point cloud data with highprecision depth information, which enhances the accuracy
of 3D object detection. However, the high cost and short

service life make it difficult for LiDAR to be widely used
in practice. Although binocular camera-based methods
[21, 30, 17, 11, 7] achieve good detection results, this is
still not a cheap option, and there are often difficulties in
calibrating binocular cameras. In contrast, the monocular
camera is cost-effective, very easy to assemble, and can provide a wealth of visual information for 3D object detection.
Monocular 3D object detection has vast potential for applications, such as self-driving vehicles and delivery robots.
Monocular 3D object detection is an extremely challenging task without the depth provided during the imaging process. To address this, researchers have made various attempts on the depth estimation from monocular images. For
instance, [5, 2] utilize CAD models to assist in estimating
the depth of the vehicle. Similarly, a pre-trained depth estimation model is adopted to estimate the depth information
of the scene in [37, 1, 40]. However, such methods directly
or indirectly used 3D depth ground-truth data in monocular 3D object detection. Meanwhile, the methods [3, 12]
without depth estimation can also achieve high accuracy in
the 3D object detection task. In this paper, we propose a 3D
object detector for monocular images that achieves state-ofthe-art performance on KITTI benchmark [15].
Humans can perceive how close the objects in a monocular image are from the camera. Why is that? When the human brain interprets the depth of an object, it compares the
object with all other objects and the surrounding environment to obtain the difference in visual effect caused by the
relative position relationship. For objects of the same size,
the bigger, the closer from a fixed perspective. Inspired by
this, we propose a novel Asymmetric Non-local Attention
Block (ANAB) to compute the response at a position as a
weighted sum of the features at all positions. Inspired by
[10, 46], we use both the local features in multiple scales
and the features that can represent the global information to
learn the depth-wise features. The multi-scale features can
reduce computational costs. The attentive maps in multiple
scales shows an explicit correlation between the sampling

6145

