3D Graph Anatomy Geometry-Integrated Network for Pancreatic Mass
Segmentation, Diagnosis, and Quantitative Patient Management
Tianyi Zhao∗1,2 , Kai Cao∗3 , Jiawen Yao1 , Isabella Nogues4 , Le Lu1 , Lingyun Huang5 , Jing Xiao5 ,
Zhaozheng Yin2 , Ling Zhang1
1
PAII Inc., 2 Stony Brook University, 3 Changhai Hospital, 4 Harvard University, 5 Ping An Technology

Abstract

1. Introduction
Pancreatic cancer is the third leading cause of cancerrelated deaths in the United States [7]. Furthermore, it
∗ equal contribution

Malignant

Malignant
Potential

No Malignant
Potential

CP

SCN

PDAC

AC

IPMN

Data distribution

The pancreatic disease taxonomy includes ten types of
masses (tumors or cysts) [20, 8]. Previous work focuses on
developing segmentation or classification methods only for
certain mass types. Differential diagnosis of all mass types
is clinically highly desirable [20] but has not been investigated using an automated image understanding approach.
We exploit the feasibility to distinguish pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) from the nine other nonPDAC
masses using multi-phase CT imaging. Both image appearance and the 3D organ-mass geometry relationship
are critical. We propose a holistic segmentation-meshclassification network (SMCN) to provide patient-level diagnosis, by fully utilizing the geometry and location information, which is accomplished by combining the anatomical structure and the semantic detection-by-segmentation
network. SMCN learns the pancreas and mass segmentation
task and builds an anatomical correspondence-aware organ
mesh model by progressively deforming a pancreas prototype on the raw segmentation mask (i.e., mask-to-mesh). A
new graph-based residual convolutional network (GraphResNet), whose nodes fuse the information of the mesh
model and feature vectors extracted from the segmentation
network, is developed to produce the patient-level differential classification results. Extensive experiments on 661 patients’ CT scans (five phases per patient) show that SMCN
can improve the mass segmentation and detection accuracy
compared to the strong baseline method nnUNet (e.g., for
nonPDAC, Dice: 0.611 vs. 0.478; detection rate: 89% vs.
70%), achieve similar sensitivity and specificity in differentiating PDAC and nonPDAC as expert radiologists (i.e.,
94% and 90%), and obtain results comparable to a multimodality test [20] that combines clinical, imaging, and
molecular testing for clinical management of patients.

Cancer Risk of Masses (Tumors or Cysts)

DC
MCN
PNET

RARE

SPT

Surgery

High-grade?

Yes

No

Monitoring

Discharge

Patient Management

Figure 1. Disease taxonomy of the ten types of pancreatic masses
(tumors, cysts). Mass type diagnosis determines the clinical malignancy indications that lead to the proper patient risk stratification and management. The purple histogram bars represent their
relative frequencies. All images are in the arterial-late CT phase.

has the poorest prognosis among all solid malignancies,
with a 5-year survival rate ∼ 10% [7, 2]. Early diagnosis is crucial, as it can potentially increase the five-year
survival rate to ∼ 50% [5]. The clinical management of
patients with pancreatic disease is based on the potential
of the mass to become an invasive cancer. Unlike masses
in other organs, pancreatic masses often cannot be reached
precisely via needle biopsy due to the pancreas’s deep location in the abdomen and the complex network of surrounding organs and vessels. Therefore, reliable imaging-based
diagnosis is critical to identifying patients who truly require cancer treatment (e.g., surgery) in a timely fashion,
while avoiding unnecessary iatrogenic morbidity. Developing deep learning methods to detect masses, identify ma113743

