Stay Positive: Non-Negative Image Synthesis for Augmented Reality
Katie Luo* Guandao Yang* Wenqi Xian Harald Haraldsson
Bharath Hariharan Serge Belongie
Cornell University

Abstract
In applications such as optical see-through and projector augmented reality, producing images amounts to solving non-negative image generation, where one can only add
light to an existing image. Most image generation methods,
however, are ill-suited to this problem setting, as they make
the assumption that one can assign arbitrary color to each
pixel. In fact, naive application of existing methods fails
even in simple domains such as MNIST digits, since one
cannot create darker pixels by adding light. We know, however, that the human visual system can be fooled by optical
illusions involving certain spatial configurations of brightness and contrast. Our key insight is that one can leverage
this behavior to produce high quality images with negligible artifacts. For example, we can create the illusion of
darker patches by brightening surrounding pixels. We propose a novel optimization procedure to produce images that
satisfy both semantic and non-negativity constraints. Our
approach can incorporate existing state-of-the-art methods,
and exhibits strong performance in a variety of tasks including image-to-image translation and style transfer.

1. Introduction
The design of images that combine views of the real
world with aligned, overlaid content remains a key challenge on the path toward widespread adoption of augmented
reality devices. Consider the problem of image generation in an optical see-through (OST) or projector AR device, where the image is formed by combining light from
the real world with light generated by a projector; see
Fig. 1. Despite the success of modern image generation
methods in applications including deep image generation
[39, 40, 37], image synthesis [62, 83], image-to-image
translation [87, 51, 35], and style transfer [33, 74], all of
the aforementioned methods assume full control over each
pixel’s color. This assumption, however, is not realistic in
the OST or projector AR setting where one can add, but
* Denotes equal contribution.

Optical See-Through
Optical combiner

Real World

Projector AR

Virtual World
(Projected)

Virtual World
(Projected)

Real World

Figure 1. Illustration of the image formation process in augmented
reality settings. Left: optical see-through setting. Right: projector
AR setting. In both settings, the image is created by adding light
to existing light sources from the real world, which motivates the
non-negative image generation problem.

not subtract, light. In fact, naively applying any of the current state-of-the-art image generation methods will result in
low-quality images in conflict with the underlying image,
often riddled with ghosting artifacts.
In this work, we focus on the task of image synthesis
under a non-negativity constraint, which limits the types of
images that can be generated. Since we restrict ourselves to
adding a non-negative residual to the input image, we would
in theory only be able to generate images in our half-space.
Intuitively, one cannot add black-framed glasses onto Brad
Pitt’s face, since doing so would require us to attenuate the
light in the desired area, i.e., adding negative light, which
is not physically possible. With such limitations, current
hardware solutions compromise by relying on dimming the
incoming light instead, using methods such as a sunglasseslike effect for OST and a darkened room for projector AR.
In fact, current solutions use very dark tints, admitting only
15 20% [22, 58] of the light from the original scene. While
this delivers increased control over the pixel dynamic range,
blocking too much light in the scene limits the kind of settings in which OST or projector AR can be applied.
Without the ability to subtract light or dim the scene, is it
still possible to succeed in image-to-image translation tasks
such as turning a day image into a night image? If humans
perceived luminance and chrominance in an objective manner, then this would be virtually impossible. Fortunately,
the human visual system is tolerant to a wide range of photometric deviations from a “true” image [70, 78], as illus110050

