Synthesize-It-Classifier: Learning a Generative Classifier through
Recurrent Self-analysis
Arghya Pal, Raphaël C.-W. Phan, KokSheik Wong
School of Information Technology, Monash University, Malaysia campus
arghya.pal@monash.edu

ImageNet

Cifar 10

LSUN (Church Class)

Figure 1: Qualitative Results of STIC Method: (best viewed while zoomed-in): We show qualitative results on the ImageNet
[5], CIFAR 10 [18] and LSUN [34] datasets. (1) ImageNet: we show results of cheeseburger, chicken and mushroom classes.
(2) CIFAR 10: the STIC synthesises photo-realistic images of cat, automobile, frog, truck, dog and deer classes (top-bottom
rows). Variation of style (illumination, background) and content (pose, shape) can be seen for each of the classes. (3) LSUN:
We show visible geometric regularities in house shape, dome-like structures, and other outdoor entities (sky, illumination).
All images are generated by using ⌧ = 10 passes. The STIC methodology description is in Sec. 3.

Abstract
We show the generative capability of an image classifier
network by synthesizing high-resolution, photo-realistic,
and diverse images at scale. The overall methodology,
called Synthesize-It-Classifier (STIC), does not require an
explicit generator network to estimate the density of the
data distribution and sample images from that, but instead
uses the classifier’s knowledge of the boundary to perform
gradient ascent w.r.t. class logits and then synthesizes images using the Gram Matrix Metropolis Adjusted Langevin
Algorithm (GRMALA) by drawing on a blank canvas. During training, the classifier iteratively uses these synthesized
images as fake samples and re-estimates the class boundary in a recurrent fashion to improve both the classification accuracy and quality of synthetic images. The STIC
shows that mixing of the hard fake samples (i.e. those synthesized by the one-hot class conditioning), and the soft fake
samples (which are synthesized as a convex combination of
classes, i.e. a mixup of classes [36]) improves class interpolation. We demonstrate an Attentive-STIC network that

shows iterative drawing of synthesized images on the ImageNet dataset that has thousands of classes. In addition,
we introduce the synthesis using a class conditional score
classifier (Score-STIC) instead of a normal image classifier
and show improved results on several real world datasets,
i.e. ImageNet, LSUN and CIFAR 10.

1. Introduction
Discriminative classifiers p(y|x) and generative models p(x) are conventionally considered as domains complementary to each other, yet the distinction between them
is blurring. A generative model p(x) [26] appears as a
data generation process that captures the underlying density of a data distribution, whereas the discriminative classifier learns complex feature representations of images with
a view to learn the class boundaries for subsequent classification. There is a recent growth of interest in Machine
Learning (ML) and Computer Vision (CV) [15, 20, 7] to use
a discriminative classifier and then synthesize novel samples from its understanding of class boundary information.
To elaborate, in the model of [7], the classifier p(y|x) log-

5161

