PISE: Person Image Synthesis and Editing with Decoupled GAN
Jinsong Zhang1 , Kun Li1∗, Yu-Kun Lai2 , Jingyu Yang1
1
Tianjin University, China 2 Cardiff University, United Kingdom
Abstract
Person image synthesis, e.g., pose transfer, is a challenging problem due to large variation and occlusion. Existing
methods have difficulties predicting reasonable invisible regions and fail to decouple the shape and style of clothing,
which limits their applications on person image editing. In
this paper, we propose PISE, a novel two-stage generative
model for Person Image Synthesis and Editing, which is
able to generate realistic person images with desired poses,
textures, or semantic layouts. For human pose transfer, we
first synthesize a human parsing map aligned with the target
pose to represent the shape of clothing by a parsing generator, and then generate the final image by an image generator. To decouple the shape and style of clothing, we propose
joint global and local per-region encoding and normalization to predict the reasonable style of clothing for invisible regions. We also propose spatial-aware normalization
to retain the spatial context relationship in the source image. The results of qualitative and quantitative experiments
demonstrate the superiority of our model on human pose
transfer. Besides, the results of texture transfer and region
editing show that our model can be applied to person image editing. The code is available for research purposes at
https://github.com/Zhangjinso/PISE.

1. Introduction
Person image synthesis is a challenging problem in computer vision and computer graphics, which has great application potentials in image editing, video generation, virtual
try-on, etc. Human pose transfer [16, 20, 23, 24, 32], i.e.,
synthesizing a new image for the same person in a target
pose, is an active topic in person image synthesis.
Recently, Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [4]
achieve great success in human pose transfer. Many methods directly learn the mapping from the source image and
pose to the target image using neural networks [32, 23,
24, 12]. Most of these methods utilize a two-branch (pose
branch and image branch) framework to transfer the feature
of the source image from the source pose to the target pose.
However, by taking keypoints as the pose representation,
∗ Corresponding author

Human Pose Transfer

Texture Transfer for Pants

Region Editing

Figure 1. Our model PISE allows to transfer new pose or texture
to a single person image, and also enables region editing.

it is difficult to predict a sharp and reasonable image with
sparse correspondences when the source pose and the target pose have large differences. To deal with this problem,
flow-based methods [13, 20] estimate an appearance flow
to obtain denser correspondences, which is used to warp
the source image or its feature to align with the target pose.
The final image delivered by refining the warped image or
decoding the warped image feature is a rearrangement of
the source image elements. Thus, the generated image can
preserve details of the source image, but the invisible region
due to occlusion is not satisfactorily recovered. To predict
invisible regions, some methods [16, 29] introduce human
parsing maps to human pose transfer. The human parsing
map provides semantic correspondence to synthesize the final image and enables applications of person image editing.
However, these methods cannot disentangle the shape and
style information (e.g., the category and texture of clothing) and fail to preserve spatial context relationships. For

7982

