Interpolation-based Semi-supervised Learning for Object Detection
Jisoo Jeong1 Vikas Verma2,3 Minsung Hyun1,4 Juho Kannala2 Nojun Kwak1 ∗
1
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, 2 Aalto University, Finland,
3
Mila - Québec Artificial Intelligence Institute, Montréal, Canada, 4 SK hynix

Abstract
Despite the data labeling cost for the object detection
tasks being substantially more than that of the classification tasks, semi-supervised learning methods for object detection have not been studied much. In this paper, we
propose an Interpolation-based Semi-supervised learning
method for object Detection (ISD), which considers and
solves the problems caused by applying conventional Interpolation Regularization (IR) directly to object detection.
We divide the output of the model into two types according to the objectness scores of both original patches that
are mixed in IR. Then, we apply a separate loss suitable for
each type in an unsupervised manner. The proposed losses
dramatically improve the performance of semi-supervised
learning as well as supervised learning. In the supervised learning setting, our method improves the baseline
methods by a significant margin. In the semi-supervised
learning setting, our algorithm improves the performance
on a benchmark dataset (PASCAL VOC and MSCOCO) in
a benchmark architecture (SSD). Our code is available at
https://github.com/soo89/ISD-SSD

1. Introduction
A dataset for object detection is much harder to create
than the one for classification. While there is only one class
in a single image for the classification task, there are multiple objects with different class labels in a single image for
the object detection task. Therefore, the dataset for supervised object detection requires a pair of a class label and
bounding box information for each object. Labeling each
object takes more than a few seconds, and creating these
datasets requires hundreds of hours [19, 1, 9].
Due to the higher time and resource complexity for creating object detection datasets, recently, methods for learning with weakly labeled data (DW )1 or unlabeled data
∗ corresponding author
NL
j
j Mi
L = (Ii , yi )i=1 where yi = (class , bbox )j=1 , DW =
Mi
NU
NW
j
(Ii , yi )i=1 where yi = (class )j=1 , and DU = (Ii )i=1 . Here, NX is
the number of images, and Mi is the number of objects in the image Ii .
1D

Figure 1. Supervised Learning (SL), Semi-supervised Learning
(SSL), Weakly-Supervised Learning (WSL) and Weakly SemiSupervised Learning (WSSL) for Object Detection. In this paper,
we deal with SSL.

(DU ) have been studied as opposed to learning with the
labeled data (DL ) only. There are mainly three types
of object detection methods: weakly-supervised, semisupervised, and weakly-semi-supervised learning. Weaklysupervised learning trains a model with a dataset that has
only class information but no location information (DW )
[34, 20, 12, 28, 13]. On the other hand, weakly-semisupervised learning is a learning method which uses DW
as well as DL [22, 30]. Weakly-semi-supervised detector improves its performance compared to that of weaklysupervised learning, but it still needs to label classes for
DW . In the setting of semi-supervised object detection, instead of DW , unlabeled data DU is utilized in combination
with the labeled data (DL ) [29, 18, 11] (See Fig. 1.).
In this paper, we address the semi-supervised object detection problem and propose a new method called
Interpolation-based Semi-supervised learning for object
Detection (ISD) whose loss terms can also be applied to
the supervised learning framework. Interpolation Regularization (IR) which mixes different images and learns

11602

