Task-Aware Variational Adversarial Active Learning
Kwanyoung Kim1,4 , Dongwon Park1 , Kwang In Kim2,3 , Se Young Chun1,2,5,†
1
Dept of EE, UNIST, 2 AIGS, UNIST, 3 Dept of CSE, UNIST, 4 Dept of Bio & Brain Eng, KAIST,
5
Dept of ECE, INMC, Seoul National University, South Korea
cubeyoung@kaist.ac.kr, dong1@unist.ac.kr, kimki@unist.ac.kr, sychun@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Often, labeling large amount of data is challenging due
to high labeling cost limiting the application domain of
deep learning techniques. Active learning (AL) tackles this
by querying the most informative samples to be annotated
among unlabeled pool. Two promising directions for AL that
have been recently explored are task-agnostic approach to
select data points that are far from the current labeled pool
and task-aware approach that relies on the perspective of
task model. Unfortunately, the former does not exploit structures from tasks and the latter does not seem to well-utilize
overall data distribution. Here, we propose task-aware variational adversarial AL (TA-VAAL) that modifies task-agnostic
VAAL, that considered data distribution of both label and
unlabeled pools, by relaxing task learning loss prediction
to ranking loss prediction and by using ranking conditional
generative adversarial network to embed normalized ranking
loss information on VAAL. Our proposed TA-VAAL outperforms state-of-the-arts on various benchmark datasets for
classifications with balanced / imbalanced labels as well as
semantic segmentation and its task-aware and task-agnostic
AL properties were confirmed with our in-depth analyses.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable performance in
various computer vision tasks such as classification [18, 13],
object detection [27, 26], and semantic segmentation [19, 4]
due to massive datasets with annotations such as ImageNet
for image classification [7] and PASCAL VOC for classification, detection, segmentation [9]. Obtaining good annotations is challenging and has often been a large-scale
project. Moreover, there are often cases where labeling massive amount of data is even more challenging or infeasible
due to high labeling cost such as labeling by experts [8] or
long labeling time per large-scale sample such as videos [1]
or pathology images [3]. Labeling cost seems to be a factor
to limit the scope of applicability of deep learning to more
†Corresponding author.

research areas and more institutes with less labeling budget.
Active learning (AL) is one of the approaches to overcoming limited labeling budget by selecting data to label
for the best possible performance [30, 11]. AL has been
widely investigated in relatively traditional machine learning
settings [5, 34, 2, 21, 23, 30, 14, 20, 36, 32, 25] and recently
in deep learning settings [11, 29, 38, 40, 35, 31, 16].
Existing AL approaches can be categorized into two
groups: Task-agnostic (or distribution-based) and task-aware
methods. Suppose that our goal is to learn a functional
model f that maps from the input domain X to the corresponding output domain Y, each equipped with the corresponding probability distributions P (x) and P (y). Taskagnostic approaches select data instances to label by exploiting the input distribution P (x). These are especially
effective in identifying influential points, e.g. these lying in
high-density regions such that once labeled, large numbers of
neighboring samples can benefit from propagating these labels [20, 39, 29, 31]. A major drawback of these approaches
is that they do not take account how outputs y depend on
inputs x: For example, for classifications, it would be more
effective to label data instances that lie in the vicinity of
decision boundaries than these lying in high-density regions
where most data points belong to the same class.
Task-aware approaches explicitly address this limitation
by modeling such dependence, e.g. via estimating the conditional distribution P (y|x). These are effective in identifying difficult data points (e.g. these close to decision boundaries) [36, 14, 11, 35, 40]. However, they do not directly
consider how the labeled samples make influence on the entire dataset. Further, as P (y|x) is unknown a priori, the label
selection process has to rely on the learner f as a surrogate
to P (y|x) but such a learner might be inaccurate at the early
stage of AL, thereby providing a poor estimate of P (y|x).
Recently, there was an attempt (SRAAL) to combine the
task-aware and task-agnostic approaches with a uncertainty
indicator and with a unified representation for both labeled
and unlabeled data [42]. Even though SRAAL achieved
state-of-the-art performance, it did not use the information
about the loss that is directly related to the given task [40]

8166

