DARCNN: Domain Adaptive Region-based Convolutional Neural Network for
Unsupervised Instance Segmentation in Biomedical Images
Joy Hsu
Stanford University

Wah Chiu
Stanford University

Serena Yeung
Stanford University

joycj@stanford.edu

wahc@stanford.edu

syyeung@stanford.edu

Abstract
In the biomedical domain, there is an abundance of
dense, complex data where objects of interest may be challenging to detect or constrained by limits of human knowledge. Labelled domain specific datasets for supervised
tasks are often expensive to obtain, and furthermore discovery of novel distinct objects may be desirable for unbiased scientific discovery. Therefore, we propose leveraging the wealth of annotations in benchmark computer vision
datasets to conduct unsupervised instance segmentation for
diverse biomedical datasets. The key obstacle is thus overcoming the large domain shift from common to biomedical
images. We propose a Domain Adaptive Region-based Convolutional Neural Network (DARCNN), that adapts knowledge of object definition from COCO, a large labelled vision
dataset, to multiple biomedical datasets. We introduce a domain separation module, a self-supervised representation
consistency loss, and an augmented pseudo-labelling stage
within DARCNN to effectively perform domain adaptation
across such large domain shifts. We showcase DARCNN’s
performance for unsupervised instance segmentation on numerous biomedical datasets.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art machine learning methods have accomplished a wide variety of impressive tasks including instance segmentation, yet much of their progress in the real
world is limited to supervised methods with large, labelled
datasets. In areas such as the biomedical domain, this is
particularly problematic, as the prerequisite labels that accompany the complex data are often time consuming to obtain. In addition, we may also be constrained by human
knowledge — biomedical data often contains unknown objects that scientists have yet to uncover, and therefore cannot
accurately annotate.
Thus, there exists a need for methods that can produce instance segmentation for unlabelled datasets. We
tackle this problem through solving the unsupervised do-

Figure 1. a) Prior domain adaptation methods for biomedical images tackle small domain shifts by using similar labelled biomedical datasets as sources to adapt to specific target datasets. b) DARCNN uses a common benchmark dataset as source and can adapt
to a wide range of biomedical images.

main adaptation task, in which we use a source dataset
with instance segmentation annotations to transfer knowledge and perform instance segmentation on target datasets.
Our choice of source dataset is motivated by the abundance of benchmark datasets in the vision field depicting
common objects. We explore leveraging the large amount
of labelled vision data in Common Objects in Context
(COCO) [20] to achieve instance segmentation in diverse,
natural biomedical images where annotations are difficult
to obtain. Our main contributions include overcoming the
large domain shift between natural images and biomedical
images, and introducing a method for unsupervised instance
segmentation on a wide range of biomedical datasets.
Past work tackling this problem in the biomedical
field have depended on the availability of similar labelled
biomedical datasets for the unsupervised instance segmentation task (see Figure 1), but it is not always feasible to find
and annotate similar images. For these prior domain adaptation methods that focus on small domain shifts, joint imagelevel and feature-level adaptation approaches and object-

1003

