Fine-Grained Shape-Appearance Mutual Learning for
Cloth-Changing Person Re-Identification
Peixian Hong1,5# , Tao Wu1,5# , Ancong Wu1∗ , Xintong Han4 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
Huya Inc, China
5
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
{hongpx,wutao63}@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,wuanc@mail.sysu.edu.cn,hanxintong@huya.com,wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Recently, person re-identification (Re-ID) has achieved
great progress. However, current methods largely depend
on color appearance, which is not reliable when a person
changes the clothes. Cloth-changing Re-ID is challenging
since pedestrian images with clothes change exhibit large
intra-class variation and small inter-class variation. Some
significant features for identification are embedded in unobvious body shape differences across pedestrians. To explore
such body shape cues for cloth-changing Re-ID, we propose
a Fine-grained Shape-Appearance Mutual learning framework (FSAM), a two-stream framework that learns finegrained discriminative body shape knowledge in a shape
stream and transfers it to an appearance stream to complement the cloth-unrelated knowledge in the appearance
features. Specifically, in the shape stream, FSAM learns
fine-grained discriminative mask with the guidance of identities and extracts fine-grained body shape features by a
pose-specific multi-branch network. To complement clothunrelated shape knowledge in the appearance stream, dense
interactive mutual learning is performed across low-level
and high-level features to transfer knowledge from shape
stream to appearance stream, which enables the appearance stream to be deployed independently without extra
computation for mask estimation. We evaluated our method
on benchmark cloth-changing Re-ID datasets and achieved
the start-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) aims at matching the
same person across different cameras. Advanced meth# Equal contribution. Work done during the internship at Huya Inc.
* Corresponding author.

濜濗澳濄

濴瀃瀃濸濴瀅濴瀁濶濸

瀀濴瀆濾

濜濗澳濄

濜濗澳濄

濜濗澳濄

濜濗澳濅

濜濗澳濅

濍濷濼瀆瀆濼瀀濼濿濴瀅
濍瀆濼瀀濼濿濴瀅

澻濴澼澳濗濼瀆濶瀅濼瀀濼瀁濴瀇濼瀉濸澳瀆濻濴瀃濸澳濷濼濹濹濸瀅濸瀁濶濸澳濼瀁澳濹濼瀁濸激濺瀅濴濼瀁濸濷澳瀀濴瀆濾瀆

濜濗澳濆

濜濗澳濇

澻濄澼澳濦濼瀀濼濿濴瀅澳瀆濻濴瀃濸澳濵濸瀇瀊濸濸瀁澳瀃濸濷濸瀆瀇瀅濼濴瀁瀆

濜濗澳濈

濜濗澳濈
澻濅澼澳濣瀂瀆濸澳瀉濴瀅濼濴瀇濼瀂瀁

澻濆澼澳濠濼瀆瀆濼瀁濺澳瀃濴瀅瀇瀆

澻濵澼澳濣瀅瀂濵濿濸瀀瀆澳瀂濹澳濴瀃瀃濿瀌濼瀁濺澳濸瀆瀇濼瀀濴瀇濸濷澳瀀濴瀆濾瀆澳瀊濼瀇濻澳濸瀅瀅瀂瀅瀆

Figure 1. Examples of images and masks in cloth-changing Re-ID.
Color appearance under cloth-changing suffers from large intraclass variation and small inter-class variation, while body shape
contains cloth-unrelated clues.

ods have achieved high performance with deep learning
[1, 34, 42, 45, 40, 53]. However, most current works largely
rely on color appearance based on the assumption that the
same person wears the same clothes in short term. Such
limitation brings dramatic performance decrease in the situation that persons change their clothes, since different persons with similar clothes may be wrongly matched. To
address this problem, we study the cloth-changing Re-ID
problem [46, 29, 48, 13].
As the color appearance becomes unreliable in clothchanging Re-ID, it is critical to learn cloth-unrelated features. Under moderate clothing change, the body shape
does not change significantly for the same person and it is
an important cue for identification. As shown in Figure 1
(a), the manually labeled fine-grained masks can capture
detailed shape differences between pedestrians. In practical situations without manual label, human mask can be
estimated by pretrained human parsing models. However,

10513

