Rethinking the Heatmap Regression for Bottom-up Human Pose Estimation

∗

Zhengxiong Luo1,2,3,4 , Zhicheng Wang1 , Yan Huang3,4 , Liang Wang3,4 , Tieniu Tan3 , and Erjin Zhou1
1

3

Megvii Inc 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC)
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)

zhengxiong.luo@cripac.ia.ac.cn

{wangzhicheng, zej}@megvii.com

{yhuang, wangliang, tnt}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Heatmap regression has become the most prevalent
choice for nowadays human pose estimation methods. The
ground-truth heatmaps are usually constructed via covering all skeletal keypoints by 2D gaussian kernels. The standard deviations of these kernels are fixed. However, for
bottom-up methods, which need to handle a large variance of human scales and labeling ambiguities, the current practice seems unreasonable. To better cope with these
problems, we propose the scale-adaptive heatmap regression (SAHR) method, which can adaptively adjust the standard deviation for each keypoint. In this way, SAHR is
more tolerant of various human scales and labeling ambiguities. However, SAHR may aggravate the imbalance
between fore-background samples, which potentially hurts
the improvement of SAHR. Thus, we further introduce the
weight-adaptive heatmap regression (WAHR) to help balance the fore-background samples. Extensive experiments
show that SAHR together with WAHR largely improves the
accuracy of bottom-up human pose estimation. As a result,
we finally outperform the state-of-the-art model by +1.5AP
and achieve 72.0AP on COCO test-dev2017, which is comparable with the performances of most top-down methods.
Source codes are available at https://github.com/
greatlog/SWAHR-HumanPose.

1. Introduction
Multi-person human pose estimation (HPE) aims to locate skeletal keypoints of all persons in a given RGB image.
It has been widely applied in human activity recognition,
human computer interaction, animation etc. Current human
pose estimation methods fall into two categories: top-down
∗ This work is done when Zhengxiong is an intern at MEGVII Research.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

Figure 1. Top row: the noses of different persons are covered by
gaussian kernels with the same standard deviation. Bottom row:
the standard deviations for keypoints of different persons are adaptively adjusted in SAHR.

and bottom-up. In top-down methods, all persons are firstly
cropped out by a human detector and then resized to the
same size before they are input to the keypoints detector.
Oppositely, bottom-up methods directly detect keypoints of
all persons simultaneously. It is more light-weight fast but
suffers from various human scales.
Heatmap regression is widely used in both top-down
and bottom-up HPE methods. The ground-truth heatmaps
are constructed by putting 2D Gaussian kernels on all keypoints. They are used to supervise the predicted heatmaps
via L2 loss. This method is easy to be implemented and
has much higher accuracy than traditional coordinate regression [35, 34, 30]. However, in current practice, different
keypoints are covered by gaussian kernels with the same
standard deviation [36, 6, 25], which means that different
keypoints are supervised by the same constructed heatmaps.

13264

