PGT: A Progressive Method for Training Models on Long Videos
Bo Pang∗ Gao Peng∗ Yizhuo Li Cewu Lu†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{pangbo, penggao, liyizhuo, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn
task loss

Abstract
Convolutional video models have an order of magnitude larger computational complexity than their counterpart image-level models. Constrained by computational
resources, there is no model or training method that can
train long video sequences end-to-end. Currently, the mainstream method is to split a raw video into clips, leading to incomplete fragmentary temporal information ﬂow.
Inspired by natural language processing techniques dealing with long sentences, we propose to treat videos as serial fragments satisfying Markov property, and train it as
a whole by progressively propagating information through
the temporal dimension in multiple steps. This progressive training (PGT) method is able to train long videos
end-to-end with limited resources and ensures the effective transmission of information. As a general and robust
training method, we empirically demonstrate that it yields
signiﬁcant performance improvements on different models
and datasets. As an illustrative example, the proposed
method improves SlowOnly network by 3.7 mAP on Charades and 1.9 top-1 accuracy on Kinetics with negligible
parameter and computation overhead. Code is available
at: https://github.com/BoPang1996/PGT.

1. Introduction
Semantic information often ﬂows across a long time
in videos. However, end-to-end modeling a long video
as a whole is not feasible for current convolutional methods since their computational complexities linearly increase
with the number of frames [51]. The main-stream solution
is splitting a video into multiple short clips [59, 60, 6, 34],
but in this way, video models can only access local fragmentary temporal information, thus, fail to model long semantics [64, 51]. Is this trade-off between computational complexity and semantic integrity unavoidable, or might there
be a speciﬁc training method tailored for video tasks that
can model long semantics with acceptable complexity?
The main cause of this problem is that 3D convolutional
∗ Equal contribution.
† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author, member of Qing Yuan Research
Insitute, MoE Key Lab of Artiﬁcial Intelligence, AI Institute, CS department of Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and Qi Zhi Institute.

original local
convolution
operator

ଵ

ଶ

ଷ

ଵ ൌ ሼ ଵ ǡ ଶ ǡ ǥ ǡ ୘ᇲ ሽ

step 1

task loss

Markov
convolution
operator

original local
convolution
operator

tg

୘ᇲ

୘ᇲ ାଵ

୘ᇲ ାଶ

୘ᇲ ାଷ

tg

ଶ୘ᇲ

ଶ ൌ ሼ ୘ᇲ ାଵ ǡ ୘ᇲ ାଶ ǡ ǥ ǡ ଶ୘ᇲ ሽ

step 2

Figure 1: Progressive training (PGT) treats videos as serial
fragments and optimizes a CNN model with multiple progressive steps on long videos. The Markov convolutional
operator designed to transfer temporal features among steps
is adopted on the ﬁrst and last frames of each step, and the
gradient is truncated between them. “tg” denotes truncating
gradients. Fi is the ith video frame and Ip is the input of
the pth progressive step containing multiple frames.
models [53, 2, 54] treat a video signal I(x, y, t) as an integrated information block and have to process it as a whole.
With the video growing longer, the information block becomes larger and the processing complexity increases to an
infeasible point. Since in the temporal dimension the development of video semantics has high-order Markov property,
violently splitting long videos and processing short clips
with convolutions to model local features will hurt semantic integrity. For example, the model will never know an
action of “pour milk” is making latte, unless it also sees the
previous action of “grinding coffee beans”.
To avoid the trade-off between computational complexity and semantic integrity — i.e., to end-to-end train a model
on long videos with much lower complexity, in this paper, we propose the progressive training (PGT) method (see
Fig. 1). Inspired by Truncated Back-Propagation through
Time (TBPTT) [63] originally designed for recurrent neural networks to model long natural language sequences, the
central idea of PGT is to 1) treat a video as serial fragments
satisfying high-order Markov property instead of an integrated signal block, 2) disassemble the integrated forward
and backward propagation into multiple serial portions like
TBPTT (see §2), which doesn’t break the Markov dependency of the calculation ﬂow. Modeling a long video in

11379

