Uncertainty-aware Joint Salient Object and Camouflaged Object Detection

1

Aixuan Li1,‡ Jing Zhang2,3,‡ Yunqiu Lv1 Bowen Liu1 Tong Zhang4 Yuchao Dai1
Northwestern Polytechnical University, China 2 Australian National University, Australia
3
CSIRO, Australia 4 EPFL, Switzerland
‡ Equal contributions;

Corresponding author:daiyuchao@nwpu.edu.cn

Abstract
Visual salient object detection (SOD) aims at finding the
salient object(s) that attract human attention, while camouflaged object detection (COD) on the contrary intends to
discover the camouflaged object(s) that hidden in the surrounding. In this paper, we propose a paradigm of leveraging the contradictory information to enhance the detection ability of both salient object detection and camouflaged
object detection. We start by exploiting the easy positive
samples in the COD dataset to serve as hard positive samples in the SOD task to improve the robustness of the SOD
model. Then, we introduce a “similarity measure” module
to explicitly model the contradicting attributes of these two
tasks. Furthermore, considering the uncertainty of labeling
in both tasks’ datasets, we propose an adversarial learning network to achieve both higher order similarity measure
and network confidence estimation. Experimental results on
benchmark datasets demonstrate that our solution leads to
state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance for both tasks1 .

1. Introduction
Visual salient object detection (SOD) aims to localize
the most salient region(s) of the images that attract human
attention. To be qualified as a “salient” object, one should
have high contrast compared with its global and local context. The camouflaged objects oppositely usually share similar structure or texture information with the environment,
which try hard to fade themselves into the local context.
In this way, the SOD models [48, 46, 42, 38] are designed
based on both global contrast and local contrast, while the
COD models [11, 26, 35, 52, 34] usually avoid searching
the camouflaged objects in those salient regions. We notice
that a higher level of saliency indicates a lower level of camouflage and vice versa as shown in Fig. 1. This observation
shows that the salient objects and camouflaged objects are
1 Our code is publicly available at: https : / / github . com /
JingZhang617/Joint_COD_SOD

Figure 1. Illustration of the transition from camouflaged objects
to salient objects, where the image in the middle could belong to
both camouflaged object dataset and salient object dataset.

two contradicting categories of objects. However, there still
exist objects that are both salient and camouflaged, e.g. the
polar bear in the middle of Fig. 1, which indicates that these
two tasks are partially positively related at the dataset level.
Existing SOD models [48, 47, 59, 46, 38] mainly focus
on two directions: 1) building effective saliency network
[47, 59] for accurate saliency detection with pixel-wise accuracy constraint; and 2) designing appropriate loss functions [46, 38] to achieve structure-preserving saliency detection. The former digs into network structure, while the
latter cares more about network loss function. We argue that
an effective training dataset can lead to more performance
gain in addition to network structure design or loss function,
it’s the training data that is regressed.
One typical solution to explore the training dataset is
data augmentation, which usually involves linear or nonlinear transformation of the dataset. We find that, although
performance improvement can be obtained with some basic
data augmentation, e.g. image flipping, rotation, cropping,
and etc., none of these methods are specially designed for
saliency detection. As a context-based task, a more effective data augmentation technique should be context-aware
For SOD, the salient objects are those that can be easily
detected, or the high-contrast objects as shown in Fig. 1.
We intend to augment the dataset to include lower contrast
samples. Considering the partial positively related attribute
of SOD and COD at dataset level, we intend to design a
joint learning framework to learn both tasks and select easy

10071

