Delving into Localization Errors for Monocular 3D Object Detection
Xinzhu Ma1 , Yinmin Zhang3 , Dan Xu2 , Dongzhan Zhou1 ,
Shuai Yi3 , Haojie Li4 , Wanli Ouyang1
1
The University of Sydney, 2 The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology,
3
SenseTime Research, 4 Dalian University of Technology
{xinzhu.ma, d.zhou, wanli.ouyang}@sydney.edu.au,
{zhangyinmin, yishuai}@sensetime.com,

danxu@cse.ust.hk,

Abstract

hjli@dlut.edu.cn

baseline (overall

70

AP40

: 9.97)

AP40
AP40
AP40

w/ gt proj. center (overall

1. Introduction
Remarkable progress has been achieved in 3D detection,
especially for LiDAR/stereo-based approaches [44, 19, 33,
9, 37], along with the advances in deep neural networks. In
contrast, the accuracy of 3D detection from only monocular
images [35, 2, 10, 25, 24, 12] is obviously lower than that
from LiDAR or stereo. In this work, we aim to quantitatively identify the problem and propose our solutions.
To investigate and quantify the underlying factors that
restrict the performance of monocular 3D object detection,

60

w/ gt depth (overall

w/ gt location (overall

50

: 16.54)

: 35.11)
: 72.36)

AP40

Estimating 3D bounding boxes from monocular images
is an essential component in autonomous driving, while accurate 3D object detection from this kind of data is very
challenging. In this work, by intensive diagnosis experiments, we quantify the impact introduced by each sub-task
and found the ‘localization error’ is the vital factor in restricting monocular 3D detection. Besides, we also investigate the underlying reasons behind localization errors, analyze the issues they might bring, and propose three strategies. First, we revisit the misalignment between the center
of the 2D bounding box and the projected center of the 3D
object, which is a vital factor leading to low localization accuracy. Second, we observe that accurately localizing distant objects with existing technologies is almost impossible,
while those samples will mislead the learned network. To
this end, we propose to remove such samples from the training set for improving the overall performance of the detector. Lastly, we also propose a novel 3D IoU oriented loss
for the size estimation of the object, which is not affected
by ‘localization error’. We conduct extensive experiments
on the KITTI dataset, where the proposed method achieves
real-time detection and outperforms previous methods by a
large margin. The code will be made available at: https:
//github.com/xinzhuma/monodle.

40
30
20
10
0
10

20

30

Depth

40

50

60

Figure 1: Range-wise evaluation on the KITTI validation
set. Metric is AP40 of the Car category under moderate setting. The sampling interval is 10 m. For example, the corresponding value at horizontal axis 20 represents the overall
performance of all samples between 15 m and 25 m.
we conduct intensive diagnostic experiments for this task,
inspired by the error identifying methods [20, 43, 17, 1]
commonly used in the 2D detection scope. Specifically, we
build our baseline model (see Section 3.2 for details) based
on CenterNet [43] and progressively replace predicted items
with their ground-truth values. To better analyze the error
patterns, we evaluate the results in a range-wise manner and
show the summary of those experiments in Figure 1. Based
on our investigation, we have the following three observations and corresponding designs.
Observation 1: The most striking feature in Figure 1 is
the leap in performance when using ground-truth location,
reaching a level similar to the state-of-the-art LiDAR-based
methods, suggesting the localization error is the key factor
in restricting monocular 3D detection. Furthermore, except
for depth estimation, detecting the projected center of the
3D object also plays an important role in restoring the 3D
position of the object. To this end, we revisit the misalignment between the center of the 2D bounding box and the
projected center of the 3D object. Besides, we also confirm
the necessity of keeping 2D detection related branches in

4721

