Learning Compositional Representation for 4D Captures with Neural ODE
Boyan Jiang1∗

Yinda Zhang2∗ Xingkui Wei1 Xiangyang Xue1
1
Fudan University 2 Google

Yanwei Fu 1

Abstract
Learning based representation has become the key to
the success of many computer vision systems. While many
3D representations have been proposed, it is still an unaddressed problem how to represent a dynamically changing
3D object. In this paper, we introduce a compositional representation for 4D captures, i.e. a deforming 3D object over
a temporal span, that disentangles shape, initial state, and
motion respectively. Each component is represented by a
latent code via a trained encoder. To model the motion, a
neural Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) is trained to
update the initial state conditioned on the learned motion
code, and a decoder takes the shape code and the updated
state code to reconstruct the 3D model at each time stamp.
To this end, we propose an Identity Exchange Training (IET)
strategy to encourage the network to learn effectively decoupling each component. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms existing stateof-the-art deep learning based methods on 4D reconstruction, and significantly improves on various tasks, including
motion transfer and completion.

1. Introduction
Shape representation is one of the core topics in 3D computer vision, especially in the era of deep learning. Early
work uses explicit representation, e.g. volume [13, 17, 58],
point cloud [46, 16, 45, 1], and mesh [18, 23, 57] for
3D related tasks, such as shape reconstruction, synthesis,
and completion. Recently, deep implicit representation
[33, 40, 22] shows promising performance in producing accurate geometry with appealing surface details. However,
arguably, we, humans, stay in a 3D world with an additional temporal dimension, and the majority of data we perceive everyday are moving or deforming 3D objects and
scenes. Many existing applications also require understand∗ indicates equal contributions.

Boyan Jiang Xingkui Wei and Xiangyang Xue are with the School of
Computer Science, Fudan University.
Yanwei Fu is with the School of Data Science, MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, and Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information
Processing, Fudan University.

geometry
template

initial state

temporal
deformation

Figure 1: We present a compositional representation for 4D
object dynamics, through which the input point cloud sequence is disentangled into semantically meaningful representations in three latent spaces for geometry template,
initial state, and temporal deformation.
ing or reconstruction of 4D data, such as autonomous driving, robotics, and virtual or augmented reality. But the deep
representation for 4D data, i.e. a deforming 3D object over
a time span, is barely missing in the literature. As a pioneer work, Niemeyer et al. [37] propose to predict velocity
field of the 3D motion via a Neural ODE [11]. However, the
method mainly focuses on recovering and integrating local
flow for 4D reconstruction, which might accumulate error
and thus produce sub-optimal quality.
In this work, we propose a novel deep compositional
representation for 4D captures. This representation can be
used to reconstruct 4D captures, and it also extracts key
understanding that supports high-level tasks, such as motion transfer, 4D completion, or future prediction. This is
achieved by an encoder that takes a 4D capture as input and
produces latent codes representing the geometry template,

5340

