Spatial-Temporal Correlation and Topology Learning
for Person Re-Identification in Videos
Jiawei Liu, Zheng-Jun Zha* , Wei Wu, Kecheng Zheng, Qibin Sun
University of Science and Technology of China, China
{jwliu6,zhazj,qibinsun}@ustc.edu.cn, {wuvy,zkcys001}@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Video-based person re-identification aims to match
pedestrians from video sequences across non-overlapping
camera views. The key factor for video person reidentification is to effectively exploit both spatial and temporal clues from video sequences. In this work, we propose
a novel Spatial-Temporal Correlation and Topology Learning framework (CTL) to pursue discriminative and robust
representation by modeling cross-scale spatial-temporal
correlation. Specifically, CTL utilizes a CNN backbone and
a key-points estimator to extract semantic local features
from human body at multiple granularities as graph nodes.
It explores a context-reinforced topology to construct multiscale graphs by considering both global contextual information and physical connections of human body. Moreover,
a 3D graph convolution and a cross-scale graph convolution are designed, which facilitate direct cross-spacetime
and cross-scale information propagation for capturing hierarchical spatial-temporal dependencies and structural information. By jointly performing the two convolutions, CTL
effectively mines comprehensive clues that are complementary with appearance information to enhance representational capacity. Extensive experiments on two video benchmarks have demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed
method and the state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) is an important technology to retrieve a person-of-interest across non-overlapping
cameras. It has drawn increasing attention during the past
few years, owing to its broad application in many realistic
scenarios, such as video surveillance [11, 47] and behavior
analysis [43] etc. However, this task remains challenging
due to the variations in illumination, viewpoint and pose, as
well as the influence of background clutter and occlusion.
Existing person Re-ID approaches are mainly divided
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Three example video sequences on MARS and iLIDSVID datasets with partial occlusions, inaccurate detection and
viewpoint variation.

into two categories: image-based methods [39, 33, 41, 25]
and video-based methods [36, 26, 22]. The former exploits static images without temporal information to retrieve
pedestrians. It has achieved impressive advances with the
surge of deep learning technique in recent years [18]. However, image-based person Re-ID heavily relies on the quality of static images, which are sensitive to noise, occlusion
and viewpoint variation, etc. Different from static images
with limited content, video sequences contain rich spatialtemporal information across a long span of time, which can
provide clean and informative clues against these problem
[22, 8]. Thus, video-based person Re-ID has the potential
to solve the restrictions in image-based person Re-ID.
A typical video-based person Re-ID pipeline extracts
and aggregates spatial and temporal clues from video sequences to generate discriminative representations. Some
preliminary methods [29, 10, 13, 52] extract appearance
features from each frame independently, and aggregate
them into video-level representation by temporal pooling
layer or recurrent neural network (RNN). In presence of
partial occlusions, inaccurate detection and viewpoint vari-

4370

