All Labels Are Not Created Equal: Enhancing Semi-supervision via Label
Grouping and Co-training
Islam Nassar1 *, Samitha Herath1 , Ehsan Abbasnejad2 , Wray Buntine1 , Gholamreza Haffari1
1
Dept of Data Science and AI, Faculty of IT, Monash University, Australia
2
Australian Institute for Machine Learning, University of Adelaide, Australia

Abstract
Pseudo-labeling is a key component in semi-supervised
learning (SSL). It relies on iteratively using the model to
generate artificial labels for the unlabeled data to train
against. A common property among its various methods
is that they only rely on the model’s prediction to make labeling decisions without considering any prior knowledge
about the visual similarity among the classes. In this paper,
we demonstrate that this degrades the quality of pseudolabeling as it poorly represents visually similar classes in
the pool of pseudo-labeled data. We propose SemCo, a
method which leverages label semantics and co-training to
address this problem. We train two classifiers with two different views of the class labels: one classifier uses the onehot view of the labels and disregards any potential similarity
among the classes, while the other uses a distributed view
of the labels and groups potentially similar classes together.
We then co-train the two classifiers to learn based on their
disagreements. We show that our method achieves stateof-the-art performance across various SSL tasks including 5.6% accuracy improvement on Mini-ImageNet dataset
with 1000 labeled examples. We also show that our method
requires smaller batch size and fewer training iterations to
reach its best performance. We make our code available
at https://github.com/islam-nassar/semco.

1. Introduction
Deep neural models require large amounts of labeled
data to achieve their high performance. This quickly becomes prohibitive and non-scalable especially when labeling data is expensive and/or non practical. Semi-supervised
learning (SSL) [5, 33] has hence emerged to explore a diverse set of methods which aim to leverage unlabeled data
to enable learning from a smaller set of labeled data.
In the context of image classification, recent methods
use unlabeled data to guide learning in different ways.
* corresponding author: islam.nassar@monash.edu

Figure 1: A conceptual diagram of our co-training solution
Some methods primarily focus on consistency regularization [29, 17], where the model is enforced to produce consistent predictions for different perturbed versions of the
same unlabeled input image. While others focus on pseudolabeling [1, 18, 13], where the model is used to produce
artificial labels for the unlabeled data that are then used to
further train the model. Evidently, combining the two approaches has shown the state-of-the-art results on various
image classification tasks [30].
When it comes to pseudo-labeling, a common problem
which hinders the SSL performance is the so-called confirmation bias [32]. This takes place when the model reassures its wrong predictions by retraining on them, leading to an accumulation of the error from which the model
can not recover. To mitigate this behaviour, some methods
use a warm-up phase until the model becomes more reliable [13, 32], or limit the number of pseudo-labeled samples in each mini-batch [1]. Other strategies include using a
confidence threshold whereby a sample is only considered
for pseudo-labeling if the model is highly confident about
its prediction [30, 18]. One property shared by all these
methods, however, is that they only rely on the model’s
output and disregard any prior knowledge about potential
similarities among the classes. As we show in Section 2,
visually similar classes are expected to confuse the model
and therefore get poorly represented in the pseudo-labeled
data pool. This fact is even more exacerbated in confidence-

7241

