RPN Prototype Alignment For Domain Adaptive Object Detector
Yixin Zhang
Zilei Wang∗
Yushi Mao
Department of Automation, University of Science and Technology of China
zhyx12@mail.ustc.edu.cn

zlwang@ustc.edu.cn

mys@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Recent years have witnessed great progress of object detection. However, due to the domain shift problem, applying the knowledge of an object detector learned from one
specific domain to another one often suffers severe performance degradation. Most existing methods adopt feature
alignment either on the backbone network or instance classifier to increase the transferability of object detector. Differently, we propose to perform feature alignment in the
RPN stage such that the foreground and background RPN
proposals in target domain can be effectively distinguished.
Specifically, we first construct one set of learnable RPN prototpyes, and then enforce the RPN features to align with the
prototypes for both source and target domains. It essentially
cooperates the learning of RPN prototypes and features to
align the source and target RPN features. Particularly, we
propose a simple yet effective method suitable for RPN feature alignment to generate high-quality pseudo label of proposals in target domain, i.e., using the filtered detection results with IoU. Furthermore, we adopt Grad CAM to find
the discriminative region within a foreground proposal and
use it to increase the discriminability of RPN features for
alignment. We conduct extensive experiments on multiple
cross-domain detection scenarios, and the results show the
effectiveness of our proposed method against previous stateof-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision, which aims to identify and localize objects of interest in an image. In the past decade, a great progress has
been witnessed for object detection due to the advance of
large-scale benchmarks and modern CNN-based detection
frameworks, such as Fast/Faster R-CNN [15, 41]. Currently, state-of-the-art detectors generally require massive
training samples with annotations of bounding boxes and
semantic labels. Particularly, the detection model learned
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. (a) Comparison of detection performance among
”Source only”, ”SWDA” [42], ”Ours”, and ”Oracle”, where the
normal case and adding ground truth boxes are tested. (b) Comparison of recall among different methods with the IoU threshold
of 0.5. Here Sim10k [24]→Cityscapes [7] is adopted as the benchmark. Best viewed in color.

from the data in a domain (i.e., source domain) would incur severe performance degradation when facing some new
environment (i.e., target domain) where object appearance,
background, or weather condition make a difference [49].
At the same time, accurately annotating all new samples
usually involve heavy labor and high cost. To address this
challenge, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [37] is
developed to adapt the model learned from the annotated
source samples to the target samples, i.e., enabling the
model work well in target domain by incorporating unlabeled samples.
Evidently, UDA need learn the knowledge useful for target domain from the data of source domain. A common
practice is to build invariant feature representation across
domains, which essentially enforces to align the feature
distributions of two domains. To this end, the measure
of domain shift is usually minimized, e.g., correlation distances [32, 39, 34, 62]. Recently, domain adversarial learning is widely adopted and achieves promising performance
by conducting a min-max game between object detector
and domain discriminator [13, 33, 21, 50]. Along previous
works [6, 42], we particularly focus on the domain adaptation problem of two-stage object detectors in this paper.
Regarding cross-domain object detection, several works
have attempted to incorporate adversarial learning into

12425

