Locate then Segment: A Strong Pipeline for Referring Image Segmentation
Ya Jing,1,2 * Tao Kong,3 Wei Wang,1,2 Liang Wang,1,2 Lei Li,3 Tieniu Tan1,2
1
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing (CRIPAC),
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition (NLPR)
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
2
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
3
ByteDance AI Lab

Abstract
Referring image segmentation aims to segment the objects referred by a natural language expression. Previous methods usually focus on designing an implicit and recurrent feature interaction mechanism to fuse the visuallinguistic features to directly generate the final segmentation mask without explicitly modeling the localization information of the referent instances. To tackle these problems,
we view this task from another perspective by decoupling it
into a “Locate-Then-Segment” (LTS) scheme. Given a language expression, people generally first perform attention
to the corresponding target image regions, then generate a
fine segmentation mask about the object based on its context. The LTS first extracts and fuses both visual and textual
features to get a cross-modal representation, then applies a
cross-model interaction on the visual-textual features to locate the referred object with position prior, and finally generates the segmentation result with a light-weight segmentation network. Our LTS is simple but surprisingly effective.
On three popular benchmark datasets, the LTS outperforms
all the previous state-of-the-arts methods by a large margin
(e.g., +3.2% on RefCOCO+ and +3.4% on RefCOCOg).
In addition, our model is more interpretable with explicitly
locating the object, which is also proved by visualization experiments. We believe this framework is promising to serve
as a strong baseline for referring image segmentation.

1. Introduction
Jointly learning vision and language is a significant task
in machine learning and pattern recognition community,
which has drawn great attention in recent years. In this paper, we study the challenging task of language-instructed
object segmentation [11, 38, 37] which aims to generate
a segmentation mask of the object in image referred by
* This work was done when Ya Jing was an intern at ByteDance AI Lab.

Man in green
sweater

Kid in white jacket
being held by man
Figure 1. The illustration of referring image segmentation. Given
a referring expression and an image, the model aims to generate a
segmentation mask of the corresponding object in image referred
by the language expression. Best viewed in color.

a natural language expression. It has wide applications,
e.g., interactive image editing and language-guided humanrobot interaction. Beyond traditional semantic segmentation, language-referring image segmentation is more challenging due to the semantic gap between image and language. In addition, the textual expression is not just limited
to entities (e.g., “person”, “horse”). It may contain descriptive words, such as object properties (e.g., “red”, “young”),
actions (e.g., “standing”, “hold”), and positional relationships (e.g., “right”, “above”).
Given the image and referring sentence, there are two
essential issues affecting the overall performance of a referring image segmentation model. First, the model must
highlight the most discriminative candidate area in image
corresponding to the given language. Second, the model
must generate a fine segmentation result. The existing referring image segmentation methods could be generally sum-

9858

