Scene Text Telescope: Text-Focused Scene Image Super-Resolution
Jingye Chen, Bin Li*, Xiangyang Xue
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing
School of Computer Science, Fudan University
{jingyechen19, libin, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn

Interpolation

Abstract
Image super-resolution, which is often regarded as a preprocessing procedure of scene text recognition, aims to recover the realistic features from a low-resolution text image. It has always been challenging due to large variations
in text shapes, fonts, backgrounds, etc. However, most existing methods employ generic super-resolution frameworks to
handle scene text images while ignoring text-specific properties such as text-level layouts and character-level details.
In this paper, we establish a text-focused super-resolution
framework, called Scene Text Telescope (STT). In terms of
text-level layouts, we propose a Transformer-Based SuperResolution Network (TBSRN) containing a Self-Attention
Module to extract sequential information, which is robust
to tackle the texts in arbitrary orientations. In terms of
character-level details, we propose a Position-Aware Module and a Content-Aware Module to highlight the position
and the content of each character. By observing that some
characters look indistinguishable in low-resolution conditions, we use a weighted cross-entropy loss to tackle this
problem. We conduct extensive experiments, including text
recognition with pre-trained recognizers and image quality evaluation, on TextZoom and several scene text recognition benchmarks to assess the super-resolution images.
The experimental results show that our STT can indeed generate text-focused super-resolution images and outperform
the existing methods in terms of recognition accuracy.

1. Introduction
Scene text recognition (STR) has drawn much research
interest of the computer vision community due to its various
applications such as license plate recognition and ID card
recognition [17, 23, 39]. While STR has made a big step
forward with the development of deep learning, recognition
performance on low-resolution (LR) text images is still subpar [44]. LR text images exist in many situations, e.g., a
* Corresponding author

Generic SR method
LR

The proposed STT

HR (ground truth)

Figure 1. The proposed STT generates a relatively clearer text image and pays more attention to character details compared with
interpolation methods and generic SR methods. “SR” and “HR”
denote super-resolution and high-resolution, respectively.

photo taken with a low-focal camera or a document image
compressed to reduce disk usages. When handling LR text
images, existing recognition or spotting methods usually
employ interpolation methods, like bicubic and bilinear interpolations, to upsample the original images [4, 27, 37, 38].
As shown in Figure 1, the image upsampled by the interpolation method is still blurred, which indeed brings difficulties to existing recognition models.
In recent years, several works employ generic superresolution methods for text image super-resolution. For example, in [8], SRCNN [7] with a shallow network is used
as the backbone. In [42], a Laplacian-pyramid backbone is
employed to combine features from several middle layers to
upsample low-resolution images. However, these methods
are not suitable for processing text images [44] since they
see text images as general ones without taking text-specific
properties (e.g. text-level layouts and character-level details) into consideration. In contrast, there are few methods
that take a part of these properties into account. For example, PlugNet [30] designs a multi-task framework, aiming
to recognize and upsample text images in one model. In
[44], a Text Super-Resolution Network (TSRN) containing
a horizontal and a vertical BLSTMs [11] is proposed to capture sequential information of text images. However, the
BLSTMs are not suitable for capturing sequential information of inclined or curved text images.

12026

