Coordinate Attention for Efficient Mobile Network Design
Qibin Hou1
Daquan Zhou1
1
National University of Singapore

Jiashi Feng2,1
2
SEA AI Lab

{andrewhoux,zhoudaquan21}@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent studies on mobile network design have demonstrated the remarkable effectiveness of channel attention (e.g., the Squeeze-and-Excitation attention) for lifting
model performance, but they generally neglect the positional information, which is important for generating spatially selective attention maps. In this paper, we propose a
novel attention mechanism for mobile networks by embedding positional information into channel attention, which
we call “coordinate attention”. Unlike channel attention
that transforms a feature tensor to a single feature vector via 2D global pooling, the coordinate attention factorizes channel attention into two 1D feature encoding processes that aggregate features along the two spatial directions, respectively. In this way, long-range dependencies can be captured along one spatial direction and meanwhile precise positional information can be preserved along
the other spatial direction. The resulting feature maps are
then encoded separately into a pair of direction-aware and
position-sensitive attention maps that can be complementarily applied to the input feature map to augment the representations of the objects of interest. Our coordinate attention is simple and can be flexibly plugged into classic
mobile networks, such as MobileNetV2, MobileNeXt, and
EfficientNet with nearly no computational overhead. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our coordinate attention
is not only beneficial to ImageNet classification but more
interestingly, behaves better in down-stream tasks, such as
object detection and semantic segmentation. Code is available at https://github.com/Andrew- Qibin/
CoordAttention.

1. Introduction
Attention mechanisms, used to tell a model “what” and
“where” to attend, have been extensively studied [47, 29]
and widely deployed for boosting the performance of modern deep neural networks [18, 44, 3, 25, 10, 14]. However, their application for mobile networks (with limited
model size) significantly lags behind that for large networks

Figure 1. Performance of different attention methods on three classic vision tasks. The y-axis labels from left to right are top-1 accuracy, mean IoU, and AP, respectively. Clearly, our approach
not only achieves the best result in ImageNet classification [33]
against the SE block [18] and CBAM [44] but performs even better
in down-stream tasks, like semantic segmentation [9] and COCO
object detection [21]. Results are based on MobileNetV2 [34].

[36, 13, 46]. This is mainly because the computational overhead brought by most attention mechanisms is not affordable for mobile networks.
Considering the restricted computation capacity of mobile networks, to date, the most popular attention mechanism for mobile networks is still the Squeeze-andExcitation (SE) attention [18]. It computes channel attention with the help of 2D global pooling and provides notable performance gains at considerably low computational
cost. However, the SE attention only considers encoding
inter-channel information but neglects the importance of
positional information, which is critical to capturing object
structures in vision tasks [42]. Later works, such as BAM
[30] and CBAM [44], attempt to exploit positional information by reducing the channel dimension of the input tensor
and then computing spatial attention using convolutions as
shown in Figure 2(b). However, convolutions can only capture local relations but fail in modeling long-range dependencies that are essential for vision tasks [48, 14].
In this paper, beyond the first works, we propose a novel
and efficient attention mechanism by embedding positional
information into channel attention to enable mobile networks to attend over large regions while avoiding incurring significant computation overhead. To alleviate the positional information loss caused by the 2D global pooling,
we factorize channel attention into two parallel 1D feature
encoding processes to effectively integrate spatial coordi-

13713

