Perceptual Indistinguishability-Net (PI-Net):
Facial Image Obfuscation with Manipulable Semantics

1

Jia-Wei Chen1,3 Li-Ju Chen3 Chia-Mu Yu2 Chun-Shien Lu1,3
Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica 2 National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
3
Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica

Abstract
With the growing use of camera devices, the industry
has many image datasets that provide more opportunities
for collaboration between the machine learning community and industry. However, the sensitive information in
the datasets discourages data owners from releasing these
datasets. Despite recent research devoted to removing sensitive information from images, they provide neither meaningful privacy-utility trade-off nor provable privacy guarantees. In this study, with the consideration of the perceptual similarity, we propose perceptual indistinguishability
(PI) as a formal privacy notion particularly for images. We
also propose PI-Net, a privacy-preserving mechanism that
achieves image obfuscation with PI guarantee. Our study
shows that PI-Net achieves significantly better privacy utility trade-off through public image data.

1. Introduction
More and more facial image datasets are becoming available in a wide variety of communities. The availability of
these datasets presents enormous opportunities for collaboration between data owners and the machine learning community (e.g., social relation recognition [43]). However, the
inherent privacy risk of such datasets prevents data owners
from sharing the data. For example, Microsoft’s facial image dataset MS-Celeb-1M, Duke’s MTMC, and Stanford’s
Brainwash were taken down due to the potential privacy
concern [30, 36].
Facial Image Obfuscation. Many facial image obfuscation (aka. face anonymization and face de-identification)
solutions have been proposed. An approach to mitigating
privacy risk of releasing facial images is to use Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) to synthesize visually similar images [7, 25]. Recently, GANs that can manipulate
semantics have been proposed to even have a fine-grained
control of attributes such as age and gender [17, 37, 50].
Based on inpainting [28, 42, 52], one can also anonymize
the image, while retaining the facial semantics, by removing the region of interest (ROI) with sensitive semantics in
the image and restoring it. Image forgery methods such as

Deepfakes [45], if used to replace sensitive semantics, can
also mitigate privacy risks for identity disclosure [3, 15].
However, all of the above methods share a common
weakness of syntactic anonymity, or say, lack of formal
privacy guarantee. Recent studies report that obfuscated
faces can be re-identified through machine learning techniques [33, 19, 35]. Even worse, the above methods are
not guaranteed to reach the analytical conclusions consistent with the one derived from original images, after manipulating semantics. To overcome the above two weaknesses,
one might resort to differential privacy (DP) [9], a rigorous
privacy notion with utility preservation. In particular, DPGANs [1, 6, 23, 46] shows a promising solution for both
the provable privacy and perceptual similarity of synthetic
images. Unfortunately, DP-GANs can only be shallow, because of its rapid noise accumulation, hindering model accuracy. One can also apply DP to the image, leading to pixelation [10]. Consequently, the images generated in such a
way are of low quality.
Key Insights. Basically, anonymizing facial images,
while retaining necessary information for tasks such as detection, recognition, and tracking is very challenging. Notably, our result is in possession of the following novelties.
First, based on metric privacy [5], we introduce perceptual indistinguishability (PI), a variant of DP with a particular consideration of perceptual similarity of the facial
images. More specifically, PI, while retaining perceptual
similarity, achieves the indistinguishability result that an adversary, when seeing an anonymized image, can hardly infer the original image, thereby protecting the privacy of the
image content. On the other hand, inherited from DP, PI
can also ensure high data utility (detection, classification,
tracking, etc.). As far as we know, this is the first time
perceptual similarity or more concretely, facial attributes,
is used to define an indistinguishability notion from the image adjacency point of view in the context of DP, which
enables the reconciliation among privacy and utility. Although facial attributes have been also exploited for face
de-identification [27, 51], in addition to relying on different
privacy notions, our study is different from theirs in that (1)
[27] needs pre-processing for face alignment and cropping
and (2) [51] learns privacy representation instead of releasing private image dataset.

6478

