Instance Localization for Self-supervised Detection Pretraining
Ceyuan Yang†
Zhirong Wu⋆
Bolei Zhou†,‡
Stephen Lin⋆
†
⋆
Chinese University of Hong Kong
Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract

1. Introduction
The dominant paradigm for training deep networks in
computer vision is by pretraining and finetuning [20, 29].
Typically, the pretraining is optimized to find a single
generic representation that is later transferred to various
downstream applications. For example, supervised pretrained models using image-level labels [26, 25] and selfsupervised pretrained models by contrastive learning [22]
both transfer remarkably well to a number of tasks, e.g., image classification, object detection, semantic segmentation
and human pose estimation.
Despite the popularity of this approach, we question the
existence of such generic and universal representations for
transfer learning. Recently, it has been observed that self1 Code and models are available at this link.
‡ indicates corresponding author.

InsLoc
InfoMin

Detection AP

Prior research on self-supervised learning has led to
considerable progress on image classification, but often
with degraded transfer performance on object detection.
The objective of this paper is to advance self-supervised
pretrained models specifically for object detection. Based
on the inherent difference between classification and detection, we propose a new self-supervised pretext task, called
instance localization. Image instances are pasted at various
locations and scales onto background images. The pretext
task is to predict the instance category given the composited images as well as the foreground bounding boxes. We
show that integration of bounding boxes into pretraining
promotes better task alignment and architecture alignment
for transfer learning. In addition, we propose an augmentation method on the bounding boxes to further enhance
the feature alignment. As a result, our model becomes
weaker at Imagenet semantic classification but stronger
at image patch localization, with an overall stronger pretrained model for object detection. Experimental results
demonstrate that our approach yields state-of-the-art transfer learning results for object detection on PASCAL VOC
and MSCOCO1 .

42

41

MoCo
BYOL

40
SimCLR
SWAV
39
62

66

70

74

Classification Accuracy

Figure 1. For visual transfer learning, it is widely assumed
that the ImageNet classification accuracy and object detection
performance are positively correlated. By studying recent selfsupervised models, we find that this is not actually the case. We
propose a novel approach, called Instance Localization (InsLoc),
which sacrifices ImageNet classification accuracy, but enjoys better generalization ability for object detection.

supervised representations which improve upon image classification performance may fail to translate the advantage
to object detection [3, 21]. Also, it is found that highlevel features is not what truly matters in transfer to detection and segmentation [46]. These indicate that current
self-supervised models may overfit to the classification task
while becoming less effective for other tasks of interest.
We identify two issues that contribute to task misalignment in transfer learning. The first is that the pretrained network needs to be re-purposed into the target network architecture for finetuning. This often involves non-trivial architectural changes, such as inserting a feature pyramid [27] or
employing convolution kernels with large dilations [4]. Second, for typical contrastive learning models, the pretraining
pretext task considers an image holistically in instance discrimination [41], without explicit spatial modelling over regions. Though it enhances transferability for classification,
this practice is less compatible with spatial reasoning tasks,
such as object detection.
In this paper, we propose a new self-supervised pretext task, called instance localization, specifically for the
downstream task of object detection. Akin to instance dis13987

