Learning Graphs for Knowledge Transfer with Limited Labels
Pallabi Ghosh

Nirat Saini
Larry S. Davis
Abhinav Shrivastava
University of Maryland, College Park

Abstract
Fixed input graphs are a mainstay in approaches that
utilize Graph Convolution Networks (GCNs) for knowledge
transfer. The standard paradigm is to utilize relationships
in the input graph to transfer information using GCNs from
training to testing nodes in the graph; for example, the
semi-supervised, zero-shot, and few-shot learning setups.
We propose a generalized framework for learning and improving the input graph as part of the standard GCN-based
learning setup. Moreover, we use additional constraints between similar and dissimilar neighbors for each node in
the graph by applying triplet loss on the intermediate layer
output. We present results of semi-supervised learning on
Citeseer, Cora, and Pubmed benchmarking datasets, and
zero/few-shot action recognition on UCF101 and HMDB51
datasets, significantly outperforming current approaches.
We also present qualitative results visualizing the graph
connections that our approach learns to update.

1. Introduction
Graph Convolution Network (GCN) based techniques
have been used widely in transfer learning for tasks where
labeled data is limited, e.g., semi-supervised learning [24,
55] and zero-shot/few-shot learning [57, 9, 12] with zero
or few samples from test classes. These approaches rely
on an input graph that captures the relationships between
the nodes in the graph. Given this input graph, a GCN is
then used to propagate and assimilate information across the
graph’s nodes, obeying the relationships expressed in the
graph connections. The goal of this framework is to transfer information from the training nodes to the test nodes.
This is a fairly generic framework which has been adapted
for a wide variety of tasks, with diverse node representations and input graphs. For example, for semi-supervised
learning [24, 55], the knowledge is transferred from training samples to test samples; and the nodes represent each
sample data point in the dataset and the input graph represents how these samples are related. Zero-shot learning [57, 9, 12] transfer knowledge from training classes to
Project : https://pallabig.github.io/LearningGraphsForGCN/

Figure 1: We use a GCN to update the input graph connections and show results for “Mixing Batter” class in zero-shot
action recognition. Language based models associates “batter” to “baseball” which is rectified in the updated graph.
test classes; and the nodes represent semantic embeddings
for classes (e.g., word2vec [34], sentence2vec [40]) and input graphs can come from a variety of sources (e.g., WordNet [35], NELL [2], NEIL [6]). Few-shot learning transfer
knowledge between class or sample based nodes [12, 23].
One of the key limitations of these GCN-based techniques discussed thus far is that the input graph structure,
as captured by the adjacency matrix, is fixed. By design,
the GCN-based approaches rely heavily on the input graphs,
and noisy or low-quality graphs have an outsized impact on
performance. In this work, we explore the adaptive learning of the input adjacency matrix over time, in conjunction
with the rest of the GCN training; i.e., the losses used to
train the underlying tasks (e.g., semi-supervised learning or
zero-/few-shot learning) are also used to update the structure of the input adjacency matrix. We show empirically
that our learned graph yields better results for downstream
tasks. Our proposed approach is a straightforward algorithm to update the graph’s structure by learning better node
representations and using these to recompute the adjacency
matrix. Note that we do not add any new network weights
to learn. This is in stark contrast with other related graph
learning works [21, 10], which have a separate dedicated
network and special loss functions to update the adjacency
matrix. Since the learned node representations, via a GCN,
capture better correlations with respect to the downstream
task, the resulting graph tends to be better than the input
graph from an external source. One such update is illustrated in Figure 1, where we learn better connections for the
class “Mixing batter”. A language-based knowledge graph

11151

