End-to-End Human Pose and Mesh Reconstruction with Transformers
Kevin Lin Lijuan Wang Zicheng Liu
Microsoft
{keli, lijuanw, zliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present a new method, called MEsh TRansfOrmer
(METRO), to reconstruct 3D human pose and mesh vertices from a single image. Our method uses a transformer
encoder to jointly model vertex-vertex and vertex-joint interactions, and outputs 3D joint coordinates and mesh vertices simultaneously. Compared to existing techniques that
regress pose and shape parameters, METRO does not rely
on any parametric mesh models like SMPL, thus it can be
easily extended to other objects such as hands. We further relax the mesh topology and allow the transformer
self-attention mechanism to freely attend between any two
vertices, making it possible to learn non-local relationships
among mesh vertices and joints. With the proposed masked
vertex modeling, our method is more robust and effective
in handling challenging situations like partial occlusions.
METRO generates new state-of-the-art results for human
mesh reconstruction on the public Human3.6M and 3DPW
datasets. Moreover, we demonstrate the generalizability of
METRO to 3D hand reconstruction in the wild, outperforming existing state-of-the-art methods on FreiHAND dataset.

1. Introduction
3D human pose and mesh reconstruction from a single
image has attracted a lot of attention because it has many
applications including virtual reality, sports motion analysis, neurodegenerative condition diagnosis, etc. It is a challenging problem due to complex articulated motion and occlusions.
Recent work in this area can be roughly divided into two
categories. Methods in the first category use a parametric
model like SMPL [24] and learn to predict shape and pose
coefficients [12, 21, 34, 17, 19, 29, 39, 18]. Great success
has been achieved with this approach. The strong prior encoded in the parametric model increases its robustness to
environment variations. A drawback of this approach is that
the pose and shape spaces are constrained by the limited exemplars that are used to construct the parametric model. To
overcome this limitation, methods in the second category do

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1: METRO learns non-local interactions among
body joints and mesh vertices for human mesh reconstruction. Given an input image in (a), METRO predicts human mesh by taking non-local interactions into consideration. (b) illustrates the attentions between the occluded
wrist joint and the mesh vertices where brighter color indicates stronger attention. (c) is the reconstructed mesh.

not use any parametric models [20, 7, 27]. These methods
either use a graph convolutional neural network to model
neighborhood vertex-vertex interactions [20, 7], or use 1D
heatmap to regress vertex coordinates [27]. One limitation
with these approaches is that they are not efficient in modeling non-local vertex-vertex interactions.
Researchers have shown that there are strong correlations between non-local vertices which may belong to different parts of the body (e.g. hand and foot) [50]. In
computer graphics and robotics, inverse kinematics techniques [2] have been developed to estimate the internal joint
positions of an articulated figure given the position of an
end effector such as a hand tip. We believe that learning
the correlations among body joints and mesh vertices including both short range and long range ones is valuable for
handling challenging poses and occlusions in body shape
reconstruction. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective framework to model global vertex-vertex interactions.
The main ingredient of our framework is a transformer.
Recent studies show that transformer [48] significantly
improves the performance on various tasks in natural language processing [3, 8, 35, 36]. The success is mainly attributed to the self-attention mechanism of a transformer,

1954

