Ego-Exo: Transferring Visual Representations
from Third-person to First-person Videos
Yanghao Li1

Tushar Nagarajan1,2 Bo Xiong1 Kristen Grauman1,2
1
Facebook AI Research 2 UT Austin

lyttonhao@fb.com, tushar@cs.utexas.edu, bxiong@fb.com, grauman@fb.com

Abstract
We introduce an approach for pre-training egocentric
video models using large-scale third-person video datasets.
Learning from purely egocentric data is limited by low
dataset scale and diversity, while using purely exocentric
(third-person) data introduces a large domain mismatch.
Our idea is to discover latent signals in third-person video
that are predictive of key egocentric-specific properties. Incorporating these signals as knowledge distillation losses
during pre-training results in models that benefit from both
the scale and diversity of third-person video data, as well
as representations that capture salient egocentric properties. Our experiments show that our “Ego-Exo” framework
can be seamlessly integrated into standard video models;
it outperforms all baselines when fine-tuned for egocentric activity recognition, achieving state-of-the-art results
on Charades-Ego and EPIC-Kitchens-100.

1. Introduction
Egocentric video captured by wearable cameras offers
a unique perspective into human behavior. It is the subject of a recent surge in research interest in first-person activity recognition [35, 77], anticipation [21, 1], and video
summarization [36, 74, 13] with many valuable future applications in augmented reality and robotics. Compared
to third-person videos, egocentric videos show the world
through a distinct viewpoint, encode characteristic egocentric motion patterns due to body and head movements, and
have a unique focus on hands, objects, and faces, driven by
the camera wearer’s attention and interaction with their surroundings.
However, these unique properties also present a fundamental challenge for video understanding. On the one
hand, learning models purely from egocentric data are limited by dataset scale. Current egocentric video datasets are
small (e.g., 90k clips in EPIC-Kitchens-100 [11] vs. 650k
in Kinetics-700 [34]) and lack diversity (e.g., videos only

(JRFHQWULFOLNHOLKRRG

3 HJR   ! 3 HJR  

,QWHUDFWDEOHREMHFWGLVWULEXWLRQ

+DQGREMHFWLQWHUDFWLRQUHJLRQV

ERZOSXPSNLQWDEOH

'LVWLOONH\HJRFHQWULFFXHV
IURPWKLUGSHUVRQYLGHRV

DFWLRQODEHO
/DUJHVFDOHWKLUGSHUVRQYLGHR
GDWDVHW HJ.LQHWLFV

'&11HQFRGHU

9LGHRPRGHOSUHWUDLQLQJ

Figure 1: Main idea. We extract key egocentric signals
from large-scale third-person data and distill them into the
video backbone during pre-training to guide feature learning for egocentric video tasks with wearable camera video.
in kitchen scenes). On the other hand, a purely exocentric approach that uses more readily available thirdperson video—the status-quo for pre-training video models [19, 67, 76, 69]—ignores the unique properties of egocentric video and faces a major domain mismatch. Prior
work has shown that this latter strategy, though popular,
is insufficient: pre-training egocentric action recognition
models with third-person data alone produces significantly
worse results than pre-training with first-person data [62].
In an attempt to bridge the domain gap, prior work explores
traditional embedding learning [61, 75] or domain adaptation approaches [10], but they require paired egocentric and
third-person videos that are either concurrently recorded or
annotated for the same set of activities, which are difficult
to collect and hence severely limit their scope.
Despite their differences, we hypothesize that the exocentric view of activity should in fact inform the egocentric view. First, humans are able to watch videos of other
people performing activities and map actions into their own
(egocentric) perspective; babies in part learn new skills in
just this manner [48, 55]. Second, exocentric video is not
devoid of person-centered cues. For example, a close-up instructional video captured from the third-person view may

6943

