Mask-ToF: Learning Microlens Masks for
Flying Pixel Correction in Time-of-Flight Imaging
Ilya Chugunov1
1

Seung-Hwan Baek1

Princeton University

2

Qiang Fu2

Wolfgang Heidrich2

Felix Heide1

King Abdullah University of Science and Technology

Abstract
We introduce Mask-ToF, a method to reduce flying pixels
(FP) in time-of-flight (ToF) depth captures. FPs are pervasive artifacts which occur around depth edges, where light
paths from both an object and its background are integrated
over the aperture. This light mixes at a sensor pixel to produce erroneous depth estimates, which can adversely affect
downstream 3D vision tasks. Mask-ToF starts at the source
of these FPs, learning a microlens-level occlusion mask
which effectively creates a custom-shaped sub-aperture for
each sensor pixel. This modulates the selection of foreground and background light mixtures on a per-pixel basis
and thereby encodes scene geometric information directly
into the ToF measurements. We develop a differentiable
ToF simulator to jointly train a convolutional neural network to decode this information and produce high-fidelity,
low-FP depth reconstructions. We test the effectiveness of
Mask-ToF on a simulated light field dataset and validate
the method with an experimental prototype. To this end, we
manufacture the learned amplitude mask and design an optical relay system to virtually place it on a high-resolution
ToF sensor. We find that Mask-ToF generalizes well to real
data without retraining, cutting FP counts in half.

1. Introduction
Large-scale image datasets such as ImageNet [15] and
CIFAR [31, 32], in tandem with a boom in computational
resources, drastically reshaped the field of image processing. In the depth domain, a similar trend [61, 8, 13] has
recently made the mass-acquisition of high-quality depth
maps a vital prerequisite for a range of 3D graphics and vision applications. These include human-centered tasks such
as pose tracking [59, 29], action recognition [26, 51], and
facial analysis [56], as well as scene-understanding problems including mapping [19], segmentation [14], and object
reconstruction [70, 10, 75]. While methods look to captured
depth datasets for ground truth, the devices used to capture
them are subject to a slew of error sources which, if not
addressed, can hurt task performance and generalizability.

(a)

Sensor Pixel

(b)

Global Aperture “Mask”

Noise/FP Susceptibility

(c)

Microlens Mask

Noise/FP Susceptibility

More Flying Pixels

More Noise

Microlens
Mask

Collected
Light

Microlens

Figure 1: (a) 3D visualization of a microlens mask selectively blocking light entering a sensor pixel. (b) The equivalent mask pattern for a global aperture setup, all sensor
pixels equally susceptible to FPs. (c) A learned mask pattern with spatially multiplexed noise/FP susceptibility.
One of many approaches to depth acquisition is passive
sensing: exploiting parallax cues to infer distances solely
from input monocular [66, 41, 18] or multiview [24, 27, 73]
images. These methods can use standard RGB cameras for
data acquisition, but struggle with textureless regions and
complex geometries [63, 36]. Active sensing approaches
tackle this challenge by first sending out a known illumination into the scene and reconstructing depth with the help
of the returned light. These include structured light methods such as active stereo, where spatially patterned light is
projected into the scene to aid in the stereo feature matching process [1]. While being robust to textureless scenes,
their accuracy is fundamentally limited by illumination pattern density and sensor baseline, resulting in a bulky camera form-factor. Some of the most successful active depth
sensing methods are time-of-flight (ToF) approaches, where
depth is estimated from the travel time of light leaving and
returning to the device. Direct ToF systems such as LiDAR
send out individual laser pulses and measure their time to
return using time-resolved sensors such as avalanche photo
diodes [12]. These can provide high-accuracy and longrange depth estimates, but use a scanning approach to collect data, leading to poor depth completeness and/or expensive sensor array systems. In contrast, amplitude-modulated
continuous wave (AMCW) ToF cameras, the focus of this

9116

