A Large-Scale Study on Unsupervised Spatiotemporal Representation Learning
Christoph Feichtenhofer

Haoqi Fan

Bo Xiong

Ross Girshick

Kaiming He

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Abstract

A series of recent methods on unsupervised representation
learning from images [36, 12, 32, 9] are based on maximizing a similarity objective for different views of the same
image under data augmentations [18, 90]. In addition to
the artificial augmentations on images, videos can provide
natural augmentations of visual content under various changing factors, such as motion, deformation, occlusion, and illumination. This work aims to generalize these image-based
methods [36, 12, 32, 9] into space-time.
We study a simple objective that can be easily incorporated into these image-based methods. Our hypothesis is
that the visual content is often temporally-persistent along
a timespan in the video. This persistency may involve an
action (e.g., a person dancing), an object (e.g., an individual person, who transitions from running to walking), and
a scene (e.g., a room with people moving), covering short
to long spans, with different levels of visual invariance (action, object, scene). Our objective simply encourages the
visual representations in different clips of the same video

Kinetics linear accuracy

SimCLR

SwAV

65
55
45
35
1

2

3

Number of temporal clips ρ

q

k1
θ

k2

θ
t1

…

1. Introduction

BYOL

θ
t2

Time
…

We present a large-scale study on unsupervised spatiotemporal representation learning from videos. With a unified perspective on four recent image-based frameworks, we study
a simple objective that can easily generalize all these methods to space-time. Our objective encourages temporallypersistent features in the same video, and in spite of its
simplicity, it works surprisingly well across: (i) different
unsupervised frameworks, (ii) pre-training datasets, (iii)
downstream datasets, and (iv) backbone architectures. We
draw a series of intriguing observations from this study,
e.g., we discover that encouraging long-spanned persistency can be effective even if the timespan is 60 seconds.
In addition to state-of-the-art results in multiple benchmarks, we report a few promising cases in which unsupervised pre-training can outperform its supervised counterpart.
Code will be made available at https://github.com/
facebookresearch/SlowFast.

MoCo
75

Figure 1. Learning to maximize the similarity between different temporal clips of the same video encourages feature persistency over time. A query clip (q) is matched to multiple key clips
(k1 , k2 , . . .) that are temporally shifted. This method can be incorporated into several unsupervised learning frameworks (MoCo [36],
SimCLR [12], BYOL [32], SwAV [9]). The figure on the top shows
that increasing the number (ρ) of temporal clips improves representation quality for all these frameworks.

to be similar. We empirically find that this objective works
well across different unsupervised frameworks (MoCo [36],
SimCLR [12], BYOL [32], SwAV [9]), either with or without
using dissimilar (negative) samples.
Our objective is a natural generalization of crops in images [18, 90] to clips in videos. This allows us to make
use of the recent unsupervised learning frameworks with
minimal modifications. We aim to learn a high-level representation of the categorical semantics present in a video by
enforcing persistency of the representation over space-time.
We investigate factors such as the effective timespan, t, between positives, and number of temporal clips, ρ, to find that
longer timespans (up to a minute) and multiple samples are
beneficial for downstream performance (Fig. 1).
Our unsupervised training is performed on large-scale
data, including Kinetics [47] (240k videos) and three versions of million-scale Instagram sets. In addition to standard
linear probing, we evaluate representation quality on multiple classification and detection downstream datasets, e.g.,
Charades [76], Something-Something [31], and AVA [33].

3299

