Heterogeneous Grid Convolution for
Adaptive, Efficient, and Controllable Computation
Ryuhei Hamaguchi1 , Yasutaka Furukawa2 , Masaki Onishi1 , and Ken Sakurada1
1
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST)
2
Simon Fraser University
ryuhei.hamaguchi@aist.go.jp, furukawa@sfu.ca, onishi@ni.aist.go.jp, k.sakurada@aist.go.jp

Figure 1. Heterogeneous grid convolution exploits the heterogeneity in the image to enable adaptive, efficient, and controllable computation
for a range of image understanding tasks such as semantic segmentation, road extraction, and salient object detection from left to right.

Abstract
This paper proposes a novel heterogeneous grid convolution that builds a graph-based image representation by exploiting heterogeneity in the image content, enabling adaptive, efficient, and controllable computations in a convolutional architecture. More concretely, the approach builds
a data-adaptive graph structure from a convolutional layer
by a differentiable clustering method, pools features to the
graph, performs a novel direction-aware graph convolution, and unpool features back to the convolutional layer.
By using the developed module, the paper proposes heterogeneous grid convolutional networks, highly efficient yet
strong extension of existing architectures. We have evaluated the proposed approach on four image understanding
tasks, semantic segmentation, object localization, road extraction, and salient object detection. The proposed method
is effective on three of the four tasks. Especially, the method
outperforms a strong baseline with more than 90% reduction in floating-point operations for semantic segmentation,
and achieves the state-of-the-art result for road extraction.
We will share our code, model, and data.

1. Introduction
Our world is heterogeneous in nature. Looking at a scene
from a car (See Fig. 1), the road occupies one third of the

image with homogeneous textures. At the far end of the
road are full of objects such as cars, pedestrians, or road
signs. The density of semantic information varies per location. Our attention to the world is also heterogeneous in
nature. With a specific task in mind, we focus our attention
to a specific portion of an image, for example, tracing a road
network in a satellite image.
While a regular grid feature representation has been successful, such a representation contains redundant information in low density regions, whereas the spatial resolution
is insufficient in high density regions. Features should be
stored adaptively based on the information density.
This paper studies a novel “heterogeneous grid convolution”, which has the following three advantages. (Adaptive)
The node features are adaptively allocated where necessary.
(Efficient) The adaptive allocation reduces redundant computations. (Controllable) An agent can focus computation
to a region of interest with an additional input.
There are two technical challenges in learning such a
flexible feature representation: (a) how to adaptively allocate nodes while exploiting image heterogeneity, and (b)
how to define a convolution operation on a heterogeneous
grid structure. We propose a differentiable clustering-based
graph pooling for the first challenge and a direction-aware
extension of the graph convolution for the second challenge.
The combination of our graph pooling and directionaware graph convolution forms a neural model, dubbed
113946

