StyleMeUp: Towards Style-Agnostic Sketch-Based Image Retrieval
Aneeshan Sain1,2

Ayan Kumar Bhunia1 Yongxin Yang1,2 Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.

{a.sain, a.bhunia, yongxin.yang, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Existing Model

Abstract
Sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) is a cross-modal
matching problem which is typically solved by learning a
joint embedding space where the semantic content shared
between photo and sketch modalities are preserved. However, a fundamental challenge in SBIR has been largely ignored so far, that is, sketches are drawn by humans and
considerable style variations exist amongst different users.
An effective SBIR model needs to explicitly account for
this style diversity, crucially, to generalise to unseen user
styles. To this end, a novel style-agnostic SBIR model is
proposed. Different from existing models, a cross-modal
variational autoencoder (VAE) is employed to explicitly disentangle each sketch into a semantic content part shared
with the corresponding photo, and a style part unique to
the sketcher. Importantly, to make our model dynamically
adaptable to any unseen user styles, we propose to metatrain our cross-modal VAE by adding two style-adaptive
components: a set of feature transformation layers to its encoder and a regulariser to the disentangled semantic content latent code. With this meta-learning framework, our
model can not only disentangle the cross-modal shared semantic content for SBIR, but can adapt the disentanglement
to any unseen user style as well, making the SBIR model
truly style-agnostic. Extensive experiments show that our
style-agnostic model yields state-of-the-art performance for
both category-level and instance-level SBIR.

1. Introduction
Sketch as an input modality has been proven to be a worthy complement to text for photo image retrieval [8, 10, 4].
Its precision in visual description is particularly useful for
fine-grained retrieval, where the goal is to find a specific object instance rather than category [44, 49, 3]. Research has
flourished in recent years, where the main focus has been on
addressing the sketch-photo domain gap [33, 16, 44] and
data scarcity [5, 3, 10, 35, 12]. Thanks to these combined
efforts, reported performances have already shown promise
for practical adaptation.

User 1

Our Model

Style 1

User 2
Style 2
User 3
Style 3

Figure 1. Owing to subjective interpretation, different users sketch
the same object instance (a shoe here) very differently. Without
considering this style diversity, an existing SBIR model yields
completely different results for different sketches. With our styleagnostic model, the same intended object is retrieved.

However, there is an important issue that has largely been
ignored so far and has impeded the effectiveness of existing
SBIR models – sketches are drawn by humans and there
exists considerable style variations amongst users (Fig. 1).
This is a result of subjective interpretation and different
drawing skills of different users. Consequently, even with
the same object instance as reference, sketches of different
users can look drastically different as shown in the example
in Fig. 1. Existing SBIR models [30, 8, 47, 35, 44] focus
primarily on bridging the gap between the photo and sketch
modalities. This is typically achieved by learning a joint
embedding space where only the common semantic content part of a matching photo-sketch pair are preserved for
matching. However, the large style variations of different
users mean that the shared common semantic content can
also vary (e.g., Fig. 1 shows that different users may choose
to depict different characteristics of the same shoe). Crucially, it can vary in an unpredictable way – a commercial
SBIR model will be used mostly by users whose sketches
have never been used for model training. These models are
thus poorly equipped to cope with this style diversity and
unable to generalise to new user styles.
In this paper, a novel style-agnostic SBIR framework is

8504

