MultiBodySync:
Multi-Body Segmentation and Motion Estimation via 3D Scan Synchronization
Jiahui Huang1 He Wang2 Tolga Birdal2 Minhyuk Sung3 Federica Arrigoni4
Shi-Min Hu1 Leonidas Guibas2
1
2
Tsinghua University Stanford University 3 KAIST 4 University of Trento

Abstract
We present MultiBodySync, a novel, end-to-end trainable multi-body motion segmentation and rigid registration framework for multiple input 3D point clouds. The
two non-trivial challenges posed by this multi-scan multibody setting that we investigate are: (i) guaranteeing correspondence and segmentation consistency across multiple input point clouds capturing different spatial arrangements of bodies or body parts; and (ii) obtaining robust motion-based rigid body segmentation applicable to
novel object categories. We propose an approach to address these issues that incorporates spectral synchronization into an iterative deep declarative network, so as to simultaneously recover consistent correspondences as well
as motion segmentation. At the same time, by explicitly
disentangling the correspondence and motion segmentation estimation modules, we achieve strong generalizability across different object categories. Our extensive evaluations demonstrate that our method is effective on various
datasets ranging from rigid parts in articulated objects to
individually moving objects in a 3D scene, be it single-view
or full point clouds. Code at https://github.com/
huangjh-pub/multibody-sync.

1. Introduction
Motion analysis in dynamic point clouds is an emerging area, required by various applications such as surveillance, autonomous driving, and robotic manipulation. Our
human-made environments are dominated by rigid body
movements, ranging from articulated objects to solids like
furniture or vehicles. These settings require us to address
rigid motions of objects or object parts – which is often
referred to as the multi-body motion estimation problem.
Despite its importance, previous work has mainly focused
on specific scenarios with known category semantics, like
category-level articulated object segmentation [41], indoor
scene instance relocalization [65], or car movement detection [72], leaving the literature of generic motion segmentation relatively unexplored.

Input Point Clouds
(Multi-Scan)

Multi-Body Segmentation
& Motion Estimation

Colored Scan
Visualization

Figure 1. MultiBodySync. Given an unordered set of point clouds,
we simultaneously segment individual moving rigid parts/objects
and register them. The transformed point clouds according to the
first scan are aggregated and shown in the middle column. Note
that the algorithm does not use color information and the right
column is shown just for visualization.

Different from traditional single scan analysis algorithms
like semantic segmentation [39], the most challenging part
in multi-body motion analysis is to disambiguate and distinguish rigid bodies. There, we are naturally required to
jointly process and relate multiple inputs, to effectively find
consistent motion-based part/object segmentations as well
as point correspondences to enable a multi-way registration. It is even more challenging when the capture is not
temporally dense, i.e., an intermittent acquisition that does
not follow a stream such as a video, and might contain large
pose variations, hampering naive temporal tracking.
In this paper, we introduce a multi-scan multi-body segmentation and motion estimation problem, where the goal
is to simultaneously discover and register rigid bodies from
multiple scans, represented either as full or partial point
clouds, where objects come from unseen categories. As
an effective solution, we present MultiBodySync, a fully
end-to-end trainable deep declarative architecture [23] able
to process an arbitrary number of unordered point sets. As
shown in Fig. 1, given a set of scans, MultiBodySync begins
relating pairs of scans via 3D scene flow [78, 64] and con-

7108

