Normal Integration via Inverse Plane Fitting
with Minimum Point-to-Plane Distance

1

Xu Cao1 Boxin Shi2,3 Fumio Okura1 Yasuyuki Matsushita1
Osaka University 2 Peking University 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract
This paper presents a surface normal integration method
that solves an inverse problem of local plane fitting. Surface reconstruction from normal maps is essential in photometric shape reconstruction. To this end, we formulate
normal integration in the camera coordinates and jointly
solve for 3D point positions and local plane displacements.
Unlike existing methods that consider the vertical distances
between 3D points, we minimize the sum of squared pointto-plane distances. Our method can deal with both orthographic or perspective normal maps with arbitrary boundaries. Compared to existing normal integration methods,
our method avoids the checkerboard artifact and performs
more robustly against natural boundaries, sharp features,
and outliers. We further provide a geometric analysis of the
source of artifacts that appear in previous methods based on
our plane fitting formulation. Experimental results on analytically computed, synthetic, and real-world surfaces show
that our method yields accurate and stable reconstruction
for both orthographic and perspective normal maps1 .

1. Introduction
Reconstructing a surface from its surface normal map,
a problem called normal integration [28], is essential for
photometric 3D reconstruction, such as shape from shading [19], photometric stereo [34], and shape from polarization [20]. Among all approaches to normal integration, variational-based methods have been studied for many
years [14, 16, 28], which are based on functional optimization. The objectives are turned into linear systems by either discretizing the functional itself [14] or its optimal
condition [28, 29] in the form of discrete Poisson’s equation. Recently, a non-variational approach based on discrete geometry processing (DGP) [37] was proposed for
normal integration. DGP also solves a linear system to estimate the surface. For all the three linear systems, however,
1 Source code is available at https : / / github . com /
hoshino042/NormalIntegration.

Functional [14]

Poisson [29]

DGP [37]

Our reconstruction
Figure 1. (Top) Typical problems in solving the linear systems for
normal integration. From left to right: The checkerboard artifact,
Gibbs phenomenon near sharp features, and sensitivity to outliers.
(Bottom) Our results from the same normal maps as above. There
is no checkerboard artifact, Gibbs phenomenon almost disappears,
and outliers hardly distort the surface.

their least squares approximate solutions suffer from several
problems. For discrete functional, a checkerboard artifact
was reported in [38], as shown in Fig. 1 top-left. Discrete
Poisson’s equation and DGP are sensitive to sharp features
or outliers, as shown in Fig. 1 top-middle and top-right.
Various remedies have been studied to improve the robustness against these artifacts. First, regularization [13, 14]
or smoothness term [38] was used to refine the reconstruction quality. However, introducing a regularization term requires tuning a weighting factor, increasing the effort to obtain a satisfactory result. Second, 2-norm of the residual
vector was replaced by p-norm [6] to increase the robustness; however, it comes with heavier computation. Third,
normal vectors with small elevation angles was treated as
outliers [37], but the heuristic thresholding does not ensure
the robustness to outliers.
Unlike the existing approaches, we focus on the residual vector of the linear systems. Discretizing the functional
or Poisson’s equation by finite difference leads to measuring the difference between the height values of 3D points.
The difference is therefore the vertical distance (i.e., the

2382

