Learning An Explicit Weighting Scheme for Adapting Complex HSI Noise
Xiangyu Rui1 , Xiangyong Cao1 , Qi Xie1 , Zongsheng Yue1 , Qian Zhao1 , Deyu Meng1,2 *
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University; 2 Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou
xyrui@outlook.com, zsyzam@gmail.com
{caoxiangyong, xie.qi, timmy.zhaoqian, dymeng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

An efficient approach for handling hyperspectral image
(HSI) denoising issue is to impose weights on different HSI
pixels to suppress negative influence brought by noisy elements. Such weighting scheme, however, largely depends on
the prior understanding or subjective distribution assumption on HSI noises, making them easily biased to complicated real noises, and hardly generalizable to diverse practical scenarios. Against this issue, this paper proposes a
new scheme aiming to capture general weighting principle in a data-driven manner. Specifically, such weighting
principle is delivered by an explicit function, called hyperweight-net (HWnet), mapping from an input noisy image
to its properly imposed weights. A Bayesian framework
as well as a variational inference algorithm for inferring
HWnet parameters is elaborately designed, expecting to extract the latent weighting rule for general diverse and complicated noisy HSIs. Comprehensive experiments substantiate that the learned HWnet can be not only finely generalized to different noise types from those used in training, but
also effectively transferred to other weighted models. Besides, as a sounder guidance, HWnet can help to more faithfully and robustly achieve deep hyperspectral prior(DHP).
The extracted weights by HWnet are verified to be able to
effectively capture complex noise knowledge underlying input HSI, revealing its working insight in experiments.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral images (HSIs) record various adjacent
electromagnetic spectrums of the same scene and provide
more plentiful information than gray-scale or RGB images.
Accordingly, over the past decades, HSIs have contributed
to many practical applications such as food security [29],
disease diagnosis [35], remote sensing [50] and so on.
The practically collected HSIs, however, are often corrupted with complex noises due to sensor erros, atmosphere,
photon, etc., like stripe and deadline ones [3]. Especially,
* Corresponding author

Predict Weights
HWnet

( )

Abstract

Noisy HSI

( )

|

= (

Denoising Problem

( )

Estimate

⊙

as ( − )/

−

+

| , )

Figure 1: (a) Our method learns an explicit HWnet function, capable of directly obtaining a proper weighting scheme for an input
noisy HSI image. (b) The learned HWnet can be used in plug &
play for weight setting of a general weighted denoising model.

the real HSI noises are usually distributed non-i.i.d. across
both spatial and spectral modes, i.e., different in different
spatial locations [4], and varied in different bands [9]. This
tends to largely hamper the performance of subsequent HSI
processing tasks, and a pre-processing step for HSI denoising is thus necessary. But the complexity of real HSI noises
makes it extremely hard to design a unique model for efficient and general HSI denoising.
An efficient utilized approach is to impose weights on
different HSI pixels, expressed as:
min ||W ⊙ (Y − X)||F + λR(X),
(1)
X
where Y, X ∈ Rhw×b represent the observed noisy and
the recovered HSIs, respectively, h, w, b denote the spatial
height, width, and spectral band number of the investigated
HSI. Note that we have reshape the spatial width and height
modes as one unique dimension. || · ||F denotes the Frobenius norm, and ⊙ means the element-wise Hadamard production. R(·) denotes a general regularization term. The
rationality of this scheme can be easily interpreted: larger
weights should be assigned to less polluted HSI pixels/areas
and vice verse, so as to suppress the negative influence
brought by the noisy elements.
There are mainly two manners used for presetting the
weighting scheme in (1). One is to pre-specify a certain
weighting function [10] or directly pre-fix weights on all elements [41] based on prior understanding to the problem or
16739

