Self-supervised Learning of Depth Inference for Multi-view Stereo
Jiayu Yang1 , Jose M. Alvarez2 , Miaomiao Liu1
1
Australian National University, 2 NVIDIA
{jiayu.yang, miaomiao.liu}@anu.edu.au, josea@nvidia.com

Khot et al. [13]

Ours (Unsupervised)

Ours (Self-supervised)

Figure 1: Point cloud reconstructed by existing unsupervised MVS network [13] and our methods. Best view on screen.

Abstract
Recent supervised multi-view depth estimation networks
have achieved promising results. Similar to all supervised approaches, these networks require ground-truth data
during training. However, collecting a large amount of
multi-view depth data is very challenging. Here, we propose a self-supervised learning framework for multi-view
stereo that exploit pseudo labels from the input data. We
start by learning to estimate depth maps as initial pseudo
labels under an unsupervised learning framework relying on image reconstruction loss as supervision. We
then refine the initial pseudo labels using a carefully designed pipeline leveraging depth information inferred from
a higher resolution image and neighboring views. We use
these high-quality pseudo labels as the supervision signal to train the network and improve, iteratively, its performance by self-training. Extensive experiments on the
DTU dataset show that our proposed self-supervised learning framework outperforms existing unsupervised multiview stereo networks by a large margin and performs
on par compared to the supervised counterpart. Code
is available at https://github.com/JiayuYANG/
Self-supervised-CVP-MVSNet.

1. Introduction
The goal of Multi-view Stereo (MVS) is to reconstruct
the 3D model of a scene from a set of images captured at

multiple viewpoints. While this problem has been studied
for decades [19], the current best performance is achieved
by cost-volume based supervised deep neural networks for
MVS [23, 24, 22, 9, 5, 21]. The success of these networks
mainly relies on large amount of ground truth depth as training data, which is generally captured by expensive and multiple synchronized images and depth sensors.
The use of synthetic data is considered a good alternative
to handle the main challenges in collecting training data for
MVS [25]. Given a set of 3D scene models with a proper
setting of lighting conditions, we can obtain a large number of synthetic multiple view images with ground truth
depths [25]. While it is possible to train the network using this synthetic data, for successfully deploying the model
in real scenes, we still require to ﬁne-tune the model using data from the target domain [16]. Another alternative is
adopting an unsupervised learning strategy [6, 13]. In this
case, the few existing unsupervised MVS approaches use
an image reconstruction loss to supervise the training process. This training strategy heavily relies on image colors’
photometric consistency for multiple views images, which
is sensitive to illumination changes. While both alternatives
remove the dependency on depth labels, their performance
is far inferior compared to their corresponding supervised
counterparts on the target domain.
In this paper, we propose a self-supervised learning
framework for depth inference from multi-view images.
Our goal is to generate high-quality depth maps as pseudo
labels for training the network only from multiple view
images. To this end, we ﬁrst rely on an image recon-

7526

