i3DMM: Deep Implicit 3D Morphable Model of Human Heads
Tarun Yenamandra1,2 , Ayush Tewari2 , Florian Bernard1,2 , Hans-Peter Seidel2 , Mohamed Elgharib2 ,
Daniel Cremers1 , and Christian Theobalt2
1
TU Munich, 2 MPI Informatics, Saarland Informatics Campus

Edited identity-color space

Head scan

i3DMM fit

Edited expression-geometry space

Edited hairstyle space (geometry + color)

Edited identity-geometry space

Figure 1. Our deep implicit 3D morphable model (i3DMM) of human heads includes semantically disentangled spaces for color (identity
and hairstyle), and geometry (identity, expression, and hairstyle). We can fit i3DMM to head scans, and edit the different components.

Abstract
We present the first deep implicit 3D morphable model
(i3DMM) of full heads. Unlike earlier morphable face models it not only captures identity-specific geometry, texture,
and expressions of the frontal face, but also models the entire head, including hair. We collect a new dataset consisting of 64 people with different expressions and hairstyles
to train i3DMM. Our approach has the following favorable
properties: (i) It is the first full head morphable model that
includes hair. (ii) In contrast to mesh-based models it can
be trained on merely rigidly aligned scans, without requiring difficult non-rigid registration. (iii) We design a novel
architecture to decouple the shape model into an implicit
reference shape and a deformation of this reference shape.
With that, dense correspondences between shapes can be
learned implicitly. (iv) This architecture allows us to semantically disentangle the geometry and color components,
as color is learned in the reference space. Geometry is
further disentangled as identity, expressions, and hairstyle,
while color is disentangled as identity and hairstyle components. We show the merits of i3DMM using ablation
studies, comparisons to state-of-the-art models, and applications such as semantic head editing and texture transfer.
We will make our model publicly available1 .
1 http://gvv.mpi-inf.mpg.de/projects/i3DMM/

1. Introduction
3D morphable models (3DMMs) are parametric models of geometry and appearance of human faces, with
widespread use in applications such as image and video
editing, face recognition and cognitive science [20]. These
models are trained using 3D scans of humans, e.g., laser
scans [4], depth sensor-based scans [9], or photometric
multi-view scans [28]. As 3DMMs usually learn a deformation space of a fixed template mesh, the training shapes
commonly need to be brought into dense surface correspondence with each other. Computing such correspondence for
the face region alone is already hard and often requires a
challenging non-convex optimizaton problem [20]; computing dense correspondence for the rest of the head and the
hair is close to impossible. Therefore, as well as due to the
lack of large 3D scan datasets with hair, most 3DMMs only
capture the face region. While some recent approaches aim
to model the complete head [15, 28, 41, 40], they do not
capture the hair region, and the appearance in the head region (if captured) is very limited.
In this work, we present i3DMM, the first implicit 3D
morphable model which captures the full head region, including hair deformations and appearance. We capture a
new dataset of full photogrammetric head scans of 64 people for training. Each subject performs several expressions and natural hair is captured. Since such scans are

12803

