Facial Action Unit Detection With Transformers
Geethu Miriam Jacob
Rakuten Institute of Technology

Björn Stenger
Rakuten Institute of Technology

geethu.jacob@rakuten.com

bjorn.stenger@rakuten.com

Abstract
The Facial Action Coding System is a taxonomy for finegrained facial expression analysis. This paper proposes a
method for detecting Facial Action Units (FAU), which define particular face muscle activity, from an input image.
FAU detection is formulated as a multi-task learning problem, where image features and attention maps are input to
a branch for each action unit to extract discriminative feature embeddings, using a new loss function, the center contrastive (CC) loss. We employ a new FAU correlation network, based on a transformer encoder architecture, to capture the relationships between different action units for the
wide range of expressions in the training data. The resulting
features are shown to yield high classification performance.
We validate our design choices, including the use of CCloss and Tversky loss functions, in ablative experiments. We
show that the proposed method outperforms state-of-theart techniques on two public datasets, BP4D and DISFA,
with an absolute improvement of the F1-score of over 2%
on each.

1. Introduction
Facial expressions are a primary means of conveying
nonverbal information. Some expressions are universally
understood, such as exhilaration or disappointment. However, expressions are specific to individuals, which motivates a person-independent representation in the form of the
Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [1]. This system describes a taxonomy of facial action units (FAU) for encoding facial expressions, based on the observed activation of
muscles or muscle groups, such as Brow Lowerer or Cheek
Raiser. Each facial expression can be mapped using this
system, and automatic FACS analysis has been applied in
domains such as healthcare, entertainment, and photography [2]. The task of FAU detection can be formulated as a
multi-label binary classification problem for detecting each
action unit [3, 4], with some works taking into account the
degree of FAU activation [5, 6, 7].
Since action units are defined by particular muscle acti-

Figure 1: Overview. Two levels of attention are captured in the
proposed approach. (a) The first level focuses on the spatial regions using an Attention Branch Network [8] and (b) the second
level of attention captures the relation between FAU feature embeddings using a transformer encoder. For each image, highly
correlated FAUs are shown in same color.

vations, the spatial extent of each action unit is limited. We
therefore employ attention maps to focus on regions of interest. Our attention model builds on the idea of Attention
Branch Networks [8], which introduce a branch structure
for estimating attention, and have been shown to perform
well on image classification and other visual tasks [8]. In
our case, separate attention maps are learnt for each action unit. Additionally, since the FAUs are related with
each other, the feature embeddings learnt using the attention maps are input to a correlation unit, using a transformer
encoder [3, 9, 10].
Figure 1 illustrates the two types of relationships we capture using our model. We model the spatial regions of individual action units using attention maps (Figure 1 (a)).
We then capture the relationship between different action
units by self-attention, using transformer encoders (Figure 1
(b)). In the figure, the spatial attention as well as the FAU
correlations for two images are shown. The full list of
AUs are listed to illustrate the AU correlations predicted by
our model. Two sample active AUs are highlighted in the
left and the corresponding correlated AUs (based on selfattention) are shown with the same color on the right in each
17680

