LayoutTransformer:
Scene Layout Generation with Conceptual and Spatial Diversity
Cheng-Fu Yang1∗
Wan-Cyuan Fan1 * Fu-En Yang1,2
Yu-Chiang Frank Wang1,2
1
Graduate Institute of Communication Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan
2
ASUS Intelligent Cloud Services, Taiwan
{b05901082, r09942092, f07942077, ycwang}@ntu.edu.tw

Abstract
When translating text inputs into layouts or images, existing works typically require explicit descriptions of each
object in a scene, including their spatial information or
the associated relationships. To better exploit the text input, so that implicit objects or relationships can be properly inferred during layout generation, we propose a LayoutTransformer Network (LT-Net) in this paper. Given a
scene-graph input, our LT-Net uniquely encodes the semantic features for exploiting their co-occurrences and implicit
relationships. This allows one to manipulate conceptually
diverse yet plausible layout outputs. Moreover, the decoder
of our LT-Net translates the encoded contextual features
into bounding boxes with self-supervised relation consistency preserved. By fitting their distributions to Gaussian
mixture models, spatially-diverse layouts can be additionally produced by LT-Net. We conduct extensive experiments
on the datasets of MS-COCO and Visual Genome, and confirm the effectiveness and plausibility of our LT-Net over
recent layout generation models. Codes will be released at
LayoutTransformer.

Generated layouts

Generated image

Input scene graph

Spatially diverse
layout generation

Inferred
Object

Conceptually diverse
layout generation

Predicate

Generated image

Generated
scene graph

Figure 1. Layout generation with conceptual and spatial diversity.
Given a scene graph input, we aim to produce diverse plausible
layouts with the ability to exploit implicit objects/relations.

1. Introduction
Text-to-image (T2I) generation takes the input text descriptions and converts them into realistic images, which
would beneﬁt a massive number of applications including
computer-aided design, art generation and image editing
emerging, it attracts the attention from researchers in computer vision and deep learning communities. In addition
to the need to output high-quality images [19, 26, 27], the
main challenge in T2I lies in the generation of plausible images, with semantic relationships preserved across different
objects. Thus, how to bridge the gap between semantic and
perceptual information requires the efforts from researchers
in the ﬁelds of computer vision and machine learning.
* Equal Contribution

A common challenge in text-to-layout or image is that,
objects and their relations described in text sentences may
not be easily described, which would result less plausible
outputs. Therefore, Johnson et al. [8] choose to convert textual input into scene graph (SG) as an intermediate text representation, which explicitly deﬁnes the objects and their
relationships in a scene. Generally, the task of SG-to-image
can be decomposed into the following two steps: SG-tolayout [6, 9, 12] and layout-to-image [13, 25, 21, 1] generation. The former focuses on modeling the geometric
properties of objects while retaining their semantic characteristics. The latter targets at synthesizing realistic images conditioned on the given layout conﬁguration. To address text-to-layout generation, [9] apply a variational au13732

