How Robust are Randomized Smoothing based Defenses to Data Poisoning?
Akshay Mehra1 , Bhavya Kailkhura2 , Pin-Yu Chen3 and Jihun Hamm1
1

Tulane University

2

Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory

3

IBM Research

{amehra, jhamm3}@tulane.edu, kailkhura1@llnl.gov, pin-yu.chen@ibm.com

Abstract
Predictions of certifiably robust classifiers remain constant in a neighborhood of a point, making them resilient to
test-time attacks with a guarantee. In this work, we present
a previously unrecognized threat to robust machine learning
models that highlights the importance of training-data quality in achieving high certified adversarial robustness. Specifically, we propose a novel bilevel optimization based data poisoning attack that degrades the robustness guarantees of certifiably robust classifiers. Unlike other poisoning attacks that
reduce the accuracy of the poisoned models on a small set of
target points, our attack reduces the average certified radius
(ACR) of an entire target class in the dataset. Moreover, our
attack is effective even when the victim trains the models
from scratch using state-of-the-art robust training methods
such as Gaussian data augmentation[8], MACER[36], and
SmoothAdv[29] that achieve high certified adversarial robustness. To make the attack harder to detect, we use cleanlabel poisoning points with imperceptible distortions. The
effectiveness of the proposed method is evaluated by poisoning MNIST and CIFAR10 datasets and training deep neural
networks using previously mentioned training methods and
certifying the robustness with randomized smoothing. The
ACR of the target class, for models trained on generated poison data, can be reduced by more than 30%. Moreover, the
poisoned data is transferable to models trained with different
training methods and models with different architectures.

1. Introduction
Data poisoning [3, 17, 31, 32, 37] is a training-time attack
where the attacker is assumed to have access to the training
data on which the victim will train the model. The attacker
can modify the training data in a manner that the model
trained on this poisoned data performs as the attacker desires.
The data hungry nature of modern machine learning methods
make them vulnerable to poisoning attacks. Attackers can
place the poisoned data online and wait for it to be scraped
by victims trying to increase the size for their training sets.
Another easy target for data poisoning is data collection by
crowd sourcing where malicious users can corrupt the data

they contribute. In most cases, an attacker can modify only
certain parts of the training data such as change the features
or labels for a speciﬁc class or modify a small subset of the
data from all classes. In this work, we assume the attacker
wants to affect the performance of the victim’s models on a
target class and modiﬁes only the features of the points belonging to that class (without affecting the labels). To evade
detection, the attacker is constrained to only add imperceptibly small perturbations to the points of the target class. Many
previous works [26, 31, 16, 19, 37, 7, 18, 33] have shown
the effectiveness of poisoning in affecting the accuracy of
models trained on poisoned data compared to the accuracy
achievable by training with clean data. In most works, the
victim is assumed to use standard training by minimizing the
empirical loss on the poisoned data to train the models and
thus the attack is optimized to hurt the accuracy of standard
training. However, recent research on test-time evasion attacks [5, 1, 34, 4] suggests that models trained with standard
training are not robust to adversarial examples, making the
assumption of victim relying on standard training to train
the models for deployment questionable.
Thus, in a realistic scenario, where the aim of the victim is to deploy the model, it’s better to assume that the
victim will rely on training procedures that yield classiﬁers
which are provably robust to test-time attacks. Several recent
works have proposed methods for training certiﬁably robust
models whose predictions are guaranteed to be constant in
a neighbourhood of a point. However, many of these methods [28, 13, 15, 35] do not scale to deep neural networks or
large datasets, due to their high complexity. Moreover, the
effect of training data quality on the performance of these
certiﬁed defenses at test time remains largely unexplored.
Recently, randomized smoothing (RS) based certiﬁcation
methods [20, 21, 8] were shown to be scalable to deep neural
networks and high dimensional datasets enabling researchers
to propose training procedures [29, 36] that lead to models
with high certiﬁed robustness. Thus, we assume that a victim
will rely on RS based certiﬁcation methods to measure the
certiﬁed robustness and use RS based training procedures
to train the models. The fact that a victim can train with
a method that improves certiﬁed adversarial robustness is

13244

