End-to-End Object Detection with Fully Convolutional Network
Jianfeng Wang1 * Lin Song2 *† Zeming Li1 Hongbin Sun2 Jian Sun1 Nanning Zheng2
1
Megvii Technology 2 College of Artificial Intelligence, Xi’an Jiaotong University
wangjianfeng@megvii.com
{lizeming,sunjian}@megvii.com

stevengrove@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
{hsun,nnzheng}@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Mainstream object detectors based on the fully convolutional network has achieved impressive performance. While
most of them still need a hand-designed non-maximum suppression (NMS) post-processing, which impedes fully endto-end training. In this paper, we give the analysis of discarding NMS, where the results reveal that a proper label
assignment plays a crucial role. To this end, for fully convolutional detectors, we introduce a Prediction-aware OneTo-One (POTO) label assignment for classification to enable end-to-end detection, which obtains comparable performance with NMS. Besides, a simple 3D Max Filtering
(3DMF) is proposed to utilize the multi-scale features and
improve the discriminability of convolutions in the local
region. With these techniques, our end-to-end framework
achieves competitive performance against many state-ofthe-art detectors with NMS on COCO and CrowdHuman
datasets. The code is available at https://github.
com/Megvii-BaseDetection/DeFCN .

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental topic in computer vision, which predicts a set of bounding boxes with predefined category labels for each image. Most of mainstream detectors [9, 22, 30, 54] utilize some hand-crafted
designs such as anchor-based label assignment and nonmaximum suppression (NMS). Recently, a quite number of
methods [46, 58, 5] have been proposed to eliminate the
pre-defined set of anchor boxes by using distance-aware
and distribution-based label assignments. Although they
achieve remarkable progress and superior performance,
there is still a challenge of discarding the NMS postprocessing, which hinders the fully end-to-end training.
To tackle this issue, Learnable NMS [13], Soft NMS [1]
and other NMS variants [12, 24, 15], and CenterNet [5] are
* Equal contribution.
† This work was done at Megvii Technology.

Figure 1. As shown in the dashed box, most detectors based on the
fully convolutional network adopt multiple predictions and NMS
post-processing for each instance. With the proposed predictionaware one-to-one label assignment and 3D Max Filtering, our endto-end detector can directly perform a single prediction for each
instance without post-processing.

proposed to improve the duplicate removal, but they still do
not provide an effective end-to-end training strategy. Meanwhile, many approaches [43, 35, 26, 32, 36] based on recurrent neural networks have been introduced to predict the
bounding box for each instance by using an autoregressive
decoder. These approaches give naturally sequential modeling for the prediction of bounding boxes. But they are only
evaluated on some small datasets without modern detectors,
and the iterative manner makes the inference process inefficient.
Recently, DETR [3] introduces a bipartite matching
based training strategy and transformers with the parallel
decoder to enable end-to-end detection. It achieves competitive performance against many state-of-the-art detectors.
However, DETR currently suffers from much longer training duration to coverage and relatively lower performance
on the small objects. To this end, this paper explores a new
perspective: could a fully convolutional network achieve
competitive end-to-end object detection?
In this paper, we attempt to answer this question in two
dimensions, i.e., label assignment and network architecture. As shown in Fig. 1, most of fully convolutional detec-

15849

