Looking into Your Speech:
Learning Cross-modal Affinity for Audio-visual Speech Separation
Jiyoung Lee1∗

Soo-Whan Chung1,2∗

Sunok Kim3

easy00@yonsei.ac.kr

soowhan.chung@navercorp.com

sunok.kim@kau.ac.kr

1

Hong-Goo Kang1†

Kwanghoon Sohn1†

hgkang@yonsei.ac.kr

khsohn@yonsei.ac.kr

Department of Electrical & Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Korea
2
Naver Corporation, Korea 3 Korea Aerospace University, Korea
https://caffnet.github.io/

Audio ahead of video

A

Synchronized

B

A

Video ahead of audio

Video ahead of audio
A

B

B

A
B

Video

Audio
A
B

Figure 1: We wish to hear individual speech of a desired speaker only even if there is frame discontinuity in the audio-visual
data. When audio and video segments are taken from different points in time (solid box),𝜸𝜸
it is intuitively difficult to separate
speech of each speaker compared 𝜹𝜹
to the aligned cases (dashed box). Best viewed in color.

Abstract

In this paper, we address the problem of separating individual speech signals from videos using audio-visual neural
processing. Most conventional approaches utilize framewise matching criteria to extract shared information between co-occurring audio and video. Thus, their performance heavily depends on the accuracy of audio-visual synchronization and the effectiveness of their representations.
To overcome the frame discontinuity problem between two
modalities due to transmission delay mismatch or jitter, we
propose a cross-modal affinity network (CaffNet) that learns
global correspondence as well as locally-varying affinities
between audio and visual streams. Given that the global
term provides stability over a temporal sequence at the
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work
† Corresponding authors

This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of
Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT). (NRF2021R1A2C2006703).

utterance-level, this resolves the label permutation problem
characterized by inconsistent assignments. By extending
the proposed cross-modal affinity on the complex network,
we further improve the separation performance in the complex spectral domain. Experimental results verify that the
proposed methods outperform conventional ones on various datasets, demonstrating their advantages in real-world
scenarios.

1. Introduction
Humans have a remarkable auditory system that can
perceive sound sources separately in their conversations
even in the presence of many surrounding sounds, including background noise, crowded babbling, thumping
music, and sometimes other loud voices [1, 2]. However, reliably separating a target speech signal for humancomputer interaction (HCI) systems such as speech recognition [3, 4, 5], speaker recognition [6, 7, 8], and emotion
recognition [9, 10] is still a challenging task because it is an
ill-posed problem.

1336

