HOTR: End-to-End Human-Object Interaction Detection with Transformers
Bumsoo Kim1,2

Junhyun Lee2
1

Jaewoo Kang2

Kakao Brain

2

Eun-Sol Kim1,† Hyunwoo J. Kim2,†

Korea University

{bumsoo.brain, eunsol.kim}@kakaobrain.com
{meliketoy, ljhyun33, kangj, hyunwoojkim}@korea.ac.kr

Abstract
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection is a task of
identifying “a set of interactions” in an image, which involves the i) localization of the subject (i.e., humans) and
target (i.e., objects) of interaction, and ii) the classification of the interaction labels. Most existing methods have
indirectly addressed this task by detecting human and object instances and individually inferring every pair of the
detected instances. In this paper, we present a novel framework, referred by HOTR, which directly predicts a set of
hhuman, object, interactioni triplets from an image based
on a transformer encoder-decoder architecture. Through
the set prediction, our method effectively exploits the inherent semantic relationships in an image and does not
require time-consuming post-processing which is the main
bottleneck of existing methods. Our proposed algorithm
achieves the state-of-the-art performance in two HOI detection benchmarks with an inference time under 1 ms after
object detection.

Figure 1. Time vs. Performance analysis for HOI detectors on
V-COCO dataset. HOI recognition inference time is measured by
subtracting the object detection time from the end-to-end inference
time. Blue circle represents sequential HOI detectors, orange circle represents parallel HOI detectors and red star represents ours.
Our method achieves an HOI recognition inference time of 0.9ms,
being significantly faster than the parallel HOI detectors such as
IPNet [30] or UnionDet [12] (the comparison between parallel
HOI detectors is highlighted in blue).

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection has been formally defined in [8] as the task to predict a set of hhuman,
object, interactioni triplets within an image. Previous methods have addressed this task in an indirect manner by
performing object detection first and associating hhuman,
objecti pairs afterward with separate post-processing steps.
Especially, early attempts (i.e., sequential HOI detectors [5,
18, 17, 26]) have performed this association with a subsequent neural network, thus being time-consuming and computationally expensive.
To overcome the redundant inference structure of sequential HOI detectors, recent researches [30, 19, 12] proposed parallel HOI detectors. These works explicitly localize interactions with either interaction boxes (i.e., the
tightest box that covers both the center point of an object
† corresponding authors

pair) [30, 19] or union boxes (i.e., the tightest box that covers both the box regions of an object pair) [12]. The localized interactions are associated with object detection results to complete the hhuman, object, interactioni triplet.
The time-consuming neural network inference is replaced
with a simple matching based on heuristics such as distance [30, 19] or IoU [12].
However, previous works in HOI detection are still
limited in two aspects; i) They require additional postprocessing steps like suppressing near-duplicate predictions
and heuristic thresholding. ii) Although it has been shown
that modeling relations between objects helps object detection [11, 2], the effectiveness of considering high-level dependency for interactions in HOI detection has not yet been
fully explored.
In this paper, we propose a fast and accurate HOI algorithm named HOTR (Human-Object interaction TRans-

74

