Adaptive Consistency Prior based Deep Network for Image Denoising
Chao Ren∗
Xiaohai He
Chuncheng Wang
Zhibo Zhao
College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China
{chaoren, hxh}@scu.edu.cn, wangchuncheng@stu.scu.edu.cn, mzhibozhao@gmail.com

Abstract
Recent studies have shown that deep networks can
achieve promising results for image denoising. However,
how to simultaneously incorporate the valuable achievements of traditional methods into the network design and
improve network interpretability is still an open problem. To
solve this problem, we propose a novel model-based denoising method to inform the design of our denoising network.
First, by introducing a non-linear filtering operator, a reliability matrix, and a high-dimensional feature transformation function into the traditional consistency prior, we propose a novel adaptive consistency prior (ACP). Second, by
incorporating the ACP term into the maximum a posteriori
framework, a model-based denoising method is proposed.
This method is further used to inform the network design,
leading to a novel end-to-end trainable and interpretable
deep denoising network, called DeamNet. Note that the
unfolding process leads to a promising module called dual
element-wise attention mechanism (DEAM) module. To the
best of our knowledge, both our ACP constraint and DEAM
module have not been reported in the previous literature.
Extensive experiments verify the superiority of DeamNet on
both synthetic and real noisy image datasets.

1. Introduction
In computer vision applications, images corrupted by
noise will significantly affect the further analysis and process. Generally, representative image denoising methods
can be categorized as filtering-based methods [48, 23, 4,
11, 15, 29, 26], model-based methods [30, 42, 14, 39, 56,
19, 55, 54, 57, 37, 38, 58, 7], and learning-based methods
[14, 33, 61, 34, 31, 32, 41, 22, 18, 6, 17, 3, 24].
Filtering-Based Methods. Classical filtering-based
methods, e.g., median filtering [48] and Wiener filtering
[23], etc., exploit certain manually designed low pass filters
to remove the image noise. Knaus et al. [26] proposed to
progressively reduce noise by deterministic annealing with
∗ Corresponding author.

Figure 1. A real noisy image from SIDD dataset [1]. Compared
with other denoising methods, DeamNet achieves better results.

a simple iterative filtering scheme. In addition, based on the
observation that a natural image patch generally has many
similar counterparts within the same image, some works remove the noise by using a stack of non-local similar patches, such as the classic non-local means (NLM) algorithm
[4], and the block-matching based 3D filtering (BM3D) algorithm [11]. Because of the success of NLM and BM3D,
various non-local filtering methods appeared [15, 29]. However, the block-wise operation may lead to blurred outputs.
Moreover, the difficulty of setting the hyper-parameters of
these methods will significantly affect the performance.
Model-Based Methods. The model-based methods usually formulate the denoising task as a maximum a posteriori (MAP)-based optimization problem, whose performance
mainly depends on image priors. With the assumption that
an image patch can be sparsely represented by some proper basis function, the sparsity prior [42, 14] was proposed
for image restoration (IR). Recently, a trilateral weighted
sparse coding scheme based image denoising method was
proposed for real-world images in [56]. With the observation that a matrix formed by the nonlocal similar patches
in a natural image has a low-rank property, the low-rank
prior based image denoising methods [19, 55, 57, 54] were
proposed. For instance, Xu et al. [19] proposed a weighted nuclear norm minimization (WNNM) method for IR via low-rank matrix approximation. In addition, Pang et al.
[37] introduced graph-based regularizers to reduce image

8596

