Nutrition5k: Towards Automatic Nutritional Understanding of Generic Food
Quin Thames

Arjun Karpur
Wade Norris∗
Fangting Xia
Tobias Weyand
Jack Sim

Liviu Panait

Google Research, USA
{quinbob,arjunkarpur,sukixia,liviu,weyand,jacksim}@google.com

Perception Labs∗
wnorris@perceptionlabs.ai

Abstract
Understanding the nutritional content of food from visual data is a challenging computer vision problem, with
the potential to have a positive and widespread impact on
public health. Studies in this area are limited to existing
datasets in the field that lack sufficient diversity or labels
required for training models with nutritional understanding capability. We introduce Nutrition5k, a novel dataset
of 5k diverse, real world food dishes with corresponding
video streams, depth images, component weights, and high
accuracy nutritional content annotation. We demonstrate
the potential of this dataset by training a computer vision
algorithm capable of predicting the caloric and macronutrient values of a complex, real world dish at an accuracy that outperforms professional nutritionists. Further we present a baseline for incorporating depth sensor
data to improve nutrition predictions. We release Nutrition5k in the hope that it will accelerate innovation in the
space of nutritional understanding. The dataset is available at https : / / github . com / google - research datasets/Nutrition5k.

1. Introduction
The nutritional composition of a person’s diet is inextricably linked to health, happiness, and longevity. Making it
easier to understand and track the nutritional breakdown of
the food we eat enables us to make better dietary choices
and potentially live longer and healthier lives. Despite the
considerable impact that what we eat has on us, the tools for
trying to understand food are extremely cumbersome and
limited.
Currently, the main approach for an individual who
wants to record the nutritional content of their food intake is
to utilize a tracking app such as MyFitnessPal. These types
∗ Work done while Wade Norris was at Google.

Figure 1.
tion5k.

Example representation of data contained in Nutri-

of apps enable a user to set intake goals for total calories,
as well as for specific macronutrients (carbohydrate, protein, and fat), and provide an interface to log and aggregate
meals to see if these goals are met. When doing this type of
tracking, each ingredient or dish consumed must be individually logged along with the exact portion size. These logs
can then be automatically converted to nutritional content
using average per portion values saved in a database. Many
apps require a scale to individually weigh and log each ingredient the user eats, but this can be a tedious and time

8903

