Learning Invariant Representations and Risks
for Semi-supervised Domain Adaptation
Bo Li13 * Yezhen Wang23 * Shanghang Zhang1 *
Dongsheng Li3
1
1
Kurt Keutzer
Trevor Darrell
Han Zhao4†
1
BAIR, UC Berkeley 2 UC San Diego 3 Microsoft Research Asia 4 UIUC

Abstract
The success of supervised learning hinges on the assumption that the training and test data come from the same
underlying distribution, which is often not valid in practice
due to potential distribution shift. In light of this, most existing methods for unsupervised domain adaptation focus
on achieving domain-invariant representations and small
source domain error. However, recent works have shown
that this is not sufficient to guarantee good generalization
on the target domain, and in fact, is provably detrimental under label distribution shift. Furthermore, in many
real-world applications it is often feasible to obtain a small
amount of labeled data from the target domain and use
them to facilitate model training with source data. Inspired by the above observations, in this paper we propose the first method that aims to simultaneously learn invariant representations and risks under the setting of semisupervised domain adaptation (Semi-DA). First, we provide
a finite sample bound for both classification and regression problems under Semi-DA. The bound suggests a principled way to obtain target generalization, i.e., by aligning both the marginal and conditional distributions across
domains in feature space. Motivated by this, we then introduce the LIRR algorithm for jointly Learning Invariant
Representations and Risks. Finally, extensive experiments
are conducted on both classification and regression tasks,
which demonstrate that LIRR consistently achieves stateof-the-art performance and significant improvements compared with the methods that only learn invariant representations or invariant risks. Our code will be released at
LIRR@github

1. Introduction
The success of supervised learning hinges on the key assumption that test data should share the same distribution
* Equal contribution.
† Work done while at Carnegie Mellon University

with the training data. Unfortunately, in most of the realworld applications, data are dynamic, meaning that there is
often a distribution shift between the training (source) and
test (target) domains. To this end, unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) methods aim to approach this problem
by adapting the predictive model from labeled source data
to the unlabeled target data. Recent advances in UDA focus
on learning domain-invariant representations that also lead
to a small error on the source domain. The goal is to learn
representations, along with the source predictor, that can
generalize to the target domain [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6]. However,
recent works [7, 8, 9] have shown that the above conditions
are not sufficient to guarantee good generalizations on the
target domain. In fact, if the marginal label distributions are
distinct across domains, the above method provably hurts
target generalization [7].
On the other hand, while labeled target data is usually
more difficult or costly to obtain than labeled source data, it
can lead to better accuracy [10]. Furthermore, in many practical applications, e.g., vehicle counting, object detection,
speech recognition, etc., it is often feasible to at least obtain
a small amount of labeled data from the target domain so
that it can facilitate model training with source data [11, 12].
Motivated by these observations, in this paper we focus on a
more realistic setting of semi-supervised domain adaptation
(Semi-DA). In Semi-DA, in addition to the large amount of
labeled source data, the learner also has access to a small
amount of labeled data from the target domain. Again, the
learner’s goal is to produce a hypothesis that well generalizes to the target domain, under the potential shift between
the source and the target. Semi-DA is a more-realistic setting that allows practitioners to design better algorithms that
can overcome the aforementioned limitations in UDA. The
key question in this scenario is: how to maximally exploit
the labeled target data for better model generalization?
In this paper, we address the above question under the
Semi-DA setting. In order to first understand how performance discrepancy occurs, we derive a finite-sample generalization bound for both classification and regression problems under Semi-DA. Our theory shows that, for a given

1104

