TearingNet: Point Cloud Autoencoder to Learn Topology-Friendly
Representations
Jiahao Pang Duanshun Li∗ Dong Tian
InterDigital, Princeton, NJ, USA
jiahao.pang@interdigital.com, duanshun@ualberta.ca, dong.tian@interdigital.com

Abstract

Based on a point cloud sampled from the surface of an
object (or a scene), humans are able to perceive its underlying shape. Via properly capturing the topology behind
the point set, human understanding is robust to variations
in scales and viewpoints. Intuitively, topology reflects how
the points are put together to form an object. Moreover,
topology is an intrinsic property of Riemannian manifolds
that are usually used to model 3D shapes in geometric learning [2, 23]. Hence, it is important to seek topology-aware
representations for point clouds in machine learning.
As an unsupervised learning architecture, autoencoder
(AE) [25] is popularly investigated to learn latent representations with unlabeled point clouds. It tries to approximate
∗ Work done while the author was an intern at InterDigital.

(b) 2D primitive −−−−→ (c) 3D point cloud

Tearing

(iv) After ←−−−− (iii) Before

Tearing

(ii) After ←−−−− (i) Before

Topology matters. Despite the recent success of point
cloud processing with geometric deep learning, it remains
arduous to capture the complex topologies of point cloud
data with a learning model. Given a point cloud dataset containing objects with various genera, or scenes with multiple
objects, we propose an autoencoder, TearingNet, which tackles the challenging task of representing the point clouds using a fixed-length descriptor. Unlike existing works directly
deforming predefined primitives of genus zero (e.g., a 2D
square patch) to an object-level point cloud, our TearingNet
is characterized by a proposed Tearing network module and
a Folding network module interacting with each other iteratively. Particularly, the Tearing network module learns the
point cloud topology explicitly. By breaking the edges of a
primitive graph, it tears the graph into patches or with holes
to emulate the topology of a target point cloud, leading to
faithful reconstructions. Experimentation shows the superiority of our proposal in terms of reconstructing point clouds
as well as generating more topology-friendly representations
than benchmarks.

1. Introduction

Folding

(a) Input

Figure 1. TearingNet for point cloud reconstruction. By Tearing
and Folding, we achieve high-quality reconstructions (c-ii) and
(c-iv). Edges of the primitive graphs are also drawn in (b) and (c).

an identity function that is non-trivially constrained by outputting a compact representation from its encoder network.
The decoder network attempts to reconstruct the point cloud
from the compact representation. The compact representation typically takes the shape of a fixed-length codeword
which characterizes geometric properties of point clouds.
Therefore, it not only preserves the ability for reconstruction [6] but is also valuable for high-level tasks such as
classification [40, 42, 11].
With ample topological structures in the real world, unfortunately, it is non-trivial to produce topology-friendly
representations that count for object point clouds with holes
(i.e., varying genera) or scene point clouds with a varying

7453

