EventZoom: Learning to Denoise and Super Resolve Neuromorphic Events
Peiqi Duan† Zihao W. Wang‡ Xinyu Zhou† Yi Ma† Boxin Shi†§
†
NELVT, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
‡
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern University
§
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

Abstract
We address the problem of jointly denoising and super
resolving neuromorphic events, a novel visual signal that
represents thresholded temporal gradients in a space-time
window. The challenge for event signal processing is that
they are asynchronously generated, and do not carry absolute intensity but only binary signs informing temporal
variations. To study event signal formation and degradation, we implement a display-camera system which enables
multi-resolution event recording. We further propose EventZoom, a deep neural framework with a backbone architecture of 3D U-Net. EventZoom is trained in a noise-to-noise
fashion where the two ends of the network are unfiltered
noisy events, enforcing noise-free event restoration. For resolution enhancement, EventZoom incorporates an event-toimage module supervised by high resolution images. Our
results showed that EventZoom achieves at least 40× temporal efficiency compared to state-of-the-art (SOTA) event
denoisers. Additionally, we demonstrate that EventZoom
enables performance improvements on applications including event-based visual object tracking and image reconstruction. EventZoom achieves SOTA super resolution image reconstruction results while being 10× faster.

1. Introduction
Neuromorphic events are novel visual signals that address several limitations of mainstream image signals, particularly featuring low power, low latency and high dynamic
range (HDR). These are due to the unique sensor design
that enables each event pixel to only compare current and
last intensity states in log-scale and fire a binary-signed
event whenever the log-intensity variation exceeds the preset thresholds [6, 10, 24, 35, 42]. Such sensors are suitable
for dynamic visual scenarios thanks to their high sensing
speed. Yet event cameras are unable to reveal scene appearCorresponding author: shiboxin@pku.edu.cn
project page: https://sites.google.com/view/EventZoom

NFS dataset

Multi-resolution
event dataset

(a) Our multi-resolution display-camera system.

(b) EventZoom results. Blue/red: positive/negative events.

Figure 1: We propose EventZoom, a network that performs
event denoising and super resolution.

ance, especially under static conditions. Moreover, events
are fired asynchronously, resulting in spatio-temporal point
clouds rather than conventional 2D image/video sequences.
As such, the problem of event signal restoration and
enhancement has strong deviation from its image-based
counterpart, and requires deliberate modifications when
applying image-based models. A particular body of the
past literature has attended to event-to-image reconstruction [2, 7, 20, 37, 38, 45, 46], and shown that image-based
visual algorithms can perform comfortably well on eventreconstructed images [37]. An extended branch explored
the benefit events could bring to low-level vision. Such
tasks take hybrid inputs of events and images, and perform
image/video enhancement in HDR and low-light imaging
[15, 50], video synthesis [49], motion deblur [18, 31], and
super resolution [44]. Nonetheless, executing visual tasks

12824

