Learning Placeholders for Open-Set Recognition
Da-Wei Zhou
Han-Jia Ye†
De-Chuan Zhan
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University
{zhoudw, yehj}@lamda.nju.edu.cn, zhandc@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Traditional classifiers are deployed under closed-set setting, with both training and test classes belong to the same
set. However, real-world applications probably face the input of unknown categories, and the model will recognize
them as known ones. Under such circumstances, open-set
recognition is proposed to maintain classification performance on known classes and reject unknowns. The closed-set
models make overconfident predictions over familiar known
class instances, so that calibration and thresholding across
categories become essential issues when extending to an
open-set environment. To this end, we proposed to learn
PlaceholdeRs for Open-SEt Recognition (P ROSER), which
prepares for the unknown classes by allocating placeholders for both data and classifier. In detail, learning data
placeholders tries to anticipate open-set class data, thus
transforms closed-set training into open-set training. Besides, to learn the invariant information between target and
non-target classes, we reserve classifier placeholders as
the class-specific boundary between known and unknown.
The proposed P ROSER efficiently generates novel class by
manifold mixup, and adaptively sets the value of reserved
open-set classifier during training. Experiments on various
datasets validate the effectiveness of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of
supervised learning, aiming to obtain the knowledge of finite
known classes. During the testing process, the well-trained
model matches an incoming instance to the class with the
highest posterior probability. However, this closed-world assumption comes to an end when the test set includes unseen
categories [16, 2, 42, 35]. Since it is impossible to cover all
classes in the world as training set [19, 33], the model would
treat all novel category instances as known ones. As a result,
the performance decays, which is unbearable in real-world
† Correspondence to: Han-Jia Ye (yehj@lamda.nju.edu.cn)

Open-set Class: Vehicle

Bird (Known)

Cat (Known)

Threshold-defined
Novel Class Space

Open-set Class: Tiger

Bird (Known)

Cat (Known)

Threshold-defined
Novel Class Space

Figure 1. The drawback of threshold-based open-set recognition.
It defines novel class space if confidence below a fixed threshold.
Bird and cat are known classes, while vehicle and tiger are openset classes in the left and right figures, respectively. Since the
distributions of the vehicle and tiger categories differ, it is hard
to rely on a single threshold to recognize unknown classes with
diverse characteristics. The same threshold which well separates
vehicles apart from known classes is not suitable for tigers.

applications. Open-set recognition [27, 3, 38, 26] is thus
proposed to conduct classification on known instances while
at the same time detect those from unknown classes.
Facing the unknown input of novel categories, an intuitive way to separate known and unknown instances is to
exert a threshold over the output probability [10]. It assumes
the model produces a higher probability for known classes
than unknowns. However, deep learning methods tend to
overfit the training instances and produce overconfident predictions [27, 8, 9]. As a result, the model would output a
high probability even for an unknown class instance, making
the threshold hard to tune. Besides, the class-compositions
are diverse, as shown in Figure 1. Since the semantic information of known classes differs in different tasks, it is
hard to acquire an optimal threshold that suits all open-set
tasks. Consequently, it is urgent to calibrate closed-set classifiers. Other methods try to foresee the distributions of novel
classes and calibrate the output with open-set probability.
[6] proposed G-OpenMax, which utilizes GAN to generate
unknown samples for training novel classifier. [22] tried
to generate images lying between decision boundaries as
counterfactual instances. [26] combined self-supervision
and augment input with generated open-set samples, which
yields high disparity. These methods try to anticipate novel
class distributions with generative models, and transform the
closed-set training into open-set training.

4401

