ArtFlow: Unbiased Image Style Transfer via Reversible Neural Flows
Jie An1∗ Siyu Huang2∗ Yibing Song3
1
University of Rochester 2 Baidu Research
{jan6,jluo}@cs.rochester.edu

Dejing Dou2 Wei Liu4 Jiebo Luo1
3
Tencent AI Lab 4 Tencent Data Platform
{huangsiyu,doudejing}@baidu.com

yibingsong.cv@gmail.com

wl2223@columbia.edu

1. Introduction
Neural style transfer aims at transferring the artistic
style from a reference image to a content image. Starting from [11, 13], numerous works based on iterative optimization [12, 44, 30, 34] and feed-forward networks [23,
53, 3, 63] improve style transfer from either visual quality or computational efficiency. Despite tremendous efforts,
these methods do not generalize well for multiple types
of style transfer. Universal style transfer (UST) is proposed to improve this generalization ability. The representative UST methods include AdaIN [20], WCT [32], and
Avatar-Net [45]. These methods are continuously extended
by [15, 22, 60, 1, 45, 33, 40, 31, 2, 56]. While achieving
favorable results as well as generalizations, these methods
are limited to disentangling and reconstructing image content during the stylization process. Fig. 1 shows some examples. Existing methods [32, 20, 45] effectively stylize
∗ J. An and S. Huang contribute equally. This work is done when J.
An is an intern in Tencent AI Lab. The code is available at https://
github.com/pkuanjie/ArtFlow.

Avatar-Net

Universal style transfer retains styles from reference
images in content images. While existing methods have
achieved state-of-the-art style transfer performance, they
are not aware of the content leak phenomenon that the image content may corrupt after several rounds of stylization
process. In this paper, we propose ArtFlow to prevent content leak during universal style transfer. ArtFlow consists
of reversible neural flows and an unbiased feature transfer
module. It supports both forward and backward inferences
and operates in a projection-transfer-reversion scheme. The
forward inference projects input images into deep features,
while the backward inference remaps deep features back to
input images in a lossless and unbiased way. Extensive experiments demonstrate that ArtFlow achieves comparable
performance to state-of-the-art style transfer methods while
avoiding content leak.

AdaIN

WCT

Abstract

(a) Content

(b) Style

(c) Round 1

(d) Round 20

Figure 1. Content leak visualization. Existing style transfer methods are not effective to preserve image content after several rounds
of stylization process as shown in (d), although their performance
is state-of-the-art in the first round as shown in (c).

content images in (c). However, image contents are corrupted after several rounds of stylization process where we
send the reference image and the output result into these
methods. We define this phenomenon as content leak and
provide an analysis in the following:
Content leak appears due to the design of UST methods
that usually consist of three parts: the first part is a fixed encoder for image embedding, the second part is a learnable
decoder to remap deep features back to images, and the third
part is a style transfer module based on deep features. We
observe that the first part is fixed. The appearance of content
leak indicates the accumulated image reconstruction errors
brought by the decoder, or the biased training process of either the decoder or the style transfer module. Specifically,
the content leaks of WCT [32] and its variants [31, 40, 56]
is mainly caused by the image reconstruction error of the
decoder. The content leak of AdaIN series [20, 22, 60] and
Avatar-Net [45] are additionally caused by the biased decoder training and a biased style transfer module, respectively. Sec. 3 shows more analyses.
In this work, we propose an unbiased style transfer
framework called ArtFlow to robustify exisiting UST methods upon overcoming content leak. Different from the
prevalent encoder-transfer-decoder structure, ArtFlow in-

862

