Learning Temporal Consistency for Low Light Video Enhancement
from Single Images

1

Fan Zhang1 Yu Li2 Shaodi You3 Ying Fu1 *
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Applied Research Center (ARC), Tencent PCG
3
University of Amsterdam

Abstract
Single image low light enhancement is an important task
and it has many practical applications. Most existing methods adopt a single image approach. Although their performance is satisfying on a static single image, we found,
however, they suffer serious temporal instability when handling low light videos. We notice the problem is because
existing data-driven methods are trained from single image
pairs where no temporal information is available. Unfortunately, training from real temporally consistent data is also
problematic because it is impossible to collect pixel-wisely
paired low and normal light videos under controlled environments in large scale and diversities with noise of identical statistics. In this paper, we propose a novel method
to enforce the temporal stability in low light video enhancement with only static images. The key idea is to learn and infer motion field (optical flow) from a single image and synthesize short range video sequences. Our strategy is general and can extend to large scale datasets directly. Based
on this idea, we propose our method which can infer motion prior for single image low light video enhancement and
enforce temporal consistency. Rigorous experiments and
user study demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of
our proposed method. Our code and model will be publicly available at https://github.com/zkawfanx/
StableLLVE.

1. Introduction
Illumination in sunny day and low light night can vary
more than 10 orders of magnitude. In low light scenes, sensor noise is not negligible due to the low signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR). Therefore, low light image enhancement is an
important task which improves the SNR and enhances the
image after modeling the noise and the signal. It enables
various computer vision algorithms to perform properly.
Rather than explicitly modeling the noise and the signal,
* Corresponding author: fuying@bit.edu.cn

recent data-driven methods [3, 4, 9, 25, 26, 27] implicitly
learn such models from image data and get satisfying results on a single static image. And they require pixel-wisely
paired images of low and high SNR for training. However,
we notice that it is impossible to collect pixel-wisely paired
low and normal light videos under controlled environments
in large scale and diversities with noise of identical statistics. Therefore, existing single image methods use either
synthetic data or temporally inconsistent single image data
for training. Thus, no temporal consistency can be learned
through existing data. One can perceive serious artifacts and
flickering from existing single image methods when handling low light videos.
In this paper, we aim to enforce temporal consistency
even when training from static images. We propose a novel
method to enforce the temporal stability in low light video
enhancement with only static images. The key idea is to
learn and infer motion field (optical flow) from a single image and synthesize short range video sequences. Our strategy is general and can extend to large scale datasets directly.
Based on this idea, we propose our method which can infer motion prior for single image low light video enhancement and enforce temporal consistency. In particular, we
present an image-based method to achieve low light video
enhancement and tackle temporal inconsistency problem
by imposing consistency on the network. Specifically, we
choose optical flow to mimic motions of dynamic scenes. It
is more capable of representing both global and local motions. We first predict plausible optical flow from static images. Then we warp images with optical flow to be adjacent
frames and impose consistency on deep model.
We conduct rigorous experiments to validate the effectiveness of our method. Experimental results on both synthetic and real data show that our method outperforms the
state-of-the-art single image methods and achieves comparable results to video-based ones, which means our method
can alleviate flickering problem without the need of videos.
Furthermore, we also conduct a user study on 26 volunteers,
of whom 78.9% prefer our method, suggesting the better
temporal stability of our method.

4967

