Look Before you Speak: Visually Contextualized Utterances
Paul Hongsuck Seo

Arsha Nagrani
Google Research

Cordelia Schmid

{phseo,anagrani,cordelias}@google.com
Next utterance candidates

Input Video
Prediction

Transcript: I'm going to go ahead and slip that into place and I'm going to make note
of which way the arrow is going in relation to the arrow on our guard. They both need
to be going the same direction next.

Think of a really tasty thing.
It will likely be flat again.
It makes it feel healthier.
Now slip that nut back on and screw it down.
It's going to take about five minutes.
…

✔

Figure 1: Visually Contextualised Future Utterance Prediction. Given an instructional video with paired text and video data, we
predict the next utterance in the video using a Co-attentional Multimodal Video Transformer. Our model trained on this task also
achieves state-of-the-art performance on downstream VideoQA benchmarks.

Abstract
While most conversational AI systems focus on textual
dialogue only, conditioning utterances on visual context (when it’s
available) can lead to more realistic conversations. Unfortunately,
a major challenge for incorporating visual context into
conversational dialogue is the lack of large-scale labeled datasets.
We provide a solution in the form of a new visually conditioned
Future Utterance Prediction task. Our task involves predicting
the next utterance in a video, using both visual frames and
transcribed speech as context. By exploiting the large number of
instructional videos online, we train a model to solve this task at
scale, without the need for manual annotations. Leveraging recent
advances in multimodal learning, our model consists of a novel
co-attentional multimodal video transformer, and when trained
on both textual and visual context, outperforms baselines that
use textual inputs alone. Further, we demonstrate that our model
trained for this task on unlabelled videos achieves state-of-the-art
performance on a number of downstream VideoQA benchmarks
such as MSRVTT-QA, MSVD-QA, ActivityNet-QA and How2QA.

1. Introduction
Imagine that you are cooking an elaborate meal, but forget the
next step in the recipe – or fixing your car and uncertain about
which tool to pick up next. Developing an intelligent dialogue
system1 that not only emulates human conversation, but also
predicts and suggests future actions – not to mention is able to
answer questions on complex tasks and topics – has long been
a moonshot goal for the AI community. Conversational AI allows
1 often used interchangeably with the term ‘conversational AI’

humans to interact with systems in free-form natural language,
in the same way that we would communicate with one another.
This has led to an outpouring of research in NLP focused on
conversational agents, ranging from goal-oriented systems for
helping with reservations [6, 82] to chit-chat models [46, 69, 87],
both of which are found in modern virtual assistants such as
Alexa, Google Assistant and Siri.
Such works, however, are limited to linguistic interactions only.
In contrast, human interaction in the physical world is facilitated
through multiple modalities (e.g. verbal, visual, haptic), each
modality often complementing the other seamlessly. While doing
a task, it is often easier to show another person your progress,
than to describe it verbally. Hence we argue that a truly intelligent
dialogue system would have knowledge of both visual and textual
contexts before making its next utterance. Unfortunately, a major
challenge for incorporating visual context is a lack of suitable
data. Most traditional conversational datasets [6, 10, 31, 71]
are solely text based, and notoriously difficult to collect, relying
on narrowly constructed ontologies [31, 55] and highly specific
domains [6, 10]. More importantly, they do not contain visual
information of the surrounding physical environment.
In an attempt to incorporate visual context to dialogue systems,
the task of visual dialog [15] was proposed, which requires an
AI agent to hold a meaningful dialog with humans given an
image [15] or a video [38]. In these works, a dialog history and
question are artificially created for each image/video in a dataset,
and the goal is then to infer context from history and answer the
question accurately. Such datasets, while valuable, are created
at great manual effort and contain artificially contrived scenarios,
where the dialog history is not naturally present in video. Such
datasets are also limited in size.
Unlike such works [15, 38], we propose to use online videos
116877

