Controlling the Rain: from Removal to Rendering
Siqi Ni, Xueyun Cao, Tao Yue, Xuemei Hu
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
nisiqi@smail.nju.edu.cn, caoxueyun@smail.nju.edu.cn, yuetao@nju.edu.cn, xuemeihu@nju.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Transforming the weather condition of images realistically is a knotty but attractive problem. Specifically, transforming images between the rain and rain-free weather conditions, i.e., deraining [9,38,39] and rain rendering [10,12],
enables us to remove rain from rain images or produce rain
effect on rain-free images. However, all these methods focus on directly transforming from a certain weather condition to the other, without considering the bidirectionalcontrolling capability, leaving an innovative problem, i.e.,
continuously tuning the rain intensities bidirectionally (decreasing or increasing), ranging from rain-free scene to
downpour with a single rain image as input.
In practice, the rains with different intensities exhibit
much different characteristics in the density of rain streaks,
the size of raindrops, and the thickness of fog. Meanwhile,
other scene-specific characters are supposed to be preserved

(a) Intensity Control

Existing rain image editing methods focus on either removing rain from rain images or rendering rain on rainfree images. This paper proposes to realize continuous control of rain intensity bidirectionally, from clear rain-free to
downpour image with a single rain image as input, without changing the scene-specific characteristics, e.g. the direction, appearance and distribution of rain. Specifically,
we introduce a Rain Intensity Controlling Network (RICNet) that contains three sub-networks of background extraction network, high-frequency rain-streak elimination network and main controlling network, which allows to control rain image of different intensities continuously by interpolation in the deep feature space. The HOG loss and
autocorrelation loss are proposed to enhance consistency
in orientation and suppress repetitive rain streaks. Furthermore, a decremental learning strategy that trains the network from downpour to drizzle images sequentially is proposed to further improve the performance and speedup the
convergence. Extensive experiments on both rain dataset
and real rain images demonstrate the effectiveness of the
proposed method.

removal

(b) Characteristics Preserved

Abstract

input

rendering

direction
appearance

distribution

Figure 1. The effect of bi-directional rain controlling. (a) Continuous rain intensity control of the single rain image input (marked
with red rectangle). (b) The preserved rain characteristics.

with the changing of rain intensity, including the direction of rain in local area, the appearance of raindrops, and
the distribution, which mostly depend on the wind direction, illumination directions and camera parameters (e.g.,
focal length, point-of-focus and exposure time), as shown in
Fig. 1. Different from the simple and naive method that removes the rain and renders new rain effect to form rain images with different rain intensities, our method can control
the intensity-dependent characters changing with the rainfall, while preserving the scene-specific features of the input
rain image, so that the generated rain images with different
intensities look consistent with the input rain image.
In this paper, a Rain Intensity Controlling Network
(RICNet) is proposed, which allows continuous and bidirectional control of the rain from removal to rendering
with different intensities and similar scene-specific characteristics from a given rain image. RICNet is composed
of three sub-networks, i.e, Background Extraction Network
(BEN), High-frequency Rain-streak Elimination Network
(HREN) and Main Controlling Network (MCN). Facilitated
by the background and fog related information extracted by
BEN and HREN, MCN could generate rain images of dif16328

