Causal Hidden Markov Model for Time Series Disease Forecasting

1

Jing Li1,2 , Botong Wu1,5 , Xinwei Sun4 , Yizhou Wang 1,3
Dept. of Computer Science, Peking University 2 Adv. Inst. of Info. Tech, Peking University
3
Center on Frontiers of Computing Studies, Peking University
4
Microsoft Research, Asia 5 Deepwise AI Lab
{lijingg, botongwu, yizhou.wang}@pku.edu.cn, xinsun@microsoft.com

Abstract
We propose a causal hidden Markov model to achieve
robust prediction of irreversible disease at an early stage,
which is safety-critical and vital for medical treatment in
early stages. Specifically, we introduce the hidden variables
which propagate to generate medical data at each time step.
To avoid learning spurious correlation (e.g., confounding
bias), we explicitly separate these hidden variables into
three parts: a) the disease (clinical)-related part; b) the disease (non-clinical)-related part; c) others, with only a),b)
causally related to the disease however c) may contain spurious correlations (with the disease) inherited from the data
provided. With personal attributes and disease label respectively provided as side information and supervision, we
prove that these disease-related hidden variables can be
disentangled from others, implying the avoidance of spurious correlation for generalization to medical data from
other (out-of-) distributions. Guaranteed by this result, we
propose a sequential variational auto-encoder with a reformulated objective function. We apply our model to the early
prediction of peripapillary atrophy and achieve promising
results on out-of-distribution test data. Further, the ablation study empirically shows the effectiveness of each component in our method. And the visualization shows the accurate identification of lesion regions from others. 1

1. Introduction
Future disease forecasting is especially important for
those irreversible diseases, such as Alzheimer’s Disease
[25] and eye diseases [1]. Forecasting at an early stage
provides the doctors with a window to implement medical treatment/intervention such as drug or physical exercise, in order to slow down or alleviate the disease progression. However, such early forecasting can face the follow1 This project is released on: https://sites.google.com/view/causalhmm

ing challenges: i) the incomplete information for forecasting, i.e., the lack of medical observation of the future stage;
ii) the medical data (such as images and clinical measurements) can suffer from distributional change across populations or hospitals, the forecasting on which is known as
out-of-distribution (OOD) generalization that can fail many
existing supervised learning models (such as adversarial attack [6]).
Existing works for future disease forecasting can be
roughly categorized into two classes: 1) forecasting with
additional supervisions; 2) forecasting based on generation
of future image. For the first class(e.g., [12, 21, 11, 27]),
this additional supervision can refer to disease labels at each
time step or the target image at future stage. Therefore,
they can not be adopted to scenarios when these supervisions are lacked (e.g., the disease label at the current stage is
unprovided due to labeling cost). For the second class(e.g.,
[19], they aim to exploit latent space to generate the sequential medical images, which can be followed by a disease
classifier for disease prediction. Although these methods
can achieve accurate generation [19], they may suffer from
learning spurious correlated features due to biases inherited
from the data provided. These biases can refer to correlated but disease-unrelated information such as background
or clinical attributes, which are data-dependent and hence
may not be robust to other data distributions (i.e., out-ofdistribution).
To avoid spurious correlation to enable robust forecasting, we propose Causal Hidden Markov Model (CausalHMM) in which we explicitly separate the diseasecausative features from others, and model them using hidden variables that propagate to generate the medical observation, as encapsulated in the causal graph in Fig. 1. Specifically as shown, among all hidden variables, i.e., s, v, z that
generate the medical image x, only s, v are causally related
to the disease label y. Taking peripapillary atrophy disease
[15] as an example, the v is related to the clinical measurements that are relevant to the disease (denoted as A, e.g.,
112105

