General Instance Distillation for Object Detection
Xing Dai∗1 Zeren Jiang∗†1,2 Zhao Wu1
Yiping Bao1 Zhicheng Wang1 Si Liu2 Erjin Zhou1
1
MEGVII Technology 2 BeiHang University
daixinghome@gmail.com
zeren.jiang99@gmail.com
wuzhao@megvii.com
baoyiping@megvii.com
wangzhicheng@megvii.com
liusi@buaa.edu.cn
zej@megvii.com

Abstract
In recent years, knowledge distillation has been proved
to be an effective solution for model compression. This
approach can make lightweight student models acquire
the knowledge extracted from cumbersome teacher models. However, previous distillation methods of detection
have weak generalization for different detection frameworks
and rely heavily on ground truth (GT), ignoring the valuable relation information between instances. Thus, we propose a novel distillation method for detection tasks based
on discriminative instances without considering the positive or negative distinguished by GT, which is called general instance distillation (GID). Our approach contains a
general instance selection module (GISM) to make full use
of feature-based, relation-based and response-based knowledge for distillation. Extensive results demonstrate that
the student model achieves significant AP improvement and
even outperforms the teacher in various detection frameworks. Specifically, RetinaNet with ResNet-50 achieves
39.1% in mAP with GID on COCO dataset, which surpasses the baseline 36.2% by 2.9%, and even better than
the ResNet-101 based teacher model with 38.1% AP.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the accuracy of object detection has
made a great progress due to the blossom of deep convolutional neural network (CNN). The deep learning network structure, including a variety of one-stage detection
models [19, 23, 24, 25, 17] and two-stage detection models [26, 16, 8, 2], has replaced the traditional object detection and has become the mainstream method in this field.
Furthermore, the anchor-free frameworks [13, 5, 32] have
also achieved better performance with more simplified ap∗ The first two authors contribute equally and the order is alphabetical.
† This work was done when Zeren was an intern at MEGVII Tech.

Teacher Backbone

Student Backbone

Distillation Loss

GIs Feature
Loss
Det Head

GIs Relation
Loss

cls

GIs Response
Loss

reg

Det Head
cls

reg

GISM
Figure 1. Overall pipeline of general instance distillation (GID).
General instances (GIs) are adaptively selected by the output both
from teacher and student model. Then the feature-based, relationbased and response-based knowledge are extracted for distillation
based on the selected GIs.

proaches. However, these high-precision deep learning
based models are usually cumbersome, while a lightweight
with high performance model is demanded in practical applications. Therefore, how to find a better trade-off between
the accuracy and efficiency has become a crucial problem.
Knowledge Distillation (KD), proposed by Hinton et al.
[10], is a promising solution for the above problem. Knowledge distillation is to transfer the knowledge of large model
to small model, thereby improving the performance of the
small model and achieving the purpose of model compression. At present, the typical forms of knowledge can be divided into three categories [7], response-based knowledge
[10, 22], feature-based knowledge [27, 35, 9] and relationbased knowledge [22, 20, 31, 33, 15]. However, most of
the distillation methods are mainly designed for multi-class
classification problems. Directly migrating the classification specific distillation method to the detection model is
17842

