Joint Learning of 3D Shape Retrieval and Deformation
Mikaela Angelina Uy1 Vladimir G. Kim2 Minhyuk Sung3 Noam Aigerman2
Siddhartha Chaudhuri2,4 Leonidas Guibas1
1

Stanford University

2

Adobe Research

3

KAIST

Abstract
We propose a novel technique for producing high-quality
3D models that match a given target object image or scan.
Our method is based on retrieving an existing shape from
a database of 3D models and then deforming its parts to
match the target shape. Unlike previous approaches that independently focus on either shape retrieval or deformation,
we propose a joint learning procedure that simultaneously
trains the neural deformation module along with the embedding space used by the retrieval module. This enables our
network to learn a deformation-aware embedding space, so
that retrieved models are more amenable to match the target after an appropriate deformation. In fact, we use the
embedding space to guide the shape pairs used to train the
deformation module, so that it invests its capacity in learning deformations between meaningful shape pairs. Furthermore, our novel part-aware deformation module can work
with inconsistent and diverse part-structures on the source
shapes. We demonstrate the benefits of our joint training
not only on our novel framework, but also on other stateof-the-art neural deformation modules proposed in recent
years. Lastly, we also show that our jointly-trained method
outperforms various non-joint baselines.

1. Introduction
Creating high-quality 3D models from a reference image or a scan is a laborious task, requiring significant expertise in 3D sculpting, meshing, and UV layout. While
neural generative techniques for 3D shape synthesis hold
promise for the future, they still lack the ability to create
3D models that rival the fidelity, level of detail, and overall
quality of artist-generated meshes [38]. Several recent techniques propose to directly retrieve a high-quality 3D model
from a database and deform it to match a target image or
point cloud, thereby approximating the target shape while
preserving the quality of the original source model. These
prior methods largely focus on one of two complementary
subproblems: either retrieving an appropriate mesh from a
database [26, 6], or training a neural network to deform a
source to a target [14, 43, 49, 36]. In most cases, the static
database mesh most closely matching the target is retrieved,

4

IIT Bombay

Database with heterogeneous deformations

…
(54 parameters,
24 constraints)

(42 parameters,
18 constraints)

(42 parameters,
24 constraints)

(36 parameters,
27 constraints)

(60 parameters,
33 constraints)

Our Joint Learning
Deform

Static Retrieval

Target 2D image

Non-joint

Baselines

Deformationaware retrieval

Jointly trained

Retrieval-aware
deformation

Figure 1. Given an input target we use jointly-learned retrieval and
deformation modules to find a source model in a heterogeneous
database and align it to the target. We demonstrate that our joint
learning outperforms static retrieval and non-joint baselines.

and then deformed for a better fit [19]. The retrieval step
is not influenced by the subsequent deformation procedure,
and thus ignores the possibility that a database shape with
different global geometry nevertheless possess local details
that will produce the best match after deformation.
Only a few works explicitly consider deformation-aware
retrieval [34, 41]. However, in these works the deformation module is a fixed, non-trainable black box, which requires complete shapes (and not e.g., natural images or partial scans) as targets, does not handle varying shape structures across the database, may necessitate time-consuming,
manually-specified optimization of a fitting energy, exhaustive enumeration of deformed variants, and does not support
back-propagating gradients through it for directly translating deformation error to retrieval error.
In this paper, we argue that retrieval and deformation
should be equal citizens in a joint problem. Given a
database of source models equipped with some parametric
representation of deformations, our goal is to learn how to
retrieve a shape from the database and predict the optimal
deformation parameters so it best matches a given target. A
key feature of our method is that both retrieval and deformation are learnable modules, each influencing the other
and trained jointly. While the benefit of deformation-aware
retrieval has been explored previously, we contribute the notion of retrieval-aware deformation: our learnable deforma-

11713

