HumanGPS: Geodesic PreServing Feature for Dense Human Correspondences
Feitong Tan1,2,∗ Danhang Tang1 Mingsong Dou1 Kaiwen Guo1 Rohit Pandey1 Cem Keskin1
Ruofei Du1 Deqing Sun1 Sofien Bouaziz1 Sean Fanello1 Ping Tan2 Yinda Zhang1
1
Google 2 Simon Fraser University

Frame 2

GPS Feature 1

warped image

flow field

warped image

GPS Feature 2

Intra-Subject Correspondence

Cross Subject

Frame 1

flow field

flow legend

Inter-Subject Correspondence

Figure 1. We propose a deep learning framework to learn a Geodesic PreServing (GPS) feature from RGB images that can produce
accurate dense human correspondences. From left to right, we show the input images, extracted features visualized in color, the intrasubject correspondences, and the reconstruction of frame 1 using frame 2, the morphing [24, 25] between frames and across subjects, and
the inter-subject correspondences. Please refer to the color legend in the bottom right for the flow directions and magnitudes.

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of building dense
correspondences between human images under arbitrary
camera viewpoints and body poses. Prior art either assumes small motion between frames or relies on local descriptors, which cannot handle large motion or visually ambiguous body parts, e.g., left vs. right hand. In contrast, we
propose a deep learning framework that maps each pixel
to a feature space, where the feature distances reflect the
geodesic distances among pixels as if they were projected
onto the surface of a 3D human scan. To this end, we introduce novel loss functions to push features apart according
to their geodesic distances on the surface. Without any semantic annotation, the proposed embeddings automatically
learn to differentiate visually similar parts and align different subjects into an unified feature space. Extensive experiments show that the learned embeddings can produce accurate correspondences between images with remarkable generalization capabilities on both intra and inter subjects. 1
∗ Work done while the author was an intern at Google.
1 Project webpage: https://feitongt.github.io/HumanGPS/

1. Introduction
Finding correspondences across images is one of the
fundamental problems in computer vision and it has been
studied for decades. With the rapid development of digital human technology, building dense correspondences between human images has been found to be particularly useful for many applications, such as non-rigid tracking and
reconstruction [12, 11, 36, 13], neural rendering [48], and
appearance transfer [62, 57]. Traditional approaches in
computer vision extract image features on local keypoints
and generate correspondences between points with similar descriptors after performing a nearest neighbor search,
e.g., SIFT [29]. More recently, deep learning methods
[26, 59, 42, 14], replaced hand-crafted components with full
end-to-end pipelines. Despite their effectiveness on many
tasks, these methods often deliver sub-optimal results when
performing dense correspondences search on humans, due
to the high variation in human poses and camera viewpoints
and visual similarity between body parts. As a result, the
existing methods either produce sparse matches, e.g., skeleton joints [7], or dense but imprecise correspondences [15].
11820

