Exploit Visual Dependency Relations for Semantic Segmentation
Mingyuan Liu, Dan Schonfeld and Wei Tang*
University of Illinois at Chicago
{mingyuan, dans, tangw}@uic.edu

Abstract
Dependency relations among visual entities are ubiquity because both objects and scenes are highly structured.
They provide prior knowledge about the real world that can
help improve the generalization ability of deep learning approaches. Different from contextual reasoning which focuses on feature aggregation in the spatial domain, visual
dependency reasoning explicitly models the dependency relations among visual entities. In this paper, we introduce a
novel network architecture, termed the dependency network
or DependencyNet, for semantic segmentation. It unifies
dependency reasoning at three semantic levels. Intra-class
reasoning decouples the representations of different object
categories and updates them separately based on the internal object structures. Inter-class reasoning then performs
spatial and semantic reasoning based on the dependency relations among different object categories. We will have an
in-depth investigation on how to discover the dependency
graph from the training annotations. Global dependency
reasoning further refines the representations of each object
category based on the global scene information. Extensive
ablative studies with a controlled model size and the same
network depth show that each individual dependency reasoning component benefits semantic segmentation and they
together significantly improve the base network. Experimental results on two benchmark datasets show the DependencyNet achieves comparable performance to the recent
states of the art.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims at assigning a categorical
label to each pixel to partition an image into multiple meaningful segments. It is a fundamental task in computer vision
and has many practical applications, such as autonomous
driving, image editing, and medical image analysis. In the
past decade, convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
become a dominant solution to it [26, 11].
* Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Visual dependence relations are ubiquity since both objects and scenes are highly structured. They provide prior knowledge about the real world that can be used to improve the generalization ability of a learning model. We consider three levels of
visual dependency. Intra-class dependency means parts of an object are related due to the object’s internal structural patterns, e.g.,
a bicycle consists of wheels, pedals and a frame. Inter-class dependency means objects are related as certain objects (e.g., a rider and
a bicycle) co-occur more frequently than the others or by chance.
Global dependency means the global scene type enforces strong
prior on the categories of objects that should appear in it.

Recent works [54, 56, 51, 9, 39] have achieved great improvement by leveraging contextual information in CNNs.
The context of a pixel refers to the collection of its surrounding pixels. It provides rich visual cues to resolve ambiguities in pixel classification. For example, the presence
of water in the context suggests that a pixel is more likely to
belong to a boat than other objects like a car or a bed. Existing approaches like ASPP [1] and PSPNet [57] explore
optimal strategies for multi-scale context aggregation. The
non-local network [46] and its variants [61, 21, 20] employ
the self-attention mechanism [44] to capture the long-range
context in an image. These methods effectively leverage the
context to enrich the representations of each pixel. However, they focus on feature aggregation in the spatial domain, and the explicit dependence relations among different
semantic categories are largely ignored.
Visual dependence relations are ubiquity since both objects and scenes are highly structured, and they occur at various semantic levels. Parts are related as they compose into
objects, e.g., a car consists of wheels and a frame. Objects

9726

