Generalized Domain Adaptation
Yu Mitsuzumi Go Irie Daiki Ikami Takashi Shibata
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation, Japan
{yu.mitsuzumi.ae, daiki.ikami.ef}@hco.ntt.co.jp, {goirie, t.shibata}@ieee.org

Class Labeled

Abstract

Class Unlabeled

Unknown

UDA

Many variants of unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) problems have been proposed and solved individually. Its side effect is that a method that works for one
variant is often ineffective for or not even applicable to another, which has prevented practical applications. In this
paper, we give a general representation of UDA problems,
named Generalized Domain Adaptation (GDA). GDA covers the major variants as special cases, which allows us
to organize them in a comprehensive framework. Moreover,
this generalization leads to a new challenging setting where
existing methods fail, such as when domain labels are unknown, and class labels are only partially given to each
domain. We propose a novel approach to the new setting.
The key to our approach is self-supervised class-destructive
learning, which enables the learning of class-invariant representations and domain-adversarial classifiers without using any domain labels. Extensive experiments using three
benchmark datasets demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art UDA methods in the new setting
and that it is competitive in existing UDA variations as well.

1. Introduction
Deep learning is data-hungry. It performs remarkably
well in a domain that has a sufficient amount of labeled
data, but its performance suffers significantly in one that
does not. Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims to
resolve this problem by transferring a model learned for a
label-rich source domain to a label-less target domain.
Besides the standard UDA, which assumes a fully labeled source domain and a completely unlabeled target domain, a number of variants have been proposed to address
more complex and practical problems. Major variants are
illustrated in Fig. 1. One representative example is multisource domain adaptation (MSDA) or multi-target domain
adaptation (MTDA), an extension to the case where there
is more than one source or target domain [45, 26, 12, 12].
Open set domain adaptation (OSDA) and partial domain

MSDA
MTDA
OSDA
PDA

GDA

Figure 1: Schematic overview of Generalized Domain
Adaptation (GDA). GDA covers major existing UDA
problems as its special cases by imposing some constraints
on classes and/or domains (represented in the shapes and
colors of symbols, respectively). Moreover, it provides new
challenging settings where domain labels are unknown, and
class labels are given to only a subset in each domain.
adaptation (PDA) address the case where the class sets of
the source and target do not match, i.e., there exist unknown
classes [25, 32, 16, 2, 3]. Some extensions of these variants
have also been studied [20, 7, 43].
Most of these variants have been proposed independently
and solved individually. A negative side of this history is
that a method that works for one variant may not work for
or even be applicable to another. In reality, it is rarely possible to identify which variant of the problems one is facing,
which requires a costly trial and error to figure out the type
of problem or find a satisfactory solution. Moreover, a real
problem is often a combination of these variants, in which
case none of the methods will eventually be applicable.
In this work, we aimed to overcome this problem. Our
approach is to first consider giving a new general representation of the UDA problems that covers all these major UDA
variants and then implement a method for solving them.
Definitions of the most existing UDA problems discussed
above assume a clear distinction between the source and target domains, and whether or not class labels are available
is determined on a domain-by-domain basis. Instead, in
11084

