LoFTR: Detector-Free Local Feature Matching with Transformers
Jiaming Sun1,2∗

Zehong Shen1∗
1

Yuang Wang1∗

Zhejiang University

2

Hujun Bao1

Xiaowei Zhou1†

SenseTime Research

Abstract
We present a novel method for local image feature
matching. Instead of performing image feature detection,
description, and matching sequentially, we propose to first
establish pixel-wise dense matches at a coarse level and
later refine the good matches at a fine level. In contrast
to dense methods that use a cost volume to search correspondences, we use self and cross attention layers in Transformer to obtain feature descriptors that are conditioned on
both images. The global receptive field provided by Transformer enables our method to produce dense matches in
low-texture areas, where feature detectors usually struggle to produce repeatable interest points. The experiments
on indoor and outdoor datasets show that LoFTR outperforms state-of-the-art methods by a large margin. LoFTR
also ranks first on two public benchmarks of visual localization among the published methods. Code is available at
our project page: https://zju3dv.github.io/loftr/.

Figure 1: Comparison between the proposed method
LoFTR and the detector-based method SuperGlue [37].
This example demonstrates that LoFTR is capable of finding correspondences on the texture-less wall and the floor
with repetitive patterns, where detector-based methods
struggle to find repeatable interest points.1

1. Introduction
Local feature matching between images is the cornerstone of many 3D computer vision tasks, including structure
from motion (SfM), simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM), visual localization, etc. Given two images to be
matched, most existing matching methods consist of three
separate phases: feature detection, feature description, and
feature matching. In the detection phase, salient points like
corners are first detected as interest points from each image. Local descriptors are then extracted around neighborhood regions of these interest points. The feature detection and description phases produce two sets of interest
points with descriptors, the point-to-point correspondences
of which are later found by nearest neighbor search or more
sophisticated matching algorithms.
The use of a feature detector reduces the search space of
matching, and the resulted sparse correspondences are sufficient for most tasks, e.g., camera pose estimation. However,
a feature detector may fail to extract enough interest points
∗ The first three authors contributed equally. The authors are affiliated
with the State Key Lab of CAD&CG and ZJU-SenseTime Joint Lab of 3D
Vision. † Corresponding author: Xiaowei Zhou.

that are repeatable between images due to various factors
such as poor texture, repetitive patterns, viewpoint change,
illumination variation, and motion blur. This issue is especially prominent in indoor environments, where low-texture
regions or repetitive patterns sometimes occupy most areas
in the field of view. Fig. 1 shows an example. Without repeatable interest points, it is impossible to find correct correspondences even with perfect descriptors.
Several recent works [34, 33, 19] have attempted to remedy this problem by establishing pixel-wise dense matches.
Matches with high confidence scores can be selected from
the dense matches, and thus feature detection is avoided.
However, the dense features extracted by convolutional neural networks (CNNs) in these works have limited receptive
field which may not distinguish indistinctive regions. Instead, humans find correspondences in these indistinctive
regions not only based on the local neighborhood, but with
a larger global context. For example, low-texture regions in
1 Only the inlier matches after RANSAC are shown. The green color
indicates a match with epipolar error smaller than 5 × 10−4 (in the normalized image coordinates).

8922

