Relation-aware Instance Refinement for Weakly Supervised Visual Grounding
Yongfei Liu1,5,6 * Bo Wan1,2 * Lin Ma3 Xuming He1,4
1
School of Information Science and Technology, ShanghaiTech University
2
Department of Electrical Engineering (ESAT), KU Leuven
3
4
Meituan
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
5
Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
6
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
{liuyf3, wanbo, hexm}@shanghaitech.edu.cn forest.linma@gmail.com
Abstract
Visual grounding, which aims to build a correspondence between visual objects and their language entities,
plays a key role in cross-modal scene understanding. One
promising and scalable strategy for learning visual grounding is to utilize weak supervision from only image-caption
pairs. Previous methods typically rely on matching query
phrases directly to a precomputed, fixed object candidate
pool, which leads to inaccurate localization and ambiguous matching due to lack of semantic relation constraints.
In our paper, we propose a novel context-aware weaklysupervised learning method that incorporates coarse-tofine object refinement and entity relation modeling into a
two-stage deep network, capable of producing more accurate object representation and matching. To effectively
train our network, we introduce a self-taught regression
loss for the proposal locations and a classification loss
based on parsed entity relations. Extensive experiments
on two public benchmarks Flickr30K Entities and ReferItGame demonstrate the efficacy of our weakly grounding
framework. The results show that we outperform the previous methods by a considerable margin, achieving 59.27%
top-1 accuracy in Flickr30K Entities and 37.68% in the
ReferItGame dataset respectively1 .

1. Introduction
Cross-modal understanding of visual scene and natural
language description plays a crucial role in bridging human
and machine intelligence, and has attracted much interest
from AI community [13]. Towards this goal, one core prob* Both authors contributed equally. This work was done when Yongfei
Liu was a research intern at Tencent AI Lab, and Bo Wan was a master
student in ShanghaiTech University. This work was supported by Shanghai
NSF Grant (No. 18ZR1425100).
1 Code
is available at https://github.com/youngfly11/ReIRWeaklyGrounding.pytorch.git

Figure 1. Comparison of visual entities representation with existing weakly-supervised grounding models. (a) Previous methods
directly match between noun phrases and a precomputed, fixed
object proposals. (b) Our approach is capable of refining the initial object proposals and enriching their representation with visual
relation context cues.

lem is to establish instance-level correspondence between
visual regions and its related language entities, which is
commonly referred to as visual grounding [15]. Such correspondence serves as a fundamental building-block for many
vision-language tasks, such as image captioning [6, 32], visual question answering [43, 23], visual navigation [37, 45]
and visual dialog[18, 7].
Much progress has been made recently in learning visual grounding with strong supervision [22, 39], which
requires costly annotations on region-phrase correspondence. A more scalable modeling strategy is to learn from
only image-caption pairs, namely weakly-supervised visual
grounding [29, 40, 2, 8, 20]. Nevertheless, learning from
such weak supervision is particularly challenging mainly
due to the severe ambiguity in visual object location and
in correspondence between diverse noun phrases and object
entities during cross-modal learning.
Most existing approaches tackle those challenges via the

5612

