Learnable Graph Matching: Incorporating Graph Partitioning with Deep
Feature Learning for Multiple Object Tracking
Jiawei He1,3 Zehao Huang2 Naiyan Wang2 Zhaoxiang Zhang1,3,4
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA) 2 TuSimple
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS
1

{hejiawei2019, zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn {zehaohuang18, winsty}@gmail.com

Abstract
Data association across frames is at the core of Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) task. This problem is usually solved by a traditional graph-based optimization or directly learned via deep learning. Despite their popularity,
we find some points worth studying in current paradigm:
1) Existing methods mostly ignore the context information
among tracklets and intra-frame detections, which makes
the tracker hard to survive in challenging cases like severe
occlusion. 2) The end-to-end association methods solely
rely on the data fitting power of deep neural networks, while
they hardly utilize the advantage of optimization-based assignment methods. 3) The graph-based optimization methods mostly utilize a separate neural network to extract features, which brings the inconsistency between training and
inference. Therefore, in this paper we propose a novel
learnable graph matching method to address these issues.
Briefly speaking, we model the relationships between tracklets and the intra-frame detections as a general undirected
graph. Then the association problem turns into a general graph matching between tracklet graph and detection
graph. Furthermore, to make the optimization end-to-end
differentiable, we relax the original graph matching into
continuous quadratic programming and then incorporate
the training of it into a deep graph network with the help
of the implicit function theorem. Lastly, our method GMTracker, achieves state-of-the-art performance on several
standard MOT datasets. Our code is available at https:
//github.com/jiaweihe1996/GMTracker.

1. Introduction
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) is a fundamental task
that aims at associating the same object across successive
frames in a video clip. A robust and accurate MOT algorithm is indispensable in broad applications, such as autonomous driving and video surveillance. The tracking-by-

Tracklets

Detections
1

2

3

1

2

(a) Hungarian Algorithm

3

1

2

(b) Graph Matching

3

(c) occlusion case

Figure 1: An illustration of intra-graph relationship used
in our graph matching formulation. We utilize the secondorder edge-to-edge similarity to model the group activity,
which is more robust under heavy occlusion. Note that not
all vertices in tracklet graph can be matched to the detection
graph because they disappear in the current frame.
detection is currently the dominant paradigm in MOT. This
paradigm consists of two steps: (1) obtaining the bounding
boxes of objects by detection frame by frame; (2) generating trajectories by associating the same objects between
frames. With the rapid development of deep learning based
object detectors, the first step is largely solved by the powerful detectors such as [37, 38]. As for the second one, recent
MOT works focus on improving the performance of data
association mainly from the following two aspects: (1) formulating the association problem as a combinatorial graph
partitioning problem and solve it by advanced optimization
techniques [5, 7, 62, 8, 65, 18]; (2) improving the appearance models by the power of deep learning[28, 67, 31, 64].
Although very recently, there are works [77, 53, 8, 65] trying to unify feature learning and data association into an
end-to-end trained neural network, these two directions are
almost isolated so that these recent attempts hardly utilize

5299

