DoDNet: Learning to Segment Multi-Organ and Tumors
from Multiple Partially Labeled Datasets
Jianpeng Zhang∗1,2 , Yutong Xie∗1,2 , Yong Xia1 , and Chunhua Shen2
1

School of Computer Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, China
2
The University of Adelaide, Australia
{james.zhang, xuyongxie}@mail.nwpu.edu.cn; yxia@nwpu.edu.cn; chhshen@gmail.com

Abstract
Due to the intensive cost of labor and expertise in annotating 3D medical images at a voxel level, most benchmark
datasets are equipped with the annotations of only one type
of organs and/or tumors, resulting in the so-called partially
labeling issue. To address this issue, we propose a dynamic
on-demand network (DoDNet) that learns to segment multiple organs and tumors on partially labeled datasets. DoDNet consists of a shared encoder-decoder architecture, a
task encoding module, a controller for dynamic filter generation, and a single but dynamic segmentation head. The
information of current segmentation task is encoded as a
task-aware prior to tell the model what the task is expected
to achieve. Different from existing approaches which fix kernels after training, the kernels in dynamic head are generated adaptively by the controller, conditioned on both input image and assigned task. Thus, DoDNet is able to
segment multiple organs and tumors, as done by multiple
networks or a multi-head network, in a much efficient and
flexible manner. We created a large-scale partially labeled
dataset called MOTS and demonstrated the superior performance of our DoDNet over other competitors on seven
organ and tumor segmentation tasks. We also transferred
the weights pre-trained on MOTS to a downstream multiorgan segmentation task and achieved state-of-the-art performance. This study provides a general 3D medical image segmentation model that has been pre-trained on a
large-scale partially labeled dataset and can be extended
(after fine-tuning) to downstream volumetric medical data
segmentation tasks. Code and models are available at:
https://git.io/DoDNet

∗ J. Zhang and Y. Xie contributed equally. Corresponding author: Y.
Xia and C. Shen. Work was done when J. Zhang and Y. Xie were visiting
The University of Adelaide.

Hepatic Vessel & Tumor
Kidney & Tumor

Pancreas & Tumor

Lung Tumor
Liver & Tumor

Colon Tumor

Spleen

Figure 1 – Illustration of partially labeled multi-organ and tumor segmentation. This task aims to segment multiple organs
and tumors using a network trained on several partially labeled
datasets, each of which is originally specialized for the segmentation of a particular abdominal organ and/or related tumors.
For instance, the first dataset only has annotations of the liver
and liver tumors, and the second dataset only provides annotations of kidneys and kidney tumors. Here each color represents
a partially labeled dataset.

1. Introduction
Automated segmentation of abdominal organs and tumors using computed tomography (CT) is one of the most
fundamental yet challenging tasks in medical image analysis [22, 18]. It plays a pivotal role in a variety of computeraided diagnosis tasks, including lesion contouring, surgical planning, and 3D reconstruction. Constrained by the
labor cost and expertise, it is hard to annotate multiple organs and tumors at voxel level in a large dataset. Consequently, most benchmark datasets were collected for the
segmentation of only one type of organs and/or tumors,
and all task-irrelevant organs and tumors were annotated
as the background (see Fig. 1). For instance, the LiTS

1195

