House-GAN++: Generative Adversarial Layout Refinement Network
towards Intelligent Computational Agent for Professional Architects
Nelson Nauata
Simon Fraser University

Sepidehsadat Hosseini
Simon Fraser University

Kai-Hung Chang
Autodesk Research

nnauata@sfu.ca

sepidh@sfu.ca

kai-hung.chang@autodesk.com

Hang Chu
Autodesk Research

Chin-Yi Cheng
Autodesk Research

Yasutaka Furukawa
Simon Fraser University

hang.chu@autodesk.com

chin-yi.cheng@autodesk.com

furukawa@sfu.ca

Input bubble diagram
Bathroom

Mix of a ground-truth and generated house layouts

Balcony
Bedroom

Study
room

Living
room
Bedroom

Outside

Kitchen

Bathroom

Figure 1. The paper makes a breakthrough in automated house layout generation. The right is the mix of a ground-truth design by
an architect and our generated samples, based on the input bubble-diagram. (The second from the right is the ground-truth.) A novel
generative adversarial layout refinement network is trained to repeatedly apply and refine the design towards perfection.

Abstract
This paper proposes a generative adversarial layout refinement network for automated floorplan generation. Our
architecture is an integration of a graph-constrained relational GAN and a conditional GAN, where a previously generated layout becomes the next input constraint, enabling
iterative refinement. A surprising discovery of our research
is that a simple non-iterative training process, dubbed
component-wise GT-conditioning, is effective in learning
such a generator. The iterative generator further allows us
to improve a metric of choice via meta-optimization techniques by controlling when to pass which input constraints
during iterative refinement. Our qualitative and quantitative evaluation based on the three standard metrics demonstrate that the proposed system makes significant improvements over the current state-of-the-art, even competitive
against the ground-truth floorplans, designed by professional architects. Code, model, and data are available at
https://ennauata.github.io/houseganpp/page.html.

1. Introduction
House design is a time-consuming iterative process,
requiring multiple rounds of refinements. An architect

sketches out a design, evaluates, adjusts, and repeats the cycles until being satisfied with a design within a given time
budget. Unfortunately, designing an effective floorplan is
possible only by professional architects, where a small fraction of buildings (less than 10% in North America) employ
a design professional for custom design due to the cost. Automatic floorplan generation will have tremendous impacts
on the trillion-dollar real-estate/construction industries.
Floorplan generation has been an active area of research. Early methods formulated it as iterative optimization [22, 21]. The surge of deep neural networks has made a
breakthrough, where state-of-the-art algorithms [24, 7] utilize Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [10]. GAN
is a one-shot generation process, converting a noise vector into a sample. A conditional GAN could take a design
in progress and produce a refined version iteratively [25].
However, there does not exist a database of incomplete
floorplans during design iterations, making such a training
infeasible.
This paper proposes a novel generative adversarial layout refinement network, where the generator is trained to
generate a floorplan as a graph of segmentation masks
by iteratively refining its design (See Fig. 1). We borrow the problem setup from the state-of-the-art system
House-GAN [24], while making a few extensions towards a

13632

