Learning View-Disentangled Human Pose Representation by Contrastive
Cross-View Mutual Information Maximization
Long Zhao1,∗ Yuxiao Wang2 Jiaping Zhao2 Liangzhe Yuan2 Jennifer J. Sun3
Florian Schroff2 Hartwig Adam2 Xi Peng4 Dimitris Metaxas1 Ting Liu2
1

Rutgers University

2

Google Research

3

Abstract
We introduce a novel representation learning method to
disentangle pose-dependent as well as view-dependent factors from 2D human poses. The method trains a network using cross-view mutual information maximization (CV-MIM)
which maximizes mutual information of the same pose performed from different viewpoints in a contrastive learning
manner. We further propose two regularization terms to ensure disentanglement and smoothness of the learned representations. The resulting pose representations can be used
for cross-view action recognition.
To evaluate the power of the learned representations, in
addition to the conventional fully-supervised action recognition settings, we introduce a novel task called singleshot cross-view action recognition. This task trains models with actions from only one single viewpoint while
models are evaluated on poses captured from all possible viewpoints. We evaluate the learned representations on standard benchmarks for action recognition, and
show that (i) CV-MIM performs competitively compared
with the state-of-the-art models in the fully-supervised scenarios; (ii) CV-MIM outperforms other competing methods by a large margin in the single-shot cross-view setting; (iii) and the learned representations can significantly
boost the performance when reducing the amount of supervised training data. Our code is made publicly available
at https : / / github . com / google - research /
google-research/tree/master/poem.

1. Introduction
Understanding human poses and actions is a fundamental problem in computer vision due to its broad applications
in the real world, such as video content analysis, intelligent
photography, AR/VR techniques, and human-computer interface. Recently, remarkable improvements have been
∗ This work was done while the author was a research intern at Google.

Caltech

4

University of Delaware

Training Dataset
Multi-View Images

Training View
View 1

Encoding
Model

Testing Views
View 1

Encoding
Model

View 2

Pose

View

Maximize Cross-View MI
View-Disentangled
Representation Learning

View 3
View 4

Single-Shot Cross-View
Action Recognition

Figure 1. Left: We propose to learn view-disentangled representation for human poses by maximizing cross-view mutual information. Right: The learned representation can be applied to downstream tasks such as single-shot cross-view action recognition.

achieved with deep learning approaches [9, 20, 28, 54, 55].
However, these data-driven approaches are usually vulnerable to changes of viewpoints. In particular, testing-time
unseen viewpoints often lead to significant degradation in
recognition performance [47].
To mitigate this issue, methods for cross-view action
recognition [47] have been proposed, where models are
trained with a set of actions captured from different viewpoints simultaneously so that they can be applied to novel
views unseen from training at testing time. Previous studies
usually require extensive supervision from multiple views
to learn view-invariant features [46, 47] or transferable representations [21, 23] for action recognition. Collecting labeled action data at scale from multiple views can be expensive and challenging in the wild due to potential limitation
of camera placement, scene and actor setup, etc.
We address this challenge by proposing a novel view-

12793

