Automated Log-Scale Quantization for Low-Cost Deep Neural Networks
Sangyun Oh1 , Hyeonuk Sim2 , Sugil Lee1 , Jongeun Lee1†
1 Department of Electrical Engineering, UNIST, Ulsan, Korea
2 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, UNIST, Ulsan, Korea
{syoh,detective,sglee17,jlee}@unist.ac.kr

Abstract
Quantization plays an important role in deep neural network (DNN) hardware. In particular, logarithmic quantization has multiple advantages for DNN hardware implementations, and its weakness in terms of lower performance
at high precision compared with linear quantization has
been recently remedied by what we call selective two-word
logarithmic quantization (STLQ). However, there is a lack
of training methods designed for STLQ or even logarithmic quantization in general. In this paper we propose a
novel STLQ-aware training method, which significantly outperforms the previous state-of-the-art training method for
STLQ. Moreover, our training results demonstrate that with
our new training method, STLQ applied to weight parameters of ResNet-18 can achieve the same level of performance
as state-of-the-art quantization method, APoT, at 3-bit precision. We also apply our method to various DNNs in image
enhancement and semantic segmentation, showing competitive results.

1. Introduction
Quantization plays an important role in implementing
energy-efﬁcient hardware for deep neural networks. Previous work on quantization mostly considers uniform quantization, but non-uniform quantization schemes such as
logarithmic-scale quantization (log-scale quantization, for
short) [19, 15] can have advantages over linear quantization
in terms of hardware implementation, since it can replace
multiplier hardware with a shifter or an adder, depending
on whether log-scale quantization is applied to one or both
operands.
Log-scale quantization places more quantization boundaries for low-magnitude values at the expense of less bound† Corresponding author.

This work was supported by Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology, Samsung Electronics Co., Ltd., IITP grant funded by MSIT of
Korea (No.2020-0-01336, Artiﬁcial Intelligence Graduate School Program
(UNIST)), and Free Innovative Research Fund of UNIST (1.170067.01).

aries for high-magnitude values. This can sometimes lead
to a lower expected quantization error overall, but often disproportionately high error that happens at high-magnitude
values can undermine the accuracy of a log-scale quantization scheme signiﬁcantly, resulting in worse performance than linear quantization at the same bit-width [15].
This problem of log-scale quantization has recently been
addressed by selective two-word logarithmic quantization
schemes (e.g. SLQ [16], FLightNN [9]). Selective two-word
logarithmic quantization (STLQ) employs the vanilla logscale quantization most of the time, but when the quantization error is higher than a certain threshold, the error
is quantized again, emitting two log-quantized words. The
de-quantization process is straightforward. Importantly, this
scheme allows the same low-complexity hardware of logscale quantization to be used while showing similar accuracy as linear quantization.
However, the previous work [16, 9] has important shortcomings. First, it uses hyperparameter(s) to control the ratio
of two-word quantization, which is suboptimal if the same
value is used for all layers/channels, or cumbersome to optimize if different values are used. Second, though some previous work [9] uses trainable latent variables to balance between accuracy and model sparsity through differentiable
training, their optimization goal does not explicitly target
model size or the number of two-word ratio, but instead
some measure of quantization error, which is only loosely
related to the two-word ratio. Consequently the training result is not optimal in terms of accuracy vs. two-word quantization ratio. Third, ﬁnding the best weight parameters for
a given two-word quantization ratio, which is a very useful use case scenario, is not directly supported by previous
work.
In this paper we propose a novel differentiable training
framework for STLQ. Our method can directly optimize
weights for a given two-word quantization ratio. Starting
with a two-word ratio constraint has a surprising side effect
that we use to our advantage in our training. That is, we
can pre-select and separate the weight parameters that are
likely to require two-word quantization from the rest of the

742

