Delving into Data: Effectively Substitute Training for Black-box Attack
Wenxuan Wang1∗‡ Bangjie Yin2∗¶ Taiping Yao2∗¶ Li Zhang1§
Yanwei Fu1†§ Shouhong Ding2†¶ Jilin Li2¶ Feiyue Huang2¶ Xiangyang Xue1‡
1

Fudan University

2

Youtu Lab, Tencent

Abstract
Deep models have shown their vulnerability when processing adversarial samples. As for the black-box attack,
without access to the architecture and weights of the attacked model, training a substitute model for adversarial
attacks has attracted wide attention. Previous substitute
training approaches focus on stealing the knowledge of the
target model based on real training data or synthetic data,
without exploring what kind of data can further improve
the transferability between the substitute and target models. In this paper, we propose a novel perspective substitute
training that focuses on designing the distribution of data
used in the knowledge stealing process. More specifically,
a diverse data generation module is proposed to synthesize large-scale data with wide distribution. And adversarial substitute training strategy is introduced to focus on the
data distributed near the decision boundary. The combination of these two modules can further boost the consistency
of the substitute model and target model, which greatly improves the effectiveness of adversarial attack. Extensive experiments demonstrate the efficacy of our method against
state-of-the-art competitors under non-target and target attack settings. Detailed visualization and analysis are also
provided to help understand the advantage of our method.

1. Introduction
Despite achieved impressive performance in most computer vision tasks, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been
* indicates equal contributions.
† indicates corresponding author.
‡ Wenxuan Wang and Xiangyang Xue are with School of Computer Science, and Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan
University. Email: {wxwang19, xyxue}@fudan.edu.cn.
§ Li Zhang and Yanwei Fu are with School of Data Science, MOE
Frontiers Center for Brain Science, and Shanghai Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University. Email: {yanweifu,
lizhangfd}@fudan.edu.cn.
¶ Bangjie Yin, Taiping Yao, Shouhong Ding, Jilin Li and Feiyue Huang
are with Youtu Lab, Tencent. Email: {bangjieyin, taipingyao, ericshding,
jerolinli, garyhuang}@tencent.com.

Figure 1. Differences between applying real data and synthetic
data for substitute training. The ‘T’/‘S’ means the target/substitute
model, the blue (+)/(-) in (b) indicates the adversarial examples,
and the dashed green/red lines represent the decision boundary.
Comparing (a) and (b), synthetic data generated in our way can
train a substitute model with a more similar decision boundary to
the target model. Best viewed in color and zoomed in.

shown to be vulnerable to even imperceptible adversarial
noise/perturbations [28, 18]. The existence of adversarial examples reveals important security risks in deploying
DNNs to real-world applications. The community studies
the adversarial attacks in the settings of white-box or blackbox attack, by whether or not fully access to the target attack model. Practically, as the information of the full target
model for white-box attack is unavailable to real-world deployment, this paper particularly focuses on the black-box
attack, which normally produces the adversarial examples
only replying on hard-labels or output scores of the target
model. Typically, the black-box attack includes the scorebased [3, 12, 11, 7] or decision-based methods [5, 1]. Nevertheless, it is required to make an avalanche of queries to
the target model in such attacks, still potentially limiting
their usability to attack DNNs in real situations.
Recently, the idea of substitute training has been extensively explored in the black-box attack [8, 26, 16, 23, 29].
Normally, rather than directly learning to synthesize adversarial examples, a substitute model is trained to make similar predictions as the target model, queried by the same

4761

