NeX: Real-time View Synthesis with Neural Basis Expansion
Suttisak Wizadwongsa*

Pakkapon Phongthawee*
Supasorn Suwajanakorn
VISTEC, Thailand

Jiraphon Yenphraphai*

{suttisak.w s19, pakkapon.p s19, jiraphony pro, supasorn.s}@vistec.ac.th

Reflectance coefficients

𝛼 𝑘0
RGB Pixel = 𝑘0 + 𝑘1

(view-dependent)

+𝑘2

𝑘1

⋯

𝑘𝑁

Neural basis functions

+𝑘3

(a) NeX MPI

+ ⋯ + 𝑘𝑁

(b) Our synthesized view #1

(c) Our synthesized view #2

Figure 1: (a) Each pixel in NeX multiplane image consists of an alpha transparency value, base color k0 , and view-dependent
reflectance coefficients k1 ...kn . A linear combination of these coefficients and basis functions learned from a neural network
produces the final color value. (b, c) show our synthesized images that can be rendered in real time with view-dependent
effects such as the reflection on the silver spoon.

Abstract
We present NeX, a new approach to novel view synthesis
based on enhancements of multiplane image (MPI) that can
reproduce next-level view-dependent effects—in real time.
Unlike traditional MPI that uses a set of simple RGBα
planes, our technique models view-dependent effects by instead parameterizing each pixel as a linear combination of
basis functions learned from a neural network. Moreover,
we propose a hybrid implicit-explicit modeling strategy that
improves upon fine detail and produces state-of-the-art results. Our method is evaluated on benchmark forwardfacing datasets as well as our newly-introduced dataset designed to test the limit of view-dependent modeling with
significantly more challenging effects such as the rainbow
reflections on a CD. Our method achieves the best overall
scores across all major metrics on these datasets with more
than 1000× faster rendering time than the state of the art.
For real-time demos, visit https://nex-mpi.github.io/

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis is an exciting and long-standing
problem that draws much attention from both the computer
vision and graphics communities. The problem comprises
* Authors contributed equally to this work.

two intriguing challenges of how to construct a visual scene
representation from only a sparse set of images and how to
render such a representation from unseen perspectives. A
wide range of applications are possible from this area of
research ranging from virtually visiting tourist attractions
to viewing any online product all around in 3D; however,
such experiences would only become most compelling and
practical when the representation allows photo-realistic and
real-time synthesis.
One candidate that can serve this purpose is multiplane
image (MPI) [53] which approximates the scene’s light field
with a set of parallel semi-transparent planes placed along
a reference viewing frustum. This representation is shown
to be more effective than traditional 3D mesh reconstruction in reproducing complex scenes with challenging occlusions, thin structures, or planar reflections. However, the
standard RGBα representation of MPI is limited to diffuse
surfaces whose appearance stays constant regardless of the
viewing angle. This greatly limits the types of objects and
scenes that MPI can capture. Recent research on implicit
scene representation has made significant progress in the
past months [21, 32, 18, 50, 42] and can be applied to view
synthesis problem. Unfortunately, its expensive network inference still prohibits real-time rendering, and reproducing
complex surface reflectance with high fidelity still remains
a challenge. Our method breaks these limits on both fronts.

8534

