Adversarial Robustness under Long-Tailed Distribution
Tong Wu1,5 , Ziwei Liu2 , Qingqiu Huang3 , Yu Wang4 , Dahua Lin1,5,6
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 2 S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, 3 Huawei,
4
Tsinghua University, 5 SenseTime-CUHK Joint Lab, 6 Centre of Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
{wt020,dhlin,hq016}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk, ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg, yu-wang@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Despite the great progress on a variety of computer vision tasks, deep neural networks are found to be vulnerable
to minor adversarial perturbations [38], i.e., easily misled
to make incorrect predictions. The existence of adversarial
examples reveals a non-negligible security risk to modern
computer vision models, with extensive efforts devoted to

Long-tailed CIFAR-10

Accuracy

Sample number

Classes
Plainly-trained A_nat

AT-trained A_nat

Robust
Accuracy

AT-trained A_rob

Long-tailed Recognition

Our

Baseline

Natural
Accurac
y

Defense

Adversarial robustness has attracted extensive studies
recently by revealing the vulnerability and intrinsic characteristics of deep networks. However, existing works on
adversarial robustness mainly focus on balanced datasets,
while real-world data usually exhibits a long-tailed distribution. To push adversarial robustness towards more realistic scenarios, in this work we investigate the adversarial
vulnerability as well as defense under long-tailed distributions. In particular, we first reveal the negative impacts
induced by imbalanced data on both recognition performance and adversarial robustness, uncovering the intrinsic
challenges of this problem. We then perform a systematic
study on existing long-tailed recognition methods in conjunction with the adversarial training framework. Several
valuable observations are obtained: 1) natural accuracy is
relatively easy to improve, 2) fake gain of robust accuracy
exists under unreliable evaluation, and 3) boundary error
limits the promotion of robustness. Inspired by these observations, we propose a clean yet effective framework, RoBal,
which consists of two dedicated modules, a scale-invariant
classifier and data re-balancing via both margin engineering at training stage and boundary adjustment during inference. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority
of our approach over other state-of-the-art defense methods. To our best knowledge, we are the first to tackle adversarial robustness under long-tailed distributions, which we
believe would be a significant step towards real-world robustness. Our code is available at: https://github.
com/wutong16/Adversarial_Long-Tail.

Balanced CIFAR-10

Figure 1. Upper: A long-tailed data distribution induces decreasing natural and robust accuracy from head to tail and a magnified
“sacrifice” of natural accuracy especially to tail classes when adversarial training is applied. Lower: Evaluation results on two
metric dimensions, including a number of long-tailed recognition
methods combined with adversarial training, several state-of-theart defense methods, and our RoBal in a region with trade-off.

improving adversarial robustness.
Existing adversarial robustness research mainly focuses
on balanced datasets such as MNIST, CIFAR, and ImageNet [12]. Nevertheless, real-world data usually exhibit
a long-tailed distribution [40, 11], which brings challenges
not only to the recognition tasks themselves but also to robustness against adversarial attacks. The former has been
attracting increasing attention recently, with a number of algorithms [24, 16, 51, 7, 2, 44] proposed to tackle the issue;
On the other hand, the latter remains largely unexplored.

8659

