SGCN:Sparse Graph Convolution Network for Pedestrian Trajectory Prediction
Liushuai Shi1 Le Wang2 * Chengjiang Long3 Sanping Zhou2 Mo Zhou2 Zhenxing Niu4 Gang Hua5
1
School of Software Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University
2
Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Robotics, Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
JD Finance America Corporation, 4 Machine Intelligence Lab, Alibaba Group 5 Wormpex AI Research

Abstract
Pedestrian trajectory prediction is a key technology in
autopilot, which remains to be very challenging due to complex interactions between pedestrians. However, previous
works based on dense undirected interaction suffer from
modeling superfluous interactions and neglect of trajectory
motion tendency, and thus inevitably result in a considerable
deviance from the reality. To cope with these issues, we
present a Sparse Graph Convolution Network (SGCN) for
pedestrian trajectory prediction. Speciﬁcally, the SGCN explicitly models the sparse directed interaction with a sparse
directed spatial graph to capture adaptive interaction pedestrians. Meanwhile, we use a sparse directed temporal graph
to model the motion tendency, thus to facilitate the prediction
based on the observed direction. Finally, parameters of a
bi-Gaussian distribution for trajectory prediction are estimated by fusing the above two sparse graphs. We evaluate
our proposed method on the ETH and UCY datasets, and the
experimental results show our method outperforms comparative state-of-the-art methods by 9% in Average Displacement
Error (ADE) and 13% in Final Displacement Error (FDE).
Notably, visualizations indicate that our method can capture
adaptive interactions between pedestrians and their effective
motion tendencies.

1. Introduction
Given the observed trajectories of pedestrians, pedestrian
trajectory prediction aims to predict a sequence of future
location coordinates of pedestrians, which plays a critical
role in various applications like autonomous driving [3, 29],
video surveillance [28, 45] and visual recognition [9, 27, 16].
Despite the recent advances in the literature, pedestrian trajectory prediction remains to be a very challenging task due to the complex interactions between pedestrians. For example, the motion of a pedestrian is very
easy to be disturbed by other pedestrians [11], close friends
∗ Corresponding author.

(A.1) Dense Undirected
Interaction

Real Trajectory
Scenario
Observed Trajectory

(B.1) Prediction
Discrepancy

Pedestrian

(A.2) Sparse Undirected
Interaction

(A.3) Sparse Directed
Interaction

(B.2) Alleviating Discrepancy (B.3) Versatile Motion
with Motion Tendency
Tendencies
Predicted Trajectory

Ground Truth

(A+B) Combination
Motion Tendency

Figure 1. Sparse Directed Interaction & Motion Tendency. Different pedestrians are marked in different colors. (A.1) Dense
undirected interaction, where any pedestrian interacts with all other
pedestrians. (A.2) Sparse undirected interaction with superﬂuous
interactions being removed. (A.3) Sparse directed interaction with
adaptive interaction pedestrians. (B.1) The predicted trajectory
severely deviates from the ground-truth as the pedestrians try to
avoid collision against each other. (B.2) Trajectory points enclosed
by the blue dotted circle indicate a motion tendency which may
be leveraged for trajectory prediction. (B.3) Variation of motion
tendencies with different sets of trajectory points.

or colleagues are likely to walk in groups [32], and different pedestrians usually conduct similar social actions [38].
To model the interactions between pedestrians, extensive
works [31, 2, 11, 23, 19, 32, 46] have been done in
the past few years, in which the weighting-by-distance
methods [31, 2, 11, 32] and the attention-based methods [23, 19, 46, 8, 17, 18] have achieved the state-of-the-art
results in pedestrian trajectory prediction.
Most of the weighting-by-distance and attention-based
methods take a dense interaction model to represent the complex interactions between pedestrians, in which they assume
that a pedestrian interacts with all the rest pedestrians. Besides, the weighting-by-distance methods apply the relative
distance to model the undirected interaction, in which the interaction between two pedestrians are identical to each other.
However, we argue that both the dense interaction and undirected interaction will introduce the superﬂuous interactions
between pedestrians. As shown in Figure 1: (1) two pairs of

8994

