Communication Efficient SGD via Gradient Sampling with Bayes Prior
Liuyihan Song*, Kang Zhao*, Pan Pan, Yu Liu, Yingya Zhang, Yinghui Xu, Rong Jin
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group
{liuyihan.slyh, zhaokang.zk, panpan.pp, ly103369, yingya.zyy, renji.xyh, jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Gradient compression has been widely adopted in dataparallel distributed training of deep neural networks to
reduce communication overhead. Some literatures have
demonstrated that large gradients are more important than
small ones because they contain more information, such
as Top-k compressor. Other mainstream methods, like
random-k compressor and gradient quantization, usually
treat all gradients equally. Different from all of them, we
regard large and small gradients selection as the exploitation and exploration of gradient information, respectively.
And we find taking both of them into consideration is the
key to boost the final accuracy. So, we propose a novel gradient compressor: Gradient Sampling with Bayes Prior in
this paper. Specifically, we sample important/large gradients based on the global gradient distribution, which is periodically updated across multiple workers. Then we introduce Bayes Prior into distribution model to further explore
the gradients. We prove the convergence of our method
for smooth non-convex problems in the distributed system.
Compared with methods that running after high compression ratio at the expense of accuracy, we pursue no loss
of accuracy and the actual acceleration benefit in practice. Experimental comparisons on a variety of computer
vision tasks (e.g. image classification and object detection) and backbones (ResNet, MobileNetV2, InceptionV3
and AlexNet) show that our approach outperforms the stateof-the-art techniques in terms of both speed and accuracy,
with the limitation of 100× compression ratio.

1. Introduction
Recently, deep learning has achieved great success in
many tasks, such as image classification [37, 45, 36], object detection [23, 32, 28], video understanding [46, 8, 47]
and so on. By taking advantage of data-parallel distributed
training equipped with more and more GPU resources, the
expensive computational time-consuming of training deep
* Equal Contribution.

Figure 1. The core idea of our gradient compression method. The
left subfigure illustrates that we sample important gradients based
on gradient distribution. The right subfigure indicates that we also
select some “trivial” ones as the exploration of gradient information.

neural networks have been dramatically reduced. However,
the communication cost keeps rising with the increasing
number of computing nodes. Even in All-Reduce architecture [31, 40], the transmission delay for communication
is obvious. To handle this problem, gradient compression
techniques [44, 22, 6, 14] have been put forward to reduce
gradients transfer data size, by substituting partial gradients
for full ones.
Although gradient compression has been well studied in
[44, 22, 6], it is still a great challenge to maintain the accuracy at a high compression ratio. [44] combines error reset
with partial synchronization to scale the compression ratio
up to 1024× successfully. But the random sampling strategy adopted in partial synchronization overlooks the importance of large gradients. In [14], two adaptive gradient
quantization schemes: ALQ and AMQ are proposed to improve the final accuracy. Unfortunately, it still suffers from
some accuracy loss (more than 1.2% on ImageNet dataset),
due to the limited representations of low-bit.
To better capture the gradient statistics, in this paper,
we propose a new gradient compression method Gradient
Sampling with Bayes Prior to further improve the accuracy.
Compared with a very high compression ratio, we pursue
no loss of accuracy and the actual acceleration benefit in
practice. The major contributions of our work are outlined

12065

