Triple-cooperative Video Shadow Detection
Zhihao Chen1∗ , Liang Wan1 *, Lei Zhu2†, Jia Shen1 , Huazhu Fu3 , Wennan Liu4 , Jing Qin5
1
College of Intelligence and Computing, Tianjin University
2
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge
3
Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
4
Academy of Medical Engineering and Translational Medicine, Tianjin University
5
The Hong Kong Polytechnic University

Abstract
Shadow detection in a single image has received significant research interests in recent years. However, much
fewer works have been explored in shadow detection over
dynamic scenes. The bottleneck is the lack of a wellestablished dataset with high-quality annotations for video
shadow detection. In this work, we collect a new video
shadow detection dataset (ViSha), which contains 120
videos with 11, 685 frames, covering 60 object categories,
varying lengths, and different motion/lighting conditions.
All the frames are annotated with a high-quality pixel-level
shadow mask. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
learning-oriented dataset for video shadow detection. Furthermore, we develop a new baseline model, named triplecooperative video shadow detection network (TVSD-Net).
It utilizes triple parallel networks in a cooperative manner to learn discriminative representations at intra-video
and inter-video levels. Within the network, a dual gated
co-attention module is proposed to constrain features from
neighboring frames in the same video, while an auxiliary
similarity loss is introduced to mine semantic information
between different videos. Finally, we conduct a comprehensive study on ViSha, evaluating 12 state-of-the-art models
(including single image shadow detectors, video object segmentation, and saliency detection methods). Experiments
demonstrate that our model outperforms SOTA competitors.

1. Introduction
As a common phenomenon in our daily life, shadows
in natural images provide hints for extracting scene geometry [41, 24], light direction [27], and camera location and
its parameters [23]. Shadows can also benefit diverse image understanding tasks, e.g., image segmentation [10], ob* Zhihao Chen and Liang Wan are the joint first authors of this work.
† Lei Zhu (lz437@cam.ac.uk) is the corresponding author of this work.

ject detection [8], and object tracking [37]. The last decade
has witnessed a growing interest in image shadow detection. Many methods have been developed by examining
color and illumination priors [14, 13], by developing datadriven approaches with hand-crafted features [21, 28, 54],
or by learning discriminative features from a convolutional
neural network (CNN) [25, 43, 39, 20, 29, 56, 19, 53].
However, in striking contrast with the flourishing development of image shadow detection, much fewer works have
been explored in shadow detection over dynamic scenes.
On the other hand, we also notice that video processing has
become an urgent topic in recent years, and a lot of methods
were proposed for video salient object detection [30, 47, 11]
and video object segmentation [35, 40]. What makes video
shadow detection lag far behind these video processing
tasks? Compared with shadow detection of a single image,
video shadow detection (VSD) needs to utilize temporal information to identify shadow pixels of each video frame.
Although there exist multiple datasets for image shadow
detection, video salient object detection, and video object
segmentation, such standard widespread benchmark (with a
sufficient number of video clips, covering diverse content)
is missing for video shadow detection. What’s more, CNNbased methods have not been exploited for this problem due
to the lack of such a dataset.
In this work, we first collect a new video shadow detection (ViSha) dataset. It contains 120 videos with 11,685
image frames and 390 seconds duration, covering shadows of 7 object classes and 60 object categories, various
motion/lighting conditions, and different instance numbers.
All the video frames are carefully annotated with a highquality pixel-level shadow mask. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first learning-oriented dataset for video
shadow detection, which could facilitate the community to
explore further in this field. Second, we develop a new
baseline model, a triple-cooperative video shadow detection network (TVSD-Net), for this task. Instead of
just exploiting temporal information within one video clip

2715

