On Self-Contact and Human Pose
Lea Müller1 , Ahmed A. A. Osman1 , Siyu Tang2 , Chun-Hao P. Huang1 , Michael J. Black1
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen

2

ETH Zürich

{lea.mueller, ahmed.osman, stang, paul.huang, black}@tuebingen.mpg.de

Abstract
People touch their face 23 times an hour, they cross
their arms and legs, put their hands on their hips, etc.
While many images of people contain some form of selfcontact, current 3D human pose and shape (HPS) regression methods typically fail to estimate this contact. To address this, we develop new datasets and methods that significantly improve human pose estimation with self-contact.
First, we create a dataset of 3D Contact Poses (3DCP) containing SMPL-X bodies fit to 3D scans as well as poses
from AMASS, which we refine to ensure good contact. Second, we leverage this to create the Mimic-The-Pose (MTP)
dataset of images, collected via Amazon Mechanical Turk,
containing people mimicking the 3DCP poses with selfcontact. Third, we develop a novel HPS optimization
method, SMPLify-XMC, that includes contact constraints
and uses the known 3DCP body pose during fitting to create near ground-truth poses for MTP images. Fourth, for
more image variety, we label a dataset of in-the-wild images with Discrete Self-Contact (DSC) information and use
another new optimization method, SMPLify-DC, that exploits discrete contacts during pose optimization. Finally,
we use our datasets during SPIN training to learn a new
3D human pose regressor, called TUCH (Towards Understanding Contact in Humans). We show that the new selfcontact training data significantly improves 3D human pose
estimates on withheld test data and existing datasets like
3DPW. Not only does our method improve results for selfcontact poses, but it also improves accuracy for non-contact
poses. The code and data are available for research purposes at https://tuch.is.tue.mpg.de.

1. Introduction
Self-contact takes many forms. We touch our bodies
both consciously and unconsciously [24]. For the major
limbs, contact can provide physical support, whereas we
touch our faces in ways that convey our emotional state.
We perform self-grooming, we have nervous gestures, and

Figure 1. The first column shows images containing self-contact.
In blue (left), results of TUCH, compared to SPIN results in violet
(right). When rendered from the camera view, the estimated pose
may look fine (column two vs. four). However, when rotated, it is
clear that training TUCH with self-contact information improves
3D pose estimation (column three vs. five).

we communicate with each other through combined face
and hand motions (e.g. “shh”). We may wring our hands
when worried, cross our arms when defensive, or put our
hands behind our head when confident. A Google search
for “sitting person” or “thinking pose” for example, will return images, the majority of which, contain self-contact.
Although self-contact is ubiquitous in human behavior,
it is rarely explicitly studied in computer vision. For our
purposes, self-contact comprises “self touch” (where the
hands touch the body) and contact between other body parts
(e.g. crossed legs). We ignore body parts that are frequently
in contact (e.g. at the crotch or armpits) and focus on contact
that is communicative or functional. Our goal is to estimate
3D human pose and shape (HPS) accurately for any pose.
When self-contact is present, the estimated pose should reflect the true 3D contact.
Unfortunately, existing methods that compute 3D bodies
from images perform poorly on images with self-contact;
see Fig. 1. Body parts that should be touching generally
are not. Recovering human meshes from images typically
involves either learning a regressor from pixels to 3D pose
and shape [20, 23], or fitting a 3D model to image features
using an optimization method [4, 34, 45, 46]. The learning approaches rely on labeled training data. Unfortunately,
current 2D datasets typically contain labeled keypoints or
segmentation masks but do not provide any information

9990

