Learning monocular 3D reconstruction of articulated categories from motion
Filippos Kokkinos
University College London

Iasonas Kokkinos
University College London, Snap Inc.

filippos.kokkinos@ucl.ac.uk

i.kokkinos@cs.ucl.ac.uk

Abstract
Monocular 3D reconstruction of articulated object categories is challenging due to the lack of training data and
the inherent ill-posedness of the problem. In this work we
use video self-supervision, forcing the consistency of consecutive 3D reconstructions by a motion-based cycle loss.
This largely improves both optimization-based and learningbased 3D mesh reconstruction. We further introduce an interpretable model of 3D template deformations that controls
a 3D surface through the displacement of a small number
of local, learnable handles. We formulate this operation as
a structured layer relying on mesh-laplacian regularization
and show that it can be trained in an end-to-end manner.
We finally introduce a per-sample numerical optimisation
approach that jointly optimises over mesh displacements and
cameras within a video, boosting accuracy both for training
and also as test time post-processing.
While relying exclusively on a small set of videos collected per category for supervision, we obtain state-of-theart reconstructions with diverse shapes, viewpoints and
textures for multiple articulated object categories. Supplementary materials, code, and videos are provided on
the project page: https://fkokkinos.github.io/
video_3d_reconstruction/.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D reconstruction of general articulated categories is a task that humans perform routinely, but remains
challenging for current computer vision systems. The breakthroughs achieved for humans [3, 17, 10, 47, 29, 21, 30, 16,
4] have relied on expressive articulated shape priors [26] and
mocap recordings to provide strong supervision in the form
of 3D joint locations. Still, for general articulated categories,
such as horses or cows, the problem remains in its infancy
due to both the lack of strong supervision [55] and the inherent challenge of representing and learning articulated
deformations for general categories.
Recent works have started tackling this problem by re-

Figure 1: We tackle the problem of monocular 3D reconstruction for articulated object categories by guiding the
deformation of a mesh template (top) through a sparse set of
3D control points regressed by a network (middle). Despite
using only weak supervision in the form of keypoints, masks
and video-based correspondence our approach is able to capture broad articulations, such as opening wings, as well as
motion of the lower limbs and neck (bottom).
lying on minimal, 2D-based supervision such as manual
keypoint annotations or masks [43] and learning morphable
model priors [43, 19, 18, 9] or hand-crafted mesh segmentations [23]. In this work we leverage the rich information
available in videos, and use networks trained for the 2D tasks
of object detection, semantic segmentation, and optical flow
to complement (optional) 2D keypoint-level supervision.
We make three contributions towards pushing the envelope of monocular 3D object category reconstruction, by
injecting ideas from structure-from-motion (SFM), geometry
processing and bundle adjustment in the task of monocular
3D articulated reconstruction.
Firstly, we draw inspiration from 3D vision which has
traditionally relied on motion information for SFM [38, 11],
SLAM [20, 28] or Non-Rigid SFM [39, 8, 7]. These
category-agnostic techniques interpret 2D point trajectories
in terms of an underlying 3D scene and a moving camera. In
this work we use the same principle to supervise monocular
11737

