PiCIE: Unsupervised Semantic Segmentation using Invariance and Equivariance
in Clustering
Jang Hyun Cho1
Utkarsh Mall2
1
University of Texas at Austin

Kavita Bala2
Bharath Hariharan2
2
Cornell University

Figure 1: From these unannotated images, we would like a recognition system to discover the concepts of house, grass, trees and sky, and
segment each image accordingly without any supervision.

Abstract
We present a new framework for semantic segmentation
without annotations via clustering. Off-the-shelf clustering
methods are limited to curated, single-label, and objectcentric images yet real-world data are dominantly uncurated, multi-label, and scene-centric. We extend clustering from images to pixels and assign separate cluster membership to different instances within each image. However, solely relying on pixel-wise feature similarity fails
to learn high-level semantic concepts and overfits to lowlevel visual cues. We propose a method to incorporate
geometric consistency as an inductive bias to learn invariance and equivariance for photometric and geometric
variations. With our novel learning objective, our framework can learn high-level semantic concepts. Our method,
PiCIE (Pixel-level feature Clustering using Invariance and
Equivariance), is the first method capable of segmenting
both things and stuff categories without any hyperparameter tuning or task-specific pre-processing. Our method
largely outperforms existing baselines on COCO [31] and
Cityscapes [8] with +17.5 Acc. and +4.5 mIoU. We show
that PiCIE gives a better initialization for standard supervised training. The code is available at https://
github.com/janghyuncho/PiCIE.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised learning from a set of unlabelled images
has gained large popularity, but still is mostly limited to
single-class, object-centric images. Consider the images
shown in Figure 1 (top). Given a collection of these and
other unlabeled images, can a machine discover the concepts of “grass”, “sky”, “house” and “trees” from each image? Going further, can it identify where in each image each
concept appears, and segment it out?
A system that is capable of such unsupervised semantic segmentation can then automatically discover classes of
objects with their precise boundaries, thus removing the
substantial cost of collecting and labeling datasets such as
COCO. It might even discover objects, materials and textures that an annotator may not know of a priori. This can
be particularly useful for analyzing novel domains: for example, discovering new kinds of visual structures in satellite
imagery. The ability of the system to discover and segment
out unknown objects may also prove useful for robots trying
to manipulate these objects in the wild.
However, while unsupervised semantic segmentation
might be useful, it is also challenging. This is because
it combines the problem of class discovery with the challenge of exhaustive pixel labeling. Recent progress in self4321
16794

