Deep Polarization Imaging for 3D Shape and SVBRDF Acquisition
Valentin Deschaintre
Imperial College London

Yiming Lin
Imperial College London

Abhijeet Ghosh
Imperial College London

v.deschaintre@ic.ac.uk

yiming.lin11@ic.ac.uk

abhijeet.ghosh@ic.ac.uk

Abstract
We present a novel method for efficient acquisition of
shape and spatially varying reflectance of 3D objects using polarization cues. Unlike previous works that have exploited polarization to estimate material or object appearance under certain constraints (known shape or multiview
acquisition), we lift such restrictions by coupling polarization imaging with deep learning to achieve high quality
estimate of 3D object shape (surface normals and depth)
and SVBRDF using single-view polarization imaging under
frontal flash illumination. In addition to acquired polarization images, we provide our deep network with strong novel
cues related to shape and reflectance, in the form of a normalized Stokes map and an estimate of diffuse color. We
additionally describe modifications to network architecture
and training loss which provide further qualitative improvements. We demonstrate our approach to achieve superior
results compared to recent works employing deep learning
in conjunction with flash illumination.

1. Introduction
In this work, we extend practical acquisition of shape and
spatially varying reflectance of 3D objects. Accurately acquiring the shape and appearance of real-world objects and
materials has been an active area of research in vision and
graphics with a wide range of applications including analysis/recognition, and digitization for visual effects, games,
virtual reality, cultural heritage, advertising or design for
example. Advances in digital imaging over the last two
decades has resulted in image-based acquisition techniques
becoming an integral component of appearance modeling
and 3D reconstruction. A recent trend has been towards
making acquisition more practical, employing commodity
off-the-shelf equipment and more recently relying on minimalistic capture coupled with advances in deep learning
techniques.
Our method allows to better recover appearance by leveraging deep learning and additional photometric cues. Similar to the recent works that employ deep learning for 3D

object appearance capture [25, 7], we employ acquisition
under frontal flash illumination. However, compared to
previous work, we additionally leverage polarization imaging and exploit polarization cues in conjunction with deep
learning.
The recent work of Ba et al. [4] proposed a similar approach to estimate surface normals of homogeneous 3D
objects under uncontrolled environment illumination. We
show that arbitrary environment illumination can limit the
quality of polarization signal and describe how flash illumination solves this problem, resulting in high quality surface normal estimate. Furthermore, our method can process non homogeneous objects and estimates a physically
based spatially-varying BRDF of higher quality than previous methods [25, 7].
We create a new HDR synthetic dataset simulating polarization behaviour on different geometries and SVBRDFs
and train an improved deep network inspired by Deschaintre et al. and Li et al. [11, 25]. Observing the polarization information of a 3D object from a single view direction under frontal flash illumination, our method estimates
the 3D shape as surface normal and depth maps and spatially varying reflectance properties as diffuse and specular
albedo maps and specular roughness map which enable high
quality renderings of acquired objects under novel lighting
conditions.
To summarize, in this paper we make the following contributions:
• We propose the first method for joint 3D shape and
SVBRDF estimation combining polarization cues (under flash illumination) and deep learning.
• We publish a new synthetic dataset with diffuse polarization effects for supervised learning.
• Analysis of polarization cues under different lighting
and practical acquisition protocol for high quality results.
• An improved deep network architecture and training
loss for 3D object appearance acquisition.
115567

