Learning Accurate Dense Correspondences and When to Trust Them
Prune Truong
Martin Danelljan
Luc Van Gool
Radu Timofte
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland
{prune.truong, martin.danelljan, vangool, radu.timofte}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Establishing dense correspondences between a pair of
images is an important and general problem. However,
dense flow estimation is often inaccurate in the case of large
displacements or homogeneous regions. For most applications and down-stream tasks, such as pose estimation,
image manipulation, or 3D reconstruction, it is crucial to
know when and where to trust the estimated matches.
In this work, we aim to estimate a dense flow field relating two images, coupled with a robust pixel-wise confidence map indicating the reliability and accuracy of the
prediction. We develop a flexible probabilistic approach
that jointly learns the flow prediction and its uncertainty.
In particular, we parametrize the predictive distribution as
a constrained mixture model, ensuring better modelling of
both accurate flow predictions and outliers. Moreover, we
develop an architecture and training strategy tailored for
robust and generalizable uncertainty prediction in the context of self-supervised training. Our approach obtains stateof-the-art results on multiple challenging geometric matching and optical flow datasets. We further validate the usefulness of our probabilistic confidence estimation for the
task of pose estimation. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/PruneTruong/PDCNet.

1. Introduction
Finding pixel-wise correspondences between pairs of
images is a fundamental computer vision problem with numerous important applications, including dense 3D reconstruction [40], video analysis [33, 45], image registration
[44, 50], image manipulation [11, 28], and texture or style
transfer [20, 26]. Dense correspondence estimation has
most commonly been addressed in the context of optical
flow [2, 12, 16, 48], where the image pairs represent consecutive frames in a video. While these methods excel in
the case of small appearance changes and limited displacements, they cannot cope with the challenges posed by the
more general geometric matching task. In geometric matching, the images can stem from radically different views of

(a) Query image

(b) Reference image

(c) Baseline

(d) PDC-Net (Ours)

Figure 1. Estimating dense correspondences between the query (a)
and the reference (b) image. The query is warped according to the
resulting flows (c)-(d). The baseline (c) does not estimate an uncertainty map and is therefore unable to filter the inaccurate flows
at e.g. occluded and homogeneous regions. In contrast, our PDCNet (d) not only estimates accurate correspondences, but also when
to trust them. It predicts a robust uncertainty map that identifies accurate matches and excludes incorrect and unmatched pixels (red).

the same scene, often captured by different cameras and at
different occasions. This leads to large displacements and
significant appearance transformations between the frames.
In contrast to optical flow, the more general dense correspondence problem has received much less attention [31,
37, 42, 52]. Dense flow estimation is prone to errors in
the presence of large displacements, appearance changes,
or homogeneous regions. It is also ill-defined in case of occlusions or in e.g. sky, where predictions are bound to be
inaccurate (Fig. 1c). For geometric matching applications,
it is thus crucial to know when and where to trust the estimated correspondences. For instance, pose estimation, 3D
reconstruction, and image-based localization require a set of
highly robust and accurate matches as input. The predicted
dense flow field must therefore be paired with a robust confidence estimate (Fig. 1d). Uncertainty estimation is also
indispensable for safety-critical tasks, such as autonomous
driving and medical imaging. In this work, we set out to

5714

