Unsupervised Pre-training for Person Re-identification
Dengpan Fu1
Lu Yuan2
1

Dongdong Chen2 Jianmin Bao2 * Hao Yang2
Lei Zhang2 Houqiang Li1 Dong Chen2

University of Science and Technology of China
fdpan@mail.ustc.edu.cn

cddlyf@gmail.com

2

Microsoft Research

lihq@ustc.edu.cn

{jianbao,haya,luyuan,leizhang,doch}@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present a large scale unlabeled person re-identification (Re-ID) dataset “LUPerson” and make
the first attempt of performing unsupervised pre-training for
improving the generalization ability of the learned person
Re-ID feature representation. This is to address the problem that all existing person Re-ID datasets are all of limited
scale due to the costly effort required for data annotation.
Previous research tries to leverage models pre-trained on
ImageNet to mitigate the shortage of person Re-ID data but
suffers from the large domain gap between ImageNet and
person Re-ID data. LUPerson is an unlabeled dataset of
4M images of over 200K identities, which is 30× larger
than the largest existing Re-ID dataset. It also covers a
much diverse range of capturing environments (e.g., camera settings, scenes, etc.). Based on this dataset, we systematically study the key factors for learning Re-ID features
from two perspectives: data augmentation and contrastive
loss. Unsupervised pre-training performed on this largescale dataset effectively leads to a generic Re-ID feature
that can benefit all existing person Re-ID methods. Using
our pre-trained model in some basic frameworks, our methods achieve state-of-the-art results without bells and whistles on four widely used Re-ID datasets: CUHK03, Market1501, DukeMTMC, and MSMT17. Our results also show
that the performance improvement is more significant on
small-scale target datasets or under few-shot setting.

1. Introduction
Model pre-training plays an indispensable role in person
Re-identification (Re-ID). Compared to other vision tasks,
as data collection and annotation for Re-ID is extremely difficult and expensive, existing public datasets all have a limited scale in terms of image number (largest MSMT17 [39],
126K images), person identities (largest Airport [25], 9,651
* Corresponding author.

(a) Market1501

(b) DukeMTMC

Figure 1: Person Re-ID performance comparison of applying different pre-trained models on two methods: IDE [45]
and MGN [38]. We report the results on different dataset
scales for Market1501 and DukeMTC with small-scale setting. IN sup. and LUP unsup. are the supervised model
trained on ImageNet and the unsupervised model trained on
LUPerson, respectively.
identities) and captured environments (< 20 scenes, fixed
cameras and resolution). To mitigate the shortage of person
Re-ID data, previous research has tried to leverage models
pre-trained on ImageNet and transfer the pre-trained feature
to Re-ID tasks [22, 3, 34, 38, 13]. However, it is arguable if
using ImageNet for pre-training is optimal, due to the large
domain gap between ImageNet and person Re-ID data.
Inspired by the recent success of self-supervised learning [6, 8, 19], we make the first attempt towards large scale
unsupervised pre-training for person Re-ID feature representation learning in this paper. Considering the limited
scale of existing Re-ID datasets, we build a new Large-scale
Unlabeled Person Re-ID dataset “LUPerson”. It consists
of 4M person images of over 200K identities extracted from
46K YouTube videos, which is 30× larger than the largest
existing Re-ID dataset MSMT [39]. Moreover, the collected
videos cover a wide range of capturing environments (e.g.,
using fixed or moving cameras, under dynamic scenes, or
having different resolutions), yielding a great data diversity
which is essential for learning generic representation. We

14750

