Background Splitting:
Finding Rare Classes in a Sea of Background
Ravi Teja Mullapudi2,3 ⋆
rmullapu@cs.cmu.edu

Fait Poms1 ⋆
fpoms@cs.stanford.edu

Deva Ramanan2
deva@cs.cmu.edu

William R. Mark3
billmark@google.com

Kayvon Fatahalian1
kayvonf@cs.stanford.edu

Rare Category Classiﬁcation Dataset Labels

Abstract
We focus on the problem of training deep image classification models for a small number of extremely rare
categories. In this common, real-world scenario, almost all images belong to the background category in
the dataset. We find that state-of-the-art approaches
for training on imbalanced datasets do not produce accurate deep models in this regime. Our solution is to
split the large, visually diverse background into many
smaller, visually similar categories during training. We
implement this idea by extending an image classification
model with an additional auxiliary loss that learns to
mimic the predictions of a pre-existing classification
model on the training set. The auxiliary loss requires no
additional human labels and regularizes feature learning
in the shared network trunk by forcing the model to discriminate between auxiliary categories for all training
set examples, including those belonging to the monolithic
background of the main rare category classification task.
To evaluate our method we contribute modified versions
of the iNaturalist and Places365 datasets where only a
small subset of rare category labels are available during
training (all other images are labeled as background).
By jointly learning to recognize both the selected rare
categories and auxiliary categories, our approach yields
models that perform 8.3 mAP points higher than stateof-the-art imbalanced learning baselines when 98.30%
of the data is background, and up to 42.3 mAP points
higher than fine-tuning baselines when 99.98% of the
data is background.

1. Introduction
Image classification tends to be evaluated on manually curated datasets that are clean and balanced [32,
⋆Both authors contributed equally to this paper. 1 Stanford
University 2 Carnegie Mellon University 3 Google Research

Standard Training Label Distribution
Positives
(<0.05%)

Negatives/Background
(>99.95%)

…
Class 1

Class 2

Class 3

…

Class 998

Class 999

Class 1000

Background Splitting Pseudo-Label Distribution

Figure 1. Top: Training classification models for rare categories is difficult because of the limited information content
and extreme label imbalance provided by a large “background” category. During training we address these issues
by splitting the background category into a large set of smaller
categories according to pseudo-labels produced by an existing, pre-trained model. Bottom: positive (blue outline) and
negative (orange outline) images for a fine-grained lizard
category in iNaturalist. Even though the negatives all have
the same label (background) they encompass a diverse set
of hard negatives (hard to distinguish from the positives)
and a vast number of easy negatives. Background splitting
extracts value from all negatives by forcing the model to
predict pseudo-labels for all images.

20]. Recent focus has shifted toward in-the-wild data
that features long-tail distributions [39, 33, 43, 44, 47],
but these datasets are still “artificial” in that every
curated image is a positive example of some category [23, 23, 3, 3, 39]. In contrast, in many real-world
settings, categories of interest are sufficiently rare that
it is far more common for images to not exhibit any
18043

