Effective Sparsification of Neural Networks with Global Sparsity Constraint
Xiao Zhou1 ,* Weizhong Zhang1 ,* Hang Xu2 , Tong Zhang1
1
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
xzhoubi@connect.ust.hk, weizhong@ust.hk, xu.hang@huawei.com, tongzhang@tongzhang-ml.org

Abstract
Weight pruning is an effective technique to reduce the
model size and inference time for deep neural networks in
real-world deployments. However, since magnitudes and
relative importance of weights are very different for different layers of a neural network, existing methods rely on either manual tuning or handcrafted heuristic rules to find
appropriate pruning rates individually for each layer. This
approach generally leads to suboptimal performance. In
this paper, by directly working on the probability space, we
propose an effective network sparsification method called
probabilistic masking (ProbMask), which solves a natural
sparsification formulation under global sparsity constraint.
The key idea is to use probability as a global criterion for
all layers to measure the weight importance. An appealing
feature of ProbMask is that the amounts of weight redundancy can be learned automatically via our constraint and
thus we avoid the problem of tuning pruning rates individually for different layers in a network. Extensive experimental results on CIFAR-10/100 and ImageNet demonstrate that
our method is highly effective, and can outperform previous
state-of-the-art methods by a significant margin, especially
in the high pruning rate situation. Notably, the gap of Top-1
accuracy between our ProbMask and existing methods can
be up to 10%. As a by-product, we show ProbMask is also
highly effective in identifying supermasks, which are subnetworks with high performance in a randomly weighted
dense neural network.

1. Introduction
Weight pruning [9] is a popular technique for alleviating
the weight redundancy in deep neural networks (DNNs) to
improve inference efficiency and decrease computation demands. Typical pruning algorithms usually prune the unimportant weights by developing proper criteria. It is repeatedly reported in the literature [8, 22, 39, 21] that by pruning one can reduce the neural network size and improve
* Equal contribution

the inference efficiency significantly with quite slight or
even negligible loss on performance, which makes deploying large-scale DNNs on equipment with limited computational and memory budget possible.
What can serve as a suitable global comparator to measure weight importance and identify sparsity level for different layers is a long-standing problem [7] though impressive
results have been achieved. We know that the core module
in pruning is the explicit or implicit criterion for identifying the redundant weights, and it is difficult to develop a
global criterion for the weights in all the layers. For example, in [9], the authors propose a simple yet effective criterion, i.e., for each layer it prunes all the weights below a
certain threshold in a fully trained network. The threshold
is obtained by sorting weight by its magnitude and retrieving the weight magnitude at the target pruning rate. The
criterion is weight magnitude in this case. Notice that the
magnitudes of the weights across layers could be quite different and different layers could have different amount of
redundancy. If we use a global threshold for all the layers, then almost all the weights in certain layers could be
pruned in order to achieve high enough pruning ratio, which
will be verified in Section 5. Thus, we need to set a proper
threshold or pruning ratio for each layer individually. In the
networks with numerous layers, it is very difficult and even
impossible to find the optimal thresholds or pruning ratios
for all the layers manually. One reasonable compromise for
such dilemma is to set sparsity level uniformly for different
layers. However, this results in imperfect weight allocation
obviously and gives unsatisfactory results on high pruning
rates.
In this paper, to address the above limitations, we propose an effective network sparsification method called probabilistic masking (ProbMask). Firstly, we know that network pruning can be naturally formulated into a problem
of finding a sparse binary mask m as well as the weights
at the same time to minimize the empirical loss (1). If the
component mi is equal to 0, it means that the corresponding weight is pruned. However, it is a discrete optimization
problem and hard to solve. We notice that if we view the
components mi in the mask as independent Bernoulli ran-

3599

