Birds of a Feather: Capturing Avian Shape Models from Images
Yufu Wang

Nikos Kolotouros
Kostas Daniilidis
University of Pennsylvania

Marc Badger

{yufu, nkolot, kostas, mbadger}@seas.upenn.edu

Figure 1: Capturing shape models from images. We deform an articulated template to capture species-specific shape
models from CUB image collections [50]. The new shape models not only articulate but can also deform according to
species-specific shape deformation modes. We combine models from diverse species to learn a multi-species model.

Abstract
Animals are diverse in shape, but building a deformable
shape model for a new species is not always possible due
to the lack of 3D data. We present a method to capture new
species using an articulated template and images of that
species. In this work, we focus mainly on birds. Although
birds represent almost twice the number of species as mammals, no accurate shape model is available. To capture a
novel species, we first fit the articulated template to each
training sample. By disentangling pose and shape, we learn
a shape space that captures variation both among species
and within each species from image evidence. We learn
models of multiple species from the CUB dataset, and contribute new species-specific and multi-species shape models
that are useful for downstream reconstruction tasks. Using
a low-dimensional embedding, we show that our learned
3D shape space better reflects the phylogenetic relationships among birds than learned perceptual features.

1. Introduction
Automated capture of animal shape and motion is a challenging problem with widespread application in agriculture,

biomechanics, animal behavior, and neuroscience. Changes
in shape can convey an animal’s health status and transmit social signals [1, 34]. Recent methods that use articulated mesh models to extract these signals from images [7, 8, 54, 55] are poised to transform these fields. One
challenge that prevents wider adoption of this approach,
however, is the difficulty of obtaining suitable models for
new species. Methods that can automatically capture the
shape of new species are highly desirable.
Recent articulated, 3D animal shape models obtain training data from 3D scans of toy animals figurines, or multiple
views of the same subject [7, 56, 55]. They produce great
quality of reconstruction when the target is represented in
the source data. How these articulated and deformable models can be extended to new animal species is still an open
problem, particularly due to the lack 3D scans. Animals’
non-cooperative nature makes obtaining 3D scans impractical.
Images of the same species, on the other hand, are more
readily available for a wider variety of categories. The
CUB [50] dataset, for example, provides image collections
for various bird species. These monocular collections remain underutilized, however, because current detailed capture methods require a strong deformable 3D shape prior,
114739

