Adaptive Weighted Discriminator for Training Generative Adversarial Networks
Vasily Zadorozhnyy1 , Qiang Cheng2, * , Qiang Ye1,†
1
Department of Mathematics
2
Institute for Biomedical Informatics, Departments of Computer Science and Internal Medicine
University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40506-0027
{vasily.zadorozhnyy, Qiang.Cheng, qye3}@uky.edu

Abstract
Generative adversarial network (GAN) has become one
of the most important neural network models for classical
unsupervised machine learning. A variety of discriminator
loss functions have been developed to train GAN’s discriminators and they all have a common structure: a sum of
real and fake losses that only depends on the actual and
generated data respectively. One challenge associated with
an equally weighted sum of two losses is that the training
may benefit one loss but harm the other, which we show
causes instability and mode collapse. In this paper, we introduce a new family of discriminator loss functions that
adopts a weighted sum of real and fake parts, which we call
adaptive weighted loss functions or aw-loss functions. Using the gradients of the real and fake parts of the loss, we
can adaptively choose weights to train a discriminator in
the direction that benefits the GAN’s stability. Our method
can be potentially applied to any discriminator model with
a loss that is a sum of the real and fake parts. Experiments
validated the effectiveness of our loss functions on unconditional and conditional image generation tasks, improving
the baseline results by a significant margin on CIFAR-10,
STL-10, and CIFAR-100 datasets in Inception Scores (IS)
and Fréchet Inception Distance (FID) metrics.

1. Introduction
Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) [15] has become one of the most important neural network models
for unsupervised machine learning. The origin of this idea
lies in the combination of two neural networks, one generative and one discriminative, that work simultaneously. The
task of the generator is to generate data of a given distribution, while the discriminator’s purpose is to try to rec* Research supported in part by NSF OIA 2040665, NIH UH3
NS100606-05, and R01 HD101508-01 grants.
† Research supported in part by NSF under grants DMS-1821144 and
DMS-1620082.

ognize which data are created by the generative model and
which are the original ones. While a variety of GAN models have been developed, many of them are prone to issues
with training such as instability where model parameters
might destabilize and not converge, mode collapse where
the generative model produces a limited number of different
samples, diminishing gradients where the generator gradient vanishes and training does not occur, and high sensitivity to hyperparameters.
In this paper, we focus on the discriminative model to
rectify the issues of instability and mode collapse in training GAN. In the GAN architecture, the discriminator model
takes samples from the original dataset and the output from
the generator as input and tries to classify whether a particular element in those samples is real or fake data [15].
The discriminator updates its parameters by maximizing
a discriminator loss function via backpropagation through
the discriminator network. In many of the proposed models [15, 16, 30, 28], the discriminator loss function consists
of two equally weighted parts: the “real part” that purely relies on the original dataset and the “fake part” that depends
on the generator network and its output; for simplicity we
will call them Lr and Lf for real and fake losses, respectively. For example, in the original GAN paper [15], the
discriminator loss function LD is written as
LD = Lr + Lf ,
(1)


with Lr = Ex∼pd log D(x) and Lf = Ez∼pz log(1 −
D(G(z))) , where D and G are the discriminative and generative models, respectively, pd is the probability distribution of the real data, and pz is the probability distribution of
the generator parameter z.
The goal of the GAN discriminator training is to increase
both Lr and Lf so that the discriminator D(·) assigns high
scores to real data and low scores to fake data. This is done
in (1) by placing equal weights on Lr and Lf [15]. However, the training with LD is not performed equally on Lr
and Lf . Indeed, a gradient ascent training step along the
∇LD may decrease Lr (or Lf ), depending on the angle be

4781

