SRDAN: Scale-aware and Range-aware Domain Adaptation Network
for Cross-dataset 3D Object Detection
Weichen Zhang1
Wen Li2
Dong Xu1
1
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, The University of Sydney
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
{weichen.zhang,dong.xu}@sydney.edu.au

liwenbnu@gmail.com

Abstract
Geometric characteristic plays an important role in the
representation of an object in 3D point clouds. For example,
large objects often contain more points, while small ones
contain fewer points. The points from objects near the capture device are denser, while those from far-range objects
are sparser. These issues bring new challenges to 3D object
detection, especially under the domain adaptation scenarios. In this work, we propose a new cross-dataset 3D object detection method named Scale-aware and Range-aware
Domain Adaptation Network (SRDAN). We take advantage
of the geometric characteristics of 3D data (i.e., size and
distance), and propose the scale-aware domain alignment
and the range-aware domain alignment strategies to guide
the distribution alignment between two domains. For scaleaware domain alignment, we design a 3D voxel-based feature pyramid network to extract multi-scale semantic voxel
features, and align the features and instances with similar scales between two domains. For range-aware domain
alignment, we introduce a range-guided domain alignment
module to align the features of objects according to their
distance to the capture device. Extensive experiments under three different scenarios demonstrate the effectiveness
of our SRDAN approach, and comprehensive ablation study
also validates the importance of geometric characteristics
for cross-dataset 3D object detection.

1. Introduction
With the advance of autonomous driving, increasing attention has been attracted to 3D object detection [63, 56,
8, 27, 69, 78, 68, 29, 43, 30, 54, 71, 42, 53]. Although
significant progress has been made, most of these works
considered only the constrained setting, where the training data used to learn the detection model and the test
data for performance evaluation are collected from a similar scenario. However, in practical applications, we often face the more challenging situation, where the training data and the test data captured by various devices
at different time/places often exhibit considerable distribution mismatch. This could lead to significant performance drop when deploying the trained model in a new sce-

(b) LiDAR Point Cloud

Large
(a) BEV Image

Small

(c) Scale Awareness

Far

Near

(d) Range Awareness

Figure 1. Motivation of the Scale-aware and Range-aware Domain
Alignment strategies in our SRDAN method. (a) A Bird’s-EyeView (BEV) image is presented for better illustration. (b) A point
cloud map collected by the LiDAR sensor (i.e., the car with gray
box in (a)) is presented to illustrate the 3D geometric characteristics. (c) At similar distances to the LiDAR sensor, large objects
(e.g., the car with orange box) often contain more points, while
small ones (e.g., the cyclist with purple box) contain fewer points.
(d) The 3D points of objects (e.g., the car with blue box) near the
LiDAR sensor are denser, while those of far-range ones (e.g., the
car with red box) are sparser. We incorporate these geometric
characteristics (i.e., size and distance) into our method, and learn
domain-invariant representation to ensure objects with similar geometric characteristics are well aligned between two domains.

nario, which is also known as the domain adaptation problem [19, 35, 36, 37, 13, 61, 74, 58, 3, 33, 25].
While many works have been proposed to address the
domain adaptation problem for 2D images, little attention
was paid to the cross-dataset object detection task for 3D
point clouds. Different from the traditional cross-dataset
object detection task for 2D images [9, 49, 26, 80, 66], the
texture information is absent in 3D point cloud data, which
makes it more challenging to deal with the data distribution mismatch issue. Consequently, the intrinsic geometric
information becomes especially important when addressing
the domain adaptation issue for the 3D object detection task.
However, it is non-trivial to capture intrinsic geometric
information. As shown in Fig. 1, the point cloud of an object can vary significantly when the geometric characteris-

6769

