Temporal-Relational CrossTransformers for Few-Shot Action Recognition
Toby Perrett

Alessandro Masullo
Tilo Burghardt
Majid Mirmehdi
Dima Damen
<first>.<last>@bristol.ac.uk
Department of Computer Science, University of Bristol, UK

Abstract
We propose a novel approach to few-shot action recognition, finding temporally-corresponding frame tuples between the query and videos in the support set. Distinct from
previous few-shot works, we construct class prototypes using the CrossTransformer attention mechanism to observe
relevant sub-sequences of all support videos, rather than
using class averages or single best matches. Video representations are formed from ordered tuples of varying numbers of frames, which allows sub-sequences of actions at
different speeds and temporal offsets to be compared.1
Our proposed Temporal-Relational CrossTransformers (TRX) achieve state-of-the-art results on few-shot splits
of Kinetics, Something-Something V2 (SSv2), HMDB51 and
UCF101. Importantly, our method outperforms prior work
on SSv2 by a wide margin (12%) due to the its ability to
model temporal relations. A detailed ablation showcases
the importance of matching to multiple support set videos
and learning higher-order relational CrossTransformers.

1. Introduction
Few-shot methods aim to learn new classes with only
a handful of labelled examples. Success in few-shot approaches for image classification [11, 19, 8] and object
recognition [26, 15] has triggered recent progress in fewshot video action recognition [31, 32, 3, 27, 4]. This is of
particular interest for fine-grained actions where collecting
enough labelled examples proves challenging [5, 12, 6].
Recent approaches that achieve state-of-the-art performance [3, 27, 4] acknowledge the additional challenges in
few-shot video recognition, due to varying action lengths
and temporal dependencies. However, these match the
query video (i.e. the video to be recognised) to the single
best video in the support set (i.e. the few labelled examples per class), e.g. [27], or to the average across all support
set videos belonging to the same class [3, 4]. Inspired by
part-based few-shot image classification [8], we consider
that, within a few-shot regime, it is advantageous to compare sub-sequences of the query video to sub-sequences of
1

Code is available at https://github.com/tobyperrett/TRX

Figure 1: For a 3-way 5-shot example, pairs of temporallyordered frames in the query (red, green, blue) are compared
against all pairs in the support set (max attention with corresponding colour). Aggregated evidence is used to construct query-specific class prototypes. We show a correctlyrecognised query using our method from SSv2 class “Failing to put something into something because it does not fit”.
all support videos when constructing class prototypes. This
better accumulates evidence, by matching sub-sequences at
various temporal positions and shifts.
We propose a novel approach to few-shot action recognition, which we term Temporal-Relational CrossTransformers (TRX). A query-specific class prototype is constructed by using an attention mechanism to match each
query sub-sequence against all sub-sequences in the support set, and aggregating this evidence. By performing the
attention operation over temporally-ordered sub-sequences

475

