Linear Semantics in Generative Adversarial Networks
Jianjin Xu *
Columbia University

Changxi Zheng
Columbia University

jx2386@columbia.edu

cxz@cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) are able to generate high-quality images, but it remains difficult to explicitly
specify the semantics of synthesized images. In this work,
we aim to better understand the semantic representation of
GANs, and thereby enable semantic control in GAN’s generation process. Interestingly, we find that a well-trained GAN
encodes image semantics in its internal feature maps in a
surprisingly simple way: a linear transformation of feature
maps suffices to extract the generated image semantics. To
verify this simplicity, we conduct extensive experiments on
various GANs and datasets; and thanks to this simplicity,
we are able to learn a semantic segmentation model for a
trained GAN from a small number (e.g., 8) of labeled images. Last but not least, leveraging our finding, we propose
two few-shot image editing approaches, namely SemanticConditional Sampling and Semantic Image Editing. Given
a trained GAN and as few as eight semantic annotations,
the user is able to generate diverse images subject to a userprovided semantic layout, and control the synthesized image
semantics. We have made the code publicly available1 .

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the striking success of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [15] in various image
synthesis tasks: to generate human faces, animals, cars, and
interior scenes [28, 12, 17, 21]. Apart from improving the
generated image quality, recent research has been directed
toward the control of GAN’s image generation process—for
example, to enforce the generated images having user specified attributes, colors, and layouts.
Toward this goal, a fundamental question remains unanswered: how does a well-trained GAN encodes image semantics—such as the layout of such semantic classes as hair,
nose, and hats—in its image generation process? Motivated
by this question, we aim to extract image semantics from
a GAN’s internal data, namely its feature maps. If we can
* Jianjin Xu is currently a research assistant at Panzhihua University.
1 https://github.com/AtlantixJJ/LinearGAN

well extract image semantics and understand the extraction
process, we can develop insight on how the image semantics
are encoded.
Our finding is surprisingly simple: a linear transformation on the GAN’s internal feature maps suffices to extract
the generated image semantics. In stark contrast to GAN’s
highly nonlinear image generation process, this simple linear
transformation is easy to understand and has a clear geometric interpretation (see Sec. 3.1).
We refer to this linear transformation process as linear semantic extraction (LSE). To verify its performance, we conduct extensive experiments on various GANs and datasets, including PGGAN [20], StyleGAN [21] and StyleGAN2 [22]
trained on FFHQ [21], CelebAHQ [25], and LSUN [37]’s
bedroom and church dataset. We also compare the performance of LSE with other semantic extraction approaches
which use learned nonlinear transformations. It turns out
that LSE is highly comparable to those more complex, nonlinear models, suggesting that image semantics are indeed
represented in a linear fashion in GANs.
Related to our study of the linear encoding of image
semantics in GANs is the work of GAN Dissection [5]. It
identifies feature maps that have causal manipulation ability
for image semantics. Yet, most feature maps in that approach
come from middle-level layers in the GAN, often having
much lower resolution than the output image. Instead, we
examine the GAN’s internal feature maps collectively. We
upsample all feature maps to the resolution of final output
image and stack them into a tensor. This approach allows
us to study per-pixel feature vectors, that is, feature values
corresponding to a particular pixel across all internal layers,
and we are able to classify every output pixel into a specific
semantic class.
The linear transformation in our proposed LSE is learned
under supervision. Its training requires image semantic annotations, which are automatically generated using a pretrained segmentation model (such as UNet [29]). Interestingly, thanks to the linearity of LSE, even a small number of
annotations suffice to train LSE well. For example, the LSE
trained with 16 annotated images on StyleGAN2 (which itself is trained on FFHQ dataset) achieves 88.1% performance
19351

