DatasetGAN: Efficient Labeled Data Factory with Minimal Human Effort
Yuxuan Zhang1,5 * Huan Ling1,2,3,∗ Jun Gao1,2,3 Kangxue Yin 1
Jean-Francois Lafleche1 Adela Barriuso4 Antonio Torralba4 Sanja Fidler1,2,3
NVIDIA1

University of Toronto2

Vector Institute3

MIT4

University of Waterloo5

y2536zha@uwaterloo.ca, {huling, jung, kangxuey, jlafleche}@nvidia.com
adela.barriuso@gmail.com, torralba@mit.edu, sfidler@nvidia.com

3 Sample from the DatasetGAN a large synthetic dataset

1 Train DatasetGAN

Mapping
Network

𝒘∈W

4

Train on synthetic and test on Real Images

Labelbranch

Latent 𝒛 ∈ 𝑍

StyleGan
Generator
Imagebranch

2 Manual annotation of few generated images

Figure 1: DATASET GAN synthesizes image-annotation pairs, and can produce large high-quality datasets with detailed pixel-wise labels. Figure illustrates the 4 steps. (1 & 2). Leverage StyleGAN and annotate only a handful of synthesized images. Train a highly effective branch to generate labels. (3).
Generate a huge synthetic dataset of annotated images authomatically. (4). Train your favorite approach with the synthetic dataset and test on real images.

Abstract
We introduce DatasetGAN: an automatic procedure to
generate massive datasets of high-quality semantically segmented images requiring minimal human effort. Current
deep networks are extremely data-hungry, benefiting from
training on large-scale datasets, which are time consuming
to annotate. Our method relies on the power of recent GANs
to generate realistic images. We show how the GAN latent
code can be decoded to produce a semantic segmentation
of the image. Training the decoder only needs a few labeled
examples to generalize to the rest of the latent space, resulting in an infinite annotated dataset generator! These generated datasets can then be used for training any computer
vision architecture just as real datasets are. As only a few
images need to be manually segmented, it becomes possible
to annotate images in extreme detail and generate datasets
with rich object and part segmentations. To showcase the
power of our approach, we generated datasets for 7 image
segmentation tasks which include pixel-level labels for 34
human face parts, and 32 car parts. Our approach outperforms all semi-supervised baselines significantly and is on
par with fully supervised methods, which in some cases require as much as 100x more annotated data as our method.

1. Introduction
Curating image datasets with pixel-wise labels such as
semantic or instance segmentation is very laborious (and

expensive). Labeling a complex scene with 50 objects can
take anywhere between 30 to 90 minutes – clearly a bottleneck in achieving the scale of a dataset that we might desire.
In this paper, we aim to synthesize large high quality labeled
datasets by needing to label only a handful of examples.
Semi-supervised learning has been a popular approach
in the quest of reducing the need for labeled data, by leveraging an additional large unlabeled dataset. The dominant
approach trains a model on a labeled dataset using ground
truth annotations while utilizing pseudo-labels [3, 46] and
consistency regularization [46, 48] on the unlabeled examples. While most methods were showcased on classification tasks, recent work also showed success for the
task of semantic segmentation [40]. On the other hand,
contrastive learning aims to train feature extractors using contrastive (unsupervised) losses on sampled image
pairs [42, 49, 8, 39], or image patches [23]. Once a powerful
image representation is trained using unsupervised losses
alone, only a small subset of labeled images is typically required to train accurate predictors. In our work, we show
that the latest state-of-the-art generative models of images
learn extremely powerful latent representations that can be
leveraged for complex pixel-wise tasks.
We introduce DatasetGAN which generates massive
datasets of high-quality semantically segmented images requiring minimal human effort. Key to our approach is an
observation that GANs trained to synthesize images must
acquire rich semantic knowledge in their ability to render

10145

