Self-Supervised 3D Mesh Reconstruction from Single Images
Tao Hu1 Liwei Wang1 Xiaogang Xu1 Shu Liu2 Jiaya Jia1,2
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong
SmartMore
{taohu,lwwang,xgxu,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, sliu@smartmore.com

Abstract

Rendered Shape

Input

𝒌$𝒕𝒉

𝒌𝒕𝒉

Recent single-view 3D reconstruction methods reconstruct object’s shape and texture from a single image with
only 2D image-level annotation. However, without explicit 3D attribute-level supervision, it is still difficult to
achieve satisfying reconstruction accuracy. In this paper,
we propose a Self-supervised Mesh Reconstruction (SMR)
approach to enhance 3D mesh attribute learning process.
Our approach is motivated by observations that (1) 3D attributes from interpolation and prediction should be consistent, and (2) feature representation of landmarks from all
images should be consistent. By only requiring silhouette
mask annotation, our SMR can be trained in an end-toend manner and generalizes to reconstruct natural objects
of birds, cows, motorbikes, etc. Experiments demonstrate
that our approach improves both 2D supervised and unsupervised 3D mesh reconstruction on multiple datasets. We
also show that our model can be adapted to other image
synthesis tasks, e.g., novel view generation, shape transfer, and texture transfer, with promising results. Our code
is publicly available at https://github.com/JiaResearch-Lab.

1. Introduction
Single-view 3D Object Reconstruction is to recover 3D
information, such as shape and texture, of the object from
a single image [7, 15, 20, 41]. It is a long-standing problem in computer vision with various applications, including
3D scene analysis, robot navigation, and virtual/augmented
reality. Traditional methods usually fit the parameters of a
3D prior morphable model, such as 3DMM [1] for faces
and SMPL [23] for human. Building these prior models is
expensive and time-consuming, and thus is not quickly applicable to many different natural objects.
In the deep learning era, deep models can learn to reconstruct 3D objects in a supervised manner [7]. 3D supervised reconstruction methods [4, 39, 5, 6, 25, 31, 11] directly minimize the discrepancy between the ground-truth
3D attributes and the predicted ones. They usually achieve

Interpolation

𝒌𝒕𝒉

Landmark
feature

Encode

𝑶

𝒌𝒕𝒉

𝒇𝒌

Rendering
U-Net

𝒌𝒕𝒉 landmark

Target Shape
Interpolation

𝒌𝒕𝒉

Landmark Classification

Encode

(a) Interpolated Consistency

(b) Landmark Consistency

Figure 1: Our proposed self-supervised methods for 3D
mesh reconstruction. Interpolated consistency provides
fine-grained 3D annotations to train the reconstruction
model by self-supervised regression. Landmark consistency
further improves the reconstructed quality in local regions
by self-supervised classification for landmarks.
supreme performances but have to be trained on synthesized or 3D scanned datasets with ground-truth 3D annotations. Meanwhile, since 2D attributes (e.g., silhouette mask or landmark) are usually easier to be obtained
than 3D attributes, 2D supervised reconstruction methods
[16, 22, 3, 15, 28, 8] do not require 3D annotations. The
key module of 2D supervised approaches is a differentiable
render [24, 16, 22], which builds a differentiable stream to
link 3D model space to 2D images and makes it possible to
reconstruct 3D objects through 2D image-level supervision.
Though 2D supervised reconstruction alleviates the dependency on 3D annotation, it is mainly to minimize the
image-level reconstruction error and does not ensure 3D attribute prediction accuracy. The 3D reconstructed results
provided in the work of ARCH [11] show that combining
2D with 3D supervision can further improve the accuracy
of 3D reconstruction. Therefore, we raise the question if it
is possible to achieve 3D attribute-level reconstruction only
with 2D annotation.
In this work, we propose Self-Supervised Mesh Reconstruction (SMR) to reconstruct category-specific 3D mesh
objects from single images. 3D attributes, including camera, shape, texture, and light, are first predicted by attribute
encoder and then are supervised at both 2D image and 3D

6002

