LiBRe: A Practical Bayesian Approach to Adversarial Detection
Zhijie Deng1 , Xiao Yang1 , Shizhen Xu2 , Hang Su1∗ , Jun Zhu1 *
1

Dept. of Comp. Sci. and Tech., BNRist Center, Institute for AI, Tsinghua-Bosch Joint ML Center, THBI Lab
1
Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China 2 RealAI
{dzj17,yangxiao19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, shizhen.xu@realai.ai, {suhangss,dcszj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite their appealing flexibility, deep neural networks
(DNNs) are vulnerable against adversarial examples. Various adversarial defense strategies have been proposed to resolve this problem, but they typically demonstrate restricted
practicability owing to unsurmountable compromise on universality, effectiveness, or efficiency. In this work, we propose a more practical approach, Lightweight Bayesian Refinement (LiBRe), in the spirit of leveraging Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) for adversarial detection. Empowered by the task and attack agnostic modeling under Bayes
principle, LiBRe can endow a variety of pre-trained taskdependent DNNs with the ability of defending heterogeneous adversarial attacks at a low cost. We develop and
integrate advanced learning techniques to make LiBRe appropriate for adversarial detection. Concretely, we build
the few-layer deep ensemble variational and adopt the pretraining & fine-tuning workflow to boost the effectiveness
and efficiency of LiBRe. We further provide a novel insight to realise adversarial detection-oriented uncertainty
quantification without inefficiently crafting adversarial examples during training. Extensive empirical studies covering a wide range of scenarios verify the practicability of LiBRe. We also conduct thorough ablation studies to evidence
the superiority of our modeling and learning strategies.1

1. Introduction
The blooming development of deep neural networks
(DNNs) has brought great success in extensive industrial
applications, such as image classification [23], face recognition [9] and object detection [49]. However, despite
their promising expressiveness, DNNs are highly vulnerable to adversarial examples [56, 19], which are generated by
adding human-imperceptible perturbations upon clean examples to deliberately cause misclassification, partly due to
their non-linear and black-box nature. The threats from ad* Corresponding author
1 Code at https://github.com/thudzj/ScalableBDL.

Bayesian
sub-module

• benign
• adversarial

task-dependent
prediction

Deterministic layers

accept/reject

Figure 1: Given a pre-trained DNN, LiBRe converts its last few
layers (excluding the task-dependent output head) to be Bayesian,
and reuses the pre-trained parameters. Then, LiBRe launches
several-round adversarial detection-oriented fine-tuning to render
the posterior effective for prediction and meanwhile appropriate
for adversarial detection. In the inference phase, LiBRe estimates
the predictive uncertainty and task-dependent predictions of the
input concurrently, where the former is used for adversarial detection and determines the fidelity of the latter.
versarial examples have been witnessed in a wide spectrum
of practical systems [51, 12], raising an urgent requirement
for advanced techniques to achieve robust and reliable decision making, especially in safety-critical scenarios [13].
Though increasing methods have been developed to
tackle adversarial examples [41, 67, 25, 18, 66], they are
not problemless. On on hand, as one of the most popular adversarial defenses, adversarial training [41, 67] introduces adversarial examples into training to explicitly tailor
the decision boundaries, which, yet, causes added training
overheads and typically leads to degraded predictive performance on clean examples. On the other hand, adversarial detection methods bypass the drawbacks of modifying
the original DNNs by deploying a workflow to detect the
adversarial examples ahead of decision making, by virtue
of auxiliary classifiers [43, 18, 66, 5] or designed statistics [14, 39]. Yet, they are usually developed for specific
tasks (e.g., image classification [66, 31, 18]) or for specific
adversarial attacks [38], lacking the flexibility to effectively
generalize to other tasks or attacks.
By regarding the adversarial example as a special case
of out-of-distribution (OOD) data, Bayesian neural networks (BNNs) have shown promise in adversarial detection [14, 37, 53]. In theory, the predictive uncertainty acquired under Bayes principle suffices for detecting hetero-

972

