Wide-Baseline Relative Camera Pose Estimation with Directional Learning
Kefan Chen∗
Google Research

Noah Snavely
Google Research

Ameesh Makadia
Google Research

chenkefan950518@gmail.com

snavely@google.com

makadia@google.com

Abstract
Modern deep learning techniques that regress the relative
camera pose between two images have difficulty dealing with
challenging scenarios, such as large camera motions resulting in occlusions and significant changes in perspective that
leave little overlap between images. These models continue
to struggle even with the benefit of large supervised training
datasets. To address the limitations of these models, we take
inspiration from techniques that show regressing keypoint
locations in 2D and 3D can be improved by estimating a
discrete distribution over keypoint locations. Analogously,
in this paper we explore improving camera pose regression
by instead predicting a discrete distribution over camera
poses. To realize this idea, we introduce DirectionNet, which
estimates discrete distributions over the 5D relative pose
space using a novel parameterization to make the estimation problem tractable. Specifically, DirectionNet factorizes
relative camera pose, specified by a 3D rotation and a translation direction, into a set of 3D direction vectors. Since
3D directions can be identified with points on the sphere,
DirectionNet estimates discrete distributions on the sphere
as its output. We evaluate our model on challenging synthetic and real pose estimation datasets constructed from
Matterport3D and InteriorNet. Promising results show a
near 50% reduction in error over direct regression methods.

1. Introduction
Estimating the relative pose between two images is fundamental to many applications in computer vision such
as 3D reconstruction, stereo rectification, and camera localization [19]. For calibrated cameras, relative pose is
synonymous with the essential matrix, which encapsulates
the projective geometry relating two views. Prevailing
approaches recover the global model from corresponding
points [30, 20, 42] within an iterative robust model fitting
process [15, 64]. Recent progress has introduced deeplearned modules that can replace components of this classic
∗ Work done while Kefan was a member of the Google AI Residency
program (g.co/airesidency).

pipeline [62, 50, 10, 9, 52, 43, 47, 2]. While this class of
techniques has been extensively analyzed [49], well-known
failure cases include where feature detection or matching is
difficult, such as low image overlap, large changes in scale or
perspective, or scenes with insufficient or repeated textures.
In these cases, it is natural to consider if supervised deep
learning can address this basic task of essential matrix estimation, considering its success in tackling a variety of
challenging computer vision problems. Specifically, can we
train a deep neural network to represent the complex function
that directly maps image pairs to their relative camera pose?
Such a model would provide an appealing alternative to formulations that are sensitive to correspondence estimation
performance.
Unfortunately, evidence suggests designing regression
models for pose estimation is challenging, and in fact finding
a parameterization of the motion groups effective in deep
learning models is still an active research topic [33, 66, 44].
Not surprisingly, the initial works exploring relative pose
regression (e.g. [38, 46]) are not conclusively successful in
the difficult scenarios described above.
In this work we introduce a novel deep learning model for
relative pose estimation, focused on the challenging widebaseline case. Conceptually, our model generates a discrete
probability distribution over relative poses, and the final pose
estimate is taken as the expectation of this distribution. Our
method is inspired by works that show estimating a discrete
distribution, or a heatmap over a quantized output space,
consistently outperforms direct regression to the continuous
output space. This conclusion has been observed in different applications, such as estimating 2D and 3D keypoint
locations [55, 32, 57], and estimating periodic angles [25].
However, it is currently unclear if this idea translates directly to complex higher dimensional output spaces. Relative
camera pose lives in a five dimensional space, so predicting a discrete distribution would require O(N 5 ) storage in
the output space alone [35]! Given that this is currently intractable for neural networks at any reasonable resolution,
the question is how can we apply this concept to the relative
pose problem effectively?
To this end, we introduce a novel formulation that builds

3258

