Spatiotemporal Contrastive Video Representation Learning
Rui Qian∗ 1,2,3
Tianjian Meng∗ 1
Boqing Gong1
Huisheng Wang1
Serge Belongie1,2,3
1

Google Research

2

Cornell University

Ming-Hsuan Yang1
Yin Cui1
3

Cornell Tech

Abstract
We present a self-supervised Contrastive Video Representation Learning (CVRL) method to learn spatiotemporal
visual representations from unlabeled videos. Our representations are learned using a contrastive loss, where
two augmented clips from the same short video are pulled
together in the embedding space, while clips from different
videos are pushed away. We study what makes for good
data augmentations for video self-supervised learning and
find that both spatial and temporal information are crucial.
We carefully design data augmentations involving spatial
and temporal cues. Concretely, we propose a temporally
consistent spatial augmentation method to impose strong
spatial augmentations on each frame of the video while
maintaining the temporal consistency across frames. We
also propose a sampling-based temporal augmentation
method to avoid overly enforcing invariance on clips that
are distant in time. On Kinetics-600, a linear classifier
trained on the representations learned by CVRL achieves
70.4% top-1 accuracy with a 3D-ResNet-50 (R3D-50)
backbone, outperforming ImageNet supervised pre-training
by 15.7% and SimCLR unsupervised pre-training by 18.8%
using the same inflated R3D-50. The performance of
CVRL can be further improved to 72.9% with a larger
R3D-152 (2⇥ filters) backbone, significantly closing the
gap between unsupervised and supervised video representation learning. Our code and models will be available at
https://github.com/tensorflow/models/tree/master/official/.

1. Introduction
Representation learning is of crucial importance in computer vision tasks, and a number of highly promising recent
developments in this area have carried over successfully
from the static image domain to the video domain. Classic hand-crafted local invariant features (e.g., SIFT [44])
⇤ The first two authors contributed equally. This work was performed
while Rui Qian worked at Google.

Figure 1. Kinetics-600 top-1 linear classification accuracy of
different spatiotemporal representations. CVRL outperforms ImageNet supervised [33] and SimCLR unsupervised [10] pre-training
using the same 3D inflated ResNets, closing the gap between unsupervised and supervised video representation learning.

for images have their counterparts (e.g., 3D SIFT [55]) in
videos, where the temporal dimension of videos gives rise
to key differences between them. Similarly, state-of-the-art
neural networks for video understanding [63, 9, 31, 71, 17,
16] often extend 2D convolutional neural networks [33, 36]
for images along the temporal dimension. More recently,
unsupervised or self-supervised learning of representations
from unlabeled visual data [32, 10, 26, 7] has gained momentum in the literature partially thanks to its ability to
model the abundantly available unlabeled data.
However, self-supervised learning gravitates to different
dimensions in videos and images, respectively. It is natural to engineer self-supervised learning signals along the
temporal dimension in videos. Examples abound, including
models for predicting the future [58, 43, 28], changing temporal sampling rates [73], sorting video frames or clips [42,
39, 72] and combining a few tasks [5]. Meanwhile, in the
domain of static images, some recent work [32, 10, 26, 7]
that exploits spatial self-supervision has reported unprecedented performance on image representation learning.
The long-standing pursuit after temporal cues for self-

6964

