Augmentation Strategies for Learning with Noisy Labels
Kento Nishi *† Yi Ding*‡ Alex Rich ‡ Tobias Höllerer ‡
†

‡

Lynbrook High School, San Jose CA, USA
University of California Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara CA, USA

kento24gs@outlook.com, yding@cs.ucsb.edu, anrich@cs.ucsb.edu, holl@cs.ucsb.edu

Abstract
Imperfect labels are ubiquitous in real-world datasets.
Several recent successful methods for training deep neural networks (DNNs) robust to label noise have used two
primary techniques: filtering samples based on loss during a warm-up phase to curate an initial set of cleanly
labeled samples, and using the output of a network as a
pseudo-label for subsequent loss calculations. In this paper, we evaluate different augmentation strategies for algorithms tackling the "learning with noisy labels" problem. We propose and examine multiple augmentation strategies and evaluate them using synthetic datasets based on
CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100, as well as on the real-world
dataset Clothing1M. Due to several commonalities in these
algorithms, we find that using one set of augmentations for
loss modeling tasks and another set for learning is the most
effective, improving results on the state-of-the-art and other
previous methods. Furthermore, we find that applying augmentation during the warm-up period can negatively impact the loss convergence behavior of correctly versus incorrectly labeled samples. We introduce this augmentation
strategy to the state-of-the-art technique and demonstrate
that we can improve performance across all evaluated noise
levels. In particular, we improve accuracy on the CIFAR10 benchmark at 90% symmetric noise by more than 15%
in absolute accuracy, and we also improve performance on
the Clothing1M dataset.

1. Introduction
Data augmentation is a common method used to expand
datasets and has been applied successfully in many computer vision problems such as image classification [32] and
object detection [28], among many others. In particular,
* Equal contribution

Source code is available at https://github.com/KentoNishi/
Augmentation-for-LNL.

there has been much success using learned augmentations
such as AutoAugment [6] and RandAugment [7] which do
not require an expert who knows the dataset to curate augmentation policies. It has been shown that incorporating
augmentation policies during training can improve generalization and robustness [12, 8]. However, few works have
explored their efficacy for the domain of learning with noisy
labels (LNL) [21].
Many techniques which tackle the LNL problem make
use of the network memorization effect, where correctly labeled data fit before incorrectly labeled data as discovered
by Arpit et al. [2]. This phenomenon was successfully explored in Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) through modeling the loss function and the training process, leading to
the development of approaches such as loss correction [29]
and sample selection [10]. Recently, the incorporation of
MixUp augmentation [35] has dramatically improved the
ability for algorithms to tolerate higher noise levels [1, 14].
While many existing works use the common random flip
and crop image augmentation which we refer to as weak
augmentation, to the best of our knowledge, no work at
the time of writing has explored using more aggressive augmentation from learned policies such as AutoAugment during training for LNL algorithms. These stronger augmentation policies include transformations such as rotate, invert,
sheer, etc. We propose to incorporate these stronger augmentation policies into existing architectures in a strategic
way to improve performance. Our intuition is that for any
augmentation technique to succeed, they must (1) improve
the generalization of the dataset and (2) not negatively impact the loss modeling and loss convergence behavior that
LNL techniques rely on.
With this in mind, we propose an augmentation strategy
we call Augmented Descent (AUG D ESC) to benefit from
data augmentation without negatively impacting the network memorization effect. Our idea for AUG D ESC is to
use two different augmentations: a weak augmentation for
any loss modeling and pseudo-labeling task, and a strong
augmentation for the back-propagation step to improve gen-

8022

