A Generalized Loss Function for Crowd Counting and Localization
Jia Wan
Ziquan Liu
Antoni B. Chan
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
jiawan1998@gmail.com, ziquanliu2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk, abchan@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Previous work [40] shows that a better density map representation can improve the performance of crowd counting. In this paper, we investigate learning the density map
representation through an unbalanced optimal transport
problem, and propose a generalized loss function to learn
density maps for crowd counting and localization. We prove
that pixel-wise L2 loss and Bayesian loss [29] are special
cases and suboptimal solutions to our proposed loss function. A perspective-guided transport cost function is further
proposed to better handle the perspective transformation in
crowd images. Since the predicted density will be pushed toward annotation positions, the density map prediction will
be sparse and can naturally be used for localization. Finally, the proposed loss outperforms other losses on four
large-scale datasets for counting, and achieves the best localization performance on NWPU-Crowd and UCF-QNRF.

1. Introduction
Crowd counting and localization draw increasing attention recently because of its practical usage in surveillance,
transport management and business. Most of the algorithms
predict a density map from a crowd image, where the summation of the density map is the crowd count [41, 4]. A
density map (a smooth heat map) is an intermediate representation of the crowd – one popular method to generate the
ground-truth density map is to place a Gaussian kernel on
each person’s dot annotation. The density map estimator is
then trained as a standard pixel-wise regression problem using L2 loss [12, 40] (see Fig. 1a). In contrast to pixel-wise
L2 loss, Bayesian loss (BL) [29] generates an aggregated
dot prediction from the density map prediction, and uses a
point-wise loss function between the ground-truth dot annotations and the aggregated dot prediction (see Fig. 1b).
Both L2 and BL assume a ﬁxed ground-truth representation, either Gaussian density kernels for L2 or Gaussian likelihoods for BL. Recent works [40, 43] have shown
that the intermediate density map representation affects the
counting performance, and a better density map representation can be learned in an end-to-end manner from the dot-

(a)

L2

pixel loss
fix transport
prediction

dot annotations

density map

(b)

point loss

BL

fix transport
prediction

dot prediction

dot annotations

optimal transport

(c)

ours
transport loss + pixel loss + point loss
prediction

dot annotations

Figure 1: Loss functions for counting: (a) L2 loss generates density map
as the supervision and uses a pixel-wise loss function. (b) Bayesian loss
(BL) [29] computes an aggregated dot prediction and uses a point-wise
loss function. We show that L2 and BL are related to an optimal transport
problem using a suboptimal transport matrix. (c) Our proposed loss is
based on unbalanced optimal transport, where the transport cost is fully
minimized and both the pixel-wise and point-wise losses are considered.

annotations. However, [40, 43] still use L2 loss for training, which is not appropriate in suppressing background and
improving localization. In particular, with L2 loss, a unit
change in density in background regions (which is a large
localization error) is equivalent to a unit change in density
near a dot annotation (which is a small localization error).
Thus the L2 loss function is not ideal for localization or generating compact density maps, and we should prefer a loss
function that has an increased penalty for errors far from the
annotations, so as to improve localization and compactness.
Considering both motivations of learning the density
map representation and using localization-sensitive loss, we
propose a generalized loss function based on an unbalanced optimal transport (OT) framework, which measures
the transport cost between the predicted density map and the
ground-truth dot annotations (see Fig. 1c). We show that the
transport matrix, which is optimized to minimize the loss, is
related to the intermediate density map representation. To
better handle perspective changes in the image, we propose
a perspective-guided transport cost function to better separate the density around people who are close together due
to the camera perspective. The proposed loss function decomposes into four terms: 1) a transport loss that pushes the

1974

