Region-aware Adaptive Instance Normalization for Image Harmonization
Jun Ling1 , Han Xue1 , Li Song1,2 , Rong Xie1 , Xiao Gu1
1
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
2
MOE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{lingjun, xue han, song li, xierong, gugu97}@sjtu.edu.cn

Different visual style of different images

Image composition plays a common but important role
in photo editing. To acquire photo-realistic composite images, one must adjust the appearance and visual style of
the foreground to be compatible with the background. Existing deep learning methods for harmonizing composite
images directly learn an image mapping network from the
composite to real one, without explicit exploration on visual style consistency between the background and the foreground images. To ensure the visual style consistency between the foreground and the background, in this paper, we
treat image harmonization as a style transfer problem. In
particular, we propose a simple yet effective Region-aware
Adaptive Instance Normalization (RAIN) module, which explicitly formulates the visual style from the background and
adaptively applies them to the foreground. With our settings, our RAIN module can be used as a drop-in module for
existing image harmonization networks and is able to bring
significant improvements. Extensive experiments on the existing image harmonization benchmark datasets shows the
superior capability of the proposed method. Code is available at https://github.com/junleen/RainNet.

1. Introduction
Image composition is one of the most common operations in image editing [39, 3] and data augmentation [6, 42],
etc. However, generating a realistic composite image by
taking an object from one image and combining it with a
new background image usually requires professional compositors to adjust the appearance of the foreground objects
by photo editing software like Adobe Photoshop, and ensure
the realism of the generated image. To alleviate this burden,
image harmonization is introduced for adjusting the foreground and making it seamlessly integrated into the new image with less human involvement, especially for non-expert
users.
However, what makes a composite image appear more
realistic? In this paper, we present a new perspective for

Style Consistency

Abstract

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. If we want to put a police
car into these images with different visual style , we must ensure
that the car is compatible with the background images (small-sized
images with red boundaries in the top row). Simple cut-and-paste
operations introduce unrealistic results (top row). Our method
aims to adaptively learn high-level visual style from different backgrounds and produce harmonious composite images (bottom row).

image harmonization. Let us take Fig. 1 for example. Fig. 1
shows three different real photos (small-sized images with
red border) that hold different visual properties. When an
unbefitting foreground object with special visual properties
is pasted into a new image with incompatible visual features, we can easily distinguish it from real photos. This
is an unsolved problem and has emerged for years, which
we call visual style discrepancy. Specifically, in this paper,
we define the visual style of an image as visual properties
including illumination, color temperature, saturation, hue,
texture etc., which varies from image to image. To make
a composite image look more realistic, we must ensure a
more consistent visual style between the foreground and the
background.
Abundant image harmonization approaches have been
proposed for improving the realism of composite images.
Traditional methods address the harmonization problem by
transferring statistics of hand-crafted features between foreground and background regions, such as color [26, 27, 39,
30]. However, these methods only work in simple cases

9361

