One-Shot Neural Ensemble Architecture Search by Diversity-Guided
Search Space Shrinking
Minghao Chen1 ,* Jianlong Fu2 , Haibin Ling1
1
Stony Brook University 2 Microsoft Research Asia
{minghao.chen,haibin.ling}@stonybrook.edu, jianf@microsoft.com

Abstract
Despite remarkable progress achieved, most neural architecture search (NAS) methods focus on searching for one
single accurate and robust architecture. To further build
models with better generalization capability and performance, model ensemble is usually adopted and performs
better than stand-alone models. Inspired by the merits of
model ensemble, we propose to search for multiple diverse
models simultaneously as an alternative way to find powerful models. Searching for ensembles is non-trivial and
has two key challenges: enlarged search space and potentially more complexity for the searched model. In this paper,
we propose a one-shot neural ensemble architecture search
(NEAS) solution that addresses the two challenges. For the
first challenge, we introduce a novel diversity-based metric to guide search space shrinking, considering both the
potentiality and diversity of candidate operators. For the
second challenge, we enable a new search dimension to
learn layer sharing among different models for efficiency
purposes. The experiments on ImageNet clearly demonstrate that our solution can improve the supernet’s capacity
of ranking ensemble architectures, and further lead to better
search results. The discovered architectures achieve superior performance compared with state-of-the-arts such as
MobileNetV3 and EfficientNet families under aligned settings. Moreover, we evaluate the generalization ability and
robustness of our searched architecture on the COCO detection benchmark and achieve a 3.1% improvement on AP
compared with MobileNetV3. Codes and models are available here.

1. Introduction
The emergence of deep neural networks greatly relieves the need for feature engineering. Previous studies
have shown that the design of neural network architecture
[11, 25, 32, 41] is essential to the performance for varied
* This work is done when Minghao is an intern at Microsoft.

Figure 1. Comparison of our method with state-of-the-art approaches on ImageNet under mobile settings.

tasks in computer vision. However, the number of possible architectures is enormous, making the manual design
very difﬁcult. Neural Architecture Search (NAS) [48] aims
to automate the design process. Recently, NAS methods
have achieved state-of-the-arts on varied tasks such as image classiﬁcation [48], semantic segmentation [23], object
detection [4], etc. Despite great progress achieved, most of
the NAS methods focus on searching for optimal architectures of single models. However, the generalization ability
and performance of single models are usually affected by
different initialization, noisy data, and training recipe modiﬁcation.
Model ensemble has been proved to be a universally effective method to build more robust and accurate models
compared with single models. Implicit ensemble methods like Dropout [34], Dropconnect [40], StochDepth [15],
Shake-Shake [9] are already widely used in neural architecture design. On the contrary, although explicit ensemble methods like averaging, bagging, boosting, and stacking have been commonly adopted in large competitions and
real-world scenarios. The use of explicit ensemble methods
in designing efﬁcient models is not fully explored due to the
extra computation they brought.
Inspired by the effectiveness of ensemble, we propose to

16530

