CRFace: Confidence Ranker for Model-Agnostic Face Detection Refinement
Noranart Vesdapunt
Microsoft Cloud&AI

Baoyuan Wang
Xiaobing.AI

noves@microsoft.com

zjuwby@gmail.com

Abstract
Face detection is a fundamental problem for many downstream face applications, and there is a rising demand for
faster, more accurate yet support for higher resolution face
detectors. Recent smartphones can record a video in 8K
resolution, but many of the existing face detectors still fail
due to the anchor size and training data. We analyze the
failure cases and observe a large number of correct predicted boxes with incorrect confidences. To calibrate these
confidences, we propose a confidence ranking network with
a pairwise ranking loss to re-rank the predicted confidences
locally within the same image. Our confidence ranker is
model-agnostic, so we can augment the data by choosing
the pairs from multiple face detectors during the training,
and generalize to a wide range of face detectors during the
testing. On WiderFace, we achieve the highest AP on the
single-scale, and our AP is competitive with the previous
multi-scale methods while being significantly faster. On 8K
resolution, our method solves the GPU memory issue and
allows us to indirectly train on 8K. We collect 8K resolution
test set to show the improvement, and we will release our
test set as a new benchmark for future research.

1. Introduction
Face detection is a long-standing research topic in computer vision. Many important downstream applications
need to build on top of it, including face reconstruction,
face tracking and face recognition, etc. Thanks to Convolution Neural Network, face detection has been improved
significantly in the past few years. However, as the camera
hardware is evolving, the demand for an even faster, more
accurate, and support for higher resolution in face detector
is rising. Recent smartphones (Samsung Galaxy S20 Ultra,
Xiaomi MI 10 Pro) can capture a 108MP image and record
a video in 8K resolution. We believe that 8K resolution will
be practical in the near future, but a lot of existing works
[40, 13, 33, 72] still fail on many 8K resolution inputs.
The main reasons for failure are anchor size and training
data. Most of the anchors are designed for the most popular face detection dataset, WiderFace [63] which only has

an image width of 1024. The common largest anchor size
is 512 [40, 13, 33, 72], so the detector has to predict up to
7K residuals. While predicting such large residuals is hard,
but possible, the classifier has never seen such large resolution in the training set and it will almost always suppress
all these boxes. Collecting 8K training data is expensive because a single image could contain hundreds of faces (Fig.
1). Designing a large anchor requires the network to be
deep enough to output multiple scales up to 8K, but BFBox
[39] shows that the average precision (AP) decreases when
the network becomes deeper. While down-sampling the image allows the detector to find a large face, the small face
could be reduced to just 1 pixel (Fig. 1). We also found that
48GB GPU memory is not enough to train RetinaFace [13]
on 8K resolution. As there are many challenges in 8K face
detection, multi-scale [26] is perhaps the most reasonable
workaround by predicting the small faces in 8K, and the
large faces in the smaller resolution, then fuse them together
with box voting [16]. However, this approach still relies on
the correct confidence as the majority of the high confidence
boxes will determine the result. Multi-scale also decreases
the 8K prediction speed (which is already severely slow) to
become much slower than a single-scale.
We analyze the fail cases and found that most of the correct box locations have already existed because many detectors predict a large number of boxes, but the confidences are
very low. To systematically test these boxes, we replace the
prediction confidence with the intersect-over-union (IoU)
between the predicted box and the closest ground truth box
and call it: oracle confidence. Fig. 2 shows that the oracle
prediction has a consistently high AP on WiderFace validation set across multiple resolutions, and by testing only on
a single-scale, it can outperform the state-of-the-art [40] by
a large margin (AP Hard: 93.3% vs 98.4%). On our collected FFHQ [30] dataset, AP could even be increased from
16.2% to 96.5%. We saw the possibility of closing the gap
between the predicted and oracle confidence. Since we can
use the oracle confidence as ground truth, we formulate this
confidence refinement problem as supervised learning.
We initially try to learn a regressor that takes an image
and face detector’s output as input to predict the new con11674

