RankDetNet: Delving into Ranking Constraints for Object Detection
Ji Liu, Dong Li, Rongzhang Zheng, Lu Tian, Yi Shan
Xilinx Inc., Beijing, China
{jiliu1, dongl, treemann, lutian, yishan}@xilinx.com

Abstract
Modern object detection approaches cast detecting objects as optimizing two subtasks of classification and localization simultaneously. Existing methods often learn
the classification task by optimizing each proposal separately and neglect the relationship among different proposals. Such detection paradigm also encounters the mismatch
between classification and localization due to the inherent
discrepancy of their optimization targets. In this work, we
propose a ranking-based optimization algorithm for harmoniously learning to rank and localize proposals in lieu of the
classification task. To this end, we comprehensively investigate three types of ranking constraints, i.e., global ranking, class-specific ranking and IoU-guided ranking losses.
The global ranking loss encourages foreground samples to
rank higher than background. The class-specific ranking
loss ensures that positive samples rank higher than negative
ones for each specific class. The IoU-guided ranking loss
aims to align each pair of confidence scores with the associated pair of IoU overlap between two positive samples of
a specific class. Our ranking constraints can sufficiently explore the relationships between samples from three different
perspectives. They are easy-to-implement, compatible with
mainstream detection frameworks and computation-free for
inference. Experiments demonstrate that our RankDetNet
consistently surpasses prior anchor-based and anchor-free
baselines, e.g., improving RetinaNet baseline by 2.5% AP
on the COCO test-dev set without bells and whistles. We
also apply the proposed ranking constraints for 3D object
detection and achieve improved performance, which further
validates the superiority and generality of our method.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental task in computer vision with extensive subsequent research fields (e.g., instance segmentation [32] and pose estimation [40]) and
wide practical applications including intelligent surveillance, autonomous driving, etc. Owing to the great advancement of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), deep

(a) Classification

(b) Global ranking

(c) Class-specific ranking

(d) IoU-guided ranking

Figure 1. Illustration of the conventional classification loss and
the proposed three types of pair-wise ranking losses. Gray color
means background and other colors mean different object classes.
Circles and Triangles indicate the object confidence and IoU overlap, respectively. Darker colors mean higher values.

learning based object detectors have achieved outstanding performance compared to the conventional hand-crafted
features and classifiers. Typical methods include two-stage
and one-stage anchor-based detectors. The two-stage methods [13, 36, 9, 16] first generate a set of limited candidate
region proposals to distinguish foreground and background,
and then classify and regress them for final detection. Twostage methods have shown superior performance for object
detection but often require large computation overhead and
thus limit the applications on the resource-constrained devices. One-stage detectors [30, 34, 29] aim to identify objects from dense pre-defined anchors without the extra proposal generation step. Despite the efficiency, these onestage detectors often suffer from the issue of foregroundbackground class imbalance. Recent anchor-free methods

264

