Multiple Object Tracking with Correlation Learning
Qiang Wang, Yun Zheng, Pan Pan, Yinghui Xu
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group
{qishi.wq, zhengyun.zy, panpan.pp, renji.xyh}@@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Recent works have shown that convolutional networks
have substantially improved the performance of multiple
object tracking by simultaneously learning detection and
appearance features. However, due to the local perception
of the convolutional network structure itself, the long-range
dependencies in both the spatial and temporal cannot be
obtained efficiently. To incorporate the spatial layout, we
propose to exploit the local correlation module to model
the topological relationship between targets and their surrounding environment, which can enhance the discriminative power of our model in crowded scenes. Specifically,
we establish dense correspondences of each spatial location and its context, and explicitly constrain the correlation volumes through self-supervised learning. To exploit
the temporal context, existing approaches generally utilize
two or more adjacent frames to construct an enhanced feature representation, but the dynamic motion scene is inherently difficult to depict via CNNs. Instead, our paper proposes a learnable correlation operator to establish frameto-frame matches over convolutional feature maps in the
different layers to align and propagate temporal context.
With extensive experimental results on the MOT datasets,
our approach demonstrates the effectiveness of correlation
learning with the superior performance and obtains stateof-the-art MOTA of 76.5% and IDF1 of 73.6% on MOT17.

1. Introduction
Multi-Object Tracking (MOT) is an essential component for computer vision with many applications, such
as video surveillance [31] and modern autonomous driving [19, 41]. It aims to continuously locate trajectories of
multiple targets in video frames. Decades of research efforts
have led to impressive performance on challenging benchmarks [24, 30, 8].
MOT has traditionally adopted the tracking-by-detection
paradigm [3, 5, 1, 58], which capitalizes on the natural division of detection and data association tasks for the problem. These algorithms extract appearance features within

(a) Apperance Only

(b) Correlation Boost

Space-time

Query
References

(c) Spatial-Temporal Correlation Representation

Figure 1. Visualization of the matching conﬁdences (a)-(b) computed between the indicated target (white cross) in the reference
image and all locations of the query image. The appearance feature based tracker [58] (a) generates undistinctive and inaccurate
conﬁdences due to the existing of similar distractors. In contrast,
our Correlation Tracker (b) predicts a distinct high-conﬁdence
value at the correct location, with correlation learning (c).

each detection patches and record object location information for subsequent data association [51, 5]. This tracking paradigm makes researchers mainly focus on optimizing detection [56, 16], feature representation [27, 15], or
data association [3, 5, 17]. With the rapid progress of detection algorithms [13, 14, 36, 35], the detection based tracking has achieved great performance improvement [56, 16].
Although tremendous strides have been made in MOT,
there still exists tough challenges in determining distractors
and frequent occlusions, especially in complex interactive
scenes [8]. Additionally, the above cascaded structure is inefﬁcient and prevents the joint optimization between stages.
One promising approach is to extend the end-to-end
trainable detection framework [36, 35, 64] to jointly learn
detection and appearance feature, which has largely advanced the state-of-the-art in MOT [44, 50, 29, 58]. However as illustrated in Fig. 1, in the case of existing similar
distractors, the appearance feature generates undistinctive
and inaccurate matching conﬁdences (Fig. 1a), severely affecting the performance of association. These methods are
limited in local descriptors, and it is difﬁcult to distinguish

3876

