Masksembles for Uncertainty Estimation
Nikita Durasov1 * Timur Bagautdinov2 Pierre Baque2 Pascal Fua1
1
Computer Vision Laboratory, EPFL, {name.surname}@epfl.ch
2
Neural Concept SA, {name.surname}@neuralconcept.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks have amply demonstrated their
prowess but estimating the reliability of their predictions remains challenging. Deep Ensembles are widely considered
as being one of the best methods for generating uncertainty
estimates but are very expensive to train and evaluate.
MC-Dropout is another popular alternative, which is
less expensive, but also less reliable. Our central intuition
is that there is a continuous spectrum of ensemble-like models of which MC-Dropout and Deep Ensembles are extreme
examples. The first one uses effectively infinite number of
highly correlated models while the second one relies on a
finite number of independent models.
To combine the benefits of both, we introduce Masksembles. Instead of randomly dropping parts of the network as
in MC-dropout, Masksemble relies on a fixed number of binary masks, which are parameterized in a way that allows
to change correlations between individual models. Namely,
by controlling the overlap between the masks and their size
one can choose the optimal configuration for the task at
hand. This leads to a simple and easy to implement method
with performance on par with Ensembles at a fraction of
the cost. We experimentally validate Masksembles on two
widely used datasets, CIFAR10 and ImageNet.

1. Introduction
The ability of deep neural networks to produce useful
predictions is now abundantly clear but assessing the reliability of these predictions remains a challenge. Among all
the methods that can be used to this end, MC-Dropout [8]
and Deep Ensembles [21] have emerged as two of the most
popular ones. Both of those methods exploit the concept of
ensembles to produce uncertainty estimates. MC-Dropout
does so implicitly - by training a single stochastic network,
where randomness is achieved by dropping different subsets
of weights for each observed sample. At test time, one can
* This work was supported in part by the Swiss National Science Foundation

obtain multiple predictions by running this network multiple times, each time with a different weight configuration.
Deep Ensembles, on the other hand, build an explicit ensemble of models, where each model is randomly initialized
and trained independently using stochastic gradient descent.
As importantly, both methods rely on the fact that the outputs of individual models are diverse, which is achieved by
introducing stochasticity into the training or testing process.
However, simply adding randomness does not always
lead to diverse predictions. In practice, MC-Dropout often
performs significantly worse than Deep Ensembles on uncertainty estimation tasks [21, 28, 12]. We argue that this
can be attributed to the fact that each weight is dropped
randomly and independently from the others. For many
configurations of hyperparameters, in particular the dropout
rate, this results in similar weight configurations and, consequently, less diverse predictions [6]. Deep Ensembles seem
to not share this weakness for reasons that are not yet fully
understood and usually produce significantly more reliable
uncertainty estimates. Unfortunately, this comes at a price,
both at training and inference time: Building an ensemble
requires training multiple models and using it means loading all of them simultaneously in memory, typically a very
scarce resource.
In this work, we introduce Masksembles, an approach
to uncertainty estimation that tackles these challenges and
produces reliable uncertainty estimates on par with Deep
Ensembles at a significantly lower computational cost. The
main idea behind the method is simple - introduce a more
structured way to drop model parameters than that of MCDropout.
Masksembles produces a fixed number of binary masks
which specify the network parameters to be dropped. The
properties of the masks effectively define the properties of
the final ensemble in terms of capacity and correlations.
During training, for each sample we randomly choose one
of the masks and drop the corresponding parts of the model
just like standard dropout. During inference, we run the
model multiple times, once per mask, to obtain a set of
predictions and, ultimately, an uncertainty estimate. Our
method has three key hyperparameters: the total number of

13539

