GATSBI: Generative Agent-centric Spatio-temporal Object
Interaction
Cheol-Hui Min

Jinseok Bae

Junho Lee

Young Min Kim

Dept. of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Korea
{mch5048, capoo95, twjhlee, youngmin.kim}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We present GATSBI, a generative model that can transform a sequence of raw observations into a structured latent
representation that fully captures the spatio-temporal context of the agent’s actions. In vision-based decision making
scenarios, an agent faces complex high-dimensional observations where multiple entities interact with each other. The
agent requires a good scene representation of the visual
observation that discerns essential components and consistently propagates along the time horizon. Our method,
GATSBI, utilizes unsupervised object-centric scene representation learning to separate an active agent, static background, and passive objects. GATSBI then models the interactions reflecting the causal relationships among decomposed entities and predicts physically plausible future states.
Our model generalizes to a variety of environments where different types of robots and objects dynamically interact with
each other. We show GATSBI achieves superior performance
on scene decomposition and video prediction compared to
its state-of-the-art counterparts.

1. Introduction
An ideal intelligent agent should be able to learn various
tasks in diverse environments without relying on specific sensor configurations or control parameters. Recent approaches
employ visual observation as the sole input to infer the physical context of the agent and its surroundings, thus aim to
adapt to a general setup. One may interpret the visual input via conventional computer vision techniques employing
deep neural networks [20, 33]. While they exhibit performance comparable to human perception, such approaches
require a large volume of annotated database. Not only are
the groundtruth labels costly to obtain, but also such supervised approaches are limited to specific tasks that they are
trained on.
In contrast, unsupervised generative models extract the

Figure 1. Our method, GATSBI, can explicitly identify the agent
by utilizing the keypoint-based heatmap. Thus, the observation is
decomposed into the agent, background, and objects. In addition,
GATSBI infers the dynamic properties of the agent and temporally
models the agent-centric interaction with the objects.

latent variables that encode the compositional relationship
between different entities without prior knowledge [25]. The
quality of representation can be verified by the ability of
reconstructing the input video sequence from the disentangled latent variables [5]. In an ideal case, the latent variables
contain the time-varying composition between the agent and
the set of objects, and the structural knowledge must propagate temporally with a consistent inference of the latent
dynamics. The latent dynamics of the learned representation
reflect the underlying physics between the extracted entities,
thus the agent can leverage the latent dynamics in predicting
the various physical contexts conditioned on its own action.
We propose a fully-unsupervised action-conditioned
video prediction model, named Generative Agent-cenTric
Spatio-temporal oBject Interaction (GATSBI). Our method is
explicitly designed for vision-based learning of robot agents
and is able to distinguish the active, passive and static com-

3074

