Drafting and Revision: Laplacian Pyramid Network for Fast High-Quality
Artistic Style Transfer
Tianwei Lin1 , Zhuoqi Ma1,2 , Fu Li1 , Dongliang He1 , Xin Li1 , Errui Ding1 ,
Nannan Wang2 , Jie Li2 , Xinbo Gao3
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.1
Xidian University.2 Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications.3
lintianwei01@baidu.com, zhuoqi ma@hotmail.com

Figure 1. Illustration of our proposed style transfer process. First we transfer global patterns in low resolution, then revise local patterns in
high resolution. For better visualization, we resize stylized images of different scale into the same size. Zoom in to have a better view.

Abstract
Artistic style transfer aims at migrating the style from an
example image to a content image. Currently, optimizationbased methods have achieved great stylization quality, but
expensive time cost restricts their practical applications.
Meanwhile, feed-forward methods still fail to synthesize complex style, especially when holistic global and local patterns
exist. Inspired by the common painting process of drawing a draft and revising the details, we introduce a novel
feed-forward method named Laplacian Pyramid Network
(LapStyle). LapStyle first transfers global style patterns in
low-resolution via a Drafting Network. It then revises the local details in high-resolution via a Revision Network, which
hallucinates a residual image according to the draft and the
image textures extracted by Laplacian filtering. Higher resolution details can be easily generated by stacking Revision
Networks with multiple Laplacian pyramid levels. The final
stylized image is obtained by aggregating outputs of all pyramid levels. Experiments demonstrate that our method can
synthesize high quality stylized images in real time, where
holistic style patterns are properly transferred.

1. Introduction
Artistic style transfer is an attractive technique which can
create an art image with the structure of a content image and
the style patterns of an example style image. It has been
a prevalent research topic for both academy and industry.
Recently, there have been a lot of methods proposed for
neural style transfer, which can be roughly divided into two
types: image-optimization and model-optimization methods.
Image-optimization methods iteratively optimize stylized
image with fixed network. The seminal work of Gatys et
al. [6] achieves style transfer in an iterative optimization
process, where the style patterns are captured by correlation
of features extracted from a pre-trained deep neural network.
Following works improve [6] mainly in the form of different
loss functions [12, 24]. Although superior stylization results
are achieved, e.g., STROTSS [12], widespread applications
of these methods are still restricted by their slow online
optimization process. On the contrary, model-optimization
methods update neural networks by training and are feedforward in testing. There are mainly three subdivided types:
(1) Per-Style-Per-Model methods [10, 15, 29, 30, 31] are
trained to synthesize images with a single given style image;

5141

