Test-Time Fast Adaptation for Dynamic Scene Deblurring
via Meta-Auxiliary Learning
Zhixiang Chi1 , Yang Wang1,2 ,
1
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies

Yuanhao Yu1 , Jin Tang1
2
University of Manitoba, Canada

{zhixiang.chi, yang.wang3, yuanhao.yu, tangjin}@huawei.com

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of dynamic scene
deblurring. Most existing deep end-to-end learning approaches adopt the same generic model for all unseen test
images. These solutions are sub-optimal, as they fail to
utilize the internal information within a specific image.
On the other hand, a self-supervised approach, SelfDeblur, enables internal training within a test image from
scratch, but it does not fully take advantage of large external datasets. In this work, we propose a novel selfsupervised meta-auxiliary learning to improve the performance of deblurring by integrating both external and internal learning. Concretely, we build a self-supervised auxiliary reconstruction task that shares a portion of the network
with the primary deblurring task. The two tasks are jointly
trained on an external dataset. Furthermore, we propose a
meta-auxiliary training scheme to further optimize the pretrained model as a base learner, which is applicable for fast
adaptation at test time. During training, the performance of
both tasks is coupled. Therefore, we are able to exploit the
internal information at test time via the auxiliary task to enhance the performance of deblurring. Extensive experimental results across evaluation datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of test-time adaptation of the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Images taken in dynamic scenes are often degraded by
objectionable blur caused by object motions and camera
shake. Restoring latent clean images from such cases is
challenging due to the spatially non-uniform property of the
blur kernels. Despite its highly ill-posed characteristic, extensive research efforts have been devoted to remove the notorious blurry artifacts in the past decades [7, 6, 44, 46, 8, 9].
Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have been popular
in this field. Various network structures have been proposed
to achieve reliable quantitative results and generate visually
pleasing clean images for dynamic scene deblurring [37, 1,

(a) Input blurry image

(b) SelfDeblur [29]
(2,500 updates)

(c) Meta-auxiliary learned
(ours, no updates)

(d) Meta-auxiliary learned
(ours, five updates)

Figure 1: Sample deblurring results. Given a blurry input
image (a), SelfDeblur [29] requires thousands of iterations
to learn the internal information of the input image (b). Our
approach uses meta-auxiliary learning to learn to adapt to
the unique properties of the given image. Before adaption,
the output has some artifacts due to the distribution shift between the training dataset and the test image (c). After five
updates, our model quickly adapts to the internal information of the test image and removes the artifacts (d).

31, 24]. In particular, the end-to-end learning approaches
have set the state-of-the-art by directly learning the statistical correlation between blurry and latent images on largescale training datasets [40, 13, 27, 36, 47, 25, 23, 5, 2].
The main shortcoming for most of the existing DNN-

9137

