LiDAR-Aug: A General Rendering-based Augmentation Framework
for 3D Object Detection
Jin Fang1,2 , Xinxin Zuo3,4 *, Dingfu Zhou1,2∗ , Shengze Jin5 , Sen Wang3,4 and Liangjun Zhang1,2
1

2

Baidu Research
3

National Engineering Laboratory of Deep Learning Technology and Application, China

University of Alberta

fangjin@baidu.com

4

University of Guelph

xzuo@ualberta.ca

5

ETH Zürich, Switzerland

zhoudingfu@baidu.com

Abstract
Annotating the LiDAR point cloud is crucial for deep
learning-based 3D object detection tasks. Due to expensive labeling costs, data augmentation has been taken as
a necessary module and plays an important role in training the neural network. “Copy” and “paste” (i.e., GTAug) is the most commonly used data augmentation strategy, however, the occlusion between objects has not been
taken into consideration. To handle the above limitation,
we propose a rendering-based LiDAR augmentation framework (i.e., LiDAR-Aug) to enrich the training data and boost
the performance of LiDAR-based 3D object detectors. The
proposed LiDAR-Aug is a plug-and-play module that can be
easily integrated into different types of 3D object detection
frameworks. Compared to the traditional object augmentation methods, LiDAR-Aug is more realistic and effective. Finally, we verify the proposed framework on the public KITTI
dataset with different 3D object detectors. The experimental results show the superiority of our method compared to
other data augmentation strategies. We plan to make our
data and code public to help other researchers reproduce
our results.

1. Introduction
Due to its precise range sensing ability to capture the
3D geometric information of environment, LiDAR sensor
has been widely used in many applications, especially in
Autonomous Driving (AD).
Recently, deep learning-based point cloud analysis such
as model classification [27], scene segmentation [28, 42],
object detection [35] has achieved significant progress by
employing high-capacity neural network. Generally, for
training a high-performance neural network, a large amount
of annotated training data [14] is a prerequisite, especially
in the AD applications where Safety is the first priority.
* Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1: Examples of augmented LiDAR data, where (a), (c)
are the original LiDAR point cloud and (b), (d) are the augmented
LiDAR point cloud by “LiDAR-Aug”. Specifically, the “LiDARAug” can be used to expand the rare objects such as traffic cone
and cyclist which has been highlighted in the sub-fig (d).

However, creating large datasets with pixel-level labels is
extremely difficult which requires extensive labor work.
This problem is even more serious when dealing with the
sparse LiDAR data. Due to its sparsity in remote distance,
how to identify and annotate the objects with rotated 3D
bounding boxes in 3D space becomes particularly difficult.
To reduce the burden of data annotation, generating synthetic data using simulators [7, 34, 25] becomes one of the
mainstream solutions. However, the simulator itself is still
very expensive, time-consuming, and difficult to generalize
to different scenarios. Besides, the distinct domain gap between simulated data and real data is another problem. Although a variety of approaches [16, 41] have been proposed,
domain adaption is still an open problem to be investigated.
Another common strategy to deal with limited annotated data is data augmentation. The effectiveness of data
augmentation has been verified in many tasks [11, 38],
which has become a typical pre-processing process before training the neural network. For 2D tasks, various
data augmentation approaches have been proposed such

4710

