Right for the Right Concept:
Revising Neuro-Symbolic Concepts by Interacting with their Explanations
Wolfgang Stammer1, *
Patrick Schramowski1, *
Kristian Kersting1,2
1
Computer Science Department, TU Darmstadt, Germany
2
Centre for Cognitive Science, TU Darmstadt, and Hessian Center for AI (hessian.AI)
{wolfgang.stammer, schramowski, kersting}@cs.tu-darmstadt.de

Abstract
Most explanation methods in deep learning map importance estimates for a model’s prediction back to the original
input space. These “visual” explanations are often insufficient, as the model’s actual concept remains elusive. Moreover, without insights into the model’s semantic concept, it
is difficult —if not impossible— to intervene on the model’s
behavior via its explanations, called Explanatory Interactive Learning. Consequently, we propose to intervene on a
Neuro-Symbolic scene representation, which allows one to
revise the model on the semantic level, e.g. “never focus on
the color to make your decision”. We compiled a novel confounded visual scene data set, the CLEVR-Hans data set,
capturing complex compositions of different objects. The
results of our experiments on CLEVR-Hans demonstrate
that our semantic explanations, i.e. compositional explanations at a per-object level, can identify confounders that
are not identifiable using “visual” explanations only. More
importantly, feedback on this semantic level makes it possible to revise the model from focusing on these factors.

1. Introduction
Machine learning models may show Clever-Hans like
moments when solving a task by learning the “wrong”
thing, e.g. making use of confounding factors within a data
set. Unfortunately, it is not easy to find out whether, say, a
deep neural network is making Clever-Hans-type mistakes
because they are not reflected in the standard performance
measures such as precision and recall. Instead, one looks at
their explanations to see what features the network is actually using [23]. By interacting with the explanations, one
may even fix Clever-Hans like moments [43, 50, 47, 44].
This Explanatory Interactive Learning (XIL), however,
very much depends on the provided explanations. Most
explanation methods in deep learning map importance es* Equal contribution

Figure 1: Neuro-Symbolic explanations are needed to revise deep learning models from focusing on irrelevant
features via global feedback rules.

timates for a model’s prediction back to the original input
space [46, 49, 48, 45, 7]. This is somewhat reminiscent
of a child who points towards something but cannot articulate why something is relevant. In other words, “visual” explanations are insufficient if a task requires a concept-level
understanding of a model’s decision. Without knowledge
about and symbolic access to the concept level, it remains
difficult—if not impossible—to fix Clever-Hans behavior.
To illustrate this, consider the classification task depicted
in Fig. 1. It shows a complex scene consisting of objects,
which vary in position, shape, size, material, and color.
Now, assume that scenes belonging to the true class show
a large cube and a large cylinder. Unfortunately, during
training, our deep network only sees scenes with large, gray
cubes. Checking the deep model’s decision process using visual explanations confirms this: the deep model has
learned to largely focus on the gray cube to classify scenes
to be positive. An easy fix would be to provide feedback
in the form of “never focus on the color to make your decision” as it would eliminate the confounding factor. Unfortunately, visual explanations do not allow us direct access to
the semantic level— they do not tell us that “the color gray

3619

