HourNAS: Extremely Fast Neural Architecture Search
Through an Hourglass Lens
Zhaohui Yang1,2 , Yunhe Wang2∗, Xinghao Chen2 , Jianyuan Guo2 ,
Wei Zhang2 , Chao Xu1 , Chunjing Xu2 , Dacheng Tao3 , Chang Xu3
1

2

Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University.
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies. 3 School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, University of Sydney.
zhaohuiyang@pku.edu.cn; yunhe.wang@huawei.com; c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) aims to automatically
discover optimal architectures. In this paper, we propose
an hourglass-inspired approach (HourNAS) for extremely
fast NAS. It is motivated by the fact that the effects of the
architecture often proceed from the vital few blocks. Acting like the narrow neck of an hourglass, vital blocks in
the guaranteed path from the input to the output of a deep
neural network restrict the information flow and influence
the network accuracy. The other blocks occupy the major
volume of the network and determine the overall network
complexity, corresponding to the bulbs of an hourglass. To
achieve an extremely fast NAS while preserving the high accuracy, we propose to identify the vital blocks and make them
the priority in the architecture search. The search space of
those non-vital blocks is further shrunk to only cover the
candidates that are affordable under the computational resource constraints. Experimental results on ImageNet show
that only using 3 hours (0.1 days) with one GPU, our HourNAS can search an architecture that achieves a 77.0% Top-1
accuracy, which outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
In the past decade, progress in deep neural networks
has resulted in the advancements in various computer vision tasks, such as image classification [6, 67, 7, 52], object detection [20, 41], and segmentation [25]. The big
success of deep neural networks is mainly contributed to
the well-designed cells and sophisticated architectures. For
example, VGGNet [51] suggested the use of smaller convolutional filters and stacked a series of convolution layers
for achieving higher performance, ResNet [26] introduced
the residual blocks to benefit the training of deeper neural networks, and DenseNet [29] designed the densely con∗ Corresponding author.

nected blocks to stack features from different depths. Besides the efforts on the initial architecture design, extensive
experiments [59, 24, 10] are often required to determine the
weights and hyperparameters of the lightweight deep neural
network [2, 11, 69, 35, 36, 37].
To automatically and efficiently search for neural networks of desireable properties (e.g., model size and FLOPs)
from a predefined search space, a number of Neural Architecture Search (NAS) algorithms [40, 65, 33, 70, 68, 18, 58, 61]
have been recently proposed. Wherein, Evolutionary Algorithm (EA) based methods [48] maintain a set of architectures and generate new architectures using genetic operations
like mutation and crossover. Reinforcement Learning (RL)
based methods [75, 76] sample architectures from the search
space and train the controllers accordingly. The differentiable based methods [40, 62, 63, 50] optimize the shared
weights and architecture parameters, which significantly reduces the demand for computation resources and makes the
search process efficient.
These methods have made tremendous efforts to greatly
accelerate the search process of NAS. Nevertheless, given
the huge computation cost on the large-scale dataset [62,
23, 64, 27, 3], e.g., 9 GPU days for NAS on the ImageNet
benchmark, most methods execute NAS in a compromised
way. The architecture is first searched on a smaller dataset
(e.g., CIFAR-10 [32]), and then the network weight of the
derived architecture is trained on the large dataset. An obvious disadvantage of this concession is that the performance
of the selected architecture on the CIFAR-10 may not be well
extended to the ImageNet benchmark [71]. We tend to use
the minimal number of parameters without discrimination
to construct an architecture that would achieve the maximal
accuracy. But just as the popular 80-20 rule1 goes, only a
few parts could be critical to the architecture’s success, and
1 The 80/20 rule (a.k.a Pareto principle, the law of vital few) is an
aphorism that states, for many events, roughly 80% of the effects come
from 20% of the causes.

10896

