Seeing in Extra Darkness Using a Deep-Red Flash
Jinhui Xiong1∗ Jian Wang2∗ Wolfgang Heidrich1
1
KAUST 2 Snap Research
Frame 88

Scotopic

Mesopic

Photopic

Rods

Rods and Cones

Cones

10 !"

10 !#

10 !$

10 %

10 $

10 #

Cones

High

Rods

Human photopic luminance (cd/m# )
(Rods dominate more as the ambient light gets darker)

Green

Red

LED

600

650

Blue
Deep-Red
(660 nm) LED
Camera
400

Frame 90

Input Stream

Sunny

Human vision

Frame 89

Output Stream

Sunset

Starlight

L = 10$# cd/m#

Log sensitivity

Low

Shree Nayar2

450

500

550

700

Wavelength(nm)

Figure 1: Top left: Human vision uses cones and rods for the perception of light. Photopic vision is associated with cones,
occurring at bright-light conditions (over 3 cd/m2 ). Scotopic vision is associated with rods, occurring at dim-light conditions
(below 10 3 cd/m2 ). At intermediate light levels, both rods and cones are active, which is called mesopic vision. Bottom
left: We propose to use deep-red (e.g. 660 nm) light as flash for low-light imaging in mesopic light levels. This new flash can
be introduced into smartphones with a minor adjustment. Middle: The eye spectral sensitivity in a dimly lit environment (0.01
cd/m2 ) and the relative responses of R, G and B color channels of the camera we used, as well as the emission spectrum of
the red LED flash. Under dim lighting, rod vision dominates, yet the rods are nearly insensible to deep-red light. Meanwhile,
our LED flash can be sensed by the camera especially in the red and green channels. Right: Inputs to our videography
pipeline are a sequence of no-flash and flash frames, and the outputs are denoised and would yield temporally stable videos
with no frame rate loss. Top left figure is reproduced from [20]. Data for cones and rods are from [38] and [17].

Abstract
We propose a new flash technique for low-light imaging,
using deep-red light as an illuminating source. Our main
observation is that in a dim environment, the human eye
mainly uses rods for the perception of light, which are not
sensitive to wavelengths longer than 620 nm, yet the camera sensor still has a spectral response. We propose a novel
modulation strategy when training a modern CNN model
for guided image filtering, fusing a noisy RGB frame and
a flash frame. This fusion network is further extended for
video reconstruction. We have built a prototype with minor
hardware adjustments and tested the new flash technique on
a variety of static and dynamic scenes. The experimental
results demonstrate that our method produces compelling
reconstructions, even in extra dim conditions.

∗ denotes equal contribution. Part of the work was done while Jinhui
Xiong was an intern in Snap Research.

1. Introduction
Low-light imaging has been a critical capability for
smartphone cameras. Existing solutions range from improved sensor design such as back-illuminated sensors [40],
to the use of different color filter arrays (e.g. RYYB instead
of traditional RGGB Bayer filters [32]). Furthermore, computational photography techniques like burst denoising [16]
are widely deployed by many companies.
Flash photography also has a long history and generally
provides the best results, especially for very low light levels
or scenes with complex motions, for which burst-denoising
image alignment might fail. However, flash photography
also has several downsides. The intensity falls off quadratically with distance from the flash, making it difficult to
shoot well-exposed photos with a large depth range. Moreover, the flash itself is dazzling to human eyes. Especially
in very dark environments, a strong white light causes unpleasant light pollution and may destroy the dark adaptation of the human visual system. Using invisible flashes

10000

