A Closer Look at Fourier Spectrum Discrepancies
for CNN-generated Images Detection
Keshigeyan Chandrasegaran
Ngoc-Trung Tran
Ngai-Man Cheung
Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD)
{ keshigeyan, ngoctrung tran, ngaiman cheung } @sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
CNN-based generative modelling has evolved to produce
synthetic images indistinguishable from real images in the
RGB pixel space. Recent works have observed that CNNgenerated images share a systematic shortcoming in replicating high frequency Fourier spectrum decay attributes.
Furthermore, these works have successfully exploited this
systematic shortcoming to detect CNN-generated images
reporting up to 99% accuracy across multiple state-of-theart GAN models.
In this work, we investigate the validity of assertions
claiming that CNN-generated images are unable to achieve
high frequency spectral decay consistency. We meticulously construct a counterexample space of high frequency
spectral decay consistent CNN-generated images emerging
from our handcrafted experiments using DCGAN, LSGAN,
WGAN-GP and StarGAN, where we empirically show that
this frequency discrepancy can be avoided by a minor architecture change in the last upsampling operation. We
subsequently use images from this counterexample space to
successfully bypass the recently proposed forensics detector
which leverages on high frequency Fourier spectrum decay
attributes for CNN-generated image detection.
Through this study, we show that high frequency Fourier
spectrum decay discrepancies are not inherent characteristics for existing CNN-based generative models—contrary
to the belief of some existing work—, and such features are not robust to perform synthetic image detection. Our results prompt re-thinking of using high
frequency Fourier spectrum decay attributes for CNNgenerated image detection. Code and models are available at https://keshik6.github.io/FourierDiscrepancies-CNN-Detection/

1. Introduction
With serious concerns over Deepfakes being widely used
for malicious purposes [18, 19, 30, 37, 2, 36, 9, 32], detec-

tion of deepfake multimedia content has become an important research field. With substantial improvement of CNNbased generative modelling in the recent years [22, 45, 23,
24, 21, 35, 8, 3, 46, 33, 27, 1, 4, 16, 38, 39], it is becoming more and more difficult to assess the “fakeness” of such
synthetic content in the RGB pixel space.

1.1. Fourier spectrum discrepancies in CNNgenerated images
Recent research suggests that CNN-based generation
methods are unable to reproduce high frequency distribution of real images. Existing work tends to conclude that
this incompetency is an intrinsic property of CNN-based
generative models [12, 10, 25]. While Zhang et al. [44] and
Wang et al. [42] report that CNN generated images have
frequency artifacts, Dzanic et al. [12] and Durall et al. [10]
suggest spectrum discrepancies in high frequency: CNNgenerated images at the highest frequencies do not decay
as usually observed in real images (Figure 1). In particular,
• Dzanic et al. [12] analyze high frequency of real and
deep network generated images, and conclude that
“deep network generated images share an observable,
systematic shortcoming in replicating the attributes of
these high-frequency modes”.
• Durall et al. [10] observe that “CNN based generative
deep neural networks are failing to reproduce spectral
distributions”, and “this effect is independent of the
underlying architecture”.
• Dzanic et al. [12] take a step further and propose to
exploit this frequency discrepancies for detection of
deep network generated images, claiming an accuracy
of up to 99.2% across multiple state-of-the-art GAN
and VAE models.
Some works also propose different techniques to
disguise these high frequency discrepancies via postprocessing the deep network generated images [12, 25], or
modifying the GAN training objective to avoid these discrepancies [10].

7200

