Revisiting Superpixels for Active Learning in Semantic Segmentation with
Realistic Annotation Costs
Lile Cai1 , Xun Xu1 , Jun Hao Liew2 , Chuan Sheng Foo1
1
Institute for Infocomm Research, Singapore
2
National University of Singapore
{caill, foo chuan sheng}@i2r.a-star.edu.sg, alex.xun.xu@gmail.com, liewjunhao@u.nus.edu

Abstract
State-of-the-art methods for semantic segmentation are
based on deep neural networks that are known to be datahungry. Region-based active learning has shown to be a
promising method for reducing data annotation costs. A
key design choice for region-based AL is whether to use
regularly-shaped regions (e.g., rectangles) or irregularlyshaped region (e.g., superpixels). In this work, we address
this question under realistic, click-based measurement of
annotation costs. In particular, we revisit the use of superpixels and demonstrate that the inappropriate choice of cost
measure (e.g., the percentage of labeled pixels), may cause
the effectiveness of the superpixel-based approach to be
under-estimated. We benchmark the superpixel-based approach against the traditional “rectangle+polygon”-based
approach with annotation cost measured in clicks, and show
that the former outperforms on both Cityscapes and PASCAL VOC. We further propose a class-balanced acquisition
function to boost the performance of the superpixel-based
approach and demonstrate its effectiveness on the evaluation datasets. Our results strongly argue for the use of
superpixel-based AL for semantic segmentation and highlight the importance of using realistic annotation costs in
evaluating such methods.

1. Introduction
In recent years, we have witnessed the rapid development and great success brought by deep learning on many
computer vision tasks, where the state-of-the-art is dominated by deep learning methods. A key ingredient to the
success of deep learning is the availability of large corpora
of annotated training data. In practice, however, the annotation cost for labeling such a corpus can be prohibitively
expensive, especially for dense prediction tasks like semantic image segmentation where pixel-wise labeling is needed.
Active learning (AL) offers one approach to address this

annotation burden by selecting only the most informative
samples for labeling.
Previous AL methods for semantic image segmentation can be broadly classified into image-based methods
[35, 31, 8] and region-based methods [23, 4, 6] according
to the granularity of data selection for annotation. Imagebased approaches consider an entire image as a sample
while region-based approaches divide images into nonoverlapping patches and consider each patch as a sample.
Further design choices for the region-based approach are
the shape and size of the regions chosen for annotation.
Previous work suggests that region-based selection outperforms image-based selection due to the increase in data variability [23]; we thus focus on region-based AL in this work.
A fundamental consideration in navigating these design choices for region-based AL is the cost of annotating a sample. Many works have measured annotation cost
in terms of the number (or percentage) of labeled pixels
[35, 31, 8, 4, 18], which is not reflective of the polygonbased annotation process used in practice [7]. As an alternative, click-based annotation costs have been proposed
[23, 6] to better capture the true annotation costs. More
concretely, three types of clicks are usually involved in the
polygon-based annotation process: 1) polygon clicks for
annotating vertices of the polygon enclosing the object-ofinterest; 2) intersection clicks for annotating the intersection
points between object boundaries and region boundaries; 3)
class clicks for assigning a single class label to each segment within the region. The number of polygon and intersection clicks required will likely be higher for regularlyshaped regions (squares, rectangles) that typically do not
respect actual object boundaries. These clicks can be reduced (even avoided) if AL is conducted with boundarypreserving regions, such that the annotator only needs to
focus on assigning classes for each region.
This consideration of annotation costs motivates the
use of (irregularly-shaped) superpixels in region-based AL
[18, 30] instead of regularly-shaped squares or rectangles. Superpixel algorithms divide an image into non-

10988

