Self-supervised Motion Learning from Static Images
Ziyuan Huang1,2 , Shiwei Zhang2 , Jianwen Jiang2 , Mingqian Tang2 , Rong Jin2 , Marcelo H. Ang Jr1
1
National University of Singapore, Singapore
2
Alibaba Group, China
ziyuan.huang@u.nus.edu, mpeangh@nus.edu.sg
{zhangjin.zsw, jianwen.jjw, mingqian.tmq,jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Motions are reflected in videos as the movement of pixels, and actions are essentially patterns of inconsistent motions between the foreground and the background. To well
distinguish the actions, especially those with complicated
spatio-temporal interactions, correctly locating the prominent motion areas is of crucial importance. However, most
motion information in existing videos are difﬁcult to label and training a model with good motion representations
with supervision will thus require a large amount of human
labour for annotation. In this paper, we address this problem by self-supervised learning. Speciﬁcally, we propose to
learn Motion from Static Images (MoSI). The model learns
to encode motion information by classifying pseudo motions
generated by MoSI. We furthermore introduce a static mask
in pseudo motions to create local motion patterns, which
forces the model to additionally locate notable motion areas for the correct classiﬁcation. We demonstrate that MoSI
can discover regions with large motion even without ﬁnetuning on the downstream datasets. As a result, the learned
motion representations boost the performance of tasks requiring understanding of complex scenes and motions, i.e.,
action recognition. Extensive experiments show the consistent and transferable improvements achieved by MoSI.
Codes will be soon released.

1. Introduction
Understanding motion patterns is a key challenge in
many video understanding problems such as action recognition [7], action localization [40] and action detection [55].
A suitable way to encode motions can signiﬁcantly boost
the performance in those tasks [41]. Early works represent
motions using hand-crafted features [35, 46, 34] based on
dense trajectories [45] and optical ﬂow [2]. With the successful application of deep neural networks [14, 22, 18] and
the construction of large scale image and video datasets [5,
19], endeavors have been made to design architectures to

Label

Prediction

Static
Image

0.0
0.2 0.0 0.7
0.1

Loss

Unmasked MoSI

FC Layer

…

…

Pseudo Motions

3D Backbone

(a) Unmasked MoSI (no static masks)

(b) Dribble

(c) Cartwheel

Figure 1: (a) Unmasked MoSI constructs image sequences
with pseudo motions from static images. The model is
trained to encode motions by predicting the direction and
speed of the pseudo motions. For simplicity, the speed granularity here is set as K = 1 (see Sec. 3.1). (b), (c) GradCAM [38] visualizations on HMDB51 videos for the conv5
pre-trained by our MoSI on ImageNet [5], where the model
locates prominent motions even without ﬁne-tuning on the
downstream dataset (See more in Sec. 4.1).
extract meaningful motion features [16, 7, 49, 47, 54, 41].
Despite their powerful capability of modeling dynamic variations between frames, the 3D convolutional models require
a large amount of manually labeled videos to achieve a good
generalized performance [13].

1276

