Shape and Material Capture at Home
Daniel Lichy1
Jiaye Wu1
Soumyadip Sengupta2
David W. Jacobs1
1
2
University of Maryland, College Park
University of Washington
dlichy@umd.edu, jiayewu@umiacs.umd.edu, soumya91@cs.washington.edu, djacobs@cs.umd.edu

Figure 1: A bare-bones capture setup (left) consisting of only an iPhone, a flashlight and a sweet potato. The user captures a few images
(with voice control) of the object by moving around with a flashlight directed at the object. We then reconstruct surface normal, albedo and
roughness at high-resolution (1024×1024). Normals are integrated to create a mesh that is rendered with novel views and illuminations.

Abstract
In this paper, we present a technique for estimating the
geometry and reflectance of objects using only a camera,
flashlight, and optionally a tripod. We propose a simple
data capture technique in which the user goes around the
object, illuminating it with a flashlight and capturing only a
few images.Our main technical contribution is the introduction of a recursive neural architecture, which can predict
geometry and reflectance at 2k × 2k resolution given an input image at 2k ×2k and estimated geometry and reflectance
from the previous step at 2k−1 × 2k−1 . This recursive architecture, termed RecNet, is trained with 256×256 resolution
but can easily operate on 1024×1024 images during inference. We show that our method produces more accurate
surface normal and albedo, especially in regions of specular highlights and cast shadows, compared to previous approaches, given three or fewer input images.

1. Introduction
Capturing an object’s shape and material is a longstudied problem in Computer Vision and Graphics, with a
broad range of applications such as Augmented and Virtual
Reality. With the rise of e-commerce, it is now even more
important to develop a system that allows sellers to capture
3D shape and material of their product with relative ease. It

can also be extremely useful for digital artists who can use
captured 3D objects as a starting point for their models.
In this work, we present a system where the shape and
reflectance of an object can be captured by a user with everyday household items. We propose a capture setup that
requires a camera, flashlight, and ideally a tripod. The user
can capture one or multiple images of an object by illuminating the object with a flashlight from multiple directions. This relatively straight-forward data capture setup
provides us with important photometric cues necessary for
high-quality reconstruction.
High quality object geometry can be recovered using a
large number of images either from different views (MultiView Stereo) [48, 67, 68], or from different lighting variations (Photometric Stereo) [10, 13, 15] . Our work
falls in the category of both Photometric Stereo (PS) and
Shape-from-Shading (SfS). PS techniques generally require
a light-stage setup in a dark room to capture an object. Although these techniques often produce high-quality reconstruction given a large enough number of images, it is extremely difficult to create such a capture setup at home. On
the other hand, single image based methods have shown
success in capturing geometry and material using a camera with co-directional flash [37], often with an extra image
without the flash [7]. However, these approaches rely on

6123

