Shape from Sky: Polarimetric Normal Recovery Under The Sky
Tomoki Ichikawa†∗ Matthew Purri‡∗ Ryo Kawahara† Shohei Nobuhara† Kristin Dana‡ Ko Nishino†
† Kyoto University
‡ Rutgers University
https://vision.ist.i.kyoto-u.ac.jp/

Polarimetic Images
Under the Sky

Angle of
Linear Polarization

https://www.ece.rutgers.edu/˜kdana/

Degree of
Linear Polarization

Surface Normal

Shading

Figure 1: We introduce a novel method for reconstructing fine geometry of non-Lambertian objects from passive observations
under the sky. The method fully leverages the polarimetric properties of sky and sun light encoded in the reflection by the
surface to recover the surface normal at each pixel.

Abstract
The sky exhibits a unique spatial polarization pattern by
scattering the unpolarized sun light. Just like insects use
this unique angular pattern to navigate, we use it to map
pixels to directions on the sky. That is, we show that the
unique polarization pattern encoded in the polarimetric appearance of an object captured under the sky can be decoded to reveal the surface normal at each pixel. We derive a polarimetric reflection model of a diffuse plus mirror surface lit by the sun and a clear sky. This model is
used to recover the per-pixel surface normal of an object
from a single polarimetric image or from multiple polarimetric images captured under the sky at different times of
the day. We experimentally evaluate the accuracy of our
shape-from-sky method on a number of real objects of different surface compositions. The results clearly show that
this passive approach to fine-geometry recovery that fully
leverages the unique illumination made by nature is a viable
option for 3D sensing. With the advent of quad-Bayer polarization chips, we believe the implications of our method
span a wide range of domains.

1. Introduction
Methods for 3D reconstruction have been of central interest in computer vision since its inception. A robust solution to it underlies a wide range of applications within vi-

sion and in surrounding areas including robotics, extended
reality (XR), and medicine. The challenge of this 2D to 3D
inverse problem lies in the combination surface reflectance
and incident illumination that generates the complex appearance of a given geometry.
In this work, we are interested in recovering the fine geometry represented by per-pixel surface normals. Surface
normal recovery can be interpreted as decoding the incident
illumination from its reflectance-modulated pixel intensity.
If we know the spatial pattern of the illumination (e.g., three
point sources) and the reflectance dictated by the object material properties (e.g., Lambertian), we can “demodulate”
the pixel intensity to obtain the surface normal.
Consider two simple models of the interaction of light
at a surface. On one hand, the appearance of a Lambertian surface lit by a point source can be perfectly modeled
with simple linear equations from which we can recover
per-pixel surface normals. On the other hand, the appearance of an ideal mirror surface captured under a rainbowlike angularly unique illumination directly tells us per-pixel
surface normals by simple lookup.
The reality, however, lives somewhere in between a set
of simple point source illumination and an angularly unique
one, and we generally do not know the exact reflectance. As
a result, we are forced to solve an ill-posed problem blindly.
This has led to numerous methods in the space such as pho∗ Equal contribution.

14832

