Action Unit Memory Network for Weakly Supervised Temporal Action
Localization
∗

Wang Luo1 , Tianzhu Zhang1, , Wenfei Yang1 , Jingen Liu2 , Tao Mei2 , Feng Wu1 , Yongdong Zhang1
1
University of Science and Technology of China; 2 JD AI Research
{lw1998,yangwf}@mail.ustc.edu.cn; {tzzhang,fengwu,zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn;
jingenliu@gmail.com; tmei@live.com

Abstract
Weakly supervised temporal action localization aims to
detect and localize actions in untrimmed videos with only
video-level labels during training. However, without framelevel annotations, it is challenging to achieve localization
completeness and relieve background interference. In this
paper, we present an Action Unit Memory Network (AUMN)
for weakly supervised temporal action localization, which
can mitigate the above two challenges by learning an action unit memory bank. In the proposed AUMN, two attention modules are designed to update the memory bank
adaptively and learn action units specific classifiers. Furthermore, three effective mechanisms (diversity, homogeneity and sparsity) are designed to guide the updating of the
memory network. To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first work to explicitly model the action units with a memory network. Extensive experimental results on two standard benchmarks (THUMOS14 and ActivityNet) demonstrate that our AUMN performs favorably against stateof-the-art methods. Specifically, the average mAP of IoU
thresholds from 0.1 to 0.5 on the THUMOS14 dataset is significantly improved from 47.0% to 52.1%.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization (TAL) is an important yet
challenging task for video understanding. Its goal is to
localize temporal boundaries of actions with specific categories in untrimmed videos [13, 7]. Because of its
broad applications in high-level tasks such as video surveillance [40], video summarization [17], and event detection [15], TAL has recently drawn increasing attentions
from the community. Up to now, deep learning based methods have made impressive progresses in this area. However, most of them handle this task in a fully supervised
way, requiring massive temporal boundary annotations for
actions [24, 51, 5, 42, 36]. Such manual annotations are ex∗ Corresponding Author

Figure 1. (a) Illustration of “Sharing Units” characteristic. The
running (red box) is a shared action unit among high-jump, longjump and cricket-bowling. (b) Illustration of “Sparsity” characteristic. An action usually occupies a small portion of untrimmed
videos. (c) Illustration of “Smoothness” characteristic. CAS1 is
more suitable for the action localization task because the CAS2
tends to divide a continuous action into multiple instances.

pensive to obtain, which limits the development potential of
fully-supervised methods in real-world scenarios.
To relieve this problem, the weakly supervised setting that only requires video-level category labels is proposed [37, 55, 39, 37, 55, 53, 29, 30, 45, 46]. It can
be formulated as a multiple instance learning problem,
where a video is treated as a bag of multiple segments
and fed into a video-level classifier to get a class activation sequence (CAS). There are two primary challenges,
named localization completeness and background interference. To solve the first challenge, previous works usually
adopt a well-designed erasing strategy [37, 55, 53] or a

9969

