Generalizable Person Re-identification with Relevance-aware Mixture of Experts
Yongxing Dai1

Xiaotong Li1

Jun Liu2

Zekun Tong3

Ling-Yu Duan1,4 *

1

National Engineering Lab for Video Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
2
Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
3
National University of Singapore, Singapore 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{yongxingdai, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn, lixiaotong@stu.pku.edu.cn
jun liu@sutd.edu.sg, zekuntong@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Domain generalizable (DG) person re-identification
(ReID) is a challenging problem because we cannot access any unseen target domain data during training. Almost
all the existing DG ReID methods follow the same pipeline
where they use a hybrid dataset from multiple source domains for training, and then directly apply the trained
model to the unseen target domains for testing. These methods often neglect individual source domains’ discriminative
characteristics and their relevances w.r.t. the unseen target
domains, though both of which can be leveraged to help the
model’s generalization. To handle the above two issues, we
propose a novel method called the relevance-aware mixture
of experts (RaMoE), using an effective voting-based mixture mechanism to dynamically leverage source domains’
diverse characteristics to improve the model’s generalization. Specifically, we propose a decorrelation loss to make
the source domain networks (experts) keep the diversity and
discriminability of individual domains’ characteristics. Besides, we design a voting network to adaptively integrate
all the experts’ features into the more generalizable aggregated features with domain relevance. Considering the
target domains’ invisibility during training, we propose a
novel learning-to-learn algorithm combined with our relation alignment loss to update the voting network. Extensive
experiments demonstrate that our proposed RaMoE outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
In recent years, the research on person re-identification
(ReID) has been appealing to academia and industry. The
goal of ReID is to identify a person across different camera
views. Many works on fully supervised ReID [48, 27, 8]
have achieved quite promising performances when train* Corresponding Author.

Figure 1. Differences between our method and the conventional
DG ReID pipeline. (a) Conventional DG ReID methods generally train a single model on the hybrid dataset from multi-source
domains and then apply the trained model to the unseen target
domain for testing, which neglects individual domains’ discriminative characteristics and target domain’s relevance w.r.t. source
domains. (b) Our method leverages the complementary information provided by all the source domain networks (also termed as
“domain experts”). In testing, we integrate features obtained by
source domain experts into an adaptive voting process based on
the unseen target domain’s relevance w.r.t. source domains.

ing and testing under the same domain (dataset). However,
when applying these well-trained ReID models to other domains, the performance often drops significantly because
of the domain biases [52]. To tackle this problem, some
researchers have studied unsupervised domain adaptation
(UDA) methods [65, 15, 57, 16, 6, 10], which utilize the unlabeled target data to finetune and adapt the source-trained
model to the target domain. However, existing UDA ReID
methods are often not powerful enough to deal with practical application scenarios, because it is sometimes hard to
collect target domain training data and time-consuming to
finetune the model on these unlabeled samples. As a result,
domain generalizable (DG) ReID [45, 29, 30] has been appealing to researchers recently. Generally, DG ReID methods utilize labeled data from multiple source domains to
learn a generalizable model for new unseen target domains,

16145

