Quasi-Dense Similarity Learning for Multiple Object Tracking
Jiangmiao Pang1
1

Linlu Qiu2

Xia Li3

Haofeng Chen4

Qi Li1

Zhejiang University 2 Georgia Institute of Technology
4
Stanford University 5 UC Berkeley

Trevor Darrell5
3

ETH Zürich

Abstract
Similarity learning has been recognized as a crucial step
for object tracking. However, existing multiple object tracking methods only use sparse ground truth matching as the
training objective, while ignoring the majority of the informative regions on the images. In this paper, we present
Quasi-Dense Similarity Learning, which densely samples
hundreds of region proposals on a pair of images for contrastive learning. We can directly combine this similarity
learning with existing detection methods to build QuasiDense Tracking (QDTrack) without turning to displacement
regression or motion priors. We also find that the resulting
distinctive feature space admits a simple nearest neighbor
search at the inference time. Despite its simplicity, QDTrack outperforms all existing methods on MOT, BDD100K,
Waymo, and TAO tracking benchmarks. It achieves 68.7
MOTA at 20.3 FPS on MOT17 without using external training data. Compared to methods with similar detectors,
it boosts almost 10 points of MOTA and significantly decreases the number of ID switches on BDD100K and Waymo
datasets. Our code and trained models are available at
https://github.com/SysCV/qdtrack.

1. Introduction
Multiple Object Tracking (MOT) is a fundamental and
challenging problem in computer vision, widely used in
safety monitoring, autonomous driving, video analytics, and
other applications. Contemporary MOT methods [2,4,44,45,
54] mainly follow the tracking-by-detection paradigm [36].
That is, they detect objects on each frame and then associate
them according to the estimated instance similarity. Recent
works [2, 4, 5, 54] show that if the detected objects are accurate, the spatial proximity between objects in consecutive
frames, measured by Interaction of Unions (IoUs) or center
distances, is a strong prior to associate the objects. However,
this location heuristic only works well in simple scenarios.
If the objects are occluded or the scenes are crowded, this

Fisher Yu3

Det
Det / Sparse
GT
ID cls

(a) Separate sparse ID classification

(c) Joint sparse triplet loss

Sparse
ID cls

(b) Joint sparse ID classification

Det

Det

Sparse
Triple

Quasidense

Sparse
Triplet

Quasidense

Det

Det

(d) Joint quasi-dense matching

Figure 1: (a) Traditional ReID model that decouples with
detector and learns with sparse ID loss; (b) joint learning
ReID model with sparse ID loss; (c) joint learning ReID
model with sparse triplet loss; (d) our quasi-dense similarity
learning.

location heuristic can easily lead to mistakes. To remedy this
problem, some methods introduce motion estimation [7, 30]
or displacement regression [10, 35, 54] to ensure accurate
distance estimation.
However, object appearance similarity usually takes a
secondary role [26, 45] to strengthen object association or reidentify vanished objects. The search region is constrained
to be local neighborhoods to avoid distractions because the
appearance features can not effectively distinguish different objects. On the contrary, humans can easily associate
the identical objects only through appearance. We conjecture this is because the image and object information is not
fully utilized for learning object similarity. As shown in Figure 1, previous methods regard instance similarity learning
as a post hoc stage after object detection or only use sparse
ground truth bounding boxes as training samples [45]. These
processes ignore the majority of the regions proposed on
the images. Because objects in an image are rarely iden-

164

