PU-GCN: Point Cloud Upsampling using Graph Convolutional Networks
Guocheng Qian*

Abdulellah Abualshour*
Guohao Li
Ali Thabet
Bernard Ghanem
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST)

{guocheng.qian, abdulellah.abualshour, guohao.li, ali.thabet,bernard.ghanem} @kaust.edu.sa

Abstract
The effectiveness of learning-based point cloud upsampling
pipelines heavily relies on the upsampling modules and
feature extractors used therein. For the point upsampling
module, we propose a novel model called NodeShuffle,
which uses a Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) to better
encode local point information from point neighborhoods.
NodeShuffle is versatile and can be incorporated into any
point cloud upsampling pipeline. Extensive experiments
show how NodeShuffle consistently improves state-of-theart upsampling methods. For feature extraction, we also
propose a new multi-scale point feature extractor, called
Inception DenseGCN. By aggregating features at multiple
scales, this feature extractor enables further performance
gain in the final upsampled point clouds. We combine
Inception DenseGCN with NodeShuffle into a new point
upsampling pipeline called PU-GCN. PU-GCN sets new
state-of-art performance with much fewer parameters and
more efficient inference. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/guochengqian/PU-GCN .

1. Introduction
Point clouds are a popular way to represent 3D data. This
increasing popularity stems from the increased availability
of 3D sensors like LiDAR. Such sensors are now a critical
part of important applications in robotics and self-driving
cars. However, due to hardware and computational constraints, these 3D sensors often produce sparse and noisy
point clouds, which show evident limitations especially for
small objects or those far away from the camera. Therefore,
point cloud upsampling, the task of converting sparse, incomplete, and noisy point clouds into dense, complete, and
clean ones, is attracting much attention.
Following the success in image super-resolution [4, 18,
13, 24], deep learning methods now achieve state-of-the-art
results in point cloud upsampling [39, 40, 38, 17]. Most
* Guocheng and Abdulellah contributed equally to this work.

Duplicatebased

NodeShuffle

NS+Inception

Ground
Truth

3PU (Original)

3PU (NodeShuffle)

PU-GCN (ours)

Ground Truth

Figure 1: Effectiveness of proposed NodeShuffle and Inception DenseGCN. We propose a Graph Convolutional
Network (GCN) based upsampling module NodeShuffle and
a multi-scale feature extractor Inception DenseGCN. Integrating NodeShuffle into the 3PU [38] upsampling pipeline
allows for better upsampling and better structure preservation capability. We propose PU-GCN that combines both
Inception DenseGCN and NodeShuffle (NS) upsampling
modules. In PU-GCN, Inception DenseGCN can further
improve upsampling quality and generate fine-grained details (e.g. the neck and ball shape of the faucet). The original 3PU uses duplicate-based upsampling.

deep upsampling pipelines comprise two major components: feature extraction and point upsampling. The performance of the point upsampling component tends to define the effectiveness of the final network. Current methods
use either multi-branch MLPs (PU-Net [40]) or a duplicatebased approach (3PU [38] and PU-GAN [17]) to upsample
3D points. Multi-branch MLPs operate on each point separately, ignoring any neighborhood information, while duplicate upsampling methods tend to generate point patches
similar to the input point clouds. Although the feature extraction modules used in their networks can encode the locality, these shortcomings of the upsampling modules still
lead to upsampled point clouds that lack local detail (see

11683

