Transformation Driven Visual Reasoning
Xin Hong1,2 Yanyan Lan3, * Liang Pang1,2 Jiafeng Guo1,2 Xueqi Cheng1,2
1
CAS Key Laboratory of Network Data Science and Technology,
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Institute for AI Industry Research, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{hongxin19b, pangliang, guojiafeng, cxq}@ict.ac.cn

lanyanyan@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

View
Initial State S

This paper defines a new visual reasoning paradigm by
introducing an important factor, i.e. transformation. The
motivation comes from the fact that most existing visual reasoning tasks, such as CLEVR in VQA, are solely defined
to test how well the machine understands the concepts and
relations within static settings, like one image. We argue
that this kind of state driven visual reasoning approach
has limitations in reflecting whether the machine has the
ability to infer the dynamics between different states, which
has been shown as important as state-level reasoning for
human cognition in Piaget’s theory. To tackle this problem, we propose a novel transformation driven visual reasoning task. Given both the initial and final states, the
target is to infer the corresponding single-step or multistep transformation, represented as a triplet (object, attribute, value) or a sequence of triplets, respectively. Following this definition, a new dataset namely TRANCE is
constructed on the basis of CLEVR, including three levels of settings, i.e. Basic (single-step transformation), Event
(multi-step transformation), and View (multi-step transformation with variant views). Experimental results show that
the state-of-the-art visual reasoning models perform well
on Basic, but are still far from human-level intelligence on
Event and View. We believe the proposed new paradigm
will boost the development of machine visual reasoning.
More advanced methods and real data need to be investigated in this direction. The resource of TVR is available at
https://hongxin2019.github.io/TVR.

1. Introduction
Visual reasoning is the process of solving problems on
the basis of analyzing the visual information, which goes
well beyond object recognition [11, 20, 30, 31]. Though
* Corresponding author.

LCR

Event
Basic

Final State S’

?T

?T

?T

Figure 1. Illustration of three settings in TRANCE. Basic: Find
the single-step transformation between the initial and final state.
Event: Find the multi-step transformation between two states.
View: Similar to Event but the view angle of the final state is
randomly chosen from Left, Center (Default), and Right.

the task is easy for the human, it is tremendously difficult
for vision systems, because it usually requires higher-order
cognition and reasoning about the world. In recent years,
several visual reasoning tasks have been proposed and attract a lot of attention in the community of computer vision, machine learning, and artificial intelligence. For example, the most representative visual question answering
(VQA) tasks, such as CLEVR [18], define a question answering paradigm to test whether machines have spatial,
relational, and other reasoning abilities for a given image.
Visual entailment tasks such as NLVR [32, 33] ask models
to determine whether a sentence is true about the states of
two images. Visual commonsense reasoning tasks, such as
VCR [42], further require the model to provide a rationale
explaining why its answer is right.
We can see that these visual reasoning tasks are all defined at state level. For example, the language descriptions
in NLVR as well as the questions and answers in VQA
and VCR are just related to the concepts or relations within
states, i.e. an image, or two images. We argue that this kind
of state driven visual reasoning fails to test the ability of
reasoning dynamics between different states. Take two images as an example. In the first image, there is a cat on a

6903

