Few-shot 3D Point Cloud Semantic Segmentation
Na Zhao Tat-Seng Chua Gim Hee Lee
Department of Computer Science, National University of Singapore
{nazhao, chuats, gimhee.lee}@comp.nus.edu.sg

Abstract

1. Introduction
Point cloud semantic segmentation is a fundamental computer vision problem, which aims to estimate the category
of each point in the 3D point cloud representation of a scene.
The outcome of 3D semantic segmentation can benefit various real-world applications, including autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented/virtual reality. However, point
cloud semantic segmentation is a challenging task due to the
unstructured and unordered characteristics of point clouds.
Recently, a number of fully supervised 3D semantic segmentation approaches [7, 8, 10, 11, 17, 24, 28, 31] have
been proposed and have achieved promising performance
on several benchmark datasets [1, 2]. Nonetheless, their
success relies heavily on the availability of large amounts of
labeled training data that are time-consuming and expensive
to collect. Moreover, these approaches follow the closed set

table

Support set

Many existing approaches for 3D point cloud semantic
segmentation are fully supervised. These fully supervised
approaches heavily rely on large amounts of labeled training data that are difficult to obtain and cannot segment new
classes after training. To mitigate these limitations, we propose a novel attention-aware multi-prototype transductive
few-shot point cloud semantic segmentation method to segment new classes given a few labeled examples. Specifically,
each class is represented by multiple prototypes to model the
complex data distribution of labeled points. Subsequently,
we employ a transductive label propagation method to exploit the affinities between labeled multi-prototypes and unlabeled points, and among the unlabeled points. Furthermore,
we design an attention-aware multi-level feature learning
network to learn the discriminative features that capture
the geometric dependencies and semantic correlations between points. Our proposed method shows significant and
consistent improvements compared to baselines in different few-shot point cloud semantic segmentation settings (i.e.
2/3-way 1/5-shot) on two benchmark datasets. Our code is
available at https://github.com/Na-Z/attMPTI.

chair

Few-shot
Segmentor

Query point cloud

Segmentation result

Figure 1. Few-shot point cloud semantic segmentation task is to
learn a segmentor that segments the query point cloud in terms of
new classes with learned knowledge from the support examples.
This figure illustrates an example with 2-way 1-shot setting.

assumption which states that the training and testing data
are drawn from the same label space. However, the closed
set assumption is not strictly adhered to the dynamic real
world, where new classes can easily occur after training. As
a result, these fully supervised approaches suffer from poor
generalization to new classes with only few examples.
Although several existing works used self-[26], weakly[6, 27] and semi-supervised [14] learning to mitigate the
data hungry bottleneck in fully supervised 3D semantic segmentation, these approaches are still under the closed set
assumption, where the generalization ability to new classes
is overlooked. The increasingly popular few-shot learning
is a promising direction that allows the model to generalize
to new classes with only a few examples. In few-shot point
cloud segmentation, our goal is to train a model to segment
new classes given a few labeled point clouds, as illustrated in
Figure 1. We adopt the commonly used meta-learning strategy, i.e. episodic training [22], that learns over a distribution
of similar few-shot tasks instead of only one target segmentation task. Each few-shot task consists of a few labeled
samples (support set) and unlabeled samples (query set), and
the model segments the query with learned knowledge from
the support. Due to the consistency between the training fewshot task and the testing task, the model is endowed with
better generalization ability that makes it less susceptible

8873

