Learning View Selection for 3D Scenes
Yifan Sun1,2 Qixing Huang1 Dun-Yu Hsiao2 Li Guan2 Gang Hua2
1 The University of Texas at Austin
2 Wormpex AI Research
{yifan,huangqx}@cs.utexas.edu

{dunyu.hsiao, li.guan}@bianlifeng.com

Modeling

ganghua@gmail.com

Neural Network
Optimization

Real1:Scenes
Setthat
Areas
of interest
+ Camera camera
Pose Initialization
camera
Figure
We present a method
optimizes
max-coverage
placement based on learning.Max-coverage
Given the real
sceneplacement
model
with the areas of interest (marked as black blocks) that require to be covered by a set of cameras, we learn a continuous scoring
function and apply continuous optimization on camera poses to improve the global coverage score. In this figure, the red area
in the top view of a scene indicates that the coverage increases after optimization.

Abstract
Efficient 3D space sampling to represent an underlying
3D object/scene is essential for 3D vision, robotics, and beyond. A standard approach is to explicitly sample a dense
collection of views and formulate it as a view selection problem, or, more generally, a set cover problem. In this paper,
we introduce a novel approach that avoids dense view sampling. The key idea is to learn a view prediction network
and a trainable aggregation module that takes the predicted
views as input and outputs an approximation of their generic
scores (e.g., surface coverage, viewing angle from surface
normals). This methodology allows us to turn the set cover
problem (or multi-view representation optimization) into a
continuous optimization problem. We then explain how to
effectively solve the induced optimization problem using continuation, i.e., aggregating a hierarchy of smoothed scoring
modules. Experimental results show that our approach arrives at similar or better solutions with about 10 x speed up
in running time, comparing with the standard methods.

1. Introduction
Computing the multi-view representation of an underlying 3D object/scene is a fundamental problem in 3D vision
and beyond. The desired output shall use a small set of
views to maximize a pre-defined scoring function that involves objectives such as coverage of the underlying scene
and viewing constraints among salient regions. A standard
approach is first to densely sample a set of views and then

formulate a generalized set cover problem, e.g., by optimally
selecting a subset of views to maximize the scoring function.
However, this approach usually incurs significant computational overheads due to the cost of rendering and solving the
induced optimization problem.
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach that avoids
explicitly sampling a dense set of views. Our approach is
motivated by training view prediction networks that take
a small collection of views as input and outputs predicted
views that correspond to other camera poses. Specifically,
our approach approximates the scoring function using a neural network that combines a view prediction network and a
scoring module.
The view prediction takes a 3D model and a camera pose
as input and outputs a concise representation under that view.
The scoring module then takes the view predictions under
multiple camera poses as input and outputs an approximation
of the pre-defined score. The entire network is trained end-toend. This approach allows us to turn the difficult multi-view
representation optimization problem into a simple continuous optimization problem. In particular, our approach avoids
explicitly sampling rendered images (See Figure 1).
Our approach is motivated by the fact that although a
rendered image may contain rich geometric details of the
underlying scene, the visibility pattern, which affects the
coverage problem’s results, has low-dimensional structures.
A 3D scene usually consists of primitive geometric shapes,
and contours of shapes (e.g., sharp edges of box-shape objects) mostly capture the visibility patterns. Recent advances
in representations of 3D models and neural network models
make it possible to learn representations of visibility patterns
114464

