POSEFusion: Pose-guided Selective Fusion for
Single-view Human Volumetric Capture

1

Zhe Li1 , Tao Yu1 , Zerong Zheng1 , Kaiwen Guo2 , Yebin Liu1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China 2 Google, Switzerland

Abstract
We propose POse-guided SElective Fusion (POSEFusion), a single-view human volumetric capture method that
leverages tracking-based methods and tracking-free inference to achieve high-fidelity and dynamic 3D reconstruction. By contributing a novel reconstruction framework
which contains pose-guided keyframe selection and robust
implicit surface fusion, our method fully utilizes the advantages of both tracking-based methods and tracking-free inference methods, and finally enables the high-fidelity reconstruction of dynamic surface details even in the invisible regions. We formulate the keyframe selection as a dynamic
programming problem to guarantee the temporal continuity
of the reconstructed sequence. Moreover, the novel robust
implicit surface fusion involves an adaptive blending weight
to preserve high-fidelity surface details and an automatic
collision handling method to deal with the potential selfcollisions. Overall, our method enables high-fidelity and
dynamic capture in both visible and invisible regions from a
single RGBD camera, and the results and experiments show
that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Human volumetric capture, due to their potential value in
holographic communication, online education, games and
the movie industry has been a popular topic in computer
vision and graphics for decades. Multi-view camera array
methods [4, 11, 28, 5, 29, 49, 32, 9, 37, 21] can achieve
high-fidelity human volumetric capture using multiple RGB
or depth sensors but suffer from sophisticated equipment or
run-time inefficiency, which limits their application deployment. In contrast, single-view human volumetric capture
[23, 59, 12, 34, 52, 14, 38, 39, 15, 25, 44] has attracted
more and more attention for its convenient setup.
Current methods for single-view human volumetric capture can be roughly classified into two categories: trackingbased methods and tracking-free ones. Tracking-based
methods utilize a pre-scanned template [23, 12, 14, 15]
or continuously fused mesh [34, 52, 44] as the reference
model, and solve or infer the deformation of the reference

Figure 1. High-fidelity and dynamic results reconstructed using
our method.

model parameterized by embedded skeletons [50, 3, 47],
node graph [23, 34], parametric body models (e.g., SMPL
[30]) [57], or a combination of them [51, 52, 14, 15]. In
these tracking-based methods, previous observations are integrated into the current frame after calculating the deformations across frames, thus plausible geometric details are
preserved in the invisible regions. In addition, the reconstructed models are temporally continuous thanks to the
frame-by-frame tracking. However, none of their deformation representations, neither skeletons nor node graph,
is able to describe topological changes or track extremely
large non-rigid deformations (Fig. 7(c)), which is an inherent drawback of the tracking-based methods.
On the other end of the spectrum, tracking-free methods [46, 33, 10, 42, 58, 1, 56, 38] mainly focus on geometric and/or texture recovery from a single RGB(D) image.
By learning from a large amount of 3D human data, these
methods demonstrate promising human reconstruction with
high-fidelity details in visible regions and plausible shape in
invisible areas [38, 39]. As the reconstruction for the current
frame is independent from the previous frames, these methods can easily handle topological changes. However, their
results may deteriorate in the cases of challenging human
poses and/or severe self-occlusions. Besides, the reconstructions in the invisible regions are usually oversmoothed
for the lack of observations (Fig. 7(d)). What’s worse,
tracking-free methods are incapable of generating temporally continuous results when applied on video inputs.
By reviewing the advantages and the drawbacks of these
two types of methods, it is easy to notice that tracking-based
methods and tracking-free inference are naturally complementary as shown in Tab. 1. A straightforward way is to

14162

