Efficient Regional Memory Network for Video Object Segmentation

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) is a task of estimating
the segmentation masks of class-agnostic objects in a video.
Typically, it can be grouped into two categories: unsupervised VOS and semi-supervised VOS. The former does not
resort to any manual annotation and interaction, while the
latter needs the masks of the target objects in the first frame.
In this paper, we focus on the latter. Even the object masks
in the first frame are provided, semi-supervised VOS is still
challenging due to object deformation, occlusion, appearance variation, and similar objects confusion.
With the recent advances in deep learning, there has
been tremendous progress in semi-supervised VOS. Early
methods [10, 18, 24] propagate object masks from previ-

22

39

52

10

22

39

52

10

22

39

52

10

22

39

52

10

22

39

52

EGMN

STM

10

CFBI

Recently, several Space-Time Memory based networks
have shown that the object cues (e.g. video frames as well
as the segmented object masks) from the past frames are
useful for segmenting objects in the current frame. However, these methods exploit the information from the memory by global-to-global matching between the current and
past frames, which lead to mismatching to similar objects
and high computational complexity. To address these problems, we propose a novel local-to-local matching solution
for semi-supervised VOS, namely Regional Memory Network (RMNet). In RMNet, the precise regional memory is
constructed by memorizing local regions where the target
objects appear in the past frames. For the current query
frame, the query regions are tracked and predicted based
on the optical flow estimated from the previous frame. The
proposed local-to-local matching effectively alleviates the
ambiguity of similar objects in both memory and query
frames, which allows the information to be passed from the
regional memory to the query region efficiently and effectively. Experimental results indicate that the proposed RMNet performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods on
the DAVIS and YouTube-VOS datasets.

RMNet

Abstract

PReMVOS

Haozhe Xie1,2 Hongxun Yao1 Shangchen Zhou3 Shengping Zhang1,4 Wenxiu Sun2,5
1
Harbin Institute of Technology 2 SenseTime Research and Tetras.AI
3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory 5 Shanghai AI Laboratory
https://haozhexie.com/project/rmnet

Figure 1. A representative example of video object segmentation
on the DAVIS 2017 dataset. Compared to existing methods rely
on optical flows (e.g. PReMVOS [18]) and global feature matching (e.g. STM [22], EGMN [17], and CFBI [41]), the proposed
RMNet is more robust in segmenting similar objects.

ous frames using optical flow and then refine the masks
with a fully convolutional network. However, mask propagation usually causes error accumulation, especially when
target objects are lost due to occlusions and drifting. Recently, matching-based methods [4, 17, 22, 28, 32, 41]
have attracted increasing attention as a promising solution
to semi-supervised VOS. The basic idea of these methods
is to perform global-to-global matching to find the correspondence of target objects between the current and past
frames. Among them, the Space-Time Memory (STM)
based approaches [17, 22, 28] exploit the past frames saved
in the memory to better handle object occlusion and drifting. However, these methods memorize and match features
in the regions without target objects, which lead to mismatching to similar objects and high computational complexity. As shown in Figure 1, they are less effective to track
and distinguish the target objects with similar appearance.
The mismatching in the global-to-global matching can
be divided into two categories, as illustrated in Figure 2. (i)
The target object in the current frame matches to the wrong
object in the past frame (solid red line). (ii) The target ob-

1286

