Learning to Segment Rigid Motions from Two Frames
⇤

Gengshan Yang1 , Deva Ramanan1,2
1
Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Argo AI
{gengshay, deva}@cs.cmu.edu

L: Optical flow

R: Reference frame

(c) Our rigid motion masks

(a) PointRend (trained on MSCOCO)

(b) Geometric (black: rigid background)

(d) Our rigid motion (projected to 2D)

(e) Our two-frame reconstruction

Figure 1: (a) Many data-driven segmentation methods heavily rely on appearance cues, and fail for novel test scenes. For instance,

PointRend [25] trained on MSCOCO fails to detect coral reef fishes even with a low confidence threshold of 0.1. (b) On the other
hand, geometric motion segmentation [5, 58] generalizes to novel appearance, but fails due to noisy flow inputs and degenerate motion
configurations. (c)-(e) We propose a neural architecture powered by geometric reasoning that decomposes a scene into a rigid background
and multiple moving rigid bodies, parameterized by 3D rigid transformations. It demonstrates generalization ability to novel scenes and
robustness to noisy inputs as well as motion degeneracies. The inferred rigid motions significantly improve depth and scene flow accuracy.

Abstract
Appearance-based detectors achieve remarkable performance on common scenes, benefiting from high-capacity
models and massive annotated data, but tend to fail for
scenarios that lack training data. Geometric motion segmentation algorithms, however, generalize to novel scenes, but
have yet to achieve comparable performance to appearancebased ones, due to noisy motion estimations and degenerate
motion configurations. To combine the best of both worlds,
we propose a modular network, whose architecture is motivated by a geometric analysis of what independent object
motions can be recovered from an egomotion field. It takes
two consecutive frames as input and predicts segmentation
masks for the background and multiple rigidly moving objects, which are then parameterized by 3D rigid transforma⇤ Code is available at github.com/gengshan-y/rigidmask.

tions. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance for
rigid motion segmentation on KITTI and Sintel. The inferred
rigid motions lead to a significant improvement for depth
and scene flow estimation.

1. Introduction
Autonomous agents such as self-driving cars need to be
able to navigate safely in dynamic environments. Static environments are far easier to process because one can make
use of geometric constraints (SFM/SLAM) to infer scene
structure [15]. Dynamic environments require the fundamental ability to both segment moving obstacles and estimate
their depth and speed [2]. Popular solutions include object
detection or semantic segmentation [27]. While one can
build accurate detectors for many categories of objects that
are able to move, “being able to move” is not equivalent to

1266

