Unsupervised Object Detection with LiDAR Clues
Hao Tian1∗ , Yuntao Chen2,3 * † , Jifeng Dai1 , Zhaoxiang Zhang2,3,4 , Xizhou Zhu1
1
SenseTime Research 2 University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
{zhuwalter,tianhao2,daijifeng}@sensetime.com
{chenyuntao2016,zhaoxiang.zhang}@ia.ac.cn
Abstract
Despite the importance of unsupervised object detection,
to the best of our knowledge, there is no previous work
addressing this problem. One main issue, widely known
to the community, is that object boundaries derived only
from 2D image appearance are ambiguous and unreliable.
To address this, we exploit LiDAR clues to aid unsupervised object detection. By exploiting the 3D scene structure, the issue of localization can be considerably mitigated.
We further identify another major issue, seldom noticed by
the community, that the long-tailed and open-ended (sub)category distribution should be accommodated. In this
paper, we present the first practical method for unsupervised object detection with the aid of LiDAR clues. In our
approach, candidate object segments based on 3D point
clouds are firstly generated. Then, an iterative segment labeling process is conducted to assign segment labels and
to train a segment labeling network, which is based on features from both 2D images and 3D point clouds. The labeling process is carefully designed so as to mitigate the
issue of long-tailed and open-ended distribution. The final segment labels are set as pseudo annotations for object
detection network training. Extensive experiments on the
large-scale Waymo Open dataset suggest that the derived
unsupervised object detection method achieves reasonable
accuracy compared with that of strong supervision within
the LiDAR visible range.

1. Introduction
Unsupervised object detection requires localization and
classification of object instances without manual annotations in 2D images. Due to the importance of the problem, various relevant tasks have been studied. For example, some weakly-supervised object detection methods [18,
22, 5, 43, 74] seek to detect objects with image-level anno* Equal contribution. † This work is done when Hao Tian and Yuntao
Chen are interns at SenseTime Research.

3D point clouds

2D images

project

2D images with boxes

Iterative Segment Labeling

Candidate
Object
Segments {𝝇𝝇𝒊𝒊 }

3D candidate segments

Randomly Jittering
Foreground
Segments

k-means
initialization only

Segment
Labels {𝒚𝒚𝒊𝒊 }

Relabeling Segments
𝑬𝑬𝑬𝑬. (𝟐𝟐)

supervision

Training Segment
Labeling Network
𝑬𝑬𝑬𝑬. (𝟑𝟑)

Object Detector Training

Figure 1: Illustration of the proposed approach.
tations only, while some semi-supervised object detection
methods [62, 41, 73] are trained on both bounding box annotated data and additional massive unlabeled images. Unsupervised object proposal generation [12, 25, 77, 67, 1]
has also been widely studied. However, to the best of our
knowledge, there is no previous work addressing the unsupervised object detection problem.
Recently, considerable progress has been made in unsupervised feature learning [55]. The networks with the
unsupervised learned features achieve accuracies on par
with those of strong supervision when fine-tuned on downstream tasks. In this trend, some cluster discrimination
based methods [85, 42, 35, 9, 91, 13, 79] have tried to address the unsupervised image classification problem. Competitive results compared with semi-supervised learning on
ImageNet [21] are obtained in [79]. However, there is still a
significant gap between unsupervised classification and unsupervised object detection, which involves both localizing
and classifying multiple object instances in images.
One widely-known issue for unsupervised object detec-

5962

