Representation Learning via Global Temporal Alignment and Cycle-Consistency
Isma Hadji, Konstantinos G. Derpanis, Allan D. Jepson
Samsung AI Centre Toronto
{isma.hadji, allan.jepson}@samsung.com

k.derpanis@partner.samsung.com

Abstract
We introduce a weakly supervised method for representation learning based on aligning temporal sequences (e.g.,
videos) of the same process (e.g., human action). The main
idea is to use the global temporal ordering of latent correspondences across sequence pairs as a supervisory signal. In particular, we propose a loss based on scoring
the optimal sequence alignment to train an embedding network. Our loss is based on a novel probabilistic path finding view of dynamic time warping (DTW) that contains the
following three key features: (i) the local path routing decisions are contrastive and differentiable, (ii) pairwise distances are cast as probabilities that are contrastive as well,
and (iii) our formulation naturally admits a global cycleconsistency loss that verifies correspondences. For evaluation, we consider the tasks of fine-grained action classification, few shot learning, and video synchronization. We report significant performance increases over previous methods. In addition, we report two applications of our temporal
alignment framework, namely 3D pose reconstruction and
fine-grained audio/visual retrieval.

1. Introduction
Temporal sequences (e.g., videos) are an appealing data
source as they provide a rich source of information and additional constraints to leverage in learning. By far the main
focus on temporal sequence analysis has been on learning representations targeting distinctions at the global signal level, e.g., action classification, where abundant labeled
data is available for training. In this paper, we target a
weakly-supervised training regime for representation learning, capable of making fine-grained temporal distinctions.
Most previous approaches to temporally fine-grained understanding of sequential signals have considered fullysupervised training methods (e.g., [56]), where labels are
provided at the sub-sequence level, e.g., frames. The major drawback of these methods is the expense in acquiring
dense labels, and their subjective nature. In contrast, a key
consideration in our work is the selection of training signals

embedding space

video 1
video 2

Figure 1. We introduce a representation learning approach based
on (globally) aligning pairs of temporal sequences (e.g., video) depicting the same process (e.g., human action). Our training objective is to learn an element-wise embedding function that supports
the alignment process. For example, here we illustrate the alignment (denoted by black dashed lines) in the embedding space between videos of the same human action (i.e., tennis forehand) containing significant variations in their appearances and dynamics.
Empirically, we show that our learned embeddings are sensitive
to both human pose and fine-grained temporal distinctions, while
being invariant to appearance, camera viewpoint, and background.

capable of scaling up to large amounts of data yet supporting finer-grained video understanding.
As outlined in Fig. 1, given a set of paired sequences
capturing the same process (e.g., tennis forehand) but highly
varied (i.e., different participants, action executions, scenes,
and camera viewpoints), our method trains an embedding
network to support the recovery of their latent temporal
alignment. We refer to our method as weakly supervised,
as only readily available sequence-level labels (e.g., tennis
forehand) are required to construct training pairings containing the same process. Given such a pair of sequences,
we use their latent temporal alignment as a supervisory signal to learn fine-grained temporal distinctions.
Key to our proposed method is a novel dynamic time
warping (DTW) formulation to score global alignments between paired sequences. DTW enforces a stronger constraint over simply considering local (soft) nearest neighbour correspondences [15], since the temporal ordering of
the matches in the sequences are taken into account. We depart from previous differentiable DTW methods [30, 8, 6]

11068

