Learning-based Image Registration with Meta-Regularization
Ebrahim Al Safadi1,2 , Xubo Song1
1
Oregon Health & Science University 2 Amazon
{alsafadi,songx}@ohsu.edu

Abstract
We introduce a meta-regularization framework for
learning-based image registration. Current learning-based
image registration methods use high-resolution architectures such as U-Nets to produce spatial transformations,
and impose simple and explicit regularization on the output
of the network to ensure that the estimated displacements
are smooth. While this approach works well on small deformations, it has been known to struggle when the deformations are large. Our method uses a more advanced form
of meta-regularization to increase the generalization ability
of learned registration models. We motivate our approach
based on Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space (RKHS) theory,
and approximate that framework via a meta-regularization
convolutional layer with radially symmetric, positive semidefinite filters that inherent its regularization properties. We
then provide a method to learn such regularization filters
while also learning to register. Our experiments on synthetic and real datasets as well as ablation analysis show
that our method can improve anatomical correspondence
compared to competing methods, and reduce the percentage
of folding and tear in the large deformation setting, reflecting better regularization and model generalization.

1. Introduction
Deformable image registration is the process of transforming images to be in anatomical correspondence with
one another. It is a critical step in many applications in
medical imaging including segmentation, diagnosis, and
computational anatomy. In the traditional approach to image registration, the transformation is obtained by solving
an optimization problem over a space of transformations
based on image similarity [1]. This optimization problem
is solved for a specific pair, and no generalization is obtained throughout this process. This demands repeating the
optimization process for any new pair of images which is
inefficient and time-consuming.
Recent advances in deep learning have enabled a
paradigm shift in the field. With the introduction of differ-

entiable Spatial Transformer layers [2] and the development
of advanced architectures such as U-Nets [3] and Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs) [4], a new level of abstraction
has become achievable. Instead of optimizing for every input image pair, a deep model can be trained to learn how to
register in an end-to-end fashion [5]. Once a model is obtained, it can be used to infer dense spatial transformations
between new pairs in a single forward pass which is much
faster than running an optimizer.
As variations in anatomical structures are usually local
and non-rigid, the registration we seek is deformable, and
the transformation model must have many degrees of freedom to capture the local changes with high resolution [6].
Therefore, one of the most challenging parts of the registration process is ensuring that the estimated spatial transformation between images is smooth and realistic, and that
the high degrees of freedom don’t result in overfitting. Furthermore, the choice of the regularization function has fundamental consequences on the class of transformations that
the model can produce, and is therefore key to building a
successful model. Most learning-based registration methods impose an explicit and generic regularization loss on
the output of the registration function, which is usually a
penalty on the first order derivative of the displacement field
[7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. We find this approach to be too limited, as it presumes the same simple smoothness properties
regardless of image content and permissible deformations,
which is not realistic. For example, some transformation
models must preserve discontinuities in the case of sliding
organs, but would not accurately apply elsewhere [13].
Furthermore, many state of the art learning-based image
registration networks leverage the high-resolution properties of U-Nets for good performance [7, 14, 11, 12]. However, this type of architecture, while good in retaining spatial resolution, struggles with datasets that have large deformations [12][15][16]. We have also observed this in
practice through controlled experiments, as we will show
in 5.4.1. Motivated to solve these two important problems,
we propose a meta-regularization framework for learningbased image registration models. Specifically, we first build
on the rich framework of Reproducing Kernel Hilbert Space
110928

