MetaAlign: Coordinating Domain Alignment and Classification for
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Guoqiang Wei1∗
1

Cuiling Lan2†

Wenjun Zeng2

University of Science and Technology of China

2

Zhibo Chen1†

Microsoft Research Asia

wgq7441@mail.ustc.edu.cn {culan,wezeng}@microsoft.com chenzhibo@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
For unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA), to alleviate the effect of domain shift, many approaches align the
source and target domains in the feature space by adversarial learning or by explicitly aligning their statistics. However, the optimization objective of such domain alignment
is generally not coordinated with that of the object classification task itself such that their descent directions for
optimization may be inconsistent. This will reduce the effectiveness of domain alignment in improving the performance of UDA. In this paper, we aim to study and alleviate the optimization inconsistency problem between the domain alignment and classification tasks. We address this
by proposing an effective meta-optimization based strategy
dubbed MetaAlign, where we treat the domain alignment
objective and the classification objective as the meta-train
and meta-test tasks in a meta-learning scheme. MetaAlign
encourages both tasks to be optimized in a coordinated way,
which maximizes the inner product of the gradients of the
two tasks during training. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed method on top of
various alignment-based baseline approaches, for tasks of
object classification and object detection. MetaAlign helps
achieve the state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
With the advance of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNN), computer vision tasks such as image classification
and object detection have gained significant improvement
[28, 48, 20]. In general, the trained models perform well on
the testing dataset of which the distribution bears a resemblance to that of training dataset. However, in many practical scenarios, directly applying such trained models to a
new domain usually suffers from significant performance
degradation. There exist differences in data characteris∗ This work was done when Guoqiang was an intern at MSRA.
† Corresponding Author.

tics/distributions between the training and testing domains,
which are known as domain shift [60, 56]. This makes it
hard to directly transfer knowledge learned from source to
target. Annotation on the samples of the target domain can
alleviate this problem but is expensive and time-consuming.
Without the requirement of annotation on target samples,
unsupervised domain adaption (UDA) attracts a lot of attention, which allows us to learn to adapt the model trained
on source to target by exploiting the unlabeled target samples.
There has been a large spectrum of UDA methods developed in the literature. The major line among them attempts
to align the distributions of source and target domains by
learning domain-invariant representations, through directly
minimizing the discrepancy between feature distributions
of two domains [62, 36, 57, 56, 16, 71] or adversarially
learning to enforce the feature representations to be indistinguishable by a domain discriminator [14, 15, 43, 37, 67,
5, 9, 41]. The former category of methods usually align domain distributions by employing explicit distribution similarity metrics, e.g., momentum distance [44, 69], or the
second-order correlation [56, 57, 45], between the source
and target domains. The latter one borrows ideas from
Generative Adversarial Networks [18] and use adversarial
training to learn aligned feature representations. However,
these alignment constraints/strategies are actually not designed specially for the object classification task. There is
a lack of efficient coordination between the optimizations
of these two tasks. During training, the optimization procedure of alignment may be inconsistent with that of the
object classification task itself, which could hurt the learning of discriminative object features for classification and
thus results in inferior object classification performance.
In this work, we aim to address this pervasive problem/challenge faced by alignment-based unsupervised domain adaptation methods, i.e., the optimization inconsistency between the domain alignment task and the classification task itself. We propose a meta-learning [53, 58] based
method dubbed MetaAlign to mitigate such inconsistency.
Particularly, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (b), we treat the domain

16643

