Improved Handling of Motion Blur in Online Object Detection
Mohamed Sayed
Gabriel Brostow
University College London
visual.cs.ucl.ac.uk/pubs/handlingMotionBlur/

Abstract
We wish to detect specific categories of objects, for online vision systems that will run in the real world. Object detection is already very challenging. It is even harder when
the images are blurred, from the camera being in a car or
a hand-held phone. Most existing efforts either focused on
sharp images, with easy to label ground truth, or they have
treated motion blur as one of many generic corruptions.
Instead, we focus especially on the details of egomotion
induced blur. We explore five classes of remedies, where
each targets different potential causes for the performance
gap between sharp and blurred images. For example, first
deblurring an image changes its human interpretability, but
at present, only partly improves object detection. The other
four classes of remedies address multi-scale texture, out-ofdistribution testing, label generation, and conditioning by
blur-type. Surprisingly, we discover that custom label generation aimed at resolving spatial ambiguity, ahead of all
others, markedly improves object detection. Also, in contrast to findings from classification, we see a noteworthy
boost by conditioning our model on bespoke categories of
motion blur.
We validate and cross-breed the different remedies experimentally on blurred COCO images and real-world blur
datasets, producing an easy and practical favorite model
with superior detection rates.

1. Introduction
A little motion blur is present in most hand-held photography. Blur is ever harder to ignore because images are
increasingly captured on the move, e.g. by a gimbaled robot
or from an autonomous vehicle. Precisely these on-the-go
situations prompt us to explore: how much does motion blur
severity impact object detection? What can be done about
it? Detection is important because it underpins many other
tasks, such as tracking and re-identification, and our initial
scope is further narrowed to egomotion induced blur.
Unsurprisingly, the severity of the blur correlates with
detection failure [2]. Fig. 1 shows an example. An ideal algorithm will make that degradation more gradual, and could

Figure 1. a) Original sharp MS COCO [26] image with object detections. b) Same image with significant linear motion-blur, with
COCO ground-truth. c) Failed predictions from original FasterRCNN. d) Predictions from network with our proposed model.

someday enable a model that surpasses even a human’s ability to see through blur. Instead of a single breakthrough, it
is more likely that a combination of approaches is needed.
Much like the “devil in the details” papers [6, 7], the task
specifics and pipeline likely make a difference.
Our main contribution is an empirical exploration of five
classes of remedies. These remedies are selected to cope
with five proposed causes for reduced detection accuracy.
The five cause/remedy pairs explored here are: 1) Is the entire image too blurry to be useful? Deblur test image first.
2) Is texture mismatch along blur axes confusing the model?
Spatially transform image to compensate. 3) Does test-time
blur differ from training data? Train model for out-ofdistribution robustness, and/or perform test-time tuning of
network. 4) Are the training labels incorrect? Customize
labels to match detection-in-blur task and reconsider labels
used for testing. 5) Are egomotion blur types too diverse?
Treat detection in blur as a multi-task problem.
Overall, we propose a new model that focuses on the
remedies from (4) and (5), and set a new standard for online
object detection in egomotion-induced blur.

2. Related Work
Deblurring: A close topic with valuable data and potential insights is image deblurring. The first canonical method

1706

