RPSRNet: End-to-End Trainable Rigid Point Set Registration Network using
Barnes-Hut 2D -Tree Representation
Sk Aziz Ali1,2
Kerem Kahraman1
Gerd Reis2
Didier Stricker1,2
1
TU Kaiserslautern 2 German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI GmbH), Kaiserslautern

Abstract
We propose RPSRNet - a novel end-to-end trainable deep
neural network for rigid point set registration. For this
task, we use a novel 2D -tree representation for the input
point sets and a hierarchical deep feature embedding in
the neural network. An iterative transformation refinement
module of our network boosts the feature matching accuracy in the intermediate stages. We achieve an inference
speed of ∼12-15 ms to register a pair of input point clouds
as large as ∼250K. Extensive evaluations on (i) KITTI
LiDAR-odometry and (ii) ModelNet-40 datasets show that
our method outperforms prior state-of-the-art methods –
e.g., on the KITTI dataset, DCP-v2 by 1.3 and 1.5 times, and
PointNetLK by 1.8 and 1.9 times better rotational and translational accuracy respectively. Evaluation on ModelNet40
shows that RPSRNet is more robust than other benchmark
methods when the samples contain a significant amount of
noise and disturbance. RPSRNet accurately registers point
clouds with non-uniform sampling densities, e.g., LiDAR
data, which cannot be processed by many existing deeplearning-based registration methods.

1. Introduction
Rigid point set registration (RPSR) is indispensable
in numerous computer vision and graphics applications –
e.g., camera pose estimation [2, 63], LiDAR-based odometry [74, 38], 3D reconstruction of partial scenes [30], simultaneous localization and mapping tasks [46], to name a few.
An RPSR method estimates the rigid motion field, parameterized by rotation (R ∈ SO(D)) and translation (t ∈ RD ),
of a moving sensor from the given pair of D-dimensional
point clouds (source and target).
Generally, different types of input data from diverse application areas pose distinct challenges to registration methods, e.g., (i) LiDAR data contains large number of points
with non-uniform sampling density, (ii) partial scans obtained from structured-light sensors or multi-view camera
systems contain a large number of points with small amount
of overlap between the point clouds, (iii) RGB-D sensors,

Figure 1. Rigid Point Set Registration using Barnes-Hut (BH)
2D -tree Representation. The center-of-masses (CoMs) and
point-densities (̺) of non-empty tree-nodes are computed for the
respective BH-trees of the source and target. These two attributes
are input to our RPSRNet which has global feature-embedding
blocks employing tree-convolution operations on the nodes. Finally, we regress rigid rotation (R ∈ SO(D)) and translation
(t ∈ RD ) parameters from output features.

such as Kinect, yield dense depth data with large displacement between consecutive frames.
Classical RPSR Methods. Iterative Closest Point (ICP)
[10] and its many variants [29, 56, 36, 60, 70, 28, 23] are
the most widely used methods that alternate the nearest correspondence search and transformation estimation steps at
every iteration. A comparative study [50] shows that several ICP variants target a specific challenge, and many of
them are prone to converge in bad local-minima. Coherent Point Drift (CPD) [44] is another state-of-the-art approach from the class of probabilistic RPSR methods. Similar to CPD, GMMReg [11], FilterReg [21], and HGMR [19]
are also probabilistic RPSR methods that treat the data as
Gaussian mixture models. The probabilistic models for
rigid alignment gives more robustness against noisy input
than ICP [10]. Recently physics-based approaches, e.g.,
GA [25], BH-RGA [26], FGA [4], and [1, 3], are appearing
computationally faster and more robust than ICP or CPD.
These methods assume that the point clouds are astrophysical particles with masses and obtain the optimal alignment
by defining a motion model for the source in a simulated
gravitational field. However, most of the above methods

13100

