From Rain Generation to Rain Removal
Hong Wang1,2,∗, Zongsheng Yue1,∗, Qi Xie1 , Qian Zhao1 , Yefeng Zheng2 , Deyu Meng3,1,†
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
Tencent Jarvis Lab, Shenzhen, China
3
Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau, China
hongwang01@stu.xjtu.edu.cn
timmy.zhaoqian@gmail.com

zsyzam@gmail.com

yefengzheng@tencent.com

1. Introduction
Recently, single image rain removal (SIRR) has attracted
considerable attention, which is usually regarded as a necessary pre-processing step of outdoor image processing tasks,
† Corresponding author

𝒛𝒛𝑏𝑏

𝐺(𝒛; 𝜃)
Generator

Latent space

𝒓𝒓𝑎𝑎

𝒓𝒓

…

For the single image rain removal (SIRR) task, the performance of deep learning (DL)-based methods is mainly affected by the designed deraining models and training
datasets. Most of current state-of-the-art focus on constructing powerful deep models to obtain better deraining results. In this paper, to further improve the deraining performance, we novelly attempt to handle the SIRR
task from the perspective of training datasets by exploring
a more efficient way to synthesize rainy images. Specifically, we build a full Bayesian generative model for rainy
image where the rain layer is parameterized as a generator with the input as some latent variables representing the physical structural rain factors, e.g., direction, scale, and thickness. To solve this model, we employ the
variational inference framework to approximate the expected statistical distribution of rainy image in a data-driven
manner. With the learned generator, we can automatically
and sufficiently generate diverse and non-repetitive training
pairs so as to efficiently enrich and augment the existing
benchmark datasets. User study qualitatively and quantitatively evaluates the realism of generated rainy images.
Comprehensive experiments substantiate that the proposed
model can faithfully extract the complex rain distribution
that not only helps significantly improve the deraining performance of current deep single image derainers, but also largely loosens the requirement of large training sample pre-collection for the SIRR task. Code is available in
https://github.com/hongwang01/VRGNet.

dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

…

𝒛𝒛

𝒛𝒛𝑎𝑎

Abstract

∗ Equal contribution

xie.qi@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

𝒓𝒓a

𝒓𝒓𝑏𝑏

Rain manifold

(a) The flowchart of rain generation

𝒓𝒓𝑏𝑏

(b) Three groups of interpolation results

Figure 1. Interpolation results in latent space z representing rain
factors. (a) The rain distribution is implicitly modeled as a generator G; (b) Three groups of generated rain layers through interpolations in latent space. For each group, ra and rb (marked
as green) represent the rain layers in the original training dataset,
while the ones (marked as red) between them are generated from
latent codes (marked as red points) in z space. These codes are
obtained by linearly interpolating between za and zb which are
the latent codes of ra and rb , respectively.

e.g., autonomous driving [14], scene segmentation [5], and
object tracking [6]. Due to the complex and diverse rain
structures in real scenes, SIRR is still a typical challenging
task in computer vision [33, 45, 54].
Driven by massive training data (rainy images) and the
powerful fitting capability of deep convolutional neural network (CNN), deep learning (DL) represents the current research trend in the SIRR task. Clearly, the performance
of DL-based methods is mainly affected by two key factors, i.e., the rationality and capacity of deraining models and the quality of training datasets. Most of current
works focus on the former and aim to improve the deraining results mainly by building more sophisticated networks [8,10,22,29,35,39,41,43,44,49,53,55,58] and designing

14791

