Learning Scalable ℓ∞ -constrained Near-lossless Image Compression via
Joint Lossy Image and Residual Compression
Yuanchao Bai1 , Xianming Liu1,2∗, Wangmeng Zuo1,2 , Yaowei Wang1 , Xiangyang Ji3
1
Peng Cheng Laboratory, 2 Harbin Institute of Technology, 3 Tsinghua University
{baiych,wangyw}@pcl.ac.cn, {csxm,wmzuo}@hit.edu.cn, xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
We propose a novel joint lossy image and residual
compression framework for learning ℓ∞ -constrained nearlossless image compression. Specifically, we obtain a lossy
reconstruction of the raw image through lossy image compression and uniformly quantize the corresponding residual to satisfy a given tight ℓ∞ error bound. Suppose that
the error bound is zero, i.e., lossless image compression,
we formulate the joint optimization problem of compressing both the lossy image and the original residual in terms
of variational auto-encoders and solve it with end-to-end
training. To achieve scalable compression with the error
bound larger than zero, we derive the probability model
of the quantized residual by quantizing the learned probability model of the original residual, instead of training
multiple networks. We further correct the bias of the derived probability model caused by the context mismatch between training and inference. Finally, the quantized residual is encoded according to the bias-corrected probability
model and is concatenated with the bitstream of the compressed lossy image. Experimental results demonstrate that
our near-lossless codec achieves the state-of-the-art performance for lossless and near-lossless image compression,
and achieves competitive PSNR while much smaller ℓ∞ error compared with lossy image codecs at high bit rates.

1. Introduction
Image compression is a ubiquitous technique in computer vision. For certain applications with stringent demands on image fidelity, such as medical imaging or image
archiving, the most reliable choice is lossless image compression. However, the compression ratio of lossless compression is upper-bounded by Shannon’s source coding theorem [36], and is typically between 2:1 and 3:1 for practical
lossless image codecs [50, 47, 37, 14, 5, 38]. To improve
the compression performance while keeping the reliability
∗ Corresponding author

of the decoded images, ℓ∞ -constrained near-lossless image
compression is developed [6, 15, 2, 47, 51] and standardized
in traditional codecs, e.g., JPEG-LS [47] and CALIC [51].
Different from lossy image compression with Peak Signalto-Noise Ratio (PSNR) or Multi-Scale Structural SIMilarity index (MS-SSIM) [45, 46] distortion measures, ℓ∞ constrained near-lossless image compression requires the
maximum reconstruction error of each pixel to be no larger
than a given tight numerical bound. Lossless image compression is a special case of near-lossless image compression, when the tight error bound is zero.
With the fast development of deep neural networks
(DNNs), learning-based lossy image compression [40, 3,
39, 41, 34, 24, 4, 31, 27, 22, 8, 7, 23, 25, 29] has achieved
tremendous progress over the last four years. Most recent methods for lossy image compression adopt variational
auto-encoder (VAE) architecture [17, 18] based on transform coding [11], where the rate is modeled by the entropy
of quantized latent variables and the reconstruction distortion is measured by PSNR or MS-SSIM. Through end-toend rate-distortion optimization, the state-of-the-art methods, such as [7], can achieve comparable performance with
the lastest compression standard Versatile Video Coding
(VVC) [32]. However, the above transform coding scheme
cannot be directly employed on near-lossless image compression, because it is difficult for DNN-based transforms to
satisfy a tight bound on the maximum reconstruction error
of each pixel, even without quantization. Invertible transforms, such as integer discrete flow [13] or wavelet-like
transform [25], are possible solutions to lossless compression but not to general near-lossless compression.
In this paper, we propose a new joint lossy image and
residual compression framework for learning near-lossless
image compression, inspired by the traditional “lossy plus
residual” coding scheme [10, 26, 2]. Specifically, we obtain
a lossy reconstruction of the raw image through lossy image compression and uniformly quantize the corresponding
residual to satisfy the given ℓ∞ error bound τ . Suppose that
the error bound τ is zero, i.e., lossless image compression,
we formulate the joint optimization problem of compress-

11946

