IIRC: Incremental Implicitly-Refined Classification
Mohamed Abdelsalam1,2 , Mojtaba Faramarzi1,2 , Shagun Sodhani3 , Sarath Chandar1,4,5
1

Mila - Quebec AI Institute, 2 University of Montreal, 3 Facebook AI Research,
4

École Polytechnique de Montréal, 5 Canada CIFAR AI Chair

{abdelsam, faramarm, sarath.chandar}@mila.quebec, sshagunsodhani@gmail.com

Abstract
We introduce the “Incremental Implicitly-Refined Classification (IIRC)” setup, an extension to the class incremental
learning setup where the incoming batches of classes have
two granularity levels. i.e., each sample could have a highlevel (coarse) label like “bear” and a low-level (fine) label
like “polar bear”. Only one label is provided at a time, and
the model has to figure out the other label if it has already
learned it. This setup is more aligned with real-life scenarios, where a learner usually interacts with the same family
of entities multiple times, discovers more granularity about
them, while still trying not to forget previous knowledge.
Moreover, this setup enables evaluating models for some
important lifelong learning challenges that cannot be easily addressed under the existing setups. These challenges
can be motivated by the example ”if a model was trained
on the class bear in one task and on polar bear in another
task, will it forget the concept of bear, will it rightfully infer that a polar bear is still a bear? and will it wrongfully
associate the label of polar bear to other breeds of bear?”.
We develop a standardized benchmark that enables evaluating models on the IIRC setup. We evaluate several stateof-the-art lifelong learning algorithms and highlight their
strengths and limitations. For example, distillation-based
methods perform relatively well but are prone to incorrectly
predicting too many labels per image. We hope that the
proposed setup, along with the benchmark, would provide a
meaningful problem setting to the practitioners.

1. Introduction
Deep learning algorithms have led to transformational
breakthroughs in computer vision [12, 17], natural language processing [19, 50], speech processing [3, 5], reinforcement learning [36, 44], robotics [16, 1], recommender
systems [11, 18], etc. On several tasks, deep learning
models have either matched or surpassed human performance. However, such super-human performance is lim-

Figure 1. Humans incrementally accumulate knowledge over time.
They encounter new entities and discover new information about
existing entities. In this process, they associate new labels with
entities and refine or update their existing labels, while ensuring
the accumulated knowledge is coherent.

ited to some narrow and well-defined setups. Moreover,
humans can continually learn and accumulate knowledge
over their lifetime, while the current learning algorithms
are known to suffer from several challenges when training
over a sequence of tasks [33, 15, 8, 45]. These challenges
are broadly studied under the domain of Lifelong Learning [47], also called Incremental Learning [42], Continual
Learning [48], and Never Ending Learning [35]. In the
general lifelong learning setup, the model experiences new
knowledge, in terms of new tasks, from the same or different domains. The model is expected to learn and solve new
tasks while retaining useful knowledge from previous tasks.
There are two popular paradigms in lifelong learning [49]: i) task incremental learning, where the model has
access to a task delimiter (say a task id), which distinguish
between tasks. Models for this setup are generally multiheaded, where there exists a separate classification layer
for each task. ii) class incremental learning, where the
model does not have access to a task delimiter, so it needs
to discriminate between all classes from all tasks at infer-

11038

