Disentangled Cycle Consistency for Highly-realistic Virtual Try-On
Chongjian Ge1

Yibing Song2∗ Yuying Ge1 Han Yang3 Wei Liu4
1
2
The University of Hong Kong
Tencent AI Lab
3
4
ETH Zürich
Tencent Data Platform

{rhettgee, yuyingge}@connect.hku.hk

yibingsong.cv@gmail.com

wl2223@columbia.edu

hanyang@ethz.ch

pluo@cs.hku.hk

Input 1

Abstract

Masked 1

CNN

Image virtual try-on replaces the clothes on a person
image with a desired in-shop clothes image. It is challenging because the person and the in-shop clothes are unpaired. Existing methods formulate virtual try-on as either
in-painting or cycle consistency. Both of these two formulations encourage the generation networks to reconstruct the
input image in a self-supervised manner. However, existing methods do not differentiate clothing and non-clothing
regions. A straightforward generation impedes the virtual
try-on quality because of the heavily coupled image contents. In this paper, we propose a Disentangled Cycleconsistency Try-On Network (DCTON). The DCTON is able
to produce highly-realistic try-on images by disentangling
important components of virtual try-on including clothes
warping, skin synthesis, and image composition. Moreover,
DCTON can be naturally trained in a self-supervised manner following cycle consistency learning. Extensive experiments on challenging benchmarks show that DCTON outperforms state-of-the-art approaches favorably.

1. Introduction
Virtual try-on of fashion images aims at changing the
clothes of a person with other in-shop clothes. There are
wide applications including costume matching, fashion image editing, and clothes retrieval for e-commerce. Existing methods mainly focus on a direct try-on based on 2D
images because of the available person images and in-shop
clothes images online. However, these images are unpaired
since the collection of images with multiple models, of
which each model wears different and pixel-wise aligned
clothes is infeasible.
To handle unpaired images, existing methods such
as VITON [15], CP-VTON [35], CP-VTON+ [24], and
* Y. Song is the corresponding author. This work is done when C. Ge is
an intern in Tencent AI Lab. The code is available at https://github.
com/ChongjianGE/DCTON.

Ping Luo1

Generation

Reconstruct 1

Self-supervised learning
(One-way)
Supervision

Clothes 1

CNN 1
Clothes 2 Input 1

Generation

Try-on 1 Clothes 1

Cycle consistency
(Vanilla)

Generation

CNN 2
CNN 1
Clothes 2 Surface Input 1

Warping
Generation
Try-on 1 Surface Clothes 1

Cycle consistency
(Ours)

Generation
Warping

CNN 2
Figure 1. Comparison of virtual try-on pipelines. The inpainting
methods (e.g., CP-VTON [35] and ACGPN [40]) shown in the top
row use one in-shop clothes to replace the same input clothes. The
vanilla CycleGAN [18] shown in the middle row introduces two
in-shop clothes for cycle consistency at the expense of generating
coupled image contents (i.e., clothes, skin, and human poses). In
the last row, we propose DCTON to disentangle virtual try-on as
clothes warping and non-clothes generation, which is built upon
vanilla cycle consistency for self-supervised learning.

ACGPN [40] formulate virtual try-on as an inpainting problem. They first mask the clothes region of a person image, and then recover the clothes region by using the same
in-shop clothes for self-supervised network training. The
pipeline is shown in the top row of Fig. 1. It is regarded
as a one-way reconstruction from the corrupted input image to its original image. Since these methods only use one
clothes during training (i.e., clothes 1 is matched to input 1),
they are not effective when the person image and the target

16928

