NeuroMorph: Unsupervised Shape Interpolation
and Correspondence in One Go
Marvin Eisenberger∗,† , David Novotny∗ , Gael Kerchenbaum∗ , Patrick Labatut∗ ,
Natalia Neverova∗ , Daniel Cremers† , Andrea Vedaldi∗
Facebook AI Research∗ , Technical University of Munich†

Figure 1: Our NeuroMorph neural network takes as input two meshes (left and right) and produces in one go (i.e. in a
single feed-forward pass) a continuous interpolation and point-to-point correspondence between them (color coded). The
interpolation, expressed as a displacement field, changes the pose of the source shape while preserving its identity.

Abstract
We present NeuroMorph, a new neural network architecture that takes as input two 3D shapes and produces in one
go, i.e. in a single feed forward pass, a smooth interpolation
and point-to-point correspondences between them. The interpolation, expressed as a deformation field, changes the
pose of the source shape to resemble the target, but leaves
the object identity unchanged. NeuroMorph uses an elegant architecture combining graph convolutions with global
feature pooling to extract local features. During training,
the model is incentivized to create realistic deformations
by approximating geodesics on the underlying shape space
manifold. This strong geometric prior allows to train our
model end-to-end and in a fully unsupervised manner without requiring any manual correspondence annotations. NeuroMorph works well for a large variety of input shapes,
including non-isometric pairs from different object categories. It obtains state-of-the-art results for both shape correspondence and interpolation tasks, matching or surpassing the performance of recent unsupervised and supervised
methods on multiple benchmarks.

1. Introduction
The ability to relate the 3D shapes of objects is of key
importance to fully understand object categories. Objects
can change their shape due to articulation, other motions
and intra-category variations, but such changes are not arbitrary. Instead, they are strongly constrained by the category
of the objects at hand. Seminal works such as [33] express
such constraints by learning statistical shape models. In order to do so, they need to put in correspondence large collections of individual 3D scans, which they do by exploiting
the fact that individual objects deform continuously in time,
and by using some manual inputs to align different object
instances. Due to the high complexity of obtaining and preprocessing such 3D data, however, these models remain rare
and mostly limited to selected categories such as humans
that are of sufficient importance in applications. In this paper, we are thus interested in developing a method that can
learn to relate different 3D shapes fully automatically, interpolating a small number of 3D reconstructions, and in a
manner which is less specific to a single category (Figure 1).
Due to the complexity of this task, authors have often
considered certain sub-problems in isolation. One is to

7473

