STaR: Self-supervised Tracking and Reconstruction of Rigid Objects in Motion
with Neural Rendering
Wentao Yuan*
University of Washington

Zhaoyang Lv
Tanner Schmidt
Steven Lovegrove
Facebook Reality Labs Research

https://wentaoyuan.github.io/star

Figure 1: An overview of our method. Given multi-view RGB videos of a dynamic scene, STaR learns a decoupled 3D representation
of the static and dynamic scene components without any human annotation, which allows it to synthesize the scene from new viewpoints
at new time photorealisticly, or even animate the scene with novel trajectories.

Abstract
We present STaR, a novel method that performs Selfsupervised Tracking and Reconstruction of dynamic scenes
with rigid motion from multi-view RGB videos without any
manual annotation. Recent work has shown that neural networks are surprisingly effective at the task of compressing
many views of a scene into a learned function which maps
from a viewing ray to an observed radiance value via volume rendering. Unfortunately, these methods lose all their
predictive power once any object in the scene has moved.
In this work, we explicitly model rigid motion of objects in
the context of neural representations of radiance fields. We
show that without any additional human specified supervision, we can reconstruct a dynamic scene with a single rigid
object in motion by simultaneously decomposing it into its
two constituent parts and encoding each with its own neu*Work done while the author was an intern at FRL Research.

ral representation. We achieve this by jointly optimizing the
parameters of two neural radiance fields and a set of rigid
poses which align the two fields at each frame. On both
synthetic and real world datasets, we demonstrate that our
method can render photorealistic novel views, where novelty is measured on both spatial and temporal axes. Our
factored representation furthermore enables animation of
unseen object motion.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen an explosion of novel scene
representations which leverage multi-layer perceptrons
(MLPs) as an implicit representation to encode spatiallyvarying properties of a scene. While these implicit representations are optimized via stochastic gradient descent,
they are not really “learning” in the traditional sense. Instead, they exploit MLPs as a compressed representation of
scene content. They can act as a substitute for traditional
representations (e.g. explicit volumetric grids), but can

13144

