Dynamic Domain Adaptation for Efficient Inference
Shuang Li1

JinMing Zhang1 Wenxuan Ma1 Chi Harold Liu1† Wei Li2
1
Beijing Institute of Technology 2 Inceptio Tech.

{shuangli, jm-zhang, wenxuanma}@bit.edu.cn liuchi02@gmail.com liweimcc@gmail.com

Abstract

Source

Target
Easy to Transfer

Domain adaptation (DA) enables knowledge transfer
from a labeled source domain to an unlabeled target domain by reducing the cross-domain distribution discrepancy. Most prior DA approaches leverage complicated and
powerful deep neural networks to improve the adaptation
capacity and have shown remarkable success. However,
they may have a lack of applicability to real-world situations such as real-time interaction, where low target inference latency is an essential requirement under limited computational budget. In this paper, we tackle the problem by
proposing a dynamic domain adaptation (DDA) framework,
which can simultaneously achieve efficient target inference
in low-resource scenarios and inherit the favorable crossdomain generalization brought by DA. In contrast to static
models, as a simple yet generic method, DDA can integrate
various domain confusion constraints into any typical adaptive network, where multiple intermediate classifiers can be
equipped to infer “easier” and “harder” target data dynamically. Moreover, we present two novel strategies to further boost the adaptation performance of multiple prediction exits: 1) a confidence score learning strategy to derive
accurate target pseudo labels by fully exploring the prediction consistency of different classifiers; 2) a class-balanced
self-training strategy to explicitly adapt multi-stage classifiers from source to target without losing prediction diversity. Extensive experiments on multiple benchmarks are
conducted to verify that DDA can consistently improve the
adaptation performance and accelerate target inference under domain shift and limited resources scenarios.

1. Introduction
Many intelligent technologies are boosted by the rapid
development of computational capacity [32, 48, 44] and
deep neural networks [43, 21, 9, 15]. To ensure high reliability, their loaded deep models have to be trained with massive amount of data, so as to enumerate all possible practical
scenarios. Unfortunately, there is always a future situation
† C. Liu is the corresponding author.

Hard to Transfer

Aeroplane

Bicycle

Car

Figure 1. Motivation of the proposed dynamic domain adaptation, which seeks to balance the cross-domain classification performance and the computational cost for target inference. The
target images in left column are easy to transfer with a small
model, whereas the “harder” images require computational expensive models to be correctly recognized.

that is unpredictable, and even an object in the same environment may display visual diversity at different times. For
instance, the photos captured by cameras of self-driving car
may exhibit large variations under different lighting conditions of day and night. This would inevitably lead to
degraded recognition, since test data (target domain) and
training data (source domain) follow different distributions.
Such a phenomenon is known as domain shift [47],
which can be tackled by domain adaptation (DA) techniques [33]. To date there have been considerable research
efforts in DA, flourishing with impressive results, especially
when applying deep neural networks [5, 29, 40, 23, 25].
They delve into searching for a feature space in which labeled and rich information in source domain can be transferred to unlabeled but related target domain. Generally,
these prevailing deep DA methods leverage static and highcomplexity base learners owing to their good transferable
capacity brought by deep and wide architectures. However,
they do not consider the transferability of different target
samples as shown in Fig. 1. In consequence, they may not
be applicable in some real-world situations that require realtime responses or are delay-sensitive to stringent computational resource constraints at inference time.
To allow deep networks to get a grip back on fast inference, there are several techniques that can effectively re-

7832

