HDR Environment Map Estimation for Real-Time Augmented Reality
Gowri Somanath
Apple

Daniel Kurz
Apple

gowri@apple.com

daniel kurz@apple.com

Abstract

1. Introduction

RGB color space for the environment maps. As shown
in Fig. 1(a), the challenge in mobile AR is limited camera field of view (FoV) and motion by the user, hence an
application is usually able to accumulate less than 100 degrees effective FoV. A virtual object placed in front of the
user, however, is expected to reflect what is behind the camera, and parts which are not present in the captured frames.
The problem is thus to estimate, given this incomplete environment map, a plausible estimation for rest of the scene
and its lighting. We show that our method is not only able
to estimate the light information, but also to synthesize a
high resolution completed scene. For instance in the scene
shown in Fig. 1(b), the estimated environment map is high
resolution, continuous, and a plausible extrapolation of the
input. The synthesized parts not only match low frequency
information (ambient light temperature and intensity), but
also finer details such as the type of light sources (in this
case, ceiling area lights). As detailed in Sec. 3, we achieve
this context-aware scene completion using the framework
of generative adversarial networks (GANs) [12] along with
novel loss functions, ProjectionLoss and ClusterLoss, designed for accurate light estimation.

In this work, we discuss video see-through augmented
reality (AR) applications, in which virtual objects are superimposed on camera frames of the real environment shown
on an opaque display, e.g. on a phone as shown in Fig. 1(e).
Creating immersive and believable AR experiences involves
many aspects of computer vision and graphics. One of the
requirements is visual coherence: the problem of matching
visual appearance of rendered objects to their real-world
background, such that virtual and real objects become indistinguishable in the composited video. Accomplishing
this involves matching various scene and camera properties,
such as lighting, geometry, and sensor noise.
This paper focusses on creating reflections and lighting
for virtual objects by estimating an omnidirectional HDR
environment map. To support rendering objects with a variety of geometry, material properties, and dimensions, the
environment map must be high dynamic range, and have
sufficient image resolution to represent objects and features
in the scene. We use the equirectangular projection and

In mobile AR frameworks [1, 2], we can obtain camera
frames, poses and scene geometry, around the 3D location
where the virtual object is to be placed. This allows a realtime renderer to create light probes [27] at the 3D location.
RGB texture information from the frames can be rendered
into an equirectangular image at these probe locations. In
this work, we focus on processing the partial environment
map at these probes. Our method takes as input a partial
environment map that is composed from one or more low
dynamic range (LDR) camera frames (8 bit per channel),
and outputs a completed environment map that is higher
dynamic range (HDR, 16 bit channel). Thus we perform
both lifting of input pixels from LDR to HDR, as well as
spatial HDR image extrapolation. The output environment
map retains the color and details from pixels that were in the
input, while filling the unknown pixels with plausible content that is coherent with the known. That is, we want the
completed environment map to represent the textures from
a plausible real scene. Through detailed quantitative and

We present a method to estimate an HDR environment
map from a narrow field-of-view LDR camera image in
real-time. This enables perceptually appealing reflections
and shading on virtual objects of any material finish, from
mirror to diffuse, rendered into a real environment using
augmented reality. Our method is based on our efficient
convolutional neural network, EnvMapNet, trained end-toend with two novel losses, ProjectionLoss for the generated
image, and ClusterLoss for adversarial training. Through
qualitative and quantitative comparison to state-of-the-art
methods, we demonstrate that our algorithm reduces the
directional error of estimated light sources by more than
50%, and achieves 3.7 times lower Frechet Inception Distance (FID). We further showcase a mobile application that
is able to run our neural network model in under 9 ms on
an iPhone XS, and render in real-time, visually coherent virtual objects in previously unseen real-world environments.

11298

