Data-Free Knowledge Distillation For Image Super-Resolution
Yiman Zhang1 , Hanting Chen1,3 , Xinghao Chen1 , Yiping Deng2 , Chunjing Xu1 , Yunhe Wang1 *
1

Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies. 2 Central Software Institution, Huawei Technologies.
Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University.

3

{yiman.zhang, chenhanting, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com

Abstract
Convolutional network compression methods require
training data for achieving acceptable results, but training data is routinely unavailable due to some privacy and
transmission limitations. Therefore, recent works focus on
learning efficient networks without original training data,
i.e., data-free model compression. Wherein, most of existing algorithms are developed for image recognition or
segmentation tasks. In this paper, we study the data-free
compression approach for single image super-resolution
(SISR) task which is widely used in mobile phones and
smart cameras. Specifically, we analyze the relationship
between the outputs and inputs from the pre-trained network and explore a generator with a series of loss functions for maximally capturing useful information. The
generator is then trained for synthesizing training samples which have similar distribution to that of the original data. To further alleviate the training difficulty of the
student network using only the synthetic data, we introduce a progressive distillation scheme. Experiments on various datasets and architectures demonstrate that the proposed method is able to be utilized for effectively learning portable student networks without the original data,
e.g., with 0.16dB PSNR drop on Set5 for ×2 super resolution. Code will be available at https://github.com/huaweinoah/Data-Efficient-Model-Compression.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks have achieved huge
success in various computer vision tasks, such as image
recognition [12], object detection [26], semantic segmentation [27] and super-resolution [7]. Such great progress
largely relies on the advances of computing power and storage capacity in modern equipments. For example, ResNet50 [12] requires a ∼98MB storage and ∼4G FLOPs. However, due to the heavy computation cost of these deep mod* Corresponding author.

els, they cannot be directly embedded into mobile devices
with limited computing capacity, such as self-driving cars,
micro-robots and cellphones. Therefore, how to compress
CNNs with enormous parameters and then apply them on
resource-constrained devices, becomes a research hotspot.
In order to accelerate the pre-trained heavy convolutional
networks, various attempts have been made recently, including quantization [24], NAS [5, 39], pruning [25, 34],
knowledge distillation [37, 38] and etc. For example, Han et
al. [11] utilize pruning, quantization and Huffman coding to
compress a deep model with extremely higher compression
and speed-up ratio. Hinton et al. [14] propose knowledge
distillation, which learns a portable student network from
a heavy teacher network. Luo et al. [29] propose ThiNet
to perform filter pruning by solving an optimization problem. Courbariaux et al. [6] propose binary neural network
with only binary weights and activations to extremely reduce the networks’ computation cost and storage consumption. Han et al. [10] introduce cheap operations in GhostNet to generate more features for lightweight convolutional
models.
Although the compressed models with low computation
complexity can be easily deployed in mobile devices, these
techniques require original data to fine-tune or train the
compressed networks to achieve comparable performance
with the pre-trained model. However, the original training data is often unavailable due to some privacy or transmission constraints. For example, Google shared a series
of excellent models trained on the JFT-300M dataset [20]
which is still unpublic. In addition, there are considerable
apps trained using privacy-related data such as face ID and
voice assistant, which is often not provided. It is very hard
to provide model compression and acceleration service for
these models without the original training data. Therefore,
existing network compression methods cannot be well performed.
To this end, recent works are devoted to compress and
accelerate the pre-trained heavy deep models without the
training dataset, i.e. data-free model compression. Lopes et
al. [28] first propose to use meta data to reconstruct the orig-

7852

