High-Fidelity and Arbitrary Face Editing
Yue Gao1 , Fangyun Wei2 , Jianmin Bao2 , Shuyang Gu3 , Dong Chen2 , Fang Wen2 , Zhouhui Lian1 *
1

Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, China
2
Microsoft Research Asia
3
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Cycle consistency is widely used for face editing. However, we observe that the generator tends to find a tricky
way to hide information from the original image to satisfy
the constraint of cycle consistency, making it impossible to
maintain the rich details (e.g., wrinkles and moles) of nonediting areas. In this work, we propose a simple yet effective
method named HifaFace to address the above-mentioned
problem from two perspectives. First, we relieve the pressure of the generator to synthesize rich details by directly
feeding the high-frequency information of the input image
into the end of the generator. Second, we adopt an additional discriminator to encourage the generator to synthesize rich details. Specifically, we apply wavelet transformation to transform the image into multi-frequency domains,
among which the high-frequency parts can be used to recover the rich details. We also notice that a fine-grained
and wider-range control for the attribute is of great importance for face editing. To achieve this goal, we propose
a novel attribute regression loss. Powered by the proposed
framework, we achieve high-fidelity and arbitrary face editing, outperforming other state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Face editing is a process of editing the specific attributes
or regions of an input facial image while keeping the nonediting attributes/areas unchanged. With the rapid development of Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [11],
many recent works on face editing [19, 6, 15, 24, 33, 8]
leverage the advanced conditional GANs and achieve remarkable progress. Due to the lack of paired images during training, they typically use cycle consistency to keep
the non-editing attributes/areas unchanged. Namely, given
an image x, it requires x = G(G(x, ∆), −∆), where G
* Zhouhui Lian is the corresponding author. This work was supported by Beijing Nova Program of Science and Technology (Grant No.:
Z191100001119077).

(a) Input x

(b) ŷ = x + EG (c) x̂ = ŷ - EG

(d) HifaFace

Figure 1: The results of a representative face editing method
StarGAN [6]: (a) the input image; (b) the output image synthesized by editing (a) with the attribute eyeglasses (EG);
(c) the reconstructed image with (b) as input. We observe
that the rich details are all missing in ŷ, but are almost restored in x̂. (d) The high-fidelity face image synthesized by
our HifaFace.
represents the generator and ∆ indicates the attribute that
needs to be changed. However, we find that even if the cycle consistency is satisfied, images generated by G may still
be blurry and lose rich details from input images.
To demonstrate the above-mentioned problem, we take
StarGAN [6] as an example. As shown in Figure 1, we feed
an input face image x to StarGAN and expect it to add eyeglasses on the face. Although the output ŷ does wear eyeglasses, the details (e.g., wrinkles and moles) are all missing. However, we observe an intriguing phenomenon as follows. When we feed ŷ into the StarGAN model and expect
removing eyeglasses on the face, the reconstruction result x̂
surprisingly recovers almost all rich details, which satisfies
the purpose of setting cycle consistency. This observation
indicates that the generator encodes the rich details of the
input image into the output image in the form of “hidden”
signals, and then decodes the feature with these “hidden”
signals to achieve reconstruction. The above-mentioned
phenomenon is called steganography [7] and is undesirable
for face editing [29].
To prevent the generator from taking this trick route to
satisfy cycle consistency, we propose a simple yet effective
face editing method called HifaFace. We tackle this problem from two perspectives. First, we directly feed the highfrequency information of the input image to the end of the

16115

