Neural Scene Flow Fields for Space-Time View Synthesis of Dynamic Scenes

Zhengqi Li1

Simon Niklaus2
1

Cornell Tech

Noah Snavely1
2

Oliver Wang2

Adobe Research

Figure 1: Our method can synthesize novel views in both space and time from a single monocular video of a dynamic
scene. Here we show video results with various configurations of fixing and interpolating view and time (left), as well as a
visualization of the recovered scene geometry (right). Please view with Adobe Acrobat or KDE Okular to see animations.

Abstract
We present a method to perform novel view and time synthesis of dynamic scenes, requiring only a monocular video
with known camera poses as input. To do this, we introduce
Neural Scene Flow Fields, a new representation that models
the dynamic scene as a time-variant continuous function
of appearance, geometry, and 3D scene motion. Our representation is optimized through a neural network to fit the
observed input views. We show that our representation can
be used for varieties of in-the-wild scenes, including thin
structures, view-dependent effects, and complex degrees of
motion. We conduct a number of experiments that demonstrate our approach significantly outperforms recent monocular view synthesis methods, and show qualitative results of
space-time view synthesis on a variety of real-world videos.

1. Introduction
The topic of novel view synthesis has recently seen impressive progress due to the use of neural networks to learn
representations that are well suited for view synthesis tasks.
Most prior approaches in this domain make the assumption
that the scene is static, or that it is observed from multiple
synchronized input views. However, these restrictions are
violated by most videos shared on the Internet today, which
frequently feature scenes with diverse dynamic content (e.g.,
humans, animals, vehicles), recorded by a single camera.
We present a new approach for novel view and time syn-

thesis of dynamic scenes from monocular video input with
known (or derivable) camera poses. This problem is highly
ill-posed since there can be multiple scene configurations
that lead to the same observed image sequences. In addition,
using multi-view constraints for moving objects is challenging, as doing so requires knowing the dense 3D motion of
all scene points (i.e., the “scene flow”).
In this work, we propose to represent a dynamic scene as a
continuous function of both space and time, where its output
consists of not only reflectance and density, but also 3D scene
motion. Similar to prior work, we parameterize this function with a deep neural network (a multi-layer perceptron,
MLP), and perform rendering using volume tracing [46]. We
optimize the weights of this MLP using a scene flow fields
warping loss that enforces that our scene representation is
temporally consistent with the input views. Crucially, as
we model dense scene flow fields in 3D, our function can
represent the sharp motion discontinuities that arise when
projecting the scene into image space, even with simple lowlevel 3D smoothness priors. Further, dense scene flow fields
also enable us to interpolate along changes in both space and
time. To the best our knowledge, our approach is the first to
achieve novel view and time synthesis of dynamic scenes
captured from a monocular camera.
As the problem is very challenging, we introduce different
components that improve rendering quality over a baseline
solution. Specifically, we analyze scene flow ambiguity at
motion disocclusions and propose a solution to it. We also
show how to use data-driven priors to avoid local minima

6498

