Dynamic Class Queue for Large Scale Face Recognition In the Wild
Bi Li1,2 ,* Teng Xi1,3∗ , Gang Zhang1 , Haocheng Feng1 , Junyu Han1 , Jingtuo Liu1 , Errui Ding1 , Wenyu Liu2
1
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.
2
School of Electronic Information and Communications, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
3
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
1

{libi01,xiteng01,zhanggang03,fenghaocheng,hanjunyu,liujingtuo,dingerrui}@baidu.com
2

liuwy@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
FC Layer

Learning discriminative representation using largescale face datasets in the wild is crucial for real-world applications, yet it remains challenging. The difficulties lie in
many aspects and this work focus on computing resource
constraint and long-tailed class distribution. Recently,
classification-based representation learning with deep neural networks and well-designed losses have demonstrated
good recognition performance. However, the computing
and memory cost linearly scales up to the number of identities (classes) in the training set, and the learning process
suffers from unbalanced classes. In this work, we propose
a dynamic class queue (DCQ) to tackle these two problems.
Specifically, for each iteration during training, a subset of
classes for recognition are dynamically selected and their
class weights are dynamically generated on-the-fly which
are stored in a queue. Since only a subset of classes is
selected for each iteration, the computing requirement is
reduced. By using a single server without model parallel, we empirically verify in large-scale datasets that 10%
of classes are sufficient to achieve similar performance as
using all classes. Moreover, the class weights are dynamically generated in a few-shot manner and therefore suitable for tail classes with only a few instances. We show
clear improvement over a strong baseline in the largest public dataset Megaface Challenge2 (MF2) which has 672K
identities and over 88% of them have less than 10 instances. Code is available at https://github.com/
bilylee/DCQ

1. Introduction
Recently, face recognition has witnessed great progress
along with the development of deep neural networks and
large-scale datasets. The size of the public training set has
* Corresponding to Bi Li and Teng Xi. Equal contribution.

Class Queue
enter

!
"

"
leave

SGD update

weight
generation

"′

 all classes vs. subset
 SGD-update vs. feedforward generation
(a) FC-based

(b) DCQ-based

Figure 1. High-level comparison between the fully connected layer
(FC layer) used in classification and the proposed DCQ module.
Generally, there are two differences. 1) For the FC layer, all
classes in the training dataset are included in the FC layer (each
row in the FC layer represents a class weight). While for DCQ,
only a subset is used. 2) The class weights in the FC layer are randomly initialized and then updated via SGD. In contrast, DCQ gets
the class weights in a few-shot manner based on another instance
x′ with the same identity as input x.

been steadily increasing from CASIA-Webface[27] (10K
identity, 0.5M instance) → MS-Celeb-1M[7] (100K identity, 5M instance) → MF2[19] (672K identity, 4.7M instance). For commercial applications, the training dataset
easily scales up to millions of identities and it is a matter of
time to reach billions of identities.
More data brings better performance. However, the
training difficulty accumulates along with the growth of
the training data. First of all, it simply needs more computing resources. For classification-based methods, where
each identity is taken as a class and the feature extractor
is learned through the classification task, the memory consumption of the fully connected layer W ∈ RD×C linearly
scales up to the number of identities C in the training set.
So is the cost to compute the matrix multiplication between
the FC layer and the input feature. Secondly, for data gathered in the real world, the class distribution is typically
long-tailed, that is, some classes have abundant instances

3763

