Instance Level Affinity-Based Transfer for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Astuti Sharma

Tarun Kalluri

Manmohan Chandraker

University of California San Diego
{asharma,sskallur,mkchandraker}@eng.ucsd.edu

Abstract
Domain adaptation deals with training models using
large scale labeled data from a specific source domain
and then adapting the knowledge to certain target domains
that have few or no labels. Many prior works learn domain agnostic feature representations for this purpose using a global distribution alignment objective which does
not take into account the finer class specific structure in
the source and target domains. We address this issue in
our work and propose an instance affinity based criterion
for source to target transfer during adaptation, called ILADA. We first propose a reliable and efficient method to extract similar and dissimilar samples across source and target, and utilize a multi-sample contrastive loss to drive
the domain alignment process. ILA-DA simultaneously accounts for intra-class clustering as well as inter-class separation among the categories, resulting in less noisy classifier boundaries, improved transferability and increased
accuracy. We verify the effectiveness of ILA-DA by observing consistent improvements in accuracy over popular domain adaptation approaches on a variety of benchmark datasets and provide insights into the proposed alignment approach. Code will be made publicly available at
https://github.com/astuti/ILA-DA.

1. Introduction
In this work, we propose a method to leverage instance
wise similarities across datasets, called ILA-DA, to improve unsupervised domain adaptation. It is well known
that models trained on a large-scale labeled dataset are
generally sensitive to domain shifts and do not generalize
well to data that lies outside the training distribution [65].
Unsupervised domain adaptation [5, 4, 53] emerged as a
feasible alternative to transfer knowledge from a labeled
source domain to one or more unlabeled target domains
by minimizing some notion of divergence between the domains [39, 35, 63, 17, 66, 8]. A majority of successful approaches rely on global distribution alignment using adver-

(a)

Before Adaptation

Adversarial Adaptation

(b)

Noisy pseudo-labels

(c)

Proposed Method

Domain Separation

Source

Pull similar samples closer

Classifier Boundary

Target

Push away dissimilar samples

Figure 1: Motivation for the proposed approach (a), (b) Most
adversarial learning based adaptation approaches achieve global
domain alignment which often leads to misalignment near the classiﬁer boundaries. (c) Using our afﬁnity matrix based approach in
combination with the proposed MSC loss, we achieve better discrimination between target samples and improve the adaptation.

sarial learning [17, 66, 8, 7, 58], where the objective is to
learn features that are good enough to fool a discriminator
into classifying source samples as target and vice versa. A
major limitation with these methods is that while learning
domain agnostic feature representations, they do not consider the ﬁner class speciﬁc structure of the samples during
the alignment resulting in noisy predictions near classiﬁer
boundaries. They do not take into account, for example,
the fact that the afﬁnity of different categories across source
and target towards alignment can be different, which might
lead to misalignment of few categories as shown in Fig. 1.
This problem is alleviated to an extent by many follow-up
works that make use of target pseudo labels to guide class
speciﬁc alignment [27, 21, 37, 50, 40, 75, 49]. However,
the performance of these approaches is in most cases tied
to the reliability of predicted pseudo labels which can be
noisy without adequate ﬁltering measures, leading to negative alignment between unrelated categories.
In this work, we address these limitations by proposing a
novel adaptation approach called ILA-DA (Instance Level
Afﬁnity-based Domain Adaptation). We combine ideas

5361

