TransNAS-Bench-101: Improving transferability and Generalizability of
Cross-Task Neural Architecture Search
Yawen Duan1, *, Xin Chen1,∗ , Hang Xu2 , Zewei Chen2 , Xiaodan Liang3,†, Tong Zhang4 , Zhenguo Li2
1
The University of Hong Kong, 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab, 3 Sun Yat-sen University,
4
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Recent breakthroughs of Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) extend the field’s research scope towards a broader
range of vision tasks and more diversified search spaces.
While existing NAS methods mostly design architectures on
a single task, algorithms that look beyond single-task search
are surging to pursue a more efficient and universal solution
across various tasks. Many of them leverage transfer learning and seek to preserve, reuse, and refine network design
knowledge to achieve higher efficiency in future tasks. However, the enormous computational cost and experiment complexity of cross-task NAS are imposing barriers for valuable research in this direction. Existing NAS benchmarks
all focus on one type of vision task, i.e., classification. In
this work, we propose TransNAS-Bench-101, a benchmark
dataset containing network performance across seven tasks,
covering classification, regression, pixel-level prediction,
and self-supervised tasks. This diversity provides opportunities to transfer NAS methods among tasks and allows
for more complex transfer schemes to evolve. We explore
two fundamentally different types of search space: cell-level
search space and macro-level search space. With 7,352
backbones evaluated on seven tasks, 51,464 trained models with detailed training information are provided. With
TransNAS-Bench-101, we hope to encourage the advent of
exceptional NAS algorithms that raise cross-task search efficiency and generalizability to the next level. Our dataset
and code will be available at Mindspore1 and VEGA2 .

1. Introduction
In recent years, networks found by Neural Architecture Search (NAS) methods are surpassing human-designed
ones, setting state-of-the-art performance on various tasks
* Equal contribution. ({kmdaniel, cyn0531}@connect.hku.hk)
† Corresponding author. (xdliang328@gmail.com)
1 https://download.mindspore.cn/dataset/TransNAS-Bench-101
2 https://www.noahlab.com.hk/opensource/vega/page/doc.html?
path=datasets/transnasbench101

[25, 21]. Ultimately, NAS calls for algorithmic solutions
that can discover near-optimal models for any task within
any search space under moderate computational budgets.
To pursue this goal, recent research in NAS quickly expanded its scope into broader vision domains such as object
detection [27] and semantic segmentation [5]. [24] seeks
to bridge the gap between sample-based and one-shot approaches. Besides searching for an optimal cell design in
earlier works [18], many recent works also investigate the
macro skeleton search of a network [29, 27].
Although many algorithms successfully shortened the
search time of NAS from months to hours [18, 9], some research has shown their reliance on specific search spaces
and datasets [28]. There are also questions on these algorithms’ efficiency when dealing with a large number of
tasks [6]. A rising direction of NAS research is thus looking for solutions that acquire transferable knowledge and
generalize well across multiple tasks and search spaces
[20, 26, 23, 14, 10]. [6] explores meta-learning to transfer network design knowledge from small tasks to larger
tasks, surpassing many efficient solutions based on parameter sharing. [3] proposes a highly memory-efficient
and effective transfer solution that does not require backpropagation for adaptation. Central to these works’ investigations are two key considerations: the transferability of
an algorithm, namely how much information an algorithm
can effectively reuse, and generalizability, which evaluates
whether a solution can be applied to different settings (e.g.,
search spaces) and still performs well.
Meanwhile, NAS is prohibitively costly. The computational intensity of single-task NAS can be discouraging, not
to mention cross-task NAS experiments. To solve this computation limitation, NAS-Bench-101 [30] and NAS-Bench201 [8] were proposed. These benchmarks have offered
great values for the NAS community, but we believe the
research scope of NAS can be further enlarged beyond classification problems and cell-based search spaces. To avoid
confusion, throughout this paper we use dataset to refer to
a set of original images, and task for pointing to certain vision domain. Hence, there can be multiple tasks for one
15251

