KRISP: Integrating Implicit and Symbolic Knowledge for Open-Domain
Knowledge-Based VQA
Kenneth Marino1,2 * Xinlei Chen2
1

Devi Parikh2,3

Carnegie Mellon University

2

Abhinav Gupta1,2

Facebook AI Research

3

Marcus Rohrbach2
Georgia Tech

Abstract

Symbolic Knowledge
fruit

apple juice

citrus

One of the most challenging question types in VQA is
when answering the question requires outside knowledge
not present in the image. In this work we study open-domain
knowledge, the setting when the knowledge required to answer a question is not given/annotated, neither at training
nor test time. We tap into two types of knowledge representations and reasoning. First, implicit knowledge which can
be learned effectively from unsupervised language pretraining and supervised training data with transformer-based
models. Second, explicit, symbolic knowledge encoded in
knowledge bases. Our approach combines both—exploiting
the powerful implicit reasoning of transformer models for
answer prediction, and integrating symbolic representations from a knowledge graph, while never losing their explicit semantics to an implicit embedding. We combine diverse sources of knowledge to cover the wide variety of
knowledge needed to solve knowledge-based questions. We
show our approach, KRISP (Knowledge Reasoning with
Implicit and Symbolic rePresentations), significantly outperforms state-of-the-art on OK-VQA, the largest available
dataset for open-domain knowledge-based VQA. We show
with extensive ablations that while our model successfully
exploits implicit knowledge reasoning, the symbolic answer
module which explicitly connects the knowledge graph to
the answer vocabulary is critical to the performance of our
method and generalizes to rare answers. 1

1. Introduction
Consider the example shown in Fig. 1. To answer
this question, we not only need to parse the question and
understand the image but also use external knowledge.
Early work in VQA focused on image and question parsing [2, 6, 23, 49, 50] assuming all required knowledge can
be learned from the VQA training set. However, learn* Work done during internship at Facebook
1 Code and more are available at https : / / github . com /

facebookresearch/krisp

juice

drink

liquid
is a
used for

orange

orange juice

Implicit Knowledge

Which liquid here comes from a citrus fruit?

… In English, the color orange is named after the
appearance of the ripe orange fruit … Orange
juice or grapefruit juice is a common breakfast
beverage …

BERT

?
Orange juice

Figure 1. An OK-VQA [51] example that requires external knowledge. Our KRISP model uses a symbolic knowledge graph as well
as the implicit knowledge learned from large-scale BERT training
to answer the question.

ing knowledge from image-question-answer triplets in the
training data is not scalable and is liable to biases in the
training data. We should exploit other external knowledge
sources such as Wikipedia or knowledge graphs. The recent
OK-VQA dataset [51] consists of these types of questions
and allows us to study open-domain knowledge in VQA.
We can define two types of knowledge representation
that can be useful for these types of questions: First we
have implicit knowledge, knowledge which is embedded
into some non-symbolic form such as the weights of a neural network derived from annotated data or large-scale unsupervised language training. Recently, transformer- and
specifically BERT- [16] based multi-modal VQA models
have been proposed [40, 46, 47], which incorporate large
scale language pretraining, implicitly capturing language
based, as well as multimodal knowledge. This type of
knowledge can be quite useful, but we find this form of implicitly learned knowledge is not sufficient to answer many
knowledge-based questions as we will show. Perhaps this
is not surprising if one considers that many facts are rare
such as “Thomas Newcomen invented the steam engine”
and learning them with implicit representations might be
less efficient while there are external sources and knowledge bases that state it explicitly.
The other type of knowledge typically studied is explicit or symbolic knowledge, often in the form of knowl-

14111

