Uncertainty-guided Model Generalization to Unseen Domains
Fengchun Qiao
University of Delaware

Xi Peng
University of Delaware

fengchun@udel.edu

xipeng@udel.edu

Abstract
We study a worst-case scenario in generalization: Outof-domain generalization from a single source. The goal is
to learn a robust model from a single source and expect it
to generalize over many unknown distributions. This challenging problem has been seldom investigated while existing
solutions suffer from various limitations. In this paper, we
propose a new solution. The key idea is to augment the
source capacity in both input and label spaces, while the
augmentation is guided by uncertainty assessment. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first work to (1) access
the generalization uncertainty from a single source and (2)
leverage it to guide both input and label augmentation for
robust generalization. The model training and deployment
are effectively organized in a Bayesian meta-learning framework. We conduct extensive comparisons and ablation study
to validate our approach. The results prove our superior
performance in a wide scope of tasks including image classification, semantic segmentation, text classification, and
speech recognition.

1. Introduction
Existing machine learning algorithms have achieved remarkable success under the assumption that training and
test data are sampled from similar distributions. When this
assumption no longer holds, even strong models (e.g., deep
neural networks) may fail to produce reliable predictions. In
this paper, we study a worst-case scenario in generalization:
Out-of-domain generalization from a single source. A model
learned from a single source is expected to generalize over
a series of unknown distributions. This problem is more
challenging than domain adaptation [39, 42, 63, 34] which
usually requires the assessment of target distributions during
training, and domain generalization [41, 14, 33, 4, 9] which
often assumes the availability of multiple sources. For example, there exists significant distribution difference in medical
images collected across different hospitals. The intelligent
1 The source code and pre-trained models are publicly available at:
https://github.com/joffery/UMGUD.

diagnosis system is required to process images unexplored
during training where model update is infeasible due to time
or resource limitations.
Recently, [59] casts this problem in an ensemble framework. It learns a group of models each of which tackles
an unseen test domain. This is achieved by performing adversarial training [15] on the source to mimic the unseen
test distributions. Yet, its generalization capability is limited due to the proposed semantic constraint, which allows
only a small amount of data augmentation to avoid semantic
changes in the label space. To address this limitation, [45]
proposes adversarial domain augmentation to relax the constraint. By maximizing the Wasserstein distance between
the source and augmentation, the domain transportation is
significantly enlarged in the input space.
However, existing data (domain) augmentation based
methods [59, 44, 8, 6, 22] merely consider to increase the
source capacity by perturbing the input space. Few of them
investigate the possibility of label augmentation. An exception is Mixup [66] which pioneers label augmentation
by randomly interpolating two data examples in both input
and label spaces. However, Mixup can hardly address the
out-of-domain generalization problem since it is restricted
in creating in-domain generations due to the linear interpolation assumption. Besides, the interpolations are randomly
sampled from a fixed distribution, which also largely restricts
the flexibility of domain mixtures, yielding sub-optimal performance for unseen domain generalization.
Another limitation of existing work [41, 14, 33, 4, 9] is
they usually overlook the potential risk of leveraging augmented data in tackling out-of-domain generalization. This
raises serious safety and security concerns in mission-critical
applications [11]. For instance, when deploying self-driving
cars in unknown environments, it is crucial to be aware of
the predictive uncertainty in risk assessment.
To tackle the aforementioned limitations, we propose uncertain out-of-domain generalization. The key idea is to
increase the source capacity guided by uncertainty estimation in both input and label spaces. More specifically, in the
input space, instead of directly augmenting raw data [59, 45],
we apply uncertainty-guided perturbations to latent fea-

6790

