Temporal Query Networks for Fine-grained Video Understanding
Chuhan Zhang
University of Oxford

Ankush Gupta
DeepMind, London

Andrew Zisserman
University of Oxford

czhang@robots.ox.ac.uk

ankushgupta@google.com

az@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Coarse action recognition

Our objective in this work is fine-grained classification of
actions in untrimmed videos, where the actions may be temporally extended or may span only a few frames of the video.
We cast this into a query-response mechanism, where each
query addresses a particular question, and has its own response label set.
We make the following four contributions: (i) We propose a new model—a Temporal Query Network—which
enables the query-response functionality, and a structural
understanding of fine-grained actions. It attends to relevant segments for each query with a temporal attention
mechanism, and can be trained using only the labels for
each query. (ii) We propose a new way—stochastic feature bank update—to train a network on videos of various lengths with the dense sampling required to respond
to fine-grained queries. (iii) we compare the TQN to
other architectures and text supervision methods, and analyze their pros and cons. Finally, (iv) we evaluate the
method extensively on the FineGym and Diving48 benchmarks for fine-grained action classification and surpass the
state-of-the-art using only RGB features. Project page:
https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/~vgg/research/tqn/.

1. Introduction
Imagine that you wish to answer particular questions about
a video. These questions could be quite general, e.g., “what
instrument is being played?”, quite specific, e.g., “do people
shake hands?”, or require a composite answer, e.g., “how
many somersaults, if any, are performed in this video, and
where?”. Answering these questions will in general require attending to the entire video (to ensure that nothing
is missed), and the response is query dependent. Further,
the response may depend on only a very few frames where
a subtle action occurs. With such video understanding capability, it is possible to effortlessly carry out regular video
metrology such as performance evaluation in sports training, or issuing reports on video logs.

dribbling basketball

braiding hair

salsa dancing

playing trumpet

Fine-grained action recognition
leap forward with leg change and 0.25 turn to side split

leg change

leap
0.25 turn

side split

Figure 1. Coarse vs. fine-grained action recognition. Top: Object and background cues from only a few frames can inform classic coarse-grained action recognition in datasets like Kinetics [27],
where visually distinct activities are to be distinguished. Bottom:
However, for finer-grain classification which depends on subtle
differences in pose, the specific sequence, duration and number of
certain sub-actions, as for the gymnastics sequence above, requires
reasoning about events at varying temporal scales and attention to
fine details. We develop a novel query-based video network and a
training framework for such fine-grained temporal reasoning.

The objective of this paper is a network and training framework that will enable questions of various granularity to be
answered on a video. Specifically, we consider untrimmed
videos and train with weak supervision, meaning that at
training time we are not provided with the temporal localization information for the response. To this end, we introduce a new Transformer-based [56] video network architecture, the Temporal Query Network (TQN), for fine-grained
action classification. The TQN ingests a video and a predefined set of queries and outputs responses for each query,
where the response is query dependent.
The queries act as ‘experts’ that are able to pick out from
the video the temporal segments required for their response.
Since the temporal position of the response is unknown,
they must examine the entire duration of the video and be
able to ignore irrelevant content, in a similar manner to a
‘matched filter’ [54]. Furthermore, since the duration of response segments may only be a few frames, excessive temporal aggregation (for example, by average pooling the entire untrimmed video) may lose the signal in the noise.

4486

