Cycle4Completion: Unpaired Point Cloud Completion using Cycle
Transformation with Missing Region Coding
Xin Wen1 , Zhizhong Han2 , Yan-Pei Cao3 , Pengfei Wan3 , Wen Zheng3 , Yu-Shen Liu1 *
1
School of Software, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, Wayne State University, USA
3
Y-tech, Kuaishou Technology, Beijing, China
x-wen16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn h312h@wayne.edu caoyanpei@gmail.com
{wanpengfei,zhengwen}@kuaishou.com liuyushen@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we present a novel unpaired point cloud
completion network, named Cycle4Completion, to infer the
complete geometries from a partial 3D object. Previous
unpaired completion methods merely focus on the learning of geometric correspondence from incomplete shapes
to complete shapes, and ignore the learning in the reverse
direction, which makes them suffer from low completion
accuracy due to the limited 3D shape understanding ability. To address this problem, we propose two simultaneous
cycle transformations between the latent spaces of complete shapes and incomplete ones. Specifically, the first
cycle transforms shapes from incomplete domain to complete domain, and then projects them back to the incomplete domain. This process learns the geometric characteristic of complete shapes, and maintains the shape consistency between the complete prediction and the incomplete
input. Similarly, the inverse cycle transformation starts
from complete domain to incomplete domain, and goes
back to complete domain to learn the characteristic of incomplete shapes. We experimentally show that our model
with the learned bidirectional geometry correspondence
outperforms state-of-the-art unpaired completion methods.
Code will be available at https:// github.com/
diviswen/Cycle4Completion.

1. Introduction
Point clouds, as a popular 3D representation, can be easily produced by 3D scanning devices and depth cameras.
However, due to the limitations of the view angles of cam* Corresponding author. This work was supported by National Key
R&D Program of China (2020YFF0304100, 2018YFB0505400), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (62072268), and in part by
Tsinghua-Kuaishou Institute of Future Media Data.

era/scanning devices and self-occlusion, raw point clouds
are often sparse, noisy and partial, which usually require
shape completion before being analyzed in further applications such as shape classification [27, 14, 23, 21, 24],
retrieval [11, 7, 12], semantic/instance segmentation [22,
39]. Although the recent data-driven supervised completion methods [16, 46, 42, 44, 17, 20] have achieved impressive performance, they heavily rely on the paired training
data, which consists of incomplete shapes and their corresponding complete ground truth. In real-world applications,
however, such high quality and large-scale paired training
dataset is not easy to access, which makes it hard to directly
train a supervised completion network.
A promising but challenging solution to this problem is
to learn a completion network in an unpaired way, where the
common practice is to establish the shape correspondence
between the incomplete shapes and complete ones from the
unpaired training data without requiring the incomplete and
complete correspondence. The latest work like Pcl2Pcl [2]
introduced an adversarial framework to merge the geometric gap between the complete shape distribution and incomplete one in the latent representation space. Although many
efforts have been made to learn the geometric correspondence from incomplete shapes to complete ones, previous
methods ignore the inverse correspondence from complete
shapes to incomplete ones, which leads to low completion
accuracy due to the limited 3D shape understanding ability.
To address this problem, we propose a novel unpaired point cloud completion network, named Cycle4Completion, to establish the geometric correspondence
between incomplete and complete shapes in both directions.
We achieve this by designing two cycle transformations,
i.e. the incomplete cycle transformation (incomplete-cycle)
and the complete cycle transformation (complete-cycle), as
shown in Figure 1. The incomplete-cycle in Figure 1(a)
learns the mapping from the incomplete domain to the com-

13080

