Multi-view 3D Reconstruction of a Texture-less Smooth Surface of Unknown
Generic Reflectance
Ziang Cheng1 , Hongdong Li1 , Yuta Asano2 , Yinqiang Zheng3 , Imari Sato2
1
Australian National University
2
National Institute of Informatics,3 The University of Tokyo, Japan
{ziang.cheng,hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au

1. Introduction
Normal

Depth

Reflectance
Multi-view images
(10 in total)

Input

Point
cloud
visualization
Shape
visualization
(rendered from novel viewpoints)

Recovered shape and reflectance

Figure 1: From a small set of input multi-view image (left), our
method recovers the dense 3D object (middle) and its unknown
generic surface reflectance (right).

Abstract

Recovering the 3D geometry of a purely texture-less object with generally unknown surface reflectance (e.g. nonLambertian) is regarded as a challenging task in multiview reconstruction. The major obstacle revolves around
establishing cross-view correspondences where photometric constancy is violated. This paper proposes a simple
and practical solution to overcome this challenge based on
a co-located camera-light scanner device. Unlike existing
solutions, we do not explicitly solve for correspondence.
Instead, we argue the problem is generally well-posed by
multi-view geometrical and photometric constraints, and
can be solved from a small number of input views. We formulate the reconstruction task as a joint energy minimization over the surface geometry and reflectance. Despite this
energy is highly non-convex, we develop an optimization algorithm that robustly recovers globally optimal shape and
reflectance even from a random initialization. Extensive experiments on both simulated and real data have validated
our method, and possible future extensions are discussed.

3D reconstruction from multi-view images is one of
the central problems in computer vision. Most traditional
multi-view reconstruction methods such as SFM (structure
from motion) often assume the scene or object to be reconstructed have distinctive features that are view-independent,
so that cross-view feature correspondences can be readily established. However, this is not the case for many
commonly-seen real-world objects or surfaces manifesting non-Lambertian reflectance. Traditional SFM methods are unable to reconstruct such texture-less surfaces with
glossy appearance. The problem is even more challenging
if the generic surface reflectance is unknown, in which case
there is no apparent way to model how object’s appearance
changes with viewpoint.

Figure 2: Two experiment setups: Hardware used for capturing
images under a co-located setup. A point light source is rigidly
attached to camera lens with a small displacement.

By marrying photometric stereo with traditional multiview methods, many papers have succeeded in overcoming parts of these challenges. Most of these methods are
reliant on an external initialization of the 3D shape (e.g.
[27, 6, 24]) to establish initial correspondences. Typically,
finer-grained details are added incrementally to the recovered geometry. However, good initialization is not often guaranteed (e.g. many require initial shape from SFM
pipelines, which are already vulnerable to textureless surface or specular highlights), and a large number of input
images are often required. Additionally, many methods re-

16226

