Seeking the Shape of Sound: An Adaptive Framework for
Learning Voice-Face Association
Peisong Wen1,2
Zhiyong Yang3,4

Qianqian Xu1,∗
Yuan He5

Yangbangyan Jiang3,4
Qingming Huang1,2,6,7,∗

1

2

Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
School of Computer Science and Tech., University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
State Key Laboratory of Info. Security (SKLOIS), Inst. of Info. Engin., CAS, Beijing, China
4
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
5
Alibaba Group, Beijing, China
6
BDKM, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
7
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

{wenpeisong20z,xuqianqian}@ict.ac.cn

{jiangyangbangyan,yangzhiyong}@iie.ac.cn

heyuan.hy@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Nowadays, we have witnessed the early progress on
learning the association between voice and face automatically, which brings a new wave of studies to the computer vision community. However, most of the prior arts along this
line (a) merely adopt local information to perform modality
alignment and (b) ignore the diversity of learning difficulty
across different subjects. In this paper, we propose a novel
framework to jointly address the above-mentioned issues.
Targeting at (a), we propose a two-level modality alignment
loss where both global and local information are considered. Compared with the existing methods, we introduce a
global loss into the modality alignment process. The global
component of the loss is driven by the identity classification. Theoretically, we show that minimizing the loss could
maximize the distance between embeddings across different identities while minimizing the distance between embeddings belonging to the same identity, in a global sense
(instead of a mini-batch). Targeting at (b), we propose a
dynamic reweighting scheme to better explore the hard but
valuable identities while filtering out the unlearnable identities. Experiments show that the proposed method outperforms the previous methods in multiple settings, including
voice-face matching, verification and retrieval.

1. Introduction
Voice and face share various potential characteristics,
e.g., gender, ethnicity, age, which are helpful for identifi-

qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn

cation and matching. Literatures [23, 10, 15] show that humans can hear the voice of an unknown person and match
the corresponding face with higher accuracy than chance,
and vice versa. From the perspective of brain science, multimodal brain regions exist in the human brain, which process both voices and faces to form person identity representations [26]. Can machines learn such ability to recognize
the face with the same identity only by hearing the voice,
or recognize the voice from the face? In recent years, researchers have started to seek an answer to this interesting
question [17, 30]. The research of this technology is beneficial to many application scenarios, including criminal investigation, synthesis or retrieval of human faces from voices
[19, 31, 2, 3], etc. This task can be specialized as crossmodal matching, verification and retrieval problems. Different from the audio-visual speech recognition task [34],
the voice-face association problem is aim to find the identity relationship between face and voice, rather than the relationship between voice and facial action.
In recent years, we have witnessed some progress of
early studies along this line. As a representative example, SVHF [17] regards the matching problem as a binary
classification problem, and has achieved comparable performance with human baseline in both voice-to-face matching
and face-to-voice matching. Benefit from the development
of deep learning and the cross-modal retrieval technology,
some recent work [11, 27, 8, 33, 16] has further verified
the feasibility of this problem through deep metric learning.
Wen et al. [30] boost the performance with multiple supervision.
Despite previous methods have been able to reach the

∗ Corresponding authors

16347

