Uncalibrated Neural Inverse Rendering for Photometric Stereo of General
Surfaces
Berk Kaya1 Suryansh Kumar1 Carlos Oliveira1 Vittorio Ferrari2 Luc Van Gool1,3
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich1 , Google Research2 , KU Leuven3

Abstract
This paper presents an uncalibrated deep neural network
framework for the photometric stereo problem. For training
models to solve the problem, existing neural network-based
methods either require exact light directions or groundtruth surface normals of the object or both. However, in
practice, it is challenging to procure both of this information precisely, which restricts the broader adoption of photometric stereo algorithms for vision application. To bypass
this difficulty, we propose an uncalibrated neural inverse
rendering approach to this problem. Our method first estimates the light directions from the input images and then
optimizes an image reconstruction loss to calculate the surface normals, bidirectional reflectance distribution function
value, and depth. Additionally, our formulation explicitly
models the concave and convex parts of a complex surface
to consider the effects of interreflections in the image formation process. Extensive evaluation of the proposed method
on the challenging subjects generally shows comparable or
better results than the supervised and classical approaches.

1. Introduction
Since Woodham’s seminal work [69], the photometric
stereo problem has become a popular choice to estimate an
object’s surface normals from its light varying images. The
formulation proposed in that paper assumes the Lambertian
reflectance model of the object, and therefore, it does not
apply to general objects with unknown reflectance property.
While multiple-view geometry methods exist to achieve a
similar goal [57, 20, 70, 76, 35, 24, 36, 37], photometric
stereo is excellent at recovering fine details on the surface,
like indentations, imprints, and even scratches. Of course,
the solution proposed in Woodham’s paper has some unrealistic assumptions. Still, it is central to the development of
several robust algorithms [71, 30, 55, 1, 22, 26] and also lies
at the core of the current state-of-the-art deep photometric
stereo methods [28, 65, 12, 10, 11, 42, 41, 27].
Generally, deep learning-based photometric stereo methods assume a calibrated setting, where all the light source

information is given both at the train and test time [28, 56,
12, 65]. Such methods attempt to learn an explicit relation
between the reflectance map and the ground-truth surface
normals. But, the exact estimation of light directions is a tedious process and requires expert skill for calibration. Motivated by that, Chen et al. [10, 11] recently proposed an uncalibrated photometric stereo method. Though it estimates
light directions using image data, the proposed method requires ground-truth surface normals for training the neural
network. Certainly, procuring ground-truth 3D surface geometry is difficult, if not impossible, which makes the acquisition task of correct surface normals strenuous. For 3D
data acquisition, active sensors are mostly used, which is
expensive and often needs post-processing of the data to remove noise and outliers. Hence, the necessity of groundtruth surface normals limits the usage of such an approach.
Further, most photometric stereo methods, including current deep-learning methods, assume that each surface point
is illuminated only by the light source, which generally
holds for a convex surface [49]. However, objects, mainly
from ancient architectures, have complex geometric structures, where the shape may compose of convex, concave,
and other fine geometric primitives (see Fig.1(a)). When
illuminated under a varying light source, certain concave
parts of the surface might reflect light onto other parts of
the object, depending on its position. Surprisingly, this phenomenon of interreflections is often ignored in the modeling
and formulation of a photometric stereo problem, despite its
vital role in the object’s imaging [28, 65, 12, 10, 11].
In this work, we overcome the above shortcomings by
proposing an uncalibrated neural inverse rendering network.
We first estimate all the light source directions and intensities using image data. Computed light source information
is then fed into the proposed neural inverse rendering network to estimate the surface normals. The idea is, those correct surface normals, when provided to the rendering equation, should reconstruct the input image as close as possible. Consequently, we can bypass the requirement of the
ground-truth surface normals at train time. Unlike recent
methods, we model the effects of both the light source and
the interreflections for rendering the image. Although one

3804

