Semantic Segmentation with Generative Models:
Semi-Supervised Learning and Strong Out-of-Domain Generalization
Daiqing Li1 *
1

NVIDIA

Junlin Yang1,3
2

Karsten Kreis1

University of Toronto

3

Yale University
Training

Abstract
Training deep networks with limited labeled data while
achieving a strong generalization ability is key in the quest
to reduce human annotation efforts. This is the goal of
semi-supervised learning, which exploits more widely available unlabeled data to complement small labeled data sets.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework for discriminative pixel-level tasks using a generative model of both
images and labels. Concretely, we learn a generative adversarial network that captures the joint image-label distribution and is trained efficiently using a large set of unlabeled images supplemented with only few labeled ones.
We build our architecture on top of StyleGAN2 [45], augmented with a label synthesis branch. Image labeling at
test time is achieved by first embedding the target image
into the joint latent space via an encoder network and testtime optimization, and then generating the label from the inferred embedding. We evaluate our approach in two important domains: medical image segmentation and part-based
face segmentation. We demonstrate strong in-domain performance compared to several baselines, and are the first
to showcase extreme out-of-domain generalization, such as
transferring from CT to MRI in medical imaging, and photographs of real faces to paintings, sculptures, and even
cartoons and animal faces. Project Page: https://nvtlabs.github.io/semanticGAN/

1. Introduction
Deep learning is now powering the majority of computer vision applications ranging from autonomous driving [93, 73] and medical imaging [78, 38] to image editing [69, 15, 98, 88, 70, 74]. However, deep networks are
extremely data hungry, typically requiring training on largescale datasets to achieve high accuracy. Even when large
datasets are available, generalizing the network’s performance to out-of-distribution data, for example, on images
captured by a different sensor, presents challenges, since
deep networks tend to overfit to artificial statistics in the
* Correspondence to {daiqingl,sfidler}@nvidia.com

Antonio Torralba4
4

MIT

5

Sanja Fidler1,2,5

Vector Institute
Out-of-Domain Test Images

CT
xray

MRI

Figure 1: Out-of-domain Generalization. Our model trained on real
faces generalizes to paintings, sculptures, cartoons and even outputs plausible segmentations for animal faces. When trained on chest x-rays, it generalizes to multiple hospitals, and even hallucinates lungs under clothed
people. Our model also generalizes well from CT to MRI medical scans.

training data. Labeling large datasets, particularly for dense
pixel-level tasks such as semantic segmentation, is already
very time consuming. Re-doing the annotation effort each
time the sensor changes is especially undesirable. This is
particularly true in the medical domain, where pixel-level
annotations are expensive to obtain (require highly-skilled
experts), and where imaging sensors vary across sites. In
this paper, we aim to significantly reduce the number of
training data required for attaining successful performance,
while achieving strong out-of-domain generalization.
Semi-supervised learning (SSL) facilitates learning with
small labeled data sets by augmenting the training set with
large amounts of unlabeled data. The literature on SSL is
vast and some classical SSL techniques include pseudolabeling [50, 2, 8, 83], consistency regularization [80, 49,
87, 23, 83], and various data augmentation techniques [7,
6, 91] (also see Sec. 2). State-of-the-art SSL performance
is currently achieved by contrastive learning, which aims to
train powerful image feature extractors using unsupervised
contrastive losses on image transformations [13, 29, 61, 32].
Once the feature extractors are trained, a smaller amount of
labels is needed, since the features already implicitly encode semantic information. While SSL approaches have
been more widely explored for classification, recent methods also tackle pixel-wise tasks [37, 62, 40, 47, 22, 68].
Although SSL techniques allow to train models with little labeled data, they usually do not explicitly model the dis-

8300

