Rethinking Graph Neural Architecture Search from Message-passing
Shaofei Cai1,2 , Liang Li1 ,* Jincan Deng1,2 , Beichen Zhang1,2 , Zheng-Jun Zha3 , Li Su2 , Qingming Huang1,2,4
1
Key Lab of Intell. Info. Process., Inst. of Comput. Tech., CAS, Beijing, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
University of Science and Technology of China, China, 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{shaofei.cai,jincan.deng,beichen.zhang}@vipl.ict.ac.cn,liang.li@ict.ac.cn,zhazj@ustc.edu.cn,
{suli,qmhuang}@ucas.ac.cn

Abstract
Graph neural networks (GNNs) emerged recently as a
standard toolkit for learning from data on graphs. Current GNN designing works depend on immense human expertise to explore different message-passing mechanisms,
and require manual enumeration to determine the proper
message-passing depth. Inspired by the strong searching
capability of neural architecture search (NAS) in CNN, this
paper proposes Graph Neural Architecture Search (GNAS)
with novel-designed search space. The GNAS can automatically learn better architecture with the optimal depth
of message passing on the graph. Specifically, we design Graph Neural Architecture Paradigm (GAP) with treetopology computation procedure and two types of finegrained atomic operations (feature filtering & neighbor aggregation) from message-passing mechanism to construct
powerful graph network search space. Feature filtering performs adaptive feature selection, and neighbor aggregation
captures structural information and calculates neighbors’
statistics. Experiments show that our GNAS can search
for better GNNs with multiple message-passing mechanisms and optimal message-passing depth. The searched
network achieves remarkable improvement over state-ofthe-art manual designed and search-based GNNs on five
large-scale datasets at three classical graph tasks. Codes
can be found at https://github.com/phython96/
GNAS-MP.

1. Introduction
Neural architecture search automatically designs effective neural networks and has achieved remarkable performance beyond manually designed networks. Most works
focus on searching CNN and RNN networks for vision and
* Corresponding author.

language tasks [15, 20, 36, 38], including multi-label object recognition [16, 32], detection [8], and sequence prediction [24]. Recently, benefiting from the powerful reasoning capability, GNN has attracted much attention from
researchers. It has become the standard toolkit for analyzing complex graph-structure data. In this paper, we introduce graph neural architecture search for improving GNNs’
reasoning capability.
The core of GNN is the message-passing mechanism on
the graph, which aggregates neighbors’ information and updates center node representations. The common messagepassing mechanisms can be divided into two classes: (1)
isotropic mechanism (e.g. GCN [12], GraphSage [9]) treats
every “edge direction” equally in node update equation. (2)
anisotropic mechanism (e.g. GAT [31], GatedGCN [4]) assigns weight for every edge according to joint representations of adjacent nodes. For example, GAT and GatedGCN
compute edge weights based on sparse attention and dense
attention mechanisms, respectively [5]. Each mechanism
has its characteristics of information transmission. Current
GNNs are usually stacked to multiple layers with the same
message-passing mechanism to capture long-range node dependencies. An onefold message-passing mechanism limits
the reasoning power of graph networks. However, manually designing GNNs with multiple message-passing mechanisms requires immense human expertise.
Another critical problem for GNN is determining the
number of graph convolution layers, that is, the depth of
message-passing. Different from CNN, recent works [17,
29, 33] show that GNN’s reasoning capability degrades as
the network goes too deep. This results from that the representations of adjacent nodes become closer to each other
after each graph convolution. In theory, with an extreme
depth, all nodes’ representations will converge to a stationary point. Further, the network depth is dataset-relevant.
Specifically, it depends on the diameter of the graph in the
specific dataset. In order to find the optimal network depth,
current works usually use enumeration with the high com-

6657

