SSAN: Separable Self-Attention Network for Video Representation Learning
Xudong Guo∗1
1
Tsinghua University

Xun Guo2
Yan Lu2
2
Microsoft Research Asia

gxd20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn {xunguo, yanlu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Self-attention has been successfully applied to video representation learning due to the effectiveness of modeling
long range dependencies. Existing approaches build the
dependencies merely by computing the pairwise correlations along spatial and temporal dimensions simultaneously. However, spatial correlations and temporal correlations represent different contextual information of scenes
and temporal reasoning. Intuitively, learning spatial contextual information first will benefit temporal modeling. In
this paper, we propose a separable self-attention (SSA)
module, which models spatial and temporal correlations sequentially, so that spatial contexts can be efficiently used in
temporal modeling. By adding SSA module into 2D CNN,
we build a SSA network (SSAN) for video representation
learning. On the task of video action recognition, our approach outperforms state-of-the-art methods on SomethingSomething and Kinetics-400 datasets. Our models often
outperform counterparts with shallower network and fewer
modalities. We further verify the semantic learning ability of our method in visual-language task of video retrieval,
which showcases the homogeneity of video representations
and text embeddings. On MSR-VTT and Youcook2 datasets,
video representations learnt by SSA significantly improve
the state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Video representation learning is crucial for tasks such as
detection, segmentation and action recognition. Although
2D and 3D CNN based approaches have been extensively
explored to capture the spatial-temporal correlations for
these tasks, learning strong and generic video representations is still challenging. One possible reason is that videos
contain not only rich semantic elements within individual
frames, but also the temporal reasoning across time which
links those elements to reveal the semantic-level information for actions and events. Effective modeling of long
∗ The work was done when the author was with MSRA as an intern.

Figure 1. Comparison between separable self-attention and
spatial-temporal self-attention on Kinetics. The red points are
query regions, and the arrows point to the relevant regions (Top-10
attention weights) with the query regions. Separable self-attention
learns more action related regions (hand and basket).

range dependencies among pixels is essential to capture
such contextual information, which current CNN operations
can hardly achieve. RNN based methods [23] have been
used for this purpose. However, they suffer from the high
computational cost. More importantly, RNN cannot establish the direct pairwise relationship between positions regardless of their distance.
Self-attention mechanism has been recognized as an effective way to build long range dependencies. In natural
language processing, self-attention based transformer [35]
has been successfully used to capture contextual information from sequential data, e.g., sentences. Recent efforts
have also introduced self-attention to computer vision domain for visual tasks such as segmentation and classification [40, 47, 37, 14]. The work from Wang et al. [37] proposed a generic self-attention form, i.e., non-local mean,
for video action recognition, which builds pairwise correlations for pixel locations from space and time simultaneously. However, the correlations from space and time represent different contextual information. The former often
relates to scenes and objects, and the latter often relates
to temporal reasoning for actions (short-term activities) and

12618

