Representative Forgery Mining for Fake Face Detection
Chengrui Wang, Weihong Deng*
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{crwang, whdeng}@bupt.edu.cn

Traditional strategy

1. Introduction
The rapid development of face manipulation technology
makes the manufacture of fake face more accessible than
before, which further accelerates the spread of fake facial
images on social media [2, 3, 33, 34]. Meanwhile, advanced
techniques make it extremely difficult for human to distinguish between real and fake face [5, 11], raising constant
concerns about the credibility of digital content [26, 27, 30].
To mitigate the toll that manipulation technology takes on
society, Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) is widely
used to construct detector for fake face detection [35].
Unfortunately, although vanilla CNN-based fake face detector can achieve satisfactory detection performance [28,
35], it may have a different understanding of forgery against
that of humans. Concretely, the experiment in Section 4.5
shows that vanilla CNN-based detector tends to check forgeries from a limited region of face, while humans usually
find representative forgery over the entire face. For exam-

Evaluating

Although vanilla Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
based detectors can achieve satisfactory performance on
fake face detection, we observe that the detectors tend
to seek forgeries on a limited region of face, which reveals that the detectors is short of understanding of forgery.
Therefore, we propose an attention-based data augmentation framework to guide detector refine and enlarge its attention. Specifically, our method tracks and occludes the
Top-N sensitive facial regions, encouraging the detector to
mine deeper into the regions ignored before for more representative forgery. Especially, our method is simple-touse and can be easily integrated with various CNN models. Extensive experiments show that the detector trained
with our method is capable to separately point out the
representative forgery of fake faces generated by different manipulation techniques, and our method enables a
vanilla CNN-based detector to achieve state-of-the-art performance without structure modification. Our code is available at https://github.com/crywang/RFM .

Our Method

Representative Forgery Mining

Training

Abstract

Low
Performance
&
Limited
Over-fitted
Attention

Detector

Detector

Detector

Detector

High
Performance
&
Complete
Representative
Attention

Figure 1. Comparison of detectors trained with traditional strategy and with our proposed RFM. Through refining training data,
our method provides meaningful guidance to force a vanilla detector to allocate its attention to a larger and representative facial region, which greatly improves detection performance. Meanwhile,
the region of interest raises a remarkable correlation to the corresponding manipulation technique.

ple, the representative forgeries of fake face generated by
Deepfakes [2] and Face2Face [34] usually appear on the facial boundary, while the representative forgeries of fake face
generated by StyleGAN [16] and PGGAN [15] are located
in the entire face flexibly (shown in Figure 2).
For better detection, detectors should allocate more attention to the forgeries which can significantly represent the
corresponding manipulation technique, rather than overfitting the forgeries which are mainly useful in minimizing
the bi-classification loss function on training set. Recent remarkable breakthroughs [6, 8, 11, 13, 22, 40, 36, 38, 24]
address this problem to some extent, which generally follow three directions: a) Through extracting the digital fingerprints produced by the defect of manipulation technique,
some works [24, 36, 38, 40] achieve advanced generalization performance on CNN-generated facial images; b)
Some works [6, 8] divide face into multiple patches and
detect them independently, which compulsively optimizes
the receptive field of detectors on fake face. c) With welldesigned training dataset, some works [11, 13, 22] lever-

14923

