Prototype Completion with Primitive Knowledge for Few-Shot Learning
Baoquan Zhang, Xutao Li∗, Yunming Ye∗, Zhichao Huang, Lisai Zhang
Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
zhangbaoquan@stu.hit.edu.cn, {lixutao, yeyunming}@hit.edu.cn,
iceshzc@stu.hit.edu.cn, LisaiZhang@foxmail.com

Abstract
Few-shot learning is a challenging task, which aims to
learn a classifier for novel classes with few examples. Pretraining based meta-learning methods effectively tackle the
problem by pre-training a feature extractor and then finetuning it through the nearest centroid based meta-learning.
However, results show that the fine-tuning step makes very
marginal improvements. In this paper, 1) we figure out
the key reason, i.e., in the pre-trained feature space, the
base classes already form compact clusters while novel
classes spread as groups with large variances, which implies that fine-tuning the feature extractor is less meaningful; 2) instead of fine-tuning the feature extractor, we focus
on estimating more representative prototypes during metalearning. Consequently, we propose a novel prototype completion based meta-learning framework. This framework
first introduces primitive knowledge (i.e., class-level part or
attribute annotations) and extracts representative attribute
features as priors. Then, we design a prototype completion
network to learn to complete prototypes with these priors.
To avoid the prototype completion error caused by primitive
knowledge noises or class differences, we further develop
a Gaussian based prototype fusion strategy that combines
the mean-based and completed prototypes by exploiting the
unlabeled samples. Extensive experiments show that our
method: (i) can obtain more accurate prototypes; (ii) outperforms state-of-the-art techniques by 2% ∼ 9% in terms
of classification accuracy. Our code is available online 1 .

1. Introduction
Humans can adapt to a novel task from only a few observations, because our brains have the excellent capability
of learning to learn. In contrast, modern artificial intelligence (AI) systems generally require a large amount of annotated samples to make the adaptations. However, prepar∗ Corresponding author
1 https://github.com/zhangbq-research/Prototype_
Completion_for_FSL

Incomplete

(a) Base Classes (σ 2 = 0.086)

Complete

(b) Novel Classes (σ 2 = 0.099)

Figure 1. The distribution of base and novel class samples in the
pre-trained feature space. “σ 2 ” denotes the averaged variance.

ing sufficient annotated samples is often laborious, expensive, or even unrealistic in some applications, for example,
cold-start recommendation [25] and drug discovery [1]. To
equip the AI systems with such human-like ability, few-shot
learning (FSL) becomes an important and widely studied
problem. Different from conventional machine learning,
FSL aims to learn a classifier from a set of base classes
with abundant labeled samples, then adapt to a set of novel
classes with few labeled data [28].
Existing studies on FSL roughly fall into four categories,
namely the metric-based methods [4], optimization-based
methods [8], graph-based methods [21], and semanticsbased methods [29]. Though their methodologies are totally different, almost all methods address the FSL problem by a two-phase meta-learning framework, i.e., metatraining and meta-test phases. Recently, Chen et al. [6] find
that introducing an extra pre-training phase can significantly
boost the performance. In this method, a feature extractor
first is pre-trained by learning a classifier on the entire base
classes. Then, the metric-based meta-learning is adopted to
fine-tune it. In the meta-test phase, the mean-based prototypes are constructed to classify novel classes via a nearest
neighbor classifier with cosine distance.
Though the pre-training based meta-learning method
achieves promising improvements, Chen et al. find that the
fine-tuning step indeed makes very marginal contributions
[6]. However, the reason is not revealed in [6]. To figure out

3754

