Learning Fine-Grained Segmentation of 3D Shapes without Part Labels
Xiaogang Wang1,2

Xun Sun2 Xinyu Cao2 Kai Xu3∗ Bin Zhou2 *
1
Southwest University
2
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, Beihang University
3
National University of Defense Technology

Abstract
Learning-based 3D shape segmentation is usually formulated as a semantic labeling problem, assuming that all
parts of training shapes are annotated with a given set of
tags. This assumption, however, is impractical for learning fine-grained segmentation. Although most off-the-shelf
CAD models are, by construction, composed of fine-grained
parts, they usually miss semantic tags and labeling those
fine-grained parts is extremely tedious. We approach the
problem with deep clustering, where the key idea is to learn
part priors from a shape dataset with fine-grained segmentation but no part labels. Given point sampled 3D shapes,
we model the clustering priors of points with a similarity
matrix and achieve part segmentation through minimizing
a novel low rank loss. To handle highly densely sampled
point sets, we adopt a divide-and-conquer strategy. We partition the large point set into a number of blocks. Each block
is segmented using a deep-clustering-based part prior network trained in a category-agnostic manner. We then train
a graph convolution network to merge the segments of all
blocks to form the final segmentation result. Our method
is evaluated with a challenging benchmark of fine-grained
segmentation, showing state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
3D shape segmentation is a fundamental problem in 3D
vision. While most existing works focus on semantic segmentation of 3D shapes into major parts (e.g., seat, back
and leg of a chair), many application scenarios, on the
other hand, demand fine-grained shape segmentation. A
definition of fine-grained parts was given in [22]. In that
work, fine-grained parts are defined in contrast with semantic parts. While semantic parts are major, functional ones
(e.g., the back, seat and leg parts of a chair), fine-grained
parts mainly refer to modeling components which are, albeit geometrically insignificant, conceptually meaningful in
* Corresponding author: kevin.kai.xu@gmail.com,zhoubin@buaa.edu.cn

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Two examples of fine-grained segmentation. For
each example, the left is the input point cloud and the right
is the fine-grained segmentation result.
the sense of assembly-based 3D modeling. Therefore, finegrained segmentation induces an intricate structural analysis of 3D objects, which facilitates part-based shape synthesis and modeling [13, 25] and meticulous robotic manipulation [1, 6]. Consequently, the problem receives increasing research attention lately [28, 23], along with dedicated
datasets [14].
Previous learning-based approaches to fine-grained 3D
shape segmentation usually formulate it as a semantic labeling problem. This requires a large training dataset of
3D shapes with fine-grained part segmentation and tags.
When working with most online shape repositories such as
ShapeNet [3], fine-grained part segmentation comes for free
since most off-the-shelf CAD models are, by construction,
composed of fine-grained parts. These fine-grained parts,
however, have no, or noisy semantic tags. Annotating finegrained parts with semantic tags is extremely tedious due
to the tiny part size and large part count (range from tens
to hundreds; see [23] for statistics). Moreover, many finegrained parts may not even have a well-defined tag. Due
to these reasons, the existing fine-grained part datasets [14]
does leave many parts unlabeled.
In this paper, we introduce a deep clustering based approach to fine-grained part segmentation, thus avoiding the
requirement of part labels. The key idea is to learn geometric part priors describing what constitutes a fine-grained
part, based on a shape dataset with fine-grained segmentation but no part labels. Working with point sampled
3D shapes, our method models the clustering priors of 3D
points with a similarity matrix of point features capturing

10276

