SRWarp: Generalized Image Super-Resolution under Arbitrary Transformation
Sanghyun Son
Kyoung Mu Lee
ASRI, Department of ECE, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{thstkdgus35, kyoungmu}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Deep CNNs have achieved significant successes in image processing and its applications, including single image
super-resolution (SR). However, conventional methods still
resort to some predetermined integer scaling factors, e.g.,
×2 or ×4. Thus, they are difficult to be applied when arbitrary target resolutions are required. Recent approaches extend the scope to real-valued upsampling factors, even with
varying aspect ratios to handle the limitation. In this paper, we propose the SRWarp framework to further generalize the SR tasks toward an arbitrary image transformation.
We interpret the traditional image warping task, specifically
when the input is enlarged, as a spatially-varying SR problem. We also propose several novel formulations, including the adaptive warping layer and multiscale blending, to
reconstruct visually favorable results in the transformation
process. Compared with previous methods, we do not constrain the SR model on a regular grid but allow numerous
possible deformations for flexible and diverse image editing. Extensive experiments and ablation studies justify the
necessity and demonstrate the advantage of the proposed
SRWarp method under various transformations.

1. Introduction
As one of the fundamental vision problems, image superresolution (SR) aims to reconstruct a high-resolution (HR)
image from a given low-resolution (LR) input. The SR
methods are widely used in several applications such as perceptual image enhancement [25, 39], editing [2, 30], and
digital zooming [42], due to its practical importance. Similar to the other vision-related tasks, recent convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) have achieved promising SR performance with large-scale datasets [1, 27], efficient structures [51, 52, 12], and novel optimization techniques [27,
39]. Recent state-of-the-art methods can reconstruct sharp
edges and crisp textures with fine details up to ×4 or ×8
scaling factors on various types of input data including realworld images [50, 4, 41], videos [38, 43, 13, 36, 26], hyperspectral [9, 48, 45], and light field arrays [49, 35, 40].

(a) Input
(b) OpenCV
(c) SRWarp
Figure 1: Real-world lens distortion correction using the
proposed SRWarp. The image is captured by the GoPro
HERO6 handheld camera. Our SRWarp implements SR
with locally-varying scale factors, which can be used to
transform an input image to the desired geometry.
From the perspective of image editing applications, the
SR algorithm supports users to effectively increase the number of pixels in the image and reconstruct high-frequency
details when its HR counterpart is unavailable. Such manipulation may include simple resizing with some predefined scaling factors or synthesizing images of arbitrary target resolutions. However, directly applying existing SR
methods in these situations is difficult because the models are usually designed to cope with some fixed integer
scales [25, 51, 39]. Recently, few methods have extended
the scope of the SR to upsample a given image by arbitrary
scaling factors [15] and aspect ratios [37]. These novel approaches provide more flexibility and versatility to existing
SR applications for their practical usage.
Nevertheless, existing SR models are not fully optimized
for general image editing tasks due to their intrinsic formulations. Previous approaches are also designed to take and
reconstruct such rectangular frames because digital images
are defined on a rectangular grid. On the contrary, images
may undergo various deformations in practice to effectively
adjust their contents within the context. For instance, homographic transformation [47, 24] aligns images from different views, and cameras incorporate various correction algorithms to remove distortions from the lens [34, 44]. One
of the shortcomings in the conventional warping methods is
that interpolation-based algorithms tend to generate blurry
results when a local region of the image is stretched. Hence,
an appropriate enhancement algorithm is required to pre-

7782

