Revisiting Knowledge Distillation: An Inheritance and Exploration Framework
Zhen Huang1, 2 ,* Xu Shen2 , Jun Xing3 , Tongliang Liu4 , Xinmei Tian1†,
Houqiang Li1 , Bing Deng2 , Jianqiang Huang2 , Xian-Sheng Hua2†
1
University of Science and Technology of China, 2 Alibaba Group
3
University of Southern California, 4 University of Sydney
hz13@mail.ustc.edu.cn, junxnui@gmail.com, tongliang.liu@sydney.edu.au, {xinmei,lihq}@ustc.edu.cn,
{shenxu.sx,dengbing.db,jianqiang.hjq,xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
Knowledge Distillation (KD) is a popular technique to
transfer knowledge from a teacher model or ensemble to
a student model. Its success is generally attributed to the
privileged information on similarities/consistency between
the class distributions or intermediate feature representations of the teacher model and the student model. However, directly pushing the student model to mimic the probabilities/features of the teacher model to a large extent
limits the student model in learning undiscovered knowledge/features. In this paper, we propose a novel inheritance
and exploration knowledge distillation framework (IE-KD),
in which a student model is split into two parts - inheritance
and exploration. The inheritance part is learned with a similarity loss to transfer the existing learned knowledge from
the teacher model to the student model, while the exploration part is encouraged to learn representations different
from the inherited ones with a dis-similarity loss. Our IEKD framework is generic and can be easily combined with
existing distillation or mutual learning methods for training
deep neural networks. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that these two parts can jointly push the student model to
learn more diversified and effective representations, and
our IE-KD can be a general technique to improve the student network to achieve SOTA performance. Furthermore,
by applying our IE-KD to the training of two networks, the
performance of both can be improved w.r.t. deep mutual
learning.

1. Introduction
Knowledge distillation is one of the most popular methods for transferring knowledge from one network (teacher)
* This work was done when the author was visiting Alibaba as a research intern.
† Corresponding author.

to another (student). It was first proposed by Hinton et
al. [10] to transfer knowledge from a large teacher network
(or ensemble) to a small student network that is easier to
deploy. It works by training the student to predict the target classification labels and mimic the class probabilities
of the teacher, as these features contain additional information about how the teacher tends to generalize [10]. All
recent distillation works follow this philosophy of an additional consistency control between the class probabilities
or intermediate representations of the teacher network and
the student network. KD [10] and Tf-KD [32] focus on the
consistency of output class probabilities. AT [33], AB [13],
FT [16], OD [12], FEED [22] and FitNet [24] propose different consistency controls of intermediate features. FSP
[31] proposes a consistency control of the intra-similarities
among intermediate features. In summary, all recent distillation methods differ in the metric of consistency between
the student model and the teacher model.
However, directly pushing the student model to mimic
the probabilities/features of the teacher model limits the student model in learning new knowledge/features. As shown
in Fig. 1(a), the student model trained with KD learns
very similar patterns compared with the well-trained teacher
(more results will be shown in supplementary materials). In
this case, the “cheetah” misclassified as a “crocodile” by
the teacher model is also misclassified by the student model
trained by KD. The model attributes most of its prediction
to the tail of the “cheetah” which resembles a “crocodile”.
As a result, the student network fails to incorporate new relevant patterns on ears and mouth that are quite discriminative between the “cheetah” and “crocodile”. Therefore, we
need a mechanism to find more useful features for correct
predictions that are omitted by the teacher network.
Intuitively, simply mimicking outputs of the teacher network will narrow the search space for the optimal parameters of the student network and lead to a poor solution from
a feature learning view. Furthermore, we find that this phenomenon becomes more evident when transferring knowl-

3579

