To the Point: Efficient 3D Object Detection in the Range Image
with Graph Convolution Kernels
Yuning Chai1
Pei Sun1
Jiquan Ngiam2
2
2
Benjamin Caine
Vijay Vasudevan
Xiao Zhang1
1

Weiyue Wang1
Dragomir Anguelov1

Waymo LLC, 2 Google Brain
{chaiy}@waymo.com

Abstract
3D object detection is vital for many robotics applications. For tasks where a 2D perspective range image exists,
we propose to learn a 3D representation directly from this
range image view. To this end, we designed a 2D convolutional network architecture that carries the 3D spherical
coordinates of each pixel throughout the network. Its layers
can consume any arbitrary convolution kernel in place of the
default inner product kernel and exploit the underlying local
geometry around each pixel. We outline four such kernels: a
dense kernel according to the bag-of-words paradigm, and
three graph kernels inspired by recent graph neural network
advances: the Transformer, the PointNet, and the Edge Convolution. We also explore cross-modality fusion with the
camera image, facilitated by operating in the perspective
range image view. Our method performs competitively on
the Waymo Open Dataset and improves the state-of-the-art
AP for pedestrian detection from 69.7% to 75.5%. It is also
efficient in that our smallest model, which still outperforms
the popular PointPillars in quality, requires 180 times fewer
FLOPS and model parameters.

1. Introduction
Deep-learning-based point cloud understanding has increased in popularity in recent years. Numerous architectures [9, 11, 14, 19, 17, 22, 21, 28, 30, 33] have been proposed to handle the sparse nature of point clouds, with
successful applications ranging from 3D object recognition
[4, 25, 29], to indoor scene understanding [6, 23] and autonomous driving [2, 8, 24].
Point clouds may have different properties based on the
way they are acquired. For example, point clouds for 3D
object recognition are often generated by taking one or many
depth images from multiple views around a single object. In
other applications such as robotics and autonomous driving,

a device such as a LiDAR continuously scans its surroundings in a rotating pattern, producing a 2D scan pattern called
the range image. Each pixel in this image contains a range
value and other features, such as each laser return’s intensity.
The operating range of these sensors has significantly
improved over the past few years. As a result, state-of-the-art
methods [11, 21, 30, 33] that require projecting points into a
dense 3D grid have become less efficient as their complexity
scales quadratically with the range. In this work, we propose
a new point cloud representation that directly operates on
the perspective 2D range image without ever projecting the
pixels to the 3D world coordinates. Therefore, it does not
suffer from the efficiency scaling problem as mentioned
earlier. We coin this new representation perspective point
cloud, or PPC for short. We are not the first to attempt to
do so. [12, 14] have proposed a similar idea by applying a
convolutional neural network to the range image. However,
they showed that these models, despite being more efficient,
are not as powerful as their 3D counterparts, i.e. 3D grid
methods [9, 11, 21, 30, 33] and 3D graph methods [19, 22].
We believe that this quality difference traces its root to the
traditional 2D convolution layers that cannot easily exploit
the range image’s underlying 3D structure. To counter this
deficiency, we propose four alternative kernels (Fig. 1: c,
d) that can replace the scalar product kernel at the heart of
the 2D convolution. These kernels inject much needed 3D
information to the perspective model, and are inspired by
recent advances in graph operations, including transformers
[26], PointNet [18] and Edge Convolutions [28].
We summarize the contributions of this paper as follows:
1) We propose a perspective range-image-based 3D model
which allows the core of the 2D convolution operation to
harness the underlying 3D structure; 2) We validate our
model on the 3D detection problem and show that the resulting model sets a new state-of-the-art for pedestrians on
the Waymo Open Dataset, while also matching the SOTA on
vehicles; 3) We provide a detailed complexity/model-size-

16000

