Monocular 3D Object Detection: An Extrinsic Parameter Free Approach
Yunsong Zhou 1 Yuan He 2 * Hongzi Zhu 1 * Cheng Wang 2 Hongyang Li 2 Qinhong Jiang 2,3
1
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 SenseTime Research 3 Shanghai AI Laboratory
{zhouyunsong,hongzi}@sjtu.edu.cn {heyuan,wangcheng,lihongyang,jiangqinhong}@senseauto.com
Abstract
Monocular 3D object detection is an important task in
autonomous driving. It can be easily intractable where
there exists ego-car pose change w.r.t. ground plane. This
is common due to the slight fluctuation of road smoothness
and slope. Due to the lack of insight in industrial application, existing methods on open datasets neglect the camera pose information, which inevitably results in the detector being susceptible to camera extrinsic parameters. The
perturbation of objects is very popular in most autonomous
driving cases for industrial products. To this end, we propose a novel method to capture camera pose to formulate
the detector free from extrinsic perturbation. Specifically,
the proposed framework predicts camera extrinsic parameters by detecting vanishing point and horizon change. A
converter is designed to rectify perturbative features in the
latent space. By doing so, our 3D detector works independent of the extrinsic parameter variations and produces accurate results in realistic cases, e.g., potholed and uneven
roads, where almost all existing monocular detectors fail
to handle. Experiments demonstrate our method yields the
best performance compared with the other state-of-the-arts
by a large margin on both KITTI 3D and nuScenes datasets.

1. Introduction
3D object detection plays an important role in a variety of computer vision tasks, such as automated driving
vehicles, autonomous drones, robotic manipulation, augmented reality applications, etc. Most existing 3D detectors require accurate depth-of-field information. To acquire
such resource, majority of the methods resort to the LiDAR
pipeline [10, 33, 37, 38, 23, 60], some to the radars solution [27, 54, 18, 20] or others to the multi-camera framework [8, 9, 21, 32, 35, 51]. In this paper, we address this
problem in a monocular camera setting and curate it specifically for automated driving scenarios With the difficulty
in directly acquiring a depth of field information, monocular 3D detection (Mono3D) is an ill-posed and challenging
task. However, Mono3D approaches have the advantage of
* Co-corresponding authors

Figure 1. The effect of extrinsic parameter perturbations on 3D
detection task. When the vehicle undergoes a slight pose change
on an uneven road, the 3D detection results are less accurate (second row). This happens often in realistic applications and the detection offset can be viewed more evidently in the bird-eye’s view.

low cost, low power consumption, and easy-to-deployment
in real-world applications. Therefore, monocular 3D detection has received increasing attention over the past few
years [2, 7, 28, 29, 34, 39].
Current Mono3D methods have achieved considerable
high accuracy given a specifically fixed camera coordinate
system. However, in real scenarios, the unevenness (perturbation) of the road surface often causes the camera extrinsic
parameters to be disturbed, which introduces a significant
algorithmic challenge. To the best of our knowledge, there
are no 3D detection datasets that takes into account the camera pose change under perturbation.
As shown in Figure 1, current datasets or detectors assume there is no perturbation, i.e., the extrinsic parameters
are set to be constant. Therefore the accurate 3D results are
obtained (top row). However, as depicted in the bottom perturbation case, the object information viewed by the camera
deviates from the real object information. This makes the
detection results unreliable by recovering a large offset in
form of both 3D boxes and bird-eye’s view. Straightforward methods to address this problem are to design complementary branches or networks to improve the generalization ability, and yet this solution yields limited improvement [5, 50, 34, 45, 12]. Some approaches utilize vehicle
CAD models or keypoints to reconstruct vehicle geometry

7556

