A functional approach to rotation equivariant non-linearities for Tensor Field
Networks.
Adrien Poulenard
Stanford University

Leonidas J. Guibas
Stanford University

padrien@stanford.edu

guibas@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
Learning pose invariant representation is a fundamental
problem in shape analysis. Most existing deep learning algorithms for 3D shape analysis are not robust to rotations
and are often trained on synthetic datasets consisting of
pre-aligned shapes, yielding poor generalization to unseen
poses. This observation motivates a growing interest in rotation invariant and equivariant methods. The field of rotation equivariant deep learning is developing in recent years
thanks to a well established theory of Lie group representations and convolutions. A fundamental problem in equivariant deep learning is to design activation functions which are
both informative and preserve equivariance. The recently
introduced Tensor Field Network (TFN) framework provides a rotation equivariant network design for point cloud
analysis. TFN features undergo a rotation in feature space
given a rotation of the input pointcloud. TFN and similar
designs consider nonlinearities which operate only over rotation invariant features such as the norm of equivariant
features to preserve equivariance, making them unable to
capture the directional information. In a recent work entitled ”Gauge Equivariant Mesh CNNs: Anisotropic Convolutions on Geometric Graphs” Hann et al. interpret 2D
rotation equivariant features as Fourier coefficients of functions on the circle. In this work we transpose the idea of
Hann et al. to 3D by interpreting TFN features as spherical harmonics coefficients of functions on the sphere. We
introduce a new equivariant nonlinearity and pooling for
TFN. We show improvments over the original TFN design
and other equivariant nonlinearities in classification and
segmentation tasks. Furthermore our method is competitive with state of the art rotation invariant methods in some
instances.

1. Introduction
In recent years many successful deep learning architectures for 3D geometric deep learning and point cloud anal-

ysis in particular have been developed, we refer to [14] for
a comprehensive survey. Yet, most methods developed for
point cloud analysis are not robust to rotations. Furthermore point cloud dataset like ModelNet [33] or ShapeNet
[6] used for training and evaluating these methods often
consist of synthetic pre-aligned shapes. In consequence,
well established point cloud methods like [25, 27, 4, 31, 21]
fail to generalise to unseen poses. An important performance gap between the aligned and unaligned or rotation augmented settings has been reported in in multiple
publications [11, 24, 7, 37]. Recently numerous works
[12, 22, 24, 7, 37, 36, 20, 39, 28] have addressed the issue of
designing rotation invariant deep learning architectures for
3D data analysis with a variety of approaches. A particularly interesting property for 3D deep learning algorithms
closely related to rotation invariance is rotation equivariance. At a high level a rotation equivariant neural network
produces features that undergo a rotation in feature space
given a rotation of the input. The key point is that this transform only depends on the rotation applied to the input. This
is a precious property for learning, guaranteeing immediate
generalization to unseen poses. Many rotation equivariant
designs [30, 17, 11, 32, 2] have been proposed, thanks to
a well established theory of SO(3) representations. A fundamental challenge in the design of equivariant networks is
the design of equivariant non-linearities. To preserve equivariance such non-linearities must commute with the rotations of equivariant features, this constraint limits the possible designs. The aforementioned methods either rely on
non-linearities applied to rotation invariant quantities like
the norm of equivariant features which cannot capture directional information or, consider polynomial equivariant
features which can be expensive to compute and complicates training. In the recent work [9] Hann et al. introduce
a non linearity for local intrinsic rotation equivariant features over surfaces by interpreting the features as Fourier
coefficients of functions over the circle, composing these
functions with non linear activations and getting new equivariant features by computing the Fourier coefficients of the
composed functions. In this work we explore a similar ap113174

