SimPoE: Simulated Character Control for 3D Human Pose Estimation
Ye Yuan1

Shih-En Wei2
Tomas Simon2
Kris Kitani1
Jason Saragih2
1
2
Carnegie Mellon University
Facebook Reality Labs
https://www.ye-yuan.com/simpoe

Figure 1. Our SimPoE framework learns a kinematics-aware video-conditioned policy that controls a character in a physics simulator (Top)
and estimates accurate and physically-plausible human motion (Bottom).

Abstract
Accurate estimation of 3D human motion from monocular video requires modeling both kinematics (body motion
without physical forces) and dynamics (motion with physical forces). To demonstrate this, we present SimPoE, a
Simulation-based approach for 3D human Pose Estimation,
which integrates image-based kinematic inference and
physics-based dynamics modeling. SimPoE learns a policy
that takes as input the current-frame pose estimate and the
next image frame to control a physically-simulated character to output the next-frame pose estimate. The policy contains a learnable kinematic pose refinement unit that uses
2D keypoints to iteratively refine its kinematic pose estimate
of the next frame. Based on this refined kinematic pose,
the policy learns to compute dynamics-based control (e.g.,
joint torques) of the character to advance the current-frame
pose estimate to the pose estimate of the next frame. This
design couples the kinematic pose refinement unit with the
dynamics-based control generation unit, which are learned
jointly with reinforcement learning to achieve accurate and
physically-plausible pose estimation. Furthermore, we propose a meta-control mechanism that dynamically adjusts
the character’s dynamics parameters based on the character state to attain more accurate pose estimates. Experiments on large-scale motion datasets demonstrate that our
approach establishes the new state of the art in pose accuracy while ensuring physical plausibility.

1. Introduction
We aim to show that accurate 3D human pose estimation
from monocular video requires modeling both kinematics
and dynamics. Human dynamics, i.e., body motion modeling with physical forces, has gained relatively little attention in 3D human pose estimation compared to its counterpart, kinematics, which models motion without physical
forces. There are two main reasons for the disparity between these two equally important approaches. First, kinematics is a more direct approach that focuses on the geometric relationships of 3D poses and 2D images; it sidesteps
the challenging problem of modeling the physical forces underlying human motion, which requires significant domain
knowledge about physics and control. Second, compared to
kinematic measurements such as 3D joint positions, physical forces present unique challenges in their measurement
and annotation, which renders standard supervised learning paradigms unsuitable. Thus, almost all state-of-the-art
methods [36, 59, 20, 19, 33] for 3D human pose estimation
from monocular video are based only on kinematics. Although these kinematic methods can estimate human motion with high pose accuracy, they often fail to produce
physically-plausible motion. Without modeling the physics
of human dynamics, kinematic methods have no notion of
force, mass or contact; they also do not have the ability
to impose physical constraints such as joint torque limits
or friction. As a result, kinematic methods often generate

7159

