More Photos are All You Need: Semi-Supervised Learning for
Fine-Grained Sketch Based Image Retrieval
Ayan Kumar Bhunia1

Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1,2 Aneeshan Sain1,2 Yongxin Yang1,2
Tao Xiang1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.

{a.bhunia, p.chowdhury, a.sain, yongxin.yang, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
A fundamental challenge faced by existing Fine-Grained
Sketch-Based Image Retrieval (FG-SBIR) models is the data
scarcity – model performances are largely bottlenecked by
the lack of sketch-photo pairs. Whilst the number of photos can be easily scaled, each corresponding sketch still
needs to be individually produced. In this paper, we aim
to mitigate such an upper-bound on sketch data, and study
whether unlabelled photos alone (of which they are many)
can be cultivated for performance gain. In particular, we introduce a novel semi-supervised framework for cross-modal
retrieval that can additionally leverage large-scale unlabelled photos to account for data scarcity. At the center of
our semi-supervision design is a sequential photo-to-sketch
generation model that aims to generate paired sketches for
unlabelled photos. Importantly, we further introduce a
discriminator-guided mechanism to guide against unfaithful generation, together with a distillation loss-based regularizer to provide tolerance against noisy training samples.
Last but not least, we treat generation and retrieval as two
conjugate problems, where a joint learning procedure is devised for each module to mutually benefit from each other.
Extensive experiments show that our semi-supervised model
yields a significant performance boost over the state-of-theart supervised alternatives, as well as existing methods that
can exploit unlabelled photos for FG-SBIR.

1. Introduction
With the ever rising popularity of touch screen devices,
sketch-based image retrieval (SBIR) has witnessed significant interest within the vision community [5, 34, 35, 50, 11,
45]. Despite starting as a category-level retrieval problem
[9, 10, 3, 12], the fine-grained nature of sketches stirred current research focus more towards fine-grained SBIR (FGSBIR) [5, 28] – which aims to retrieve a particular photo
based on a query sketch at an intra-category basis.
Recent FG-SBIR works [48, 26, 5, 28] predominately

Labelled SketchPhoto Pairs
Generated
Sketches

Photo to Sketch
Generation Model

Synthetic SketchPhoto Pairs

Joint
Training

Fine-Grained
SBIR Model

Unlabelled
Photos

Labelled SketchPhoto Pairs

Training with labelled data
Training with un-labelled data

Figure 1. Our proposed method additionally leverages large scale
photos without any manually labelled paired sketches to improve
FG-SBIR performance. Moreover, we show that the two conjugate
process, photo-to-sketch generation and fine-grained SBIR, could
improve each other by joint training.

rely on fully-supervised triplet loss-based deep networks to
yield retrieval performances of practical value. The underlying assumption is largely inline with the progression of
supervised photo-only models – that one can always (relatively easily) obtain additional labelled training data to sustain desired performance gains. This assumption however
does not hold for FG-SBIR – sketch-photo pairs can not
be easily scaled as per their photo-only counterparts. That
is, instead of crawling and then labelling photos, the corresponding sketch for any given photo will need to be separately drawn by hand. As a result, current FG-SBIR datasets
still remain in their thousands (6.7K for QMUL-ShoeV2
[48, 39], and 2K for QMUL-ChairV2 [39]), while photodatasets [32] are available in millions. This data scarcity
problem has consequently resulted in very recent attempts
that aim at designing generalisable and zero-shot models
[26], yet performances of these models remain far away
from fully-supervised alternatives.
In this paper, we face the music and make the bold assumption that there will hardly be sufficiently large sketchphoto pairs to train a good model. Instead, we test the hypothesis that – freely-available unlabelled photo data would

4247

