Learning Position and Target Consistency for Memory-based Video Object
Segmentation
Li Hu, Peng Zhang, Bang Zhang, Pan Pan, Yinghui Xu, Rong Jin
Machine Intelligence Technology Lab, Alibaba Group
{hooks.hl, futian.zp, zhangbang.zb, panpan.pp, renji.xyh, jinrong.jr}@alibaba-inc.com

Abstract
This paper studies the problem of semi-supervised video
object segmentation(VOS). Multiple works have shown that
memory-based approaches can be effective for video object
segmentation. They are mostly based on pixel-level matching, both spatially and temporally. The main shortcoming of memory-based approaches is that they do not take
into account the sequential order among frames and do
not exploit object-level knowledge from the target. To address this limitation, we propose to Learn position and target Consistency framework for Memory-based video object
segmentation, termed as LCM. It applies the memory mechanism to retrieve pixels globally, and meanwhile learns
position consistency for more reliable segmentation. The
learned location response promotes a better discrimination
between target and distractors. Besides, LCM introduces
an object-level relationship from the target to maintain target consistency, making LCM more robust to error drifting.
Experiments show that our LCM achieves state-of-the-art
performance on both DAVIS and Youtube-VOS benchmark.
And we rank the 1st in the DAVIS 2020 challenge semisupervised VOS task.

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation(VOS) is a fundamental computer vision task, with a wide range of applications including video editing, video composition and autonomous driving. In this paper, we focus on the task of semi-supervised
video object segmentation. Given a video and the ground
truth object mask of the first frame, semi-supervised VOS
predicts the segmentation masks of the objects specified by
the ground truth mask in the first frame for the remaining frames. In video sequences, the target object will undergo large appearance changes due to continuous motion
and variable camera view. And it may disappear in some
frames due to occlusion between different objects. Furthermore, there are also similar instances of same categories

Reference frame

w/o PGM & ORM

w/ PGM & ORM
(LCM)

Figure 1. Typical memory-based approaches rely on pixel-level
similarity, which leads to errors in prediction, as show in second
row. The proposed Position Guidance Module(PGM) helps the
network track the motion trajectory(bottom left). And the objectaware Object Relation Module(ORM) prevents the network from
making fragmented segmentation pieces(bottom right).

that are difficult to distinguish, making the problem even
harder. Therefore, semi-supervised VOS is extremely challenging despite the provided annotation in the first frame.
The fundamental problem of VOS lies in how to
make full use of the spatio-temporally structured information contained in video frames. Memory-based approaches are recently proposed with significant performance improvements in popular VOS benchmarks, e.g.
DAVIS[33, 34] and Youtube-VOS[46]. Space-Time Memory network(STM)[29] is the first memory-based semisupervised VOS method, developing a memory mechanism
to store information from all previous frames for the query
frame to read. It differs from other matching-based methods as it expands its search range to the entire space-time
domain and perform dense matching in the feature space.
However, memory-based methods only consider pixel-level
matching and tend to retrieve all pixels with high matching score in the query image. It may fail when a non-target
region share similar visual appearance with the target re-

4144

