Rotation Equivariant Siamese Networks for Tracking
Deepak K. Gupta⋆ , Devanshu Arya† , Efstratios Gavves⋆
⋆
QUVA Lab, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
†
Informatics Institute, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{d.k.gupta,d.arya,e.gavves}@uva.nl

Abstract
Rotation is among the long prevailing, yet still unresolved, hard challenges encountered in visual object tracking. The existing deep learning-based tracking algorithms
use regular CNNs that are inherently translation equivariant, but not designed to tackle rotations. In this paper,
we first demonstrate that in the presence of rotation instances in videos, the performance of existing trackers is
severely affected. To circumvent the adverse effect of rotations, we present rotation-equivariant Siamese networks
(RE-SiamNets), built through the use of group-equivariant
convolutional layers comprising steerable filters. SiamNets
allow estimating the change in orientation of the object in
an unsupervised manner, thereby facilitating its use in relative 2D pose estimation as well. We further show that
this change in orientation can be used to impose an additional motion constraint in Siamese tracking through imposing restriction on the change in orientation between two
consecutive frames. For benchmarking, we present Rotation Tracking Benchmark (RTB), a dataset comprising a
set of videos with rotation instances. Through experiments
on two popular Siamese architectures, we show that RESiamNets handle the problem of rotation very well and outperform their regular counterparts. Further, RE-SiamNets
can accurately estimate the relative change in pose of the
target in an unsupervised fashion, namely the in-plane rotation the target has sustained with respect to the reference frame. Code and data can be accessed at https:
//github.com/dkgupta90/re-siamnet.

1. Introduction
The task of visual object tracking with Siamese networks [1, 29], also referred as Siamese tracking, transforms the problem of tracking into similarity estimation between a template frame and sampled regions from a candidate frame. Siamese trackers have recently gained popularity in the field of visual object tracking, especially because of their strong discriminative power obtained from

Figure 1: Example demonstrating rotation non-equivariance
in regular CNN models used in object tracking, ψθ (f (·)) 6=
f (ψθ (·)). Here f (·) and ψθ (·) denote the neural network
encoding function and rotation transform, respectively.

similarity matching. This is the primary reason most of
the state-of-the-art trackers are based on this framework
[1, 11, 18, 19, 29].
Although Siamese trackers are generally shown to work
well, they are still prone to failure under challenges such as
partial occlusion [16], scale change [27] or when one of the
two inputs is rotated.
This paper focuses on handling the adverse affects of inplane rotation of objects on the performance of Siamese
trackers. Object rotation is considered to be amongst the
hardest challenges of tracking with no effective solution till
date. It can commonly occur in real-life scenarios, especially when the camera records from the top, as in drones,
where either the object is rotating or the camera itself. Egocentric videos are another example, where large head rotations can cause the target to rotate.
The CNN architectures used in Siamese trackers are not
inherently equivariant to in-plane rotations of the target.
The implication is that the model may perform well on object orientations that are represented in the training set, but
may fail on other previously unseen orientations. This happens because the latent encoding obtained from the network
for such cases might not be representative of the input image itself. Example demonstrating this issue is shown in
Figure 1. Further, even if it were equivariant, the cross-

12362

