Learning Tensor Low-Rank Prior for Hyperspectral Image Reconstruction
Shipeng Zhang1 Lizhi Wang2 Lei Zhang2 Hua Huang3 *
1
2
3
Xi’an Jiaotong University
Beijing Institute of Technology
Beijing Normal University
zsp6869123@stu.xjtu.edu.cn,

{wanglizhi,leizhang}@bit.edu.cn,

PSNR

Abstract

Learning Based

36

Snapshot hyperspectral imaging has been developed to
capture the spectral information of dynamic scenes. In this
paper, we propose a deep neural network by learning the
tensor low-rank prior of hyperspectral images (HSI) in the
feature domain to promote the reconstruction quality. Our
method is inspired by the canonical-polyadic (CP) decomposition theory, where a low-rank tensor can be expressed
as a weight summation of several rank-1 component tensors. Specifically, we first learn the tensor low-rank prior of
the image features with two steps: (a) we generate rank-1
tensors with discriminative components to collect the contextual information from both spatial and channel dimensions of the image features; (b) we aggregate those rank-1
tensors into a low-rank tensor as a 3D attention map to exploit the global correlation and refine the image features.
Then, we integrate the learned tensor low-rank prior into
an iterative optimization algorithm to obtain an end-to-end
HSI reconstruction. Experiments on both synthetic and real
data demonstrate the superiority of our method.

1. Introduction
Hyperspectral imaging systems capture the spectral information of the scene across tens to hundreds of discrete
bands. The rich spectral details are beneficial to various
computer vision tasks, such as face recognition[28], objecting tracking [16] and appearance modeling [26]. To obtain the 3D hyperspectral image (HSI), conventional hyperspectral imaging systems [4, 30, 33, 46] scan the scene
with multiple exposures, which makes those systems cannot be used in the dynamic scenes. To this end, numerous
snapshot hyperspectral imaging systems have been developed [7, 13, 27, 49] in the last few decades. Based on the
compressive sensing theory [3, 6, 22], coded aperture snapshot spectral imaging (CASSI) [2, 36] draws an increasing attention due to the promising ability in capturing the
dynamic target. However, the bottleneck of CASSI is the
limited quality of reconstructing the 3D HSI from the 2D
* Corresponding author

huahuang@bnu.edu.cn

Model Based

Ours
34.53dB

DNU
32.61dB
32
AE
28.07dB

SNNR
30.40dB

28
TV
25.44dB

3DSR
27.47dB

24
Smoothing

Sparsity

Low-rank

Image Prior

Figure 1: Development trends of the HSI priors. Model
based methods and learning based methods show a similar
development trend in both image priors and reconstruction
accuracy (PSNR). We exploit the tensor low-rank prior with
deep learning and obtain the best reconstruction result.
compressive measurement. Since this problem is underdetermined, exploiting the image intrinsic prior is essential
to regularize the reconstruction solution.
So far, two kinds of methods, i.e., model based methods
and learning based methods, have been developed to exploit
the image prior for HSI reconstruction and show a similar
development trend, as shown in Figure 1.
In model based methods, numerous priors, from piecewise smoothing prior [42, 50], sparsity prior [35, 41] to
low-rank prior [15, 24], are proposed to finish HSI reconstruction with conventional iterative optimization algorithms. Besides, different data structures, from 2D matrix to
3D tensor, have been employed to characterize those priors.
Among these priors, the tensor low-rank prior stands out
as a convincing way to model the high contextual correlation in the high-dimensional structure [52]. However, these
priors equipped with conventional optimization algorithms
suffer from low computational efficiency in practice.
In deep learning, image priors, including piecewise
smoothing [12, 45] and sparsity prior [39, 47], are characterized by neural networks for HSI reconstruction. They
usually exploit those priors in the feature domain. Methods in this venues have obtained promising reconstruction
accuracy and efficiency. However, they do not take the lowrank prior into consideration, especially in tensor structure,
which limits the improvement of reconstruction quality.
112006

