Safe Local Motion Planning with Self-Supervised Freespace Forecasting
Peiyun Hu1 , Aaron Huang1 , John Dolan1 , David Held1 , Deva Ramanan1,2
1
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University, 2 Argo AI
{peiyunh@cs, aaronhua@andrew, jdolan@andrew, dheld@andrew, deva@cs}.cmu.edu

Figure 1: What are good 3D representations that support planning in dynamic environments? We visualize a typical urban motion
planning scenario from a bird’s-eye view, where an autonomous vehicle (AV) awaits an unprotected left turn. We highlight a candidate
plan with a blue arrow, whose endpoint represents where the AV will be in 1s. An object-centric representation (left), as adopted by
standard perception stacks, focuses on object properties (their shape, orientation, position, etc.) both at the current time step and the future.
Alternatively, a freespace-centric representation directly captures the freespace of the surrounding scene and can be readily obtained by
raycasting measurements from a depth (e.g., LiDAR) sensor. Forecasting a future version (in 1s) of either representation could help the
AV identify a potential collision associated with the candidate plan, however at wildly different annotation costs. Forecasting future object
trajectories requires a massive amount of object and track labels to train perceptual modules. Instead, we explore future freespace, whose
forecasting can be naturally self-supervised by simply letting time move forward and raycasting future sensor measurements. We propose
approaches to planning with forecasted freespace and learning to plan with future freespace.

Abstract
Safe local motion planning for autonomous driving in
dynamic environments requires forecasting how the scene
evolves. Practical autonomy stacks adopt a semantic
object-centric representation of a dynamic scene and build
object detection, tracking, and prediction modules to solve
forecasting. However, training these modules comes at
an enormous human cost of manually annotated objects
across frames. In this work, we explore future freespace
as an alternative representation to support motion planning. Our key intuition is that it is important to avoid straying into occupied space regardless of what is occupying
it. Importantly, computing ground-truth future freespace is
annotation-free. First, we explore freespace forecasting as
a self-supervised learning task. We then demonstrate how
to use forecasted freespace to identify collision-prone plans
from off-the-shelf motion planners. Finally, we propose fu-

ture freespace as an additional source of annotation-free
supervision. We demonstrate how to integrate such supervision into the learning-based planners. Experimental results
on nuScenes and CARLA suggest both approaches lead to a
significant reduction in collision rates.1

1. Introduction
Motion planning in dynamic environments requires forecasting how the scene imminently evolves. What representation should we forecast to support planning? In practice, standard autonomy stacks forecast a semantic objectcentric representation by building perceptual modules such
as object detection, tracking, and prediction [42]. However,
in the context of machine learning, training these modules
comes at an enormous annotation cost, requiring massive
1 Code will be available at https://github.com/peiyunh/ff

12732

