Layerwise Optimization by Gradient Decomposition for Continual Learning

1

Shixiang Tang1†
Dapeng Chen3
Jinguo Zhu2
Shijie Yu4
Wanli Ouyang1
2
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Group, Australia
Xi’an Jiaotong University
3
4
Sensetime Group Limited, Hong Kong
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, CAS
tangshixiang@sensetime.com

dapengchenxjtu@yahoo.com

Abstract
Deep neural networks achieve state-of-the-art and sometimes super-human performance across various domains.
However, when learning tasks sequentially, the networks
easily forget the knowledge of previous tasks, known as
“catastrophic forgetting”. To achieve the consistencies between the old tasks and the new task, one effective solution
is to modify the gradient for update. Previous methods enforce independent gradient constraints for different tasks,
while we consider these gradients contain complex information, and propose to leverage inter-task information by gradient decomposition. In particular, the gradient of an old
task is decomposed into a part shared by all old tasks and a
part specific to that task. The gradient for update should be
close to the gradient of the new task, consistent with the gradients shared by all old tasks, and orthogonal to the space
spanned by the gradients specific to the old tasks. In this
way, our approach encourages common knowledge consolidation without impairing the task-specific knowledge. Furthermore, the optimization is performed for the gradients of
each layer separately rather than the concatenation of all
gradients as in previous works. This effectively avoids the
influence of the magnitude variation of the gradients in different layers. Extensive experiments validate the effectiveness of both gradient-decomposed optimization and layerwise updates. Our proposed method achieves state-of-theart results on various benchmarks of continual learning.

1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed the great progress in deep
learning (DL) through training on large datasets. A typical supervised DL task requires independent and identically distributed (i.i.d) samples from a stationary distribution [15, 39, 46]. However, many DL models deployed
in the real-world are exposed to non-stationary situations
where data is acquired sequentially and its distribution
varies over time. In this scenario, DNNs trained by Stochas2 This work was done when Shixiang Tang was an intern at SenseTime.

wanli.ouyang@sydney.edu.au

tic Gradient Descent (SGD) will easily forget the knowledge from previous tasks while adapting to the information from the incoming tasks. This phenomenon, known as
catastrophic forgetting, invokes more effective algorithms
for continual learning (CL), the goal of which is to learn
consecutive tasks without severe performance degradation
on previous tasks [5, 30, 34, 38, 44, 43, 57, 57, 50].
One of the popular attempts for continual learning relies
on a set of episodic memories, where each episodic memory stores representative data from an old task [5, 38, 30].
In particular, the network parameters are jointly optimized
by the recorded samples that are regularly replayed and the
samples drawn from the new task. An effective solution
is to modify the gradients for updates. The methods like
GEM, A-GEM and S-GEM obtain gradient update by requiring the loss of each old task does not increase [7, 30].
In practice, the constraints are imposed by forcing the inner
product between the gradient for update and the gradient of
every old task non-negative.
In this work, we consider that the gradients of multiple tasks have mixed information and should be disentangled when used for learning. There are two parts mixed
in the gradients, shared gradient and task-specific gradients. Optimization along the shared gradient will be beneficial for memorizing all old tasks, but optimization along
task-specific gradients will fall into a dilemma that optimizing one episodic memory will inevitably damage another.
Therefore, different constraints are imposed on two gradients. We encourage the consistency between gradient for
update and the shared gradient but expect that the gradient
for update will be orthogonal to all task-specific gradients.
The first constraint can be mathematically presented as the
inner product of shared gradient and gradient for update
non-negative. The second constraint requires the gradient
for update should be orthogonal to the space spanned by
all task-specific gradients. Our further analysis points out
that the second constraints can be relaxed by PCA, which
captures the most important gradient constraints.
Furthermore, we observe the large variation of magnitudes for the gradients in different layers. However, the
previous gradient modification methods ignore the intrinsic

9634

