Where and What? Examining Interpretable Disentangled Representations
Xinqi Zhu, Chang Xu, Dacheng Tao
The University of Sydney
{xzhu7491@uni.,c.xu@,dacheng.dao@}sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Capturing interpretable variations has long been one of
the goals in disentanglement learning. However, unlike the
independence assumption, interpretability has rarely been
exploited to encourage disentanglement in the unsupervised
setting. In this paper, we examine the interpretability of disentangled representations by investigating two questions:
where to be interpreted and what to be interpreted? A latent
code is easily to be interpreted if it would consistently impact a certain subarea of the resulting generated image. We
thus propose to learn a spatial mask to localize the effect of
each individual latent dimension. On the other hand, interpretability usually comes from latent dimensions that capture simple and basic variations in data. We thus impose
a perturbation on a certain dimension of the latent code,
and expect to identify the perturbation along this dimension
from the generated images so that the encoding of simple
variations can be enforced. Additionally, we develop an
unsupervised model selection method, which accumulates
perceptual distance scores along axes in the latent space.
On various datasets, our models can learn high-quality disentangled representations without supervision, showing the
proposed modeling of interpretability is an effective proxy
for achieving unsupervised disentanglement.

1. Introduction
Learning disentangled representations in generative
models has gained increasing interest in recent years [18,
41, 1, 25]. Disentangled representations are supposed to
capture independent factors of variations in data [2], which
should ideally coincide with natural concepts summarized
by humans. These representations can usually be applied to
various downstream tasks such as controllable image generation and manipulation [34, 56, 51, 32, 35], domain adaptation [46, 5], abstract reasoning [54], and machine learning
fairness [9, 40].
Adopting the definition from [10], we can characterize
disentanglement from three perspectives: informativeness,
independence, and interpretability. In the context of unsu-

pervised disentangled representation learning, the first two
properties have been commonly adopted as proxies to encourage the disentanglement in representations. Methods
built based on the framework of the Generative Adversarial
Networks (GANs) [16] maximize the mutual information
between a subset of latent variables and the generated samples [8, 21, 38]. On the other hand, the methods based on
the Variational Autoencoders (VAEs) [31, 18, 29, 7, 33, 22]
usually enforce the statistical independence in latent codes.
Unlike the informativeness and independence properties,
the interpretability property in disentanglement has rarely
been explored in the unsupervised setting. Partially due
to the meaning of the term interpretability which indicates
the correspondence between the learned representations and
human-defined concepts, it sounds impossible to approach
this goal without revealing the ground-truth labels. Unfortunately, omitting the modeling of interpretability leaves
the existing unsupervised models a huge flaw: the representations satisfying the informativeness and independence
goals are far from unique, in which case the target representation is indeed included in the solution pool but not
distinguishable from other entangled ones. A most intuitive example could be the rotation of coordinates in the
latent space, where the existing approaches built for modeling informativeness and independence are blind to this
transformation. This nonuniqueness problem is explained
by the impossibility conclusion of unsupervised disentanglement drawn in [41], and also agrees with the results
about the rotation invariance in [44]. On the contrary,
modeling interpretability by providing models with groundtruth labels solves such nonuniqueness problem, which coincides with the supervised and semi-supervised settings
[47, 30, 11, 32, 57, 34, 42, 43].
A rising problem is, can we enforce interpretability in
representations without supervision? A precise matching
between the target concepts and the learned representations
is unrealistic because it depends on how the target solution
is defined. For example, digital color can be represented
in RGB or HSV, but an unsupervised model does not know
which one is more preferable without being told which one
is wanted. However in more general cases, there is no doubt

5861

