Regularizing Neural Networks via Adversarial Model Perturbation
Yaowei Zheng
BDBC and SKLSDE
Beihang University, China

Richong Zhang*
BDBC and SKLSDE
Beihang University, China

Yongyi Mao
School of EECS
University of Ottawa, Canada

hiyouga@buaa.edu.cn

zhangrc@act.buaa.edu.cn

ymao@uottawa.ca

Abstract

1. Introduction
To date, the generalization behaviour of deep neural networks is still a mystery, despite some recent progress (see,
e.g., [1, 3, 19, 24, 26, 46, 48]). A commonly accepted and
empirically verified understanding in this regard is that the
model parameter that corresponds to a flat minimum of the
empirical risk tends to generalize better. For example, the authors of [19, 26] argue that flat minima correspond to simple
models, which are less likely to overfit. This understanding
has inspired great effort studying factors in the optimization
process (such as learning rate and batch size) that impacting
the flatness of the found minima [14, 20, 25] so as to better
understand the generalization behaviour of deep networks.
Meanwhile developing effective regularization techniques
remains as the most important approach in practice to alleviate overfitting and force model towards better generalization
* Corresponding author

L

L

Effective regularization techniques are highly desired in
deep learning for alleviating overfitting and improving generalization. This work proposes a new regularization scheme,
based on the understanding that the flat local minima of the
empirical risk cause the model to generalize better. This
scheme is referred to as adversarial model perturbation
(AMP), where instead of directly minimizing the empirical risk, an alternative “AMP loss” is minimized via SGD.
Specifically, the AMP loss is obtained from the empirical
risk by applying the “worst” norm-bounded perturbation
on each point in the parameter space. Comparing with
most existing regularization schemes, AMP has strong theoretical justifications, in that minimizing the AMP loss can
be shown theoretically to favour flat local minima of the
empirical risk. Extensive experiments on various modern
deep architectures establish AMP as a new state of the art
among regularization schemes. Our code is available at
https://github.com/hiyouga/AMP-Regularizer.

LERM
LAMP

LERM

sharp minimum

flat minimum
θ ∗ERM

θ

θ ∗AMP

Figure 1: An example showing an empirical risk curve (left)
and its corresponding AMP loss curve (right, blue).
(e.g., [16, 28, 29, 39, 41, 49]). Some recent research in fact
suggests that the effectiveness of certain regularization techniques is due to their ability to find flatter minima [22, 44].
Additionally, there have been significant research advances in recent years in developing more effective regularization schemes, which include, for example, MixUp,
Flooding [22, 49]. Despite their great success, these techniques usually fall short of strong principles or theoretical
justifications. Thus one expects more principled and more
powerful regularization schemes are yet to be discovered.
This work sets out to develop a powerful regularization
scheme under the principle of finding flat local minima of
the empirical risk. To that end, we propose a novel regularization scheme which can be strongly justified in terms of
its ability to finding flat minima. This scheme is referred to
as Adversarial Model Perturbation or AMP, where instead
of minimizing the empirical risk LERM (θ) over model parameter θ, it minimizes an alternative “AMP loss”. Briefly,
the AMP loss LAMP (θ) at a parameter setting θ is the worst
(or highest) empirical risk of all perturbations of θ with the
perturbation norm no greater than a small value ǫ, namely,
LAMP (θ) :=

max LERM (θ + ∆)

∆:k∆k≤ǫ

(1)

To see why minimizing the AMP loss provides opportunities to find flat local minima of the empirical risk, consider
the example in Figure 1. Figure 1 (left) sketches an empirical
risk curve LERM , which contains two local minima, a sharp
one on the left and a flat one on the right. The process of obtaining the AMP loss from the empirical risk can be seen as

8156

