Smoothing the Disentangled Latent Style Space for
Unsupervised Image-to-Image Translation
Yahui Liu1,3 , Enver Sangineto1 , Yajing Chen2 , Linchao Bao2 , Haoxian Zhang2 ,
Nicu Sebe1 , Bruno Lepri3 , Wei Wang1* , Marco De Nadai3∗
University of Trento, Italy

2

Tencent AI Lab, China

3

Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy

Specie

Specie

Smile

Age

Gender

1

Figure 1: Our method generates smooth interpolations within and across domains in various image-to-image translation
tasks. Here, we show gender, age and smile translations from CelebA-HQ [20] and animal translations from AFHQ [10].

Abstract
Image-to-Image (I2I) multi-domain translation models
are usually evaluated also using the quality of their semantic interpolation results. However, state-of-the-art models
frequently show abrupt changes in the image appearance
during interpolation, and usually perform poorly in interpolations across domains. In this paper, we propose a new
training protocol based on three specific losses which help
a translation network to learn a smooth and disentangled
latent style space in which: 1) Both intra- and inter-domain
interpolations correspond to gradual changes in the generated images and 2) The content of the source image is better
preserved during the translation. Moreover, we propose a
novel evaluation metric to properly measure the smoothness
of latent style space of I2I translation models. The proposed
method can be plugged in existing translation approaches,
and our extensive experiments on different datasets show
that it can significantly boost the quality of the generated
images and the graduality of the interpolations.

1. Introduction
Translating images from one domain to another is
a challenging image manipulation task that has recently
drawn increasing attention in the computer vision community [9, 10, 16, 17, 26, 29, 37, 43]. A “domain” refers to a
set of images sharing some distinctive visual pattern, usually called “style” (e.g., the gender or the hair color in face
datasets) [10, 16, 43]. The Image-to-Image (I2I) translation
task aims to change the domain-specific aspects of an image
while preserving its “content” (e.g., the identity of a person
or the image background) [16]. Since paired data (e.g., images of the same person with different gender) are usually
not available, an important aspect of I2I translation models
is the unsupervised training [43]. Moreover, it is usually desirable to synthesize the multiple appearances modes within
the same style domain, in such a way to be able to generate
diverse images for the same input image.
Recent work addresses the I2I translation using multi* These two authors contributed equally to this work. Correspondence
to: wei.wang@unitn.it and denadai@fbk.eu.

10785

