Spatially-Varying Outdoor Lighting Estimation from Intrinsics
Yongjie Zhu1 † Yinda Zhang2 Si Li1 ∗ Boxin Shi3, 4 ∗
1
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
2
Google 3 NELVT, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University
4
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University

2

𝐋𝐋𝐋𝐋𝐋𝐋𝐈𝐈𝐥𝐥
𝐆𝐆𝐋𝐋𝐋𝐋𝐆𝐆𝐈𝐈𝐥𝐥

1

We present SOLID-Net, a neural network for spatiallyvarying outdoor lighting estimation from a single outdoor
image for any 2D pixel location. Previous work has used a
unified sky environment map to represent outdoor lighting.
Instead, we generate spatially-varying local lighting environment maps by combining global sky environment map
with warped image information according to geometric information estimated from intrinsics. As no outdoor dataset
with image and local lighting ground truth is readily available, we introduce the SOLID-Img dataset with physicallybased rendered images and their corresponding intrinsic
and lighting information. We train a deep neural network to
regress intrinsic cues with physically-based constraints and
use them to conduct global and local lightings estimation.
Experiments on both synthetic and real datasets show that
SOLID-Net significantly outperforms previous methods.

1. Introduction
Estimating outdoor lighting from a single image is one of
the fundamental problems in computer vision. By providing outdoor scene properties from the physical aspect, it has
huge impact on many applications, e.g., face/body relighting, scene understanding, augmented reality (AR), and so
on. This task is rather challenging since images are formed
by conflating lighting with complex surface reflectance distribution and object geometry. In the outdoor scenario, existing solutions usually employ low-dimensional parametric
models such as the Hošek-Wilkie (HW) sky model [11] with
four parameters to fit the sky illumination. The capacity of
parametric models is not sufficient to represent the complex real-world illumination, and a recent non-parametric
∗ Corresponding authors. † Part of this work was finished as a visiting student at Peking University. This work was supported by National
National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 61872012,
62088102, National Key R&D Program of China (2019YFF0302902), and
Beijing Academy of Artificial Intelligence (BAAI).

𝟑𝟑𝟑𝟑𝟎𝟎∘
𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟏𝟎𝟎∘

Abstract

𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈 𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈 + 𝐋𝐋𝐋𝐋𝐋𝐋𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐋𝐋𝐋𝐋𝐈𝐈𝐈𝐈

2

1

3

4

4
3

Figure 1: Given a single low-dynamic-range (LDR) image with limited FOV and a location in pixel coordinate
(marked by numbers), SOLID-Net, for the first time, infers
a panoramic HDR illumination map representing the light
arriving from all directions at the location. Note that the
global environment map (could be estimated using existing
method [10]) is only able to cover a small part of the local
lighting (red contours).

approach using an autoencoder to learn the sky illumination
model from a large-scale sky panorama dataset and encoding the lighting information from a single limited Field-ofView (FOV) image shows more promising results [10].
However, as far as we know, all existing outdoor lighting
estimation methods [11, 10, 24] only consider the outdoor
illumination as a single global map without any spatiallyvarying consideration, i.e., the light probe is surrounded by
an environment map that casts rays from infinitely far away.
A spatially-varying lighting estimation has proved to be
successful in indoor scenarios, which is achieved by modeling local indoor lighting using low-frequency parametric
lighting represented by spherical harmonics (SH) [9, 5] or
panoramic environment map [18].
Extending spatially-varying lighting estimation from indoor to outdoor is non-trivial in three aspects: 1) The extremely high-dynamic-range (HDR) sunlight and the complicated sky light under different weather conditions make
it more difficult to parameterize outdoor than indoor lighting [9, 5], while the existing non-parametric sky model [10]
treats it as a pure deep learning task without considering
physics image formation constraint. 2) Non-parametric
112834

