Personalized Outfit Recommendation with Learnable Anchors
Zhi Lu† Yang Hu§ Yan Chen § * Bing Zeng†
†
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
§
University of Science and Technology of China
zhilu@std.uestc.edu.cn, {eeyhu,eecyan}@ustc.edu.cn, eezeng@uestc.edu.cn

Abstract
outfit a

The multimedia community has recently seen a tremendous surge of interest in the fashion recommendation problem. A lot of efforts have been made to model the compatibility between fashion items. Some have also studied
users’ personal preferences for the outfits. There is, however, another difficulty in the task that hasn’t been dealt with
carefully by previous work. Users that are new to the system usually only have several (less than 5) outfits available
for learning. With such a limited number of training examples, it is challenging to model the user’s preferences reliably. In this work, we propose a new solution for personalized outfit recommendation that is capable of handling this
case. We use a stacked self-attention mechanism to model
the high-order interactions among the items. We then embed the items in an outfit into a single compact representation within the outfit space. To accommodate the variety of
users’ preferences, we characterize each user with a set of
anchors, i.e. a group of learnable latent vectors in the outfit space that are the representatives of the outfits the user
likes. We also learn a set of general anchors to model the
general preference shared by all users. Based on this representation of the outfits and the users, we propose a simple
but effective strategy for the new user profiling tasks. Extensive experiments on large scale real-world datasets demonstrate the performance of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Personalized outfit recommendation is the task of predicting whether a set of fashion items that constitute an
outfit are well matched and whether they fit the taste of a
specific user. It has wide applications in fashion oriented
social networks and online shopping. However, mining the
compatibility relationships between items and capturing the
diverse fashion preferences of different users can be very
* The corresponding author is Yang Hu. This work was supported by
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61602090).

outfit b

embedding of outfits
anchors of user 1

outfit c

anchors of user 2

outfit style space

(a)

User
Proﬁling

Outﬁt 1

Recommendation results based on outﬁt 1

User
Proﬁling

Outﬁt 2

Recommendation results based on outﬁt 2

(b)

Figure 1: (a) Outfit style space. Each user is represented by
a set of anchors in the outfit style space. (b) Examples of
recommended results for new users with only one historical
outfit. The outfits in orange boxes are positive outfits and
those in blue boxes are negative outfits. Our method recommends compatible outfits that fit the taste of a user even
with very few learning examples.

challenging. Compared to visual similarity, both the compatibility and the personal preference relations are more implicit and subtle.
Many previous works have studied the compatibility between a pair of fashion items [22, 36]. When it comes to
outfits that consist of multiple items, some works decom-

12722

