CoSMo: Content-Style Modulation for Image Retrieval with Text Feedback
Seungmin Lee∗
Dongwan Kim∗
Bohyung Han
Seoul National University
{dltmdals14, dongwan123, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
We tackle the task of image retrieval with text feedback,
where a reference image and modifier text are combined to
identify the desired target image. We focus on designing an
image-text compositor, i.e., integrating multi-modal inputs
to produce a representation similar to that of the target image. In our algorithm, Content-Style Modulation (CoSMo),
we approach this challenge by introducing two modules
based on deep neural networks: the content and style modulators. The content modulator performs local updates to the
reference image feature after normalizing the style of the
image, where a disentangled multi-modal non-local block
is employed to achieve the desired content modifications.
Then, the style modulator reintroduces global style information to the updated feature. We provide an in-depth
view of our algorithm and its design choices, and show
that it accomplishes outstanding performance on multiple
image-text retrieval benchmarks. Our code can be found at:
https://github.com/postBG/CosMo.pytorch

Similar t-shirt but
has a different print.

(a) Example of a content modification

Similar t-shirt but
blue instead of red.

(b) Example of a style modification

Figure 1. Examples of image retrieval with text feedback. Starting
from a reference image, the user interacts with the system by providing a text input that expresses the desired changes. Given these
inputs, the system retrieves images from a database that most accurately resembles the user’s request. (a) and (b) depict examples
of content and style modifications, respectively.

1. Introduction
Image retrieval is a crucial computer vision task that
serves as the foundation for a variety of applications such
as product search [22, 45, 61], person re-identification [69,
14, 42], and internet search [61, 52]. One of the most
challenging aspects of building image retrieval systems is
the ability to understand the user’s intention accurately.
Currently, a majority of image search engines are based
on either image-to-image matching [52, 61] or image-text
matching [59, 74, 70], where a user provides a single image or sentence as an input to find the most relevant images.
However, it is not straightforward to express the complex
target concept via a single image or text and design a model
representing the intended concept. Furthermore, the users
are unable to refine the retrieved results that fail to reflect
their intention effectively.
We explore a different setting of image search—image
retrieval with text feedback [66, 10]—where a reference im∗ equal contribution.

age and a modifier text are used jointly as a query, as illustrated in Figure 1. Here, the reference image does not
have any attribute labels, and the modifier text is a description of how the reference image should be changed to
obtain the desired results, i.e., target images. While inherently more complex than the standard image retrieval
setting, this approach allows users to express their concepts more precisely by leveraging visual-linguistic information. In addition, since the users can recursively refine
the search results based on previous results, the proposed
algorithm would eventually lead to substantially improved
output quality with high fidelity to input queries.
To tackle the task of image retrieval with text feedback,
we create an image-text composition module that produces
features similar to the target image features by combining
the representations of the reference image and the modifier text. There are two main challenges in designing such a
composition module. First, the module should be able to selectively preserve and modify the reference image features,

802

