Temporal Context Aggregation Network for Temporal Action
Proposal Refinement
Zhiwu Qing1∗

Haisheng Su2†

Weihao Gan2

Dongliang Wang2

Wei Wu2

Xiang Wang1 Yu Qiao3,4 Junjie Yan2 Changxin Gao1 Nong Sang1†
1
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control,
School of Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
SenseTime Research
3
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
4
Shanghai AI Laboratory, Shanghai, China
{qzw,wxiang,cgao,nsang}@hust.edu.cn, yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn
{suhaisheng,ganweihao,wangdongliang,wuwei,yanjunjie}@sensetime.com

Abstract
Temporal action proposal generation aims to estimate
temporal intervals of actions in untrimmed videos, which is
a challenging yet important task in the video understanding
ﬁeld. The proposals generated by current methods still suffer from inaccurate temporal boundaries and inferior conﬁdence used for retrieval owing to the lack of efﬁcient temporal modeling and effective boundary context utilization. In
this paper, we propose Temporal Context Aggregation Network (TCANet) to generate high-quality action proposals
through “local and global” temporal context aggregation
and complementary as well as progressive boundary reﬁnement. Speciﬁcally, we ﬁrst design a Local-Global Temporal Encoder (LGTE), which adopts the channel grouping
strategy to efﬁciently encode both “local and global” temporal inter-dependencies. Furthermore, both the boundary
and internal context of proposals are adopted for framelevel and segment-level boundary regressions, respectively.
Temporal Boundary Regressor (TBR) is designed to combine these two regression granularities in an end-to-end
fashion, which achieves the precise boundaries and reliable conﬁdence of proposals through progressive reﬁnement. Extensive experiments are conducted on three challenging datasets: HACS, ActivityNet-v1.3, and THUMOS14, where TCANet can generate proposals with high precision and recall. By combining with the existing action
classiﬁer, TCANet can obtain remarkable temporal action
detection performance compared with other methods. Not
surprisingly, the proposed TCANet won the 1st place in the
CVPR 2020 - HACS challenge leaderboard on temporal action localization task.
∗ The work was done during an internship at SenseTime.
† Corresponding author.

Background

ࡿ࢚ࢇ࢚࢘

ࡱ࢔ࢊ

Background

Skiing

Local Temporal Encoder

Global Temporal Encoder

LGTE

Encoded
Feature
TBR

Starting Context

Candidate Proposal
Internal Context

Ending Context

Start-Boundary
Regression

Segment- Level
Regression

End-Boundary
Regression

Segment-Level Regression Output
Frame-Level Regression Output
Fused Output

Figure 1. Overview of our proposed method. Given an untrimmed
video, TCANet captures the “local and global” temporal relationships in parallel by LGTE. In TBR, the internal and boundary context of proposals are utilized for segment-level boundary regression and frame-level boundary regression, respectively.

1. Introduction
The temporal action detection task requires locating the
starting and ending time of action instances from long
untrimmed videos and classifying the actions. This task can
be applied to many ﬁelds, such as video content analysis and
video recommendation. Most existing temporal action detection methods follow a two-stage scheme [35, 26], namely
temporal action proposal generation and classiﬁcation. Although action recognition methods [37, 5] have achieved
impressive classiﬁcation accuracy, the temporal action detection performance is still unsatisfactory in several mainstream benchmarks [14, 2, 45]. Hence, many researchers
target improving the quality of temporal action proposals.
Current proposal generation methods can be mainly divided into two steps. First, the temporal relationship is captured by stacked temporal convolutions [20, 18, 16, 30, 29]

485

