Repetitive Activity Counting by Sight and Sound
Yunhua Zhang1
1

University of Amsterdam

Ling Shao2
2

Cees G. M. Snoek1

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

Abstract
This paper strives for repetitive activity counting in
videos. Different from existing works, which all analyze the
visual video content only, we incorporate for the first time
the corresponding sound into the repetition counting process.
This benefits accuracy in challenging vision conditions such
as occlusion, dramatic camera view changes, low resolution,
etc. We propose a model that starts with analyzing the sight
and sound streams separately. Then an audiovisual temporal
stride decision module and a reliability estimation module
are introduced to exploit cross-modal temporal interaction.
For learning and evaluation, an existing dataset is repurposed and reorganized to allow for repetition counting with
sight and sound. We also introduce a variant of this dataset
for repetition counting under challenging vision conditions.
Experiments demonstrate the benefit of sound, as well as
the other introduced modules, for repetition counting. Our
sight-only model already outperforms the state-of-the-art by
itself, when we add sound, results improve notably, especially
under harsh vision conditions. The code and datasets are
available at https://github.com/xiaobai1217/
RepetitionCounting.

Convolutional
Network

2

Count

Sight
Reliable?

✓

Sound
Count

5

Convolutional
Network

Figure 1: From sight and sound, as well as their cross-modal interaction, we predict the number of repetitions for an (unknown)
activity happening in a video. This is especially beneficial in challenging vision conditions with occlusions and low illumination.

1. Introduction
The goal of this paper is to count in video the repetitions
of (unknown) activities, like bouncing on a trampoline, slicing an onion or playing ping pong. The computer vision
solutions to this challenging problem have a long tradition.
Early work emphasized on repetitive motion estimation by
Fourier analysis, e.g., [4, 10, 24, 36], and more recently by a
continuous wavelet transform [28, 29]. State-of-the-art solutions rely on convolutional neural networks [11, 21, 42] and
large-scale count-annotated datasets [11, 42] to learn to predict the number of repetitions in a video. Albeit successful,
all existing works focus exclusively on the visual modality,
and could fail in poor sight conditions such as low illumination, occlusion, camera view changes, etc. Different from
existing works, we propose in this paper the first repetitive
activity counting method based on sight and sound.
Analyzing sound has recently proven advantageous in a

variety of computer vision challenges, such as representation
learning by audio-visual synchronization [1, 3, 19, 23], video
captioning [25, 34, 39], sound source localization [27, 30],
to name a few. Correspondingly, several mechanisms for
fusing both modalities have been introduced. In works for
action recognition by previewing the audio track [20] and
talking-face generation [31, 38], the audio network usually
works independently and the predictions guide the inference
process of the visual counterpart. In contrast, feature multiplication and concatenation operations, as well as cross-modal
attention mechanisms, are widely adopted for fusion in tasks
like audio-visual synchronization [2, 19, 27] and video captioning [25, 34, 39]. We also combine sight and sound, but
observe that for some activities, like playing ping pong, humans can count the number of repetitions by just listening.
This gives us an incentive that sound could be an important

14070

