HybrIK: A Hybrid Analytical-Neural Inverse Kinematics Solution
for 3D Human Pose and Shape Estimation
Jiefeng Li, Chao Xu, Zhicun Chen, Siyuan Bian, Lixin Yang, Cewu Lu†
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{ljf likit,xuchao.19962007, zhicun chen, biansiyuan, siriusyang, lucewu}@sjtu.edu.cn
Forward Kinematics

Abstract
Model-based 3D pose and shape estimation methods reconstruct a full 3D mesh for the human body by estimating several parameters. However, learning the abstract parameters is a highly non-linear process and suffers from
image-model misalignment, leading to mediocre model performance. In contrast, 3D keypoint estimation methods
combine deep CNN network with the volumetric representation to achieve pixel-level localization accuracy but may
predict unrealistic body structure. In this paper, we address the above issues by bridging the gap between body
mesh estimation and 3D keypoint estimation. We propose a
novel hybrid inverse kinematics solution (HybrIK). HybrIK
directly transforms accurate 3D joints to relative body-part
rotations for 3D body mesh reconstruction, via the twistand-swing decomposition. The swing rotation is analytically solved with 3D joints, and the twist rotation is derived
from the visual cues through the neural network. We show
that HybrIK preserves both the accuracy of 3D pose and
the realistic body structure of the parametric human model,
leading to a pixel-aligned 3D body mesh and a more accurate 3D pose than the pure 3D keypoint estimation methods.
Without bells and whistles, the proposed method surpasses
the state-of-the-art methods by a large margin on various
3D human pose and shape benchmarks. As an illustrative
example, HybrIK outperforms all the previous methods by
13.2 mm MPJPE and 21.9 mm PVE on 3DPW dataset. Our
code is available at https://github.com/Jeff-sjtu/HybrIK.

1. Introduction
Recovering the 3D surface from a monocular RGB image is a fundamentally ill-posed problem. It has a wide rage
of application scenarios [52, 31, 27, 28, 8]. With the development of the parametric statistical human body shape
models [2, 29, 47], a realistic and controllable 3D mesh of
† Cewu Lu is the corresponding author. He is the member of Qing
Yuan Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI
Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China.

3D
Mesh
Estimation

3D
Keypoint
Estimation

Parametric Model

3D Skeleton

Inverse Kinematics

Figure 1. Closing the loop between the 3D skeleton and the
parametric model via HybrIK. A 3D skeleton predicted by the
neural network can be transformed into a parametric body mesh
by inverse kinematics without loss of accuracy. The parametric
body mesh can generate structural realistic 3D skeleton by forward
kinematics.

human body can be generated from only a few parameters,
e.g. shape parameters and relative rotations of body parts.
Recent studies develop the model-based methods [7, 18, 23]
to obtain these parameters from the monocular RGB input
and produce 3D pose and shape of human bodies.
Most of the model-based methods can be categorized into two classes: optimization-based approach
and learning-based approach. Optimization-based approaches [13, 7, 47] estimate the body pose and shape by
an iterative fitting process. The parameters of the statistical
model are tuned to reduce the error between its 2D projection and 2D observations, e.g. 2D joint locations and silhouette. However, the optimization problem is non-convex and
takes a long time to solve. The results are sensitive to the
initialization. These issues shift the spotlight towards the
learning-based approaches. With a parametric body model,
learning-based approaches use neural networks to regress
the model parameters directly [18, 23, 20]. But the parameter space in the statistical model is abstract, making it difficult for the networks to learn the mapping function.
This challenge prompts us to look into the field of 3D
keypoint estimation. Instead of the direct regression, previous methods [48, 60] adopt volumetric heatmap as the target
representation to learn 3D joint locations and have achieved

3383

