NPAS: A Compiler-aware Framework of Unified Network Pruning and
Architecture Search for Beyond Real-Time Mobile Acceleration
Zhengang Li⋆1 , Geng Yuan⋆1 , Wei Niu⋆2 , Pu Zhao⋆1 *, Yanyu Li1 , Yuxuan Cai1 , Xuan Shen1 , Zheng Zhan1 ,
Zhenglun Kong1 , Qing Jin1 , Zhiyu Chen3 , Sijia Liu4 , Kaiyuan Yang3 , Bin Ren2 , Yanzhi Wang1 , Xue Lin1
1
Northeastern University, 2 College of William and Mary,
3
Rice University, 4 Michigan State University
1

{li.zhen, yuan.geng, zhao.pu, li.yanyu, cai.yuxu, shen.xu, zhan.zhe, kong.zhe,
jinqingking, yanz.wang, xue.lin}@northeastern.edu
2

wniu@email.wm.edu, bren@cs.wm.edu, 3 {zc37, kyang}@rice.edu, 4 liusiji5@msu.edu

Abstract
With the increasing demand to efficiently deploy DNNs
on mobile edge devices, it becomes much more important
to reduce unnecessary computation and increase the execution speed. Prior methods towards this goal, including
model compression and network architecture search (NAS),
are largely performed independently, and do not fully consider compiler-level optimizations which is a must-do for
mobile acceleration. In this work, we first propose (i) a general category of fine-grained structured pruning applicable
to various DNN layers, and (ii) a comprehensive, compiler
automatic code generation framework supporting different
DNNs and different pruning schemes, which bridge the gap
of model compression and NAS. We further propose NPAS,
a compiler-aware unified network pruning and architecture search. To deal with large search space, we propose
a meta-modeling procedure based on reinforcement learning with fast evaluation and Bayesian optimization, ensuring the total number of training epochs comparable with
representative NAS frameworks. Our framework achieves
6.7ms, 5.9ms, and 3.9ms ImageNet inference times with
78.2%, 75% (MobileNet-V3 level), and 71% (MobileNet-V2
level) Top-1 accuracy respectively on an off-the-shelf mobile phone, consistently outperforming prior work.

1. Introduction
The growing popularity of mobile AI applications and
the demand for real-time Deep Neural Network (DNN) executions raise significant challenges for DNN accelerations.
However, the ever-growing size of DNN models causes intensive computation and memory cost, which impedes the
* ⋆ These authors contributed equally.

deployment on resource limited mobile devices.
DNN weight pruning [71, 21, 54, 27, 28] has
been proved as an effective model compression technique
that can remove redundant weights of the DNN models,
thereby reducing storage and computation costs simultaneously. Existing work mainly focus on unstructured pruning
scheme [24, 21, 46] where arbitrary weight can be removed,
and (coarse-grained) structured pruning scheme [54, 85, 84,
50, 82, 45] to eliminate whole filters/channels. The former
results in high accuracy but limited hardware parallelism
(and acceleration), while the latter is the opposite. Another
active research area is the Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) [86], which designs more efficient DNN architectures using automatic searching algorithms. EfficientNet
[69] and MobileNetV3 [30] are representative lightweight
networks obtained by using NAS approaches. Recently,
hardware-aware NAS [68, 73, 8, 33] has been investigated
targeting acceleration on actual hardware platforms.
Different from the prior work on coarse-grained pruning
and NAS that find a smaller, yet regular, DNN structure,
recent work [48, 58, 16] propose to prune the weights in a
more fine-grained manner, e.g., assigning potentially different patterns to kernels. Higher accuracy can be achieved
as a result of the intra-kernel flexibility, while high hardware parallelism (and mobile inference acceleration) can be
achieved with the assist of compiler-level code generation
techniques [58]. This work reveals a new dimension of optimization: With the aid of advanced compiler optimizations,
it is possible to achieve high accuracy and high acceleration
simultaneously by injecting a proper degree of fine granularity in weight pruning. Despite the promising results,
pattern-based pruning [48, 58] is only applied to 3×3 convolutional (CONV) layers, which limits the applicability.
As the first contribution, we propose a general category of fine-grained structured pruning schemes that can be

14255

