Monocular 3D Multi-Person Pose Estimation by Integrating
Top-Down and Bottom-Up Networks
Yu Cheng1 , Bo Wang2 , Bo Yang2 , Robby T. Tan1,3
1
National University of Singapore
2
Tencent Game AI Research Center
3
Yale-NUS College
e0321276@u.nus.edu, {bohawkwang,brandonyang}@tencent.com, robby.tan@nus.edu.sg

Frame 140

Abstract
In monocular video 3D multi-person pose estimation,
inter-person occlusion and close interactions can cause human detection to be erroneous and human-joints grouping
to be unreliable. Existing top-down methods rely on human detection and thus suffer from these problems. Existing bottom-up methods do not use human detection, but
they process all persons at once at the same scale, causing them to be sensitive to multiple-persons scale variations. To address these challenges, we propose the integration of top-down and bottom-up approaches to exploit their
strengths. Our top-down network estimates human joints
from all persons instead of one in an image patch, making it
robust to possible erroneous bounding boxes. Our bottomup network incorporates human-detection based normalized heatmaps, allowing the network to be more robust in
handling scale variations. Finally, the estimated 3D poses
from the top-down and bottom-up networks are fed into our
integration network for final 3D poses. Besides the integration of top-down and bottom-up networks, unlike existing pose discriminators that are designed solely for a single person, and consequently cannot assess natural interperson interactions, we propose a two-person pose discriminator that enforces natural two-person interactions. Lastly,
we also apply a semi-supervised method to overcome the
3D ground-truth data scarcity. Quantitative and qualitative
evaluations show the effectiveness of the proposed method.
Our code is available publicly. 1

1. Introduction
Estimating 3D multi-person poses from a monocular
video has drawn increasing attention due to its importance
for real-world applications (e.g., [32, 28, 2, 7]). Unfortunately, it is generally still challenging and an open prob1 https://github.com/3dpose/3D-Multi-Person-Pose

Frame 150

Frame 180

Input
frames

Topdown

Bottomup

Our
results

Figure 1. Incorrect 3D multi-person pose estimation from existing top-down (2nd row) and bottom-up (3rd row) methods.
The top-down method is RootNet [32], the bottom-up method is
SMAP [53]. The input images are from MuPoTS-3D dataset [29].
The top-down method suffers from inter-person occlusion and the
bottom-up method is sensitive to scale variations (i.e., the 3D
poses of the two persons in the back are inaccurately estimated).
Our method substantially outperforms the state-of-the-art.

lem, particularly when multiple persons are present in the
scene. Multiple persons can generate inter-person occlusion, which causes human detection to be erroneous. Moreover, multiple persons in a scene are likely in close contact with each other and interact, which makes human-joints
grouping unreliable.

7649

