Visual Navigation with Spatial Attention
Bar Mayo
Technion

Tamir Hazan
Technion

Ayellet Tal
Technion

mayo.bar@gmail.com

tamir.hazan@technion.ac.il

ayellet@ee.technion.ac.il

(a) Paths—Ours & [30]’s

(b) Our agent’s view

(c) Our attention

(d) [30]’s view

Figure 1. Visual navigation. (a) The agent aims at finding a TV (red rectangle) in a living room (top view), starting from a given location
(black circle). Our agent’s path is marked in orange and [30]’s path is in magenta. At each step, the agent is given a specific view, depending
on its position. In this example, our agent starts by turning around in its starting location to gather information—a strategy it has learned.
(b) shows our agent’s view before the first move forward, whereas (d) shows [30]’s view before its first move forward. (c) shows our
attention model, which combines semantic and spatial information of (b)’s view; it directs our agent to move forward, towards the TV.
Differently, the view in (d) is part of [30]’s lengthy exploration (magenta path in (a)) after the sought-after TV.

Abstract
This work focuses on object goal visual navigation, aiming at finding the location of an object from a given class,
where in each step the agent is provided with an egocentric RGB image of the scene. We propose to learn the
agent’s policy using a reinforcement learning algorithm.
Our key contribution is a novel attention probability model
for visual navigation tasks. This attention encodes semantic information about observed objects, as well as spatial information about their place. This combination of
the “what” and the “where” allows the agent to navigate
toward the sought-after object effectively. The attention
model is shown to improve the agent’s policy and to achieve
state-of-the-art results on commonly-used datasets.

1. Introduction
Human and animals can navigate new environments relatively well. This adaption to new surroundings, although
natural, is not trivial. It requires to find parallels between the
new observations and our past experience. This is largely
possible due to our ability to sort through new visual information and intelligently focus on the most relevant se-

mantic cues. For instance, when looking for a toaster in a
previously-unvisited kitchen, our intuition is to look for the
refrigerator, while ignoring other ”irrelevant” information,
since our past experience indicates that the toaster is usually
located not far from the refrigerator.
Object goal visual navigation tasks include two basic
components: semantic understanding of the scene and path
planning [28, 3, 14]. With the increase of data and computation power, reinforcement learning algorithms excelled
in learning policies for these two components jointly in an
end-to-end manner [25, 21, 13, 6]. As a result, many extensions to visual navigation were presented, including tasks
specified by natural language instructions [7], by a desired
goal image [37], or by a target object [30, 10]. Reinforcement learning of spatial and semantic relations is a fundamental challenge for these tasks [31].
This work focuses on object goal visual navigation,
where the goal is to find an instance of the target object class
(Figure 1). Like previous works, we utilize reinforcement
learning. We propose to improve the agent’s policy by encoding semantic information about observed objects using a
convolutional net, as well as spatial information about their
place, using an attention probability model. This combination of both semantic and spatial information, i.e., of “what”
116898

