Cross-Iteration Batch Normalization
Zhuliang Yao1, 2 *

Yue Cao2
Shuxin Zheng2
Gao Huang1
1
2
Tsinghua University
Microsoft Research Asia

{yzl17@mails.,gaohuang@}tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
A well-known issue of Batch Normalization is its significantly reduced effectiveness in the case of small mini-batch
sizes. When a mini-batch contains few examples, the statistics upon which the normalization is defined cannot be reliably estimated from it during a training iteration. To address this problem, we present Cross-Iteration Batch Normalization (CBN), in which examples from multiple recent
iterations are jointly utilized to enhance estimation quality. A challenge of computing statistics over multiple iterations is that the network activations from different iterations
are not comparable to each other due to changes in network weights. We thus compensate for the network weight
changes via a proposed technique based on Taylor polynomials, so that the statistics can be accurately estimated and
batch normalization can be effectively applied. On object
detection and image classification with small mini-batch
sizes, CBN is found to outperform the original batch normalization and a direct calculation of statistics over previous iterations without the proposed compensation technique. Code is available at https://aka.ms/cbn.

1. Introduction
Batch Normalization (BN) [10] has played a significant
role in the success of deep neural networks. It was introduced to address the issue of internal covariate shift, where
the distribution of network activations changes during training iterations due to the updates of network parameters.
This shift is commonly believed to be disruptive to network
training, and BN alleviates this problem through normalization of the network activations by their mean and variance,
computed over the examples within the mini-batch at each
iteration. With this normalization, network training can be
performed at much higher learning rates and with less sensitivity to weight initialization.
In BN, it is assumed that the distribution statistics for the
examples within each mini-batch reflect the statistics over
* This work is done when Zhuliang Yao is an intern at Microsoft Research Asia. Correspondence to: Yue Cao (yuecao@microsoft.com).

Stephen Lin2

{yuecao,Shuxin.Zheng,stevelin}@microsoft.com

the full training set. While this assumption is generally valid
for large batch sizes, it breaks down in the small batch size
regime [18, 31, 9], where noisy statistics computed from
small sets of examples can lead to a dramatic drop in performance. This problem hinders the application of BN to
memory-consuming tasks such as object detection [20, 3],
semantic segmentation [15, 2] and action recognition [30],
where batch sizes are limited due to memory constraints.
Towards improving estimation of statistics in the small
batch size regime, alternative normalizers have been proposed. Several of them, including Layer Normalization
(LN) [1], Instance Normalization (IN) [28], and Group Normalization (GN) [31], compute the mean and variance over
the channel dimension, independent of batch size. Different channel-wise normalization techniques, however, tend
to be suitable for different tasks, depending on the set of
channels involved. Although GN is designed for detection task, the slow inference speed limits its practical usage.
On the other hand, synchronized BN (SyncBN) [18] yields
consistent improvements by processing larger batch sizes
across multiple GPUs. These gains in performance come at
the cost of additional overhead needed for synchronization
across the devices.
A seldom explored direction for estimating better statistics is to compute them over the examples from multiple recent training iterations, instead of from only the current iteration as done in previous techniques. This can substantially
enlarge the pool of data from which the mean and variance
are obtained. However, there exists an obvious drawback
to this approach, in that the activation values from different iterations are not comparable to each other due to the
changes in network weights. As shown in Figure 1, directly
calculating the statistics over multiple iterations, which we
refer to as Naive CBN, results in lower accuracy.
In this paper, we present a method that compensates for
the network weight changes among iterations, so that examples from preceding iterations can be effectively used to
improve batch normalization. Our method, called CrossIteration Batch Normalization (CBN), is motivated by the
observation that network weights change gradually, instead of abruptly, between consecutive training iterations,

12331

