Dynamic Probabilistic Graph Convolution for Facial Action Unit Intensity
Estimation
Tengfei Song1 , Zijun Cui2 , Yuru Wang3∗ , Wenming Zheng1∗, and Qiang Ji2
1
Southeast University
2
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
3
Northeast Normal University
songtf@seu.edu.cn, cuiz3@rpi.edu, wangyr915@nenu.edu.cn,
wenming zheng@seu.edu.cn, qji@ecse.rpi.edu

Abstract
Deep learning methods have been widely applied to automatic facial action unit (AU) intensity estimation and
achieved the state-of-the-art performance. These methods,
however, are mostly appearance-based and fail to exploit
the underlying structural information among AUs. In this
paper, we propose a novel dynamic probabilistic graph convolution (DPG) model to simultaneously exploit AU appearances, AU dynamics, and their semantic structural dependencies for AU intensity estimation. Firstly, we propose to
use Bayesian Network to capture the inherent dependencies
among AUs. Secondly, we introduce probabilistic graph
convolution that allows to perform graph convolution on
the distribution of Bayesian Network structure to extract
AU structural features. Finally, we introduce a dynamic
deep model based on LSTM to simultaneously combine AU
appearance features, AU dynamic features, and AU structural features for AU intensity estimation. In experiments,
our method achieves comparable and even better performance with the state-of-the-art methods on two benchmark
facial AU intensity estimation databases, i.e., FERA 2015
and DISFA.

1. Introduction
Facial muscle movements contain rich information related to human emotions, which are significant for human
communication. Ekman and Friesen proposed a Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [8] to depict the movement of
these facial muscles. FACS defines rules to annotate the
intensities of different action units (AUs) and the AU intensities are quantified into 6 discrete levels.
With the availability of high performance computing and
∗ Corresponding author

Figure 1. The illustration of combining the dynamic and structural dependencies with semantic knowledge for AU intensity estimation.

the large scale datasets, deep neural network has been a
dominant method in many computer vision tasks [35, 13].
The most commonly used deep neural networks, i.e., Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) [19] and Long ShortTerm Memory Network (LSTM) [15], show excellent performance in extracting discriminative local features and
capturing the temporal dependencies, respectively. Their
applications in the field of human behavior analysis also
achieve much improvement, including human action recognition [26], expression recognition [41] and facial AU
recognition [24, 36, 6, 21, 30]. However, their success
highly rely on the large amount of training data, which is
difficult to obtain for facial AU intensity estimation. The
reason is that the process of facial AU intensity annotation
is time-consuming and requires strong domain expertise.
Moreover, the data distribution of AU intensity is generally
imbalanced. Therefore, the performance of deep method on
AU intensity estimation is limited under insufficient data.
Rather than increasing training data for AU intensity estimation, the prior knowledge provides more generic information that is helpful to improve the performance of deep
model. Because of the underlying facial anatomy and the
need to form a coherent facial expression, a certain group
of AUs may be activated under a specific expression and, at
the same time, they may suppress the activity of other AUs
[45]. For instance, cheek raiser and lip corner puller occur
simultaneously for smile. Besides, the changes of AU over
a short temporal period are usually observed as continuous

4845

