Can audio-visual integration strengthen robustness
under multimodal attacks?
Yapeng Tian
Chenliang Xu
University of Rochester
{yapengtian,chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu

Abstract
In this paper, we propose to make a systematic study
on machines’ multisensory perception under attacks. We
use the audio-visual event recognition task against multimodal adversarial attacks as a proxy to investigate the robustness of audio-visual learning. We attack audio, visual,
and both modalities to explore whether audio-visual integration still strengthens perception and how different fusion
mechanisms affect the robustness of audio-visual models.
For interpreting the multimodal interactions under attacks,
we learn a weakly-supervised sound source visual localization model to localize sounding regions in videos. To mitigate multimodal attacks, we propose an audio-visual defense approach based on an audio-visual dissimilarity constraint and external feature memory banks. Extensive experiments demonstrate that audio-visual models are susceptible to multimodal adversarial attacks; audio-visual
integration could decrease the model robustness rather
than strengthen under multimodal attacks; even a weaklysupervised sound source visual localization model can be
successfully fooled; our defense method can improve the invulnerability of audio-visual networks without significantly
sacrificing clean model performance. The source code and
pre-trained models are released in https://github.
com/YapengTian/AV-Robustness-CVPR21.

1. Introduction
Our daily perceptual experiences are specified by multiple cooperated senses with multisensory integration [50].
When we are talking with a person, we can learn her/his
spoken words and emotions from the seen lip movements,
gestures, facial expressions, and heard speech sounds. Numerous psychological and cognitive studies show that the
availability of sensory inputs from several modalities ensures the robustness of the human perception system [66,
29, 75]. However, the robustness highly depends on the reliability of multisensory inputs. For our human perception

Violin

Audio-Visual
Adversarial Attack

Guitar

Figure 1: Adding imperceptible perturbations into audio
and visual inputs by an audio-visual adversarial attack, our
joint perception model predicts a wrong event class: Guitar
and tend to localize visual regions without the sound source.
system, it might fail if certain senses are attacked. For example, the McGurk effect1 [46] indicates a perceptual illusion, which occurs when a speech sound is paired with the
visual component of another sound, leading to the perception of a third speech sound.
For computation models, our community indeed has
devoted to develop data-driven approaches in lip reading [15, 58, 14], visually indicated sound separation [20, 25,
53, 87, 86, 81, 22], audio-visual event localization [71, 42,
77, 61, 62], audio-visual video parsing [70], audio-visual
embodied navigation [9, 23], and audio-visual action recognition [28, 37, 78] to achieve robust auditory or visual perception by integrating audio and visual information. However, whether these computational perception models still
1 https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2k8fHR9jKVM

5601

