ECKPN: Explicit Class Knowledge Propagation Network for Transductive
Few-shot Learning
Chaofan Chen1 , Xiaoshan Yang2,3 , Changsheng Xu2,3† , Xuhui Huang4 , Zhe Ma4
1
2

School of Information Science and Technology, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC)

National Lab of Pattern Recognition (NLPR), Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CASIA)
3

School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (UCAS)
4

X Lab, The Second Academy of CASIC, Beijing China

chencfbupt@gmail.com, {xiaoshan.yang,csxu}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn, {starhxh,mazhe thu}@126.com

Abstract
Recently, the transductive graph-based methods have
achieved great success in the few-shot classification task.
However, most existing methods ignore exploring the classlevel knowledge that can be easily learned by humans from
just a handful of samples. In this paper, we propose an
Explicit Class Knowledge Propagation Network (ECKPN),
which is composed of the comparison, squeeze and calibration modules, to address this problem. Specifically, we
first employ the comparison module to explore the pairwise
sample relations to learn rich sample representations in the
instance-level graph. Then, we squeeze the instance-level
graph to generate the class-level graph, which can help
obtain the class-level visual knowledge and facilitate modeling the relations of different classes. Next, the calibration module is adopted to characterize the relations of the
classes explicitly to obtain the more discriminative classlevel knowledge representations. Finally, we combine the
class-level knowledge with the instance-level sample representations to guide the inference of the query samples. We
conduct extensive experiments on four few-shot classification benchmarks, and the experimental results show that the
proposed ECKPN significantly outperforms the state-of-the
art methods.

1. Introduction
Recent deep learning methods rely on a large amount
of labeled data to achieve high performance, which may
have problems in some scenarios, where the cost of data
collection is high, and thus it is difficult to obtain a large
amount of labeled data. The learning schema of these deep
methods is different from that of humans. After being exposed to a few data/samples, human beings can use their
prior knowledge to learn quickly so as to successfully recognize new classes. Therefore, how to reduce the gap be† indicates corresponding author: Changsheng Xu.

q

Class 1
Class 2
Support Sample
Query Sample

Class-level Knowledge Representation

Distribution Boundary Learned Through
Pairwise Sample Relations

Figure 1. An illustration of the role of class-level knowledge representations (e.g., class centers).

tween deep learning methods and human learning abilities
has aroused the interest of many researchers. Few-shot
learning [17, 21, 45], which simulates the human learning
schema, has attracted much attention in the field of computer vision and machine learning.
As a straightforward method to solve the few-shot learning task, traditional fine-tuning techniques [10] can utilize
the samples of the new classes to update the parameters of
the network pretrained on the classes with sufficient samples. However, these methods always lead to over-fitting,
since only a few training samples are not enough to represent the data distributions of the corresponding classes
and learn effective classifiers. A successful attempt to solve
the over-fitting problem is to apply the meta-learning mechanism [20] in few-shot learning task. The meta-learning
based methods [3, 43, 30, 31, 23, 37, 7, 28, 12, 11, 52,
47, 2, 29] are composed of two steps: meta-train and metatest. Each step (meta-train or meta-test) consists of multiple episodes (sub-tasks), and the data of each episode are
composed of support set and query set. These methods
keep the meta-train environment consistent with the metatest to help improve the generalization ability of the models, thereby solving the problem of over-fitting. Nowadays,
meta-learning has become a general training mechanism in
most of the few-shot learning methods. In this paper, we
also follow this training mechanism.

6596

