LaPred: Lane-Aware Prediction of Multi-Modal Future Trajectories of Dynamic
Agents
ByeoungDo Kim1
Seong Hyeon Park1
Seokhwan Lee1
Elbek Khoshimjonov1
2
3
3
Dongsuk Kum
Junsoo Kim
Jeong Soo Kim
Jun Won Choi1∗
1
2
Hanyang University
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
3
Hyundai Motor Company
{bdkim,shpark,shlee,elbek}@spa.hanyang.ac.kr
{Junsoo.Kim,jskim1074}@hyundai.com

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of predicting the
future motion of a dynamic agent (called a target agent)
given its current and past states as well as the information on its environment. It is paramount to develop a prediction model that can exploit the contextual information
in both static and dynamic environments surrounding the
target agent and generate diverse trajectory samples that
are meaningful in a traffic context. We propose a novel
prediction model, referred to as the lane-aware prediction
(LaPred) network, which uses the instance-level lane entities extracted from a semantic map to predict the multimodal future trajectories. For each lane candidate found in
the neighborhood of the target agent, LaPred extracts the
joint features relating the lane and the trajectories of the
neighboring agents. Then, the features for all lane candidates are fused with the attention weights learned through a
self-supervised learning task that identifies the lane candidate likely to be followed by the target agent. Using the
instance-level lane information, LaPred can produce the
trajectories compliant with the surroundings better than 2D
raster image-based methods and generate the diverse future trajectories given multiple lane candidates. The experiments conducted on the public nuScenes dataset and Argoverse dataset demonstrate that the proposed LaPred method
significantly outperforms the existing prediction models,
achieving state-of-the-art performance in the benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Predicting the future motion of a dynamic agent given its
past trajectory is crucial for self-driving robots and vehicles
∗ Corresponding author: Jun Won Choi

dskum@kaist.ac.kr

junwchoi@hanyang.ac.kr

to conduct path planning and collision avoidance. However,
predicting motion in realistic environments is challenging
because the motion of the dynamic agent is determined by
various indirectly observed factors, including the agent’s intention, the static environment around the agent, and the interaction with other agents. Such uncertainties in prediction
tasks entail multiple plausible trajectories that an agent can
take to reach its intended goals. Specifically, the distribution
of an agent’s future trajectory will be multi-modal in that
the agent can exhibit different maneuvers (e.g., right turn,
left turn, or straight) for given specific scenes (e.g., fourway crossroad), or change the lanes and adjust its speed interacting with other agents. Therefore, a prediction model
should suggest more than one plausible trajectory samples
that follow the distribution for the given situation.
To predict such a diverse set of trajectories, the model
must understand the environmental context consisting of
social patterns in temporal motion as well as observations for static scene environment via sensors or semantic maps. Therefore, the model’s ability to extract and
meaningfully represent such multiple cues is crucial. Deep
neural networks (DNN) suit this task well, owing to their
large capacity and capability of end-to-end learning representation. Previous art has presented sophisticated architectures for interaction modeling [1, 6, 8, 10, 12, 15,
16, 22, 23, 26, 28, 29, 30, 34], static-scene processing
[3, 5, 14, 16, 17, 24, 25, 26, 27, 32, 34], and multi-modal
trajectory modeling [3, 5, 10, 11, 16, 22, 24, 25, 26, 33].
However, intermediate logic in DNN models is often not
interpretable, and thus human designers have limited space
to intervene with a prediction instance. For example, most
prediction models do not allow to explicitly condition on a
particular set of lanes on the road, while such decisions implicitly stem from random input noise. This is a practical
drawback when the models are to be used in self-driving
robots, causing them to sample inefficiently many trajecto114636

