Behavior-Driven Synthesis of Human Dynamics
Andreas Blattmann*
Timo Milbich*
Michael Dorkenwald*
Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing, IWR
Heidelberg University, Germany

Abstract
Generating and representing human behavior are of major importance for various computer vision applications.
Commonly, human video synthesis represents behavior as
sequences of postures while directly predicting their likely
progressions or merely changing the appearance of the depicted persons, thus not being able to exercise control over
their actual behavior during the synthesis process. In contrast, controlled behavior synthesis and transfer across individuals requires a deep understanding of body dynamics and
calls for a representation of behavior that is independent
of appearance and also of specific postures. In this work,
we present a model for human behavior synthesis which
learns a dedicated representation of human dynamics independent of postures. Using this representation, we are able
to change the behavior of a person depicted in an arbitrary
posture, or to even directly transfer behavior observed in
a given video sequence. To this end, we propose a conditional variational framework which explicitly disentangles
posture from behavior. We demonstrate the effectiveness of
our approach on this novel task, evaluating capturing, transferring, and sampling fine-grained, diverse behavior, both
quantitatively and qualitatively. Project page is available at
https://cutt.ly/5l7rXEp

1. Introduction
Understanding human appearance, posture and behavior are key problems of computer vision with numerous
applications in autonomous driving [39, 41, 23], surveillance [12, 50, 60], medical treatment [6, 54] and beyond. While there has been major progress on representation [59, 48] and - with the advent of deep generative models [34, 24] - synthesis [7, 30] and manipulation [20, 13, 17]
of posture and appearance, the understanding of representation and synthesis of behavior is an open problem.
Human motor behavior is defined by the distinct dynamics of our limbs and the entire body. Take for example a
person raising their arm. This is fully determined by the
upward movement of the arm. Since the remaining body

posture is mostly unaffected, the behavior can be directly
performed independently of a particular initial body configuration such as a sitting or standing posture (cf. Fig. 1).
Moreover, rather complex behavior like running involves an
interplay between certain body limbs, e.g. arms swinging
synchronously with the movement of legs, and, thus, is naturally limited to certain postures to start with. To nevertheless
enact such behavior from arbitrary starting poses, first a transition to fitting initial body configurations may be required for instance, a sitting person needs to stand up before being
able to walk. Finally, specific body features like size or build
do not affect the ability to perform a walking behavior.
While behavior is eventually instantiated as a sequence of
individual postures that can be observed in a video, this
would be a suboptimal representation: We want the overall
behavior to be the same, e.g. raising arm or walking, regardless of the initial posture it starts with. Although we are
looking at different realizations it should still be represented
as being the same behavior. Consequently, understanding,
controlling, and synthesizing behavior calls for separate disentangled representations of the characteristic behavior and
of individual (in particular the initial) posture. In contrast,
present work on human motion synthesis typically represents
behavior directly by means of the observed sequence of postures [3, 40, 63, 57]. Thus, as no explicit understanding and
representation of behavior is developed, synthesizing human
behavior has been limited to only changing person appearance [57, 9, 56] or forecasting the most likely continuation
of the depicted posture sequence [3, 40, 63, 11]. However,
controlling such sequences, e.g. to re-enact a novel behavior
by an observed person, asks for a posture independent representation which captures only the behavior dynamics to be
transferred. Moreover, instantiating the re-enacted behavior
requires combining these dynamics with the, potentially significantly different, posture of the target person.
In this paper we propose a conditional variational generative
model for controlled human behavior synthesis which only
requires a collection of sequences without any class labels
provided. Our models learns to understand the characteristic
motor dynamics of behavior, which enables us to transfer
behavior between videos. We learn a dedicated representa-

* Indicates equal contribution.

12236

