S 3 : Learnable Sparse Signal Superdensity for Guided Depth Estimation
Yu-Kai Huang

Yueh-Cheng Liu
Tsung-Han Wu
Hung-Ting Su
Yu-Cheng Chang
Tsung-Lin Tsou
Yu-An Wang
Winston H. Hsu
National Taiwan University
Abstract

Dense depth estimation plays a key role in multiple applications such as robotics, 3D reconstruction, and augmented
reality. While sparse signal, e.g., LiDAR and Radar, has
been leveraged as guidance for enhancing dense depth estimation, the improvement is limited due to its low density
and imbalanced distribution. To maximize the utility from
the sparse source, we propose Sparse Signal Superdensity
(S 3 ) technique, which expands the depth value from sparse
cues while estimating the confidence of expanded region.
The proposed S 3 can be applied to various guided depth
estimation approaches and trained end-to-end at different
stages, including input, cost volume and output. Extensive
experiments demonstrate the effectiveness, robustness, and
flexibility of the S 3 technique on LiDAR and Radar signal.

RGB

Sparse Signal

Ground Truth

Depth from RGB

Guide with Sparse Signal

Guide with S3

(a) Low Density Problem.

RGB

4-beam Sparse Signal

Ground Truth

Depth from RGB

Guide with 4-beam

Guide with S3

(b) Imbalanced Signal Distribution.

1. Introduction
Dense depth estimation is crucial in the field of 3D reconstruction [14], 3D object detection [44, 47], and robotic
vision [25, 28]. Many works have proposed to estimate
depth from RGB images or stereo pairs. Yet, the stereo estimation could be unreliable on homogeneous planes, large
illumination changes, and repetitive textures [38, 43]; while
monocular depth estimation is an ill-posed problem [11]
and inherently ambiguous and unreliable [20, 24]. To attain a higher level of robustness and accuracy, modern solutions commonly leverage raw sparse signal, such as LiDAR [2, 34, 24] and Radar [5, 29], to improve depth estimation results or object detection for the challenging outdoor
scenes, termed guidance in this paper.
Despite the success of those sparse-guidance methods,
however, we still find two big problems with sparse signal. First, raw sparse signal can be ignored by networks
when it is largely different from depth predicted with RGB
(shown in Figure 1a). This situation stems from the low
density property of the sparse signal, which is a common
problem in many large-scale dataset. For example, KITTI
dataset [12] wraps up an average density of 4.0% and

Figure 1: Major problems of sparse depth signal. (a)
The network tends to ignore the low density hint if depth
from RGB is hugely different from sparse signal. (b) Imbalanced signal distribution would make the guidance to be
not equally distributed. We can observe the trace of the 4
scanning lines of LiDAR (yellow circle). Our proposed S 3
method successfully overcome the two problems. The noise
in the top example is removed, and the guided result in the
bottom example is smoother and closer to the ground truth.
Best viewed in zoomed digital.

nuScenes dataset [4] has an average of less than 50 Radar
points over a 900 × 1600 image. Actually, the guidance
module tends to ignore the accurate but sparse signals when
they strongly disagree with the original prediction.
Furthermore, imbalance guidance is also the main problem. As shown in Figure 1b, the algorithms only focus
on the small region with high signal density while barely
correct the low-density region between scanning lines and
cause non-smoothing result. However, these low-density
parts neither implicate less importance nor less confidence.

16706

