SelfDoc: Self-Supervised Document Representation Learning
Peizhao Li1 ,* Jiuxiang Gu2 , Jason Kuen2 , Vlad I. Morariu2 , Handong Zhao2 ,
Rajiv Jain2 , Varun Manjunatha2 , Hongfu Liu1
1
Brandeis University, 2 Adobe Research
{peizhaoli,hongfuliu}@brandeis.edu
{jigu,kuen,morariu,hazhao,rajijain,vmanjuna}@adobe.com

Abstract
We propose SelfDoc, a task-agnostic pre-training framework for document image understanding. Because documents are multimodal and are intended for sequential reading, our framework exploits the positional, textual, and visual information of every semantically meaningful component in a document, and it models the contextualization
between each block of content. Unlike existing document
pre-training models, our model is coarse-grained instead
of treating individual words as input, therefore avoiding an
overly fine-grained with excessive contextualization. Beyond that, we introduce cross-modal learning in the model
pre-training phase to fully leverage multimodal information from unlabeled documents. For downstream usage,
we propose a novel modality-adaptive attention mechanism for multimodal feature fusion by adaptively emphasizing language and vision signals. Our framework benefits
from self-supervised pre-training on documents without requiring annotations by a feature masking training strategy.
It achieves superior performance on multiple downstream
tasks with significantly fewer document images used in the
pre-training stage compared to previous works.

1. Introduction
Documents, such as business forms, scholarly and news
articles, invoices, letters, and text-based emails, encode and
convey information through language, visual content, and
layout structure. Automated document understanding is
a crucial research area for business and academic values.
It can significantly reduce labor-intensive document workflows through automated entity recognition, document classification, semantic extraction, document completion, etc.
Many works have been proposed applying machine
learning for document analysis [13, 15, 37, 36, 15, 18].
However, parsing a document remains non-trivial and poses
* This work was done during the author’s internship at Adobe Research.

multiple challenges. One challenge is modeling and understanding contextual information when interpreting content.
For example, since information in documents is organized
for sequential reading, the interpretation of a piece of content relies heavily on its surrounding context. Similarly, a
heading can indicate and summarize the meaning of subsequent blocks of text, and a caption could be useful for
understanding a related figure. Another challenge is effectively incorporating the cues from multiple data modalities.
In contrast to other data formats like images or plain text,
documents combine textual and visual information, and
both of the two modalities are complemented by the document layout. Additionally, from a practical perspective,
many tasks related to document understanding are labelscarce. A framework that can learn from unlabeled documents (i.e., pre-training) and perform model fine-tuning for
specific downstream applications is more preferred than the
one that requires fully-annotated training data.
In this work, we develop a task-agnostic representation
learning framework for document images. Our model fully
exploits the textual, visual, and positional information of
every semantically meaningful component in a document,
e.g., text block, heading, and figure. To model the internal
relationships among components in documents, we adopt
the contextualized attention mechanism from natural language processing (NLP) [32] and employ it at the component level. We design two branches separately for textual and visual representation learning, and later encourage
cross-modal learning with the proposed cross-modality encoder. In order to seek a better modality fusion for downstream usage, we propose a modality-adaptive attention
mechanism to fuse the language and vision features adaptively. Moreover, our framework learns a generic representation from a collection of unlabeled documents via selfsupervised learning, and afterward, it will be fine-tuned on
various document-related downstream applications.
There are two major differences between our SelfDoc
and LayoutLM [36], which also introduces a task-agnostic
document pre-training framework by applying 2D posi-

5652

