Taming Transformers for High-Resolution Image Synthesis
Patrick Esser*
Robin Rombach*
Björn Ommer
Heidelberg Collaboratory for Image Processing, IWR, Heidelberg University, Germany
*Both authors contributed equally to this work

Figure 1. Our approach enables transformers to synthesize high-resolution images like this one, which contains 1280x460 pixels.

Abstract
Designed to learn long-range interactions on sequential
data, transformers continue to show state-of-the-art results
on a wide variety of tasks. In contrast to CNNs, they contain
no inductive bias that prioritizes local interactions. This
makes them expressive, but also computationally infeasible for long sequences, such as high-resolution images. We
demonstrate how combining the effectiveness of the inductive bias of CNNs with the expressivity of transformers enables them to model and thereby synthesize high-resolution
images. We show how to (i) use CNNs to learn a contextrich vocabulary of image constituents, and in turn (ii) utilize
transformers to efficiently model their composition within
high-resolution images. Our approach is readily applied
to conditional synthesis tasks, where both non-spatial information, such as object classes, and spatial information,
such as segmentations, can control the generated image.
In particular, we present the first results on semanticallyguided synthesis of megapixel images with transformers.
Project page at https://git.io/JLlvY.

1. Introduction
Transformers are on the rise—they are now the de-facto
standard architecture for language tasks [64, 50, 51, 5]

and are increasingly adapted in other areas such as audio
[12] and vision [8, 15]. In contrast to the predominant vision architecture, convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
the transformer architecture contains no built-in inductive
prior on the locality of interactions and is therefore free
to learn complex relationships among its inputs. However,
this generality also implies that it has to learn all relationships, whereas CNNs have been designed to exploit prior
knowledge about strong local correlations within images.
Thus, the increased expressivity of transformers comes with
quadratically increasing computational costs, because all
pairwise interactions are taken into account. The resulting energy and time requirements of state-of-the-art transformer models thus pose fundamental problems for scaling
them to high-resolution images with millions of pixels.
Observations that transformers tend to learn convolutional structures [15] thus beg the question: Do we have
to re-learn everything we know about the local structure
and regularity of images from scratch each time we train
a vision model, or can we efficiently encode inductive image biases while still retaining the flexibility of transformers? We hypothesize that low-level image structure is well
described by a local connectivity, i.e. a convolutional architecture, whereas this structural assumption ceases to be
effective on higher semantic levels. Moreover, CNNs not
only exhibit a strong locality bias, but also a bias towards

12873

