Spatially-Adaptive Pixelwise Networks for Fast Image Translation
Tamar Rott Shaham1

Michaël Gharbi2
1

Richard Zhang2

Technion

2

Adobe Research

4

ASAPNet
(Ours)

Abstract

1. Introduction
Translating images from one domain to another has been
extensively studied in recent years [18]. Current approaches
usually train a conditional Generative Adversarial Network
(GAN) to learn a direct mapping from one domain to the
other [53, 5, 48, 32, 27]. Although these approaches have
made rapid progress in terms of visual quality, model size
and inference time have also grown significantly. The computational cost of these algorithms becomes even more acute
when operating on high resolution images, which is the most
desirable setting in typical real-world applications.
In this work, we present a novel architecture, designed
for fast image-to-image translation1 . The key ingredient for
an efficient runtime is a new generator that operates pixelwise: each pixel is processed independently from the others
using a pixel-specific, lightweight Multi-Layer Perceptron
1 https://tamarott.github.io/ASAPNet_web

Resolution [Megapixels]

We introduce a new generator architecture, aimed at fast
and efficient high-resolution image-to-image translation. We
design the generator to be an extremely lightweight function of the full-resolution image. In fact, we use pixel-wise
networks; that is, each pixel is processed independently of
others, through a composition of simple affine transformations and nonlinearities. We take three important steps to
equip such a seemingly simple function with adequate expressivity. First, the parameters of the pixel-wise networks
are spatially varying, so they can represent a broader function class than simple 1 × 1 convolutions. Second, these
parameters are predicted by a fast convolutional network
that processes an aggressively low-resolution representation
of the input. Third, we augment the input image by concatenating a sinusoidal encoding of spatial coordinates, which
provides an effective inductive bias for generating realistic
novel high-frequency image content. As a result, our model is
up to 18× faster than state-of-the-art baselines. We achieve
this speedup while generating comparable visual quality
across different image resolutions and translation domains.

Eli Shechtman2

Tomer Michaeli1

pix2pixHD

3

2
SIMS

SPADE

1
CRN

0

CC-FPSE

0

100

ASAPNet (Ours)

200

300
400
Runtime [ms]

Pix2PixHD

500

600

700

SPADE

Figure 1: Fast image translation. Our novel spatially adaptive pixelwise design enables generating high-resolution
images at significantly lower runtimes than existing methods, while maintaining high visual quality. Particularly, as
seen in the plot our model is 2-18× faster than baselines
[27, 32, 34, 48, 5], depending on resolution.
(MLP). At first glance, the representation power of this generator should appear limited. However, three key components
make our network fully expressive. First, in contrast to traditional convolutional networks, where network parameters are
shared across spatial positions, the parameters of the MLPs
vary spatially so each pixel is effectively transformed by a
different function. Second, the spatially-varying parameters
are predicted at low-resolution by a convolutional network
that processes a drastically downsampled representation of
the input. This makes the MLPs adaptive to the input image
(i.e., the pixel-functions depend on the input image itself).
Third, in addition to the input pixel values, the local MLPs

14882

