Real-Time High-Resolution Background Matting
Shanchuan Lin*
Brian Curless

Andrey Ryabtsev*
Soumyadip Sengupta
Steve Seitz
Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman
University of Washington

{linsh,ryabtsev,soumya91,curless,seitz,kemelmi}@cs.washington.edu

Zoom input and background shot

Zoom with new background

Our Zoom plugin with new background

Figure 1: Current video conferencing tools like Zoom can take an input feed (left) and replace the background, often introducing artifacts,
as shown in the center result with close-ups of hair and glasses that still have the residual of the original background. Leveraging a frame
of video without the subject (far left inset), our method produces real-time, high-resolution background matting without those common
artifacts. The image on the right is our result with the corresponding close-ups, screenshot from our Zoom plugin implementation.

Abstract
We introduce a real-time, high-resolution background replacement technique which operates at 30fps in 4K resolution, and 60fps for HD on a modern GPU. Our technique is
based on background matting, where an additional frame of
the background is captured and used in recovering the alpha matte and the foreground layer. The main challenge is
to compute a high-quality alpha matte, preserving strandlevel hair details, while processing high-resolution images
in real-time. To achieve this goal, we employ two neural
networks; a base network computes a low-resolution result
which is refined by a second network operating at highresolution on selective patches. We introduce two largescale video and image matting datasets: VideoMatte240K
and PhotoMatte13K/85. Our approach yields higher quality results compared to the previous state-of-the-art in background matting, while simultaneously yielding a dramatic
boost in both speed and resolution.

1. Introduction
Background replacement, a mainstay in movie special
effects, now enjoys wide-spread use in video conferencing
tools like Zoom, Google Meet, and Microsoft Teams. In addition to adding entertainment value, background replacement can enhance privacy, particularly in situations where
a user may not want to share details of their location and
* Equal contribution.

environment to others on the call. A key challenge of this
video conferencing application is that users do not typically
have access to a green screen or other physical props used to
facilitate background replacement in movie special effects.
While many tools now provide background replacement
functionality, they yield artifacts at boundaries, particularly in areas where there is fine detail like hair or glasses
(Figure 1). In contrast, traditional image matting methods
[6, 16, 17, 29, 9, 2, 7] provide much higher quality results, but do not run in real-time, at high resolution, and
frequently require manual input. In this paper, we introduce the first fully-automated, real-time, high-resolution
matting technique, producing state-of-the-art results at 4K
(3840×2160) at 30fps and HD (1920×1080) at 60fps. Our
method relies on capturing an extra background image to
compute the alpha matte and the foreground layer, an approach known as background matting.
Designing a neural network that can achieve realtime matting on high-resolution videos of people is extremely challenging, especially when fine-grained details
like strands of hair are important; in contrast, the previous
state-of-the-art method [27] is limited to 512×512 at 8fps.
Training a deep network on such a large resolution is extremely slow and memory intensive. It also requires large
volumes of images with high-quality alpha mattes to generalize; the publicly available datasets [32, 24] are too limited.
Since it is difficult to collect a high-quality dataset with
manually curated alpha mattes in large quantities, we pro-

8762

