LOHO: Latent Optimization of Hairstyles via Orthogonalization
Rohit Saha1,2 *
1

Brendan Duke1,2

University of Toronto

2

Florian Shkurti1,4

Modiface, Inc.

3

Graham W. Taylor3,4

University of Guelph

Parham Aarabi1,2
4

Vector Institute

Figure 1: Hairstyle transfer samples synthesized using LOHO. For given portrait images (a) and (d), LOHO is capable of manipulating
hair attributes based on multiple input conditions. Inset images represent the target hair attributes in the order: appearance and style,
structure, and shape. LOHO can transfer appearance and style (b), and perceptual structure (e) while keeping the background unchanged.
Additionally, LOHO can change multiple hair attributes simultaneously and independently (c).

Abstract
Hairstyle transfer is challenging due to hair structure
differences in the source and target hair. Therefore, we
propose Latent Optimization of Hairstyles via Orthogonalization (LOHO), an optimization-based approach using
GAN inversion to infill missing hair structure details in latent space during hairstyle transfer. Our approach decomposes hair into three attributes: perceptual structure, appearance, and style, and includes tailored losses to model
each of these attributes independently. Furthermore, we
propose two-stage optimization and gradient orthogonalization to enable disentangled latent space optimization of
our hair attributes. Using LOHO for latent space manipulation, users can synthesize novel photorealistic images by
manipulating hair attributes either individually or jointly,
transferring the desired attributes from reference hairstyles.
LOHO achieves a superior FID compared with the current
state-of-the-art (SOTA) for hairstyle transfer. Additionally,
LOHO preserves the subject’s identity comparably well according to PSNR and SSIM when compared to SOTA image embedding pipelines. Code is available at https:
//github.com/dukebw/LOHO.

* Corresponding Author: rohitsaha@cs.toronto.edu

1. Introduction
We set out to enable users to make semantic and structural edits to their portrait image with fine-grained control.
As a particular challenging and commercially appealing example, we study hairstyle transfer, wherein a user can transfer hair attributes from multiple independent source images
to manipulate their own portrait image. Our solution, Latent
Optimization of Hairstyles via Orthogonalization (LOHO),
is a two-stage optimization process in the latent space of a
generative model, such as a generative adversarial network
(GAN) [12, 18]. Our key technical contribution is that we
control attribute transfer by orthogonalizing the gradients
of our transferred attributes so that the application of one
attribute does not interfere with the others.
Our work is motivated by recent progress in GANs,
enabling both conditional [15, 32] and unconditional [19]
synthesis of photorealistic images. In parallel, recent
works have achieved impressive latent space manipulation
by learning disentangled feature representations [26], enabling photorealistic global and local image manipulation.
However, achieving controlled manipulation of attributes of
the synthesized images while maintaining photorealism remains an open challenge.
Previous work on hairstyle transfer [30] produced realistic transfer of hair appearance using a complex pipeline of
GAN generators, each specialized for a specific task such
as hair synthesis or background inpainting. However, the

1984

