Progressive Semantic Segmentation
Chuong Huynh1 Anh Tuan Tran1,2 Khoa Luu1,3 Minh Hoai1,4
1
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam, 2 VinUniversity, Hanoi, Vietnam
3
University of Arkansas, Fayetteville, AR 72701, USA
4
Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY 11790, USA
{v.chuonghm,v.anhtt152,v.khoal,v.hoainm}@vinai.io

Abstract
The objective of this work is to segment high-resolution
images without overloading GPU memory usage or losing
the fine details in the output segmentation map. The memory constraint means that we must either downsample the
big image or divide the image into local patches for separate processing. However, the former approach would lose
the fine details, while the latter can be ambiguous due to
the lack of a global picture. In this work, we present MagNet, a multi-scale framework that resolves local ambiguity by looking at the image at multiple magnification levels.
MagNet has multiple processing stages, where each stage
corresponds to a magnification level, and the output of one
stage is fed into the next stage for coarse-to-fine information
propagation. Each stage analyzes the image at a higher
resolution than the previous stage, recovering the previously lost details due to the lossy downsampling step, and
the segmentation output is progressively refined through the
processing stages. Experiments on three high-resolution
datasets of urban views, aerial scenes, and medical images
show that MagNet consistently outperforms the state-of-theart methods by a significant margin. Code is available at
https://github.com/VinAIResearch/MagNet.

1. Introduction
The current state-of-the-art (SOTA) semantic image segmentation techniques [1, 4, 16, 19, 21, 23, 26] are based on
deep learning, where a convolutional neural network (CNN)
takes an input image and outputs a segmentation map. Most
of the existing techniques, however, assume that the entire
segmentation process can be performed with a single feedforward pass of the input image and the entire process can
be fitted into GPU memory. Unfortunately, most existing
techniques cannot handle high-resolution input images due
to memory and other computational constraints. One approach to handle a large input image is to downsample it,
but this results in a low-resolution segmentation map, which
is not adequate for applications that require high-resolution

(a) Input image

(b) Ground truth

(c) Downsampling

(d) Patch processing

(e) GLNet

(f) DenseCRF

(g) PointRend

(h) MagNet (Proposed)

Figure 1: Comparing several semantic segmentation and refinement approaches on a high-resolution input image. Downsampling loses fine details, while Patch Processing wrongly classifies local patches due to the lack of the global context. The collaborative global-local network GLNet fails due to the large discrepancy between the global and local branches. Post-processing and
refinement methods such as DenseCRF and PointRend can only
correct small mistakes due to local inconsistency. MagNet outperforms other methods, thanks to a novel multi-scale segmentation
and refinement framework. Best viewed in color.

output with fine details [12, 24], e.g., for tracking the progression of malignant lesion [8]. Another approach to handle a large input image is to divide the image into small
patches and process each patch independently. This approach, however, does not take into account the global information [22] that is needed to resolve ambiguity in local
patches. The limitations of these two approaches are illustrated in Fig. 1(c) & (d).
One way to address the limitations of the two aforemen-

16755

