DOTS: Decoupling Operation and Topology in Differentiable
Architecture Search
Yu-Chao Gu1∗

Li-Juan Wang1∗ Yun Liu1 Yi Yang2 Yu-Huan Wu1
Shao-Ping Lu1 Ming-Ming Cheng1†
1
2
TKLNDST, CS, Nankai University
Zhejiang University

Abstract
Differentiable Architecture Search (DARTS) has attracted extensive attention due to its efficiency in searching
for cell structures. DARTS mainly focuses on the operation search and derives the cell topology from the operation
weights. However, the operation weights can not indicate
the importance of cell topology and result in poor topology
rating correctness. To tackle this, we propose to Decouple
the Operation and Topology Search (DOTS), which decouples the topology representation from operation weights and
makes an explicit topology search. DOTS is achieved by
introducing a topology search space that contains combinations of candidate edges. The proposed search space
directly reflects the search objective and can be easily extended to support a flexible number of edges in the searched
cell. Existing gradient-based NAS methods can be incorporated into DOTS for further improvement by the topology search. Considering that some operations (e.g., SkipConnection) can affect the topology, we propose a group
operation search scheme to preserve topology-related operations for a better topology search. The experiments on CIFAR10/100 and ImageNet demonstrate that DOTS is an effective solution for differentiable NAS. The code is released
at https://github.com/guyuchao/DOTS.

1. Introduction
Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has attracted extensive attention for its potential to find the optimal architecture in a large search space automatically. Previous reinforcement learning and evolutionary learning based approaches [34, 41, 58] require a full training process to validate the architecture performance, consuming hundreds of
GPU-days to search. To reduce the search cost, one-shot
methods [8, 10, 18, 40] adopt the weight sharing strategy,
which trains the supernet once and derives child architec∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.
† M.M. Cheng (cmm@nankai.edu.cn) is the corresponding author.

ture performance from the supernet directly. Recent methods [4, 6, 50, 51] based on differentiable architecture search
(DARTS) [35] also adopt the weight sharing strategy and
further reduce the search cost by unifying the supernet training and child architecture searching.
In DARTS, the operation selection is parameterized with
learnable operation weights, which is updated with the supernet training. After training, the operation weights are
used to rank the importance of operations and topology. The
edge importance in DARTS is represented as the largest operation weight on this edge. DARTS retains the two most
important edges for each intermediate node to derive the
topology of the searched cell. A question is raised: whether
the edge importance indicated by the operation weights accurately ranks the stand-alone model’s performance. As
illustrated in Fig. 1, we find no obvious rank correlation,
which implies that DARTS has no superiority over choosing edges randomly (see more details in Sec. 3.2). Furthermore, DARTS’ handcraft policy of edge numbers restricts
their potential to find more flexible cell structures.
This paper addresses the above problems via Decoupling
Operation and Topology Search (DOTS). The meaning of
decoupling is two-fold. On the one hand, we decouple the
topology representation from the operation weights. In detail, we introduce a topology search space containing the
pairwise combinations of edges. The topology search space
is continuously relaxed, and the relaxed topology weights
model the combinatorial distribution of candidate edges.
The proposed topology search space directly reflects the
search objective and can be easily extended to support a
flexible number of edges. On the other hand, we decouple the operation and topology search processes. The overall search process is divided into the operation search stage
and the topology search stage, in which we update operation
weights and edge combination weights, respectively. With
decoupling the two searching processes, existing gradientbased NAS methods can be directly incorporated into the
DOTS’ operation search and get further improvement by
the topology search. Furthermore, the topology search is
performed in a shrunk supernet, making it more efficient

12311

