ABMDRNet: Adaptive-weighted Bi-directional Modality Difference
Reduction Network for RGB-T Semantic Segmentation
Qiang Zhang1 Shenlu Zhao1 Yongjiang Luo2 Dingwen Zhang1 Nianchang Huang1* Jungong Han3*
1
School of Mechano-Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, China
2
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, China
3
Computer Science Department, Aberystwyth University, U.K.
nchuang@stu.xidian.edu.cn, jungonghan77@gmail.com

Abstract

RGB Image to Thermal Image Translation
Multi-level RGB features
Translation
network

Semantic segmentation models gain robustness against
poor lighting conditions by virtue of complementary information from visible (RGB) and thermal images. Despite its
importance, most existing RGB-T semantic segmentation
models perform primitive fusion strategies, such as concatenation, element-wise summation and weighted summation, to fuse features from different modalities. These strategies, unfortunately, overlook the modality differences due to
different imaging mechanisms, so that they suffer from the
reduced discriminability of the fused features. To address
such an issue, we propose, for the first time, the strategy of
bridging-then-fusing, where the innovation lies in a novel
Adaptive-weighted Bi-directional Modality Difference Reduction Network (ABMDRNet). Concretely, a Modality Difference Reduction and Fusion (MDRF) subnetwork is designed, which first employs a bi-directional image-to-image
translation based method to reduce the modality differences between RGB features and thermal features, and then
adaptively selects those discriminative multi-modality features for RGB-T semantic segmentation in a channel-wise
weighted fusion way. Furthermore, considering the importance of contextual information in semantic segmentation,
a Multi-Scale Spatial Context (MSC) module and a MultiScale Channel Context (MCC) module are proposed to exploit the interactions among multi-scale contextual information of cross-modality features together with their longrange dependencies along spatial and channel dimensions,
respectively. Comprehensive experiments on MFNet dataset
demonstrate that our method achieves new state-of-the-art
results.

* Equally corresponding authors.

RGB

Thermal

Supervision
Supervision

Translation
network

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

(f)

(g)

Multi-level thermal features

Thermal Image to RGB Image Translation
(a)

Figure 1. Illustration of modality difference reduction. (a) Bidirectional modality difference reduction. (b)-(d) Original RGB
features, thermal features and their fused features, respectively.
(e)-(g) RGB features, thermal features and their fused features after reducing modality differences, respectively.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation aims to assign category labels to
each pixel in a natural image, which plays an important role
in many computer vision task, such as autonomous driving
[6, 31], pedestrian detection [1], pathological analysis [20,
26] and so on.
So far, CNN-based RGB semantic segmentation methods [14,15,20,27] have achieved prominent results in many
large-scale datasets [5, 16]. However, their performance
may signiﬁcantly degrade under poor lighting conditions.
To boost semantic segmentation performance, recent researches pay more attention to RGB-T semantic segmentation [9, 22, 25], where thermal images may complement
rich contour information and semantic information to RGB
images under poor lighting conditions.
Existing models for multi-modality pixel-level prediction tasks, including RGB-T semantic segmentation and
RGB-T salient object detection, usually adopt simple strategies, such as element-wise summation [25], concatenation
[9] and weighted summation [8, 32], to capture the complementary information from paired RGB and thermal images.
However, they usually ignore the modality differences between RGB images and thermal images, which are caused

2633

