Self-generated Defocus Blur Detection via Dual Adversarial Discriminators
Wenda Zhao1∗, Cai Shang1 , Huchuan Lu1
1
School of Information and Communication Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
zhaowenda@dlut.edu.cn; 1147626517@dlut.mail.edu.cn; lhchuan@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Defocus blur will emerge when the scene is out of the
camera’s focus distance, which is a common phenomenon
in an image. Defocus blur detection (DBD) can be potentially used to many vision tasks (e.g., salient region detection [9], autofocus [39], depth estimation [19, 5]). Thus,
DBD has been gaining more and more research interest. Recently, deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs)-based
DBD methods [25, 24, 43, 27, 44, 25, 11, 38, 45] achieve
∗ Corresponding author: Wenda Zhao (zhaowenda@dlut.edu.cn).

(b) SOD

ECSSD dataset; Deleting the n-th block
(d) Lesion study of SOD

(c) DBD

0.7
0.6
0.5
MAE
FM
0.4
MAE_R
FM_R
0.3
0.2
0.1 D1 D3 D5 D7 D9 D11 D13 D15

Evaluation metrics

(a) Source

0.7
0.6
0.5
MAE
FM
0.4
MAE_R
FM_R
0.3
0.2
0.1 D1 D3 D5 D7 D9 D11 D13 D15

Evaluation metrics

Although existing fully-supervised defocus blur detection
(DBD) models significantly improve performance, training
such deep models requires abundant pixel-level manual annotation, which is highly time-consuming and error-prone.
Addressing this issue, this paper makes an effort to train
a deep DBD model without using any pixel-level annotation. The core insight is that a defocus blur region/focused
clear area can be arbitrarily pasted to a given realistic full
blurred image/full clear image without affecting the judgment of the full blurred image/full clear image. Specifically, we train a generator G in an adversarial manner
against dual discriminators Dc and Db . G learns to produce a DBD mask that generates a composite clear image
and a composite blurred image through copying the focused
area and unfocused region from corresponding source image to another full clear image and full blurred image.
Then, Dc and Db can not distinguish them from realistic full clear image and full blurred image simultaneously, achieving a self-generated DBD by an implicit manner
to define what a defocus blur area is. Besides, we propose a bilateral triplet-excavating constraint to avoid the
degenerate problem caused by the case one discriminator
defeats the other one. Comprehensive experiments on two widely-used DBD datasets demonstrate the superiority
of the proposed approach. Source codes are available at:
https://github.com/shangcai1/SG.

DUT dataset; Deleting the n-th block

(e) Lesion study of DBD

Figure 1. Semantic correlation comparison of saliency object detection (SOD) and defocus blur detection (DBD). (a)-(c): source
image, SOD result, and DBD result. (d) and (e) are lesion studies
of SOD and DBD on ECSSD dataset [33] and DUT dataset [44],
respectively. ResNet50 [7] is fully trained, and then we measure
the importance of each convolution block by removing it, leaving
the skip connection unchanged.

a high performance through abundant labeled data (e.g.,
pixel-level annotation [20, 43]). However, manual annotation is time-consuming and error-prone. In order to bridge
this gap, we make an effort to obtain DBD directly from real
images without using any pixel-level annotation.
Intuitively, some unsupervised segmentation tasks, such
as saliency object detection [35, 36] and semantic segmentation [31, 14, 8, 13, 30, 17], can be used to relieve our
problem. For example, Zhang et al. [36] propose a “supervision by fusion” strategy through generating reliable supervisory signals in the process of weak saliency model fusion. Bielski et al. [2] adopt the idea, where objects can
be moved locally independently of a given background, to
design perturbed generative models for unsupervised object
segmentation. In brief, these methods always employ ob-

6933

