How does topology influence gradient propagation and
model performance of deep networks with DenseNet-type skip connections?
Kartikeya Bhardwaj1,∗ , Guihong Li2, *, and Radu Marculescu2
1
Arm Inc., San Jose, CA, USA 95134
2
The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA 78712
kartikeya.bhardwaj@arm.com, {lgh,radum}@utexas.edu

Abstract
DenseNets introduce concatenation-type skip connections
that achieve state-of-the-art accuracy in several computer
vision tasks. In this paper, we reveal that the topology of
the concatenation-type skip connections is closely related
to the gradient propagation which, in turn, enables a predictable behavior of DNNs’ test performance. To this end,
we introduce a new metric called NN-Mass to quantify how
effectively information ﬂows through DNNs. Moreover, we
empirically show that NN-Mass also works for other types
of skip connections, e.g., for ResNets, Wide-ResNets (WRNs),
and MobileNets, which contain addition-type skip connections (i.e., residuals or inverted residuals). As such, for
both DenseNet-like CNNs and ResNets/WRNs/MobileNets,
our theoretically grounded NN-Mass can identify models
with similar accuracy, despite having signiﬁcantly different
size/compute requirements. Detailed experiments on both
synthetic and real datasets (e.g., MNIST, CIFAR-10, CIFAR100, ImageNet) provide extensive evidence for our insights.
Finally, the closed-form equation of our NN-Mass enables
us to design signiﬁcantly compressed DenseNets (for CIFAR10) and MobileNets (for ImageNet) directly at initialization
without time-consuming training and/or searching.1

1. Introduction
DenseNets [7] and their variants have been widely
adopted by the deep learning community to achieve excellent performance in many computer vision tasks such
as image classiﬁcation, object detection, image segmentation, super resolution, among many others [39, 8, 38]. One
of the main contributions of DenseNets is the introduction
of concatenation-type skip connections where the output
channels from all previous layers are concatenated at the
input of the current convolutional layer. The concatenationtype skip connections2 have been particularly valuable to
* Equal Contribution
1 Code at https://github.com/SLDGroup/NN_Mass.

2 Also referred to as DenseNet-type skip connections.

the deep learning literature. For instance, in addition to
signiﬁcant accuracy and efﬁciency gains in computer vision applications, many state-of-the-art Neural Architecture
Search (NAS) techniques have exploited the concatenationtype skip connections into their search space to obtain highperformance models [24, 16, 26, 17, 40]. However, to the
best of our knowledge, the properties of concatenation-type
skip connections such as their gradient propagation and the
resulting effect on model performance has not been explored.
Recently, an important method called Dynamical Isometry emerged in order to quantify gradient ﬂow through
DNNs [29, 31, 23, 13]. When DNNs achieve “dynamical
isometry”, the signal ﬂows through such networks without
signiﬁcant ampliﬁcation or attenuation. This, in turn, helps
the learning process and, hence, quantiﬁes the gradient properties of DNNs. The role of Dynamical Isometry in trainability has been demonstrated for networks such as ResNets [5]
which have addition-type skip connections.
Due to concatenation of channels, DenseNet-type skip
connections enforce strong structural/topological constraints
on the gradient propagation (i.e., the gradients can only follow speciﬁc paths during training). In general, the topology
(or structure) of graphs/networks directly inﬂuences the process taking place over them [21]. For instance, how closely
the users of a social network are connected to each other
completely determines how fast the information propagates
through the network [14, 9]. Consequently, the structural
constraints imposed by concatenation of channels must also
affect the learning dynamics of DNNs. Motivated by this
observation, we study the relationship between topology, gradient ﬂow, and model performance of such deep networks.
Note that, to study these topological properties, we do not
use the original DenseNets which contain all-to-all connections [7], but rather a generalized version where we can vary
the density of skip connections (more details in Section 3).
To this end, we ﬁrst deﬁne our setup of DNNs with
concatenation-type skip connections. Then, we propose a
new metric called NN-Mass to quantify the topological properties of DNNs considered within this setup. Next, we show

13498

