Dynamic Neural Radiance Fields for
Monocular 4D Facial Avatar Reconstruction
Guy Gafni1 Justus Thies1 Michael Zollhöfer2 Matthias Nießner1
1
Technical University of Munich 2 Facebook Reality Labs Research

Figure 1: Given a monocular portrait video sequence of a person, we reconstruct a dynamic neural radiance field representing
a 4D facial avatar, which allows us to synthesize novel head poses as well as changes in facial expressions.

Abstract
We present dynamic neural radiance fields for modeling the appearance and dynamics of a human face1 . Digitally modeling and reconstructing a talking human is a key
building-block for a variety of applications. Especially, for
telepresence applications in AR or VR, a faithful reproduction of the appearance including novel viewpoint or headposes is required. In contrast to state-of-the-art approaches
that model the geometry and material properties explicitly,
or are purely image-based, we introduce an implicit representation of the head based on scene representation networks. To handle the dynamics of the face, we combine our
scene representation network with a low-dimensional morphable model which provides explicit control over pose and
expressions. We use volumetric rendering to generate images from this hybrid representation and demonstrate that
such a dynamic neural scene representation can be learned
from monocular input data only, without the need of a specialized capture setup. In our experiments, we show that
this learned volumetric representation allows for photorealistic image generation that surpasses the quality of stateof-the-art video-based reenactment methods.
1 gafniguy.github.io/4D-Facial-Avatars

1. Introduction
Reconstructing 4D models of humans and, especially,
the human face, is an ongoing research problem in the
field of computer vision and computer graphics. 4D avatars
are essential for augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality
(VR) telepresence applications as well as for video editing,
such as visual dubbing in movie productions. These applications need a faithful reconstruction of the human’s appearance, as well as the ability to change the viewpoint or
head pose (especially, in VR) and the expressions (e.g., for
visual dubbing). Representing a human head with explicit
geometry and material properties (e.g., albedo, reflectance)
is challenging; the skin has effects like subsurface scattering, the eyes are highly reflective and the hair has a complex geometry with fine scale details. While the explicit
reconstruction of high quality geometry of the skin surface
in a multi-view studio setup is tractable [4, 16, 52], hair
is often approximated by retrieval and refinement of hair
styles [18, 50], which leads to an unrealistic visual reproduction.
To handle the material properties and complex geometry of a 4D facial avatar, we introduce dynamic neural radiance fields. Our approach is a neural rendering method
combining classical volume rendering with a novel neural

8649

