Neural Parts: Learning Expressive 3D Shape Abstractions
with Invertible Neural Networks
Despoina Paschalidou1,5,6 Angelos Katharopoulos3,4 Andreas Geiger1,2,5 Sanja Fidler6,7,8
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems Tübingen 2 University of Tübingen
3
Idiap Research Institute, Switzerland 4 École Polytechique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL)
5
Max Planck ETH Center for Learning Systems 6 NVIDIA 7 University of Toronto 8 Vector Institute
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

angelos.katharopoulos@idiap.ch

sfidler@nvidia.com

Abstract
Impressive progress in 3D shape extraction led to representations that can capture object geometries with high
fidelity. In parallel, primitive-based methods seek to represent objects as semantically consistent part arrangements.
However, due to the simplicity of existing primitive representations, these methods fail to accurately reconstruct 3D
shapes using a small number of primitives/parts. We address the trade-off between reconstruction quality and number of parts with Neural Parts, a novel 3D primitive representation that defines primitives using an Invertible Neural
Network (INN) which implements homeomorphic mappings
between a sphere and the target object. The INN allows
us to compute the inverse mapping of the homeomorphism,
which in turn, enables the efficient computation of both the
implicit surface function of a primitive and its mesh, without any additional post-processing. Our model learns to
parse 3D objects into semantically consistent part arrangements without any part-level supervision. Evaluations on
ShapeNet, D-FAUST and FreiHAND demonstrate that our
primitives can capture complex geometries and thus simultaneously achieve geometrically accurate as well as interpretable reconstructions using an order of magnitude fewer
primitives than state-of-the-art shape abstraction methods.

(a) Convexes

(b) Neural Parts

Figure 1: Expressive Primitives. We address the trade-off
between reconstruction quality and sparsity (i.e. number of
parts) in primitive-based methods. Prior work [83, 61, 63,
16] has considered convex shapes as primitives, which due
to their simplicity, require a large number of parts to accurately represent complex shapes. This results in less interpretable shape abstractions (i.e. primitives are not identifiable parts e.g. legs, arms etc.). In this work, we propose
Neural Parts, a novel 3D primitive representation that can
represent arbitrarily complex genus-zero shapes and thus
yields geometrically more accurate and semantically more
meaningful parts compared to simpler primitives.

1. Introduction
Recovering the geometry of a 3D shape from a single
RGB image is a fundamental task in computer vision and
graphics. Existing shape reconstruction models utilize a
neural network to learn a parametric function that maps the
input image into a mesh [47, 33, 41, 84, 89, 59], a pointcloud [24, 66, 1, 40, 80, 89], a voxel grid [8, 15, 26, 68,
70, 77, 87] or an implicit surface [51, 13, 60, 73, 88, 52].
An alternative line of research focuses on compact low-

dimensional representations that reconstruct 3D objects by
decomposing them into simpler parts, called primitives
[83, 61, 16, 30]. Primitive-based representations seek to
infer semantically consistent part arrangements across different object instances and provide a more interpretable alternative, compared to representations that only focus on
capturing the global object geometry. Primitives are particularly useful for various applications where the notion of
13204

