BCNet: Searching for Network Width with Bilaterally Coupled Network
Xiu Su1 , Shan You2,3 ,* Fei Wang2 , Chen Qian2 , Changshui Zhang3 , Chang Xu1∗
1
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
2
SenseTime Research
3
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University,
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Tsinghua University (THUAI),
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist)
xisu5992@uni.sydney.edu.au, {youshan,wangfei,qianchen}@sensetime.com
zcs@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn, c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Searching for a more compact network width recently
serves as an effective way of channel pruning for the deployment of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) under
hardware constraints. To fulfill the searching, a one-shot
supernet is usually leveraged to efficiently evaluate the performance w.r.t. different network widths. However, current
methods mainly follow a unilaterally augmented (UA) principle for the evaluation of each width, which induces the
training unfairness of channels in supernet. In this paper, we introduce a new supernet called Bilaterally Coupled Network (BCNet) to address this issue. In BCNet,
each channel is fairly trained and responsible for the same
amount of network widths, thus each network width can be
evaluated more accurately. Besides, we leverage a stochastic complementary strategy for training the BCNet, and propose a prior initial population sampling method to boost the
performance of the evolutionary search. Extensive experiments on benchmark CIFAR-10 and ImageNet datasets indicate that our method can achieve state-of-the-art or competing performance over other baseline methods. Moreover,
our method turns out to further boost the performance of
NAS models by refining their network widths. For example,
with the same FLOPs budget, our obtained EfficientNet-B0
achieves 77.36% Top-1 accuracy on ImageNet dataset, surpassing the performance of original setting by 0.48%.

1. Introduction
For practical deployment of convolutional neural networks (CNNs), it is important to consider different hardware budgets [12, 10, 11, 30], to name a few, floating point
operations (FLOPs), latency, memory footprint and energy
* Corresponding authors.

consumption. One way to simultaneously accommodate all
these budgets is to prune the redundant channels of a model,
so that a compact network width can be obtained. Typical channel pruning usually leverages a pre-trained network
and implement the pruning in an end-to-end [21, 24, 32] or
layer-by-layer [16, 36] manner. After pruning, the structure of the pre-trained model remains unchanged, so that
the pruned network is friendly to off-the-shelf deep learning frameworks and can be further boosted by other techniques, such as quantization [12] and knowledge distillation
[17, 41, 22].
Recently, [26] found the core of channel pruning is to
learn a more compact network width instead of the retained weights. Other literature also uses number of channels/filters to indicate the network width. Thus follow-up
work resorts to neural architecture search (NAS) [38, 40,
39, 1] or other automl techniques for directly searching for
an optimal network width, such as MetaPruning [25], AutoSlim [43] and TAS [6]. In their methods, a one-shot supernet is usually leveraged for evaluation of different widths.
Concretely, for the width c at a certain layer, we need to assign c channels (filters) in the layer and all layers follow the
same way. Then all these assigned channels in the supernet
specify a sub-network with the supernet. As a result, the
performance of a network width refers to the accuracy of
the specified sub-network with shared weights of supernet.
For fair evaluation of different network widths, during the
training of supernet, all network widths will be evenly sampled from the supernet and get optimized accordingly. For
brevity, we use the name of layer width to indicate the width
for a certain layer, while network width represents the set of
widths for all layers.
In this way, how to specify the sub-network(s) for
each network width matters for the performance evaluation. However, current methods [25, 43, 6] mainly follow a

2175

