Distribution-aware Adaptive Multi-bit Quantization

1

Sijie Zhao1,2 , Tao Yue1 , Xuemei Hu1
School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing, China
2
Shenzhen Institute of Future Media Technology, Shenzhen 518071, China
sjzhao@smail.nju.edu.cn, yuetao@nju.edu.cn, xuemeihu@nju.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we explore the compression of deep neural networks by quantizing the weights and activations into
multi-bit binary networks (MBNs). A distribution-aware
multi-bit quantization (DMBQ) method that incorporates
the distribution prior into the optimization of quantization
is proposed. Instead of solving the optimization in each
iteration, DMBQ search the optimal quantization scheme
over the distribution space beforehand, and select the quantization scheme during training using a fast lookup table
based strategy. Based upon DMBQ, we further propose
loss-guided bit-width allocation (LBA) to adaptively quantize and even prune the neural network. The first-order Taylor expansion is applied to build a metric for evaluating the
loss sensitivity of the quantization of each channel, and automatically adjust the bit-width of weights and activations
channel-wisely. We extend our method to image classification tasks and experimental results show that our method
not only outperforms state-of-the-art quantized networks in
terms of accuracy but also is more efficient in terms of training time compared with state-of-the-art MBNs, even for the
extremely low bit width (below 1-bit) quantization cases.

1. Introduction
In the past decades, deep neural networks have achieved
great successes in many ﬁelds [15, 21, 37, 7]. However,
the requirements of huge memory footprint and computational resources impede the practical deployment of network based algorithms on resource-constraint devices, e.g.,
mobile phones, smart dresses and autopilot vehicles.
To facilitate deployability, network quantization methods quantize the weights and activations into low precision,
greatly compressing the model size and reducing the required computational resources in inference [19, 39, 13, 5,
3]. These network quantization methods need to solve two
main problems: (1) How to quantize the weights and activations with lower precision and higher accuracy? (2) How to
allocate the bit-width to quantize different parts of weights
and activations for optimal performance?

As for the former problem, three main types of quantization schemes are proposed, including ﬁxed-point [19, 13],
power of two [24, 38, 18] and binary/ternary [6, 16, 40, 28,
20, 26] quantization. Recently, the multi-bit quantization
(MBQ) [20] that quantize weights and activations into the
combination of multiple binary bases is proposed, which
could achieve better performance and require less computational resources. Based upon MBQ strategy, various methods [20, 36, 32, 27] have been proposed to optimize the
quantization problem in the training process to improve the
accuracy of MBQ and have made signiﬁcant improvements.
However, how to derive the optimal quantization schemes,
i.e., the multi-bit binary ﬁlters and the corresponding coordinates, efﬁciently during the iterations of training-aware
quantization remains a knotty problem [27], suffering from
the difﬁculty of the integer optimization (theoretically NPhard). In this paper, inspired by Banner et al. [1] that the
distribution can be utilized in the quantization, we explore
the distribution of weights and dedicate to ﬁnd the optimal quantization scheme of MBQ under the distribution assumption. By minimizing the expected mean square error
, a lookup table based strategy is proposed to optimize the
quantization schemes with very few computational cost during the iterations.
As for the latter one, except the globally uniﬁed bitwidth allocation, mixed precision quantization which allocates different bit-width to different parts of the network,
either layer-wise [9, 8, 10, 31] or channel-wise [22, 17, 5],
is proposed to reduce the degradation of quantization, especially for low-bit cases. However, the bit-width allocation is quite challenging. Existing methods, e.g., deep reinforcement learning [22, 10, 31], Hessian information [9, 8],
and pruning-based optimization [27], require considerable
computation cost, hindering their application in practice. In
this paper, through modeling the quantization effect upon
the loss of network with Taylor expansion, we formulate a
metric to evaluate the quantization sensitivity of weights,
i.e., the loss variation of the network with the quantization
of weights. Since only gradients of quantized weights are
required, which could be directly obtained from the back19281

