I3 Net: Implicit Instance-Invariant Network for Adapting
One-Stage Object Detectors
Chaoqi Chen1 , Zebiao Zheng2 , Yue Huang2∗ , Xinghao Ding2 , Yizhou Yu1,3 *
1
The University of Hong Kong
2
School of Informatics, Xiamen University, China
3
Deepwise AI Lab
cqchen1994@gmail.com, zbzheng@stu.xmu.edu.cn
huangyue05@gmail.com, dxh@xmu.edu.cn, yizhouy@acm.org

Abstract
Recent works on two-stage cross-domain detection have
widely explored the local feature patterns to achieve more
accurate adaptation results. These methods heavily rely on
the region proposal mechanisms and ROI-based instancelevel features to design fine-grained feature alignment
modules with respect to the foreground objects. However, for one-stage detectors, it is hard or even impossible to obtain explicit instance-level features in the detection pipelines. Motivated by this, we propose an Implicit
Instance-Invariant Network (I3 Net), which is tailored for
adapting one-stage detectors and implicitly learns instanceinvariant features via exploiting the natural characteristics
of deep features in different layers. Specifically, we facilitate the adaptation from three aspects: (1) Dynamic and
Class-Balanced Reweighting (DCBR) strategy, which considers the coexistence of intra-domain and intra-class variations to assign larger weights to those sample-scarce categories and easy-to-adapt samples; (2) Category-aware Object Pattern Matching (COPM) module, which boosts the
cross-domain foreground objects matching guided by the
categorical information and suppresses the uninformative
background features; (3) Regularized Joint Category Alignment (RJCA) module, which jointly enforces the category
alignment at different domain-specific layers with a consistency regularization. Experiments reveal that I3 Net exceeds
the state-of-the-art performance on benchmark datasets.

1. Introduction
Object detection has achieved remarkable progress due
to the unprecedented development of deep convolutional
networks (CNNs) and the existence of large-scale annotated
* Corresponding authors

Figure 1: Upper: Illustration of previous two-stage crossdomain detection methods. Lower: Motivation of the proposed method based on the observation with respect to the
characteristics of deep features in different layers.
datasets. However, collecting large amounts of instancelevel annotated data in various domains for object detection
is prohibitively costly. An alternative would be applying
the off-the-shelf detection model trained on the source domain to a new target domain. However, deep object detectors suffer from performance degradation when applied
to a new domain under the presence of domain shift [41].
This problem has inspired the research on Unsupervised
Domain Adaptation (UDA) [27], which aims to bridge the
distribution discrepancy between source and target domains
via knowledge transfer. Numerous approaches, such as moment matching [11, 6, 23, 25, 49] and adversarial learning [7, 42, 37, 24, 44], have been proposed for cross-domain
image classification and semantic segmentation.

12576

