Dynamic Weighted Learning for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Ni Xiao, Lei Zhang()
Learning Intelligence & Vision Essential (LiVE) Group
School of Microelectronics and Communication Engineering, Chongqing University, China
{nixiao, leizhang}@cqu.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) aims to improve the classification performance on an unlabeled target domain by leveraging information from a fully labeled source domain. Recent approaches explore domaininvariant and class-discriminant representations to tackle this task. These methods, however, ignore the interaction between domain alignment learning and class discrimination learning. As a result, the missing or inadequate tradeoff between domain alignment and class discrimination are prone to the problem of negative transfer. In this paper, we propose Dynamic Weighted Learning (DWL) to avoid the discriminability vanishing problem
caused by excessive alignment learning and domain misalignment problem caused by excessive discriminant learning. Technically, DWL dynamically weights the learning
losses of alignment and discriminability by introducing the
degree of alignment and discriminability. Besides, the problem of sample imbalance across domains is first considered in our work, and we solve the problem by weighing
the samples to guarantee information balance across domains. Extensive experiments demonstrate that DWL has
an excellent performance in several benchmark datasets.
Code is available at https://github.com/NiXiaocqu/TransferLearning-dwl-cvpr2021.

1. Introduction
Collecting a large number of labeled samples is a timeconsuming and laborious task. To tackle these problems, many domain adaptation algorithms have been proposed
[18, 42, 28, 30, 17, 36]. Unsupervised/semi-supervised domain adaptation applies the model learned in the labeled
source domain to the unlabeled/partially labeled target domain by alleviating the domain divergence.
In recent years, many domain adaptation methods combined with deep neural networks have achieved remarkable performance [23, 8, 2, 26, 19, 37], which explore deep
models to reduce the domain shift between the training set

(source domain) and the testing set (target domain). The
mainstream approaches tend to learn domain-invariant representations. While class discriminability is also critical to
domain adaptation. Many domain adaptation methods that
explore the feature discriminability have been proposed recently [5, 16, 3, 43, 28]. Speciﬁcally, Li et al. [16] investigates the discriminability by using a discriminability criterion based on Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA). Deng
et al. [5] forces the target structure to be discriminative by
introducing a clustering loss. Chen et al. [3] guaranteed
the discriminability by restricting the value of the eigenvalue. These methods are helpful to explore the discriminability of feature representations. However, they independently consider the domain alignment and class discriminability of feature representations. In fact, excessive alignment
will easily lead to the loss of discriminability, while the excessive pursuit of discriminability will lead to the domain
misalignment. Moreover, for different cross-domain data
scenarios, the degree of alignment and discriminability is
different. For data scenarios with a small distribution discrepancy between domains, the model should pay more attention to the learning of discriminability, while for tasks
with a large distribution discrepancy, the model should pay
more attention to the alignment of distributions. Furthermore, the previous methods did not consider the problem
of the imbalanced sample size of the two domains. On the
whole, the domain with a large sample size is equivalent to having larger weight in the process of optimizing the
model. Such imbalance easily leads to model bias during
training and leads to poor alignment and discrimination. As
a result, it is easy to cause negative transfer.
To address the above challenges, on the one hand, we
propose dynamically weighted learning between domain
alignment and class discriminability. This dynamic learning
idea is scalable to most previous DA models. On the other hand, we weight the samples according to the imbalance
degree of the sample number of the two domains. Since the
degree of alignment and discriminability will change with
the iterative learning process, the degree of discriminability
and alignment are monitored in real-time and fed back to the

15242

