IoU Attack: Towards Temporally Coherent Black-Box
Adversarial Attack for Visual Object Tracking

1

Shuai Jia1 Yibing Song2 Chao Ma1 * Xiaokang Yang1
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
Tencent AI Lab
{jiashuai,chaoma,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn, yibingsong.cv@gmail.com

SiamRPN++

Abstract
Adversarial attack arises due to the vulnerability of deep
neural networks to perceive input samples injected with imperceptible perturbations. Recently, adversarial attack has
been applied to visual object tracking to evaluate the robustness of deep trackers. Assuming that the model structures of
deep trackers are known, a variety of white-box attack approaches to visual tracking have demonstrated promising
results. However, the model knowledge about deep trackers
is usually unavailable in real applications. In this paper,
we propose a decision-based black-box attack method for
visual object tracking. In contrast to existing black-box adversarial attack methods that deal with static images for image classification, we propose IoU attack that sequentially
generates perturbations based on the predicted IoU scores
from both current and historical frames. By decreasing the
IoU scores, the proposed attack method degrades the accuracy of temporal coherent bounding boxes (i.e., object motions) accordingly. In addition, we transfer the learned perturbations to the next few frames to initialize temporal motion attack. We validate the proposed IoU attack on stateof-the-art deep trackers (i.e., detection based, correlation
filter based, and long-term trackers). Extensive experiments
on the benchmark datasets indicate the effectiveness of the
proposed IoU attack method. The source code is available
at https://github.com/VISION-SJTU/IoUattack.

1. Introduction
Visual object tracking is one of the fundamental computer vision problems with a wide range of applications.
The convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have significantly advanced visual tracking performance. Meanwhile,
the enigma of interpreting CNNs has perplexed existing visual tracking algorithms as well. For example, injecting
imperceptible perturbations into input images leads deep
neural networks to predict incorrectly [37, 43, 48]. To in* Corresponding author.

DiMP

LTMU

(a) Original results
(b) IoU attack
Figure 1. IoU attack for visual object tracking. State-of-the-art
deep trackers (i.e., SiamRPN++ [22], DiMP [1], and LTMU [5])
effectively locate target objects in the original video sequences as
shown in (a). Our IoU attack decreases their tracking accuracies
by injecting imperceptible perturbations as shown in (b).

vestigate the robustness of visual tracking algorithms with
deep models, recent approaches [3, 44, 16, 24] assume that
the model structures of deep tracking algorithms are known
and carry out white-box attack on them. Despite the demonstrated promising results, the concrete structures and parameters of deep trackers are barely known in real applications.
In this paper, we investigate black-box adversarial attack for
visual tracking, where the model knowledge of deep trackers is unknown.
Prevalent black-box attack algorithms inject imperceptible perturbations into input images to decrease network
classification accuracies. Although these methods are effective to attack static images, they are not suitable to attack temporally moving objects in videos. This is because

6709

