NormalFusion: Real-Time Acquisition of Surface Normals
for High-Resolution RGB-D Scanning
Hyunho Ha†

Andreas Meuleman†

Joo Ho Lee*
†

KAIST

Min H. Kim†

* University of Tuebingen

19.22 fps

Abstract

1. Introduction
Shape-from-shading (SfS) has been commonly used to
enhance geometric details in 3D scanning. When surface
reflectance and illumination are known, SfS factorizes reflected irradiance of camera signals to photometric normals
in the camera’s resolution [12]. When a high-resolution
camera is used, the geometry quality can be improved significantly by combining base geometry and normals [21].
However, when reflectance and illumination are unavailable, SfS becomes a very ill-posed problem. Multiview SfS
estimates distributions of illumination and albedo by leveraging multiview input [1, 10] and then obtains high-detail
normals from shading. The geometry quality of these multiview SfS methods is significantly higher than that of realtime scanning methods using a conventional RGB-D cam-

Normals

Ours

Geometry

Multiview shape-from-shading (SfS) has achieved highdetail geometry, but its computation is expensive for solving a multiview registration and an ill-posed inverse rendering problem. Therefore, it has been mainly used for
offline methods. Volumetric fusion enables real-time scanning using a conventional RGB-D camera, but its geometry resolution has been limited by the grid resolution of
the volumetric distance field and depth registration errors.
In this paper, we propose a real-time scanning method
that can acquire high-detail geometry by bridging volumetric fusion and multiview SfS in two steps. First, we propose the first real-time acquisition of photometric normals
stored in texture space to achieve high-detail geometry. We
also introduce geometry-aware texture mapping, which progressively refines geometric registration between the texture
space and the volumetric distance field by means of normal
texture, achieving real-time multiview SfS. We demonstrate
our scanning of high-detail geometry using an RGB-D camera at ∼20 fps. Results verify that the geometry quality of
our method is strongly competitive with that of offline multiview SfS methods.

Conventional fusion

Our normal fusion

Figure 1: Result of our real-time normal fusion method,
compared with the conventional fusion method that accumulates TSDFs of depth maps in the canonical space. We
decompose camera signals to photometric normals and accumulate them in texture space associated with voxel grids
of TSDFs, enabling high-resolution geometry in real-time.
Refer to the supplemental video for real-time demo.
era. However, when a camera is unstructured and scenes
are uncontrolled, multiview SfS becomes highly underdetermined; therefore, the ill-posed multiview SfS problem needs to be solved by expensive non-linear optimization with strong assumptions of scene and lighting conditions [29, 28] in addition to multiview registration.
Despite the strong benefits of multiview SfS to highresolution geometry, it has been hardly achieved in realtime RGB-D scanning due to several challenges. First, multiview color and depth frames need to be registered by iterative closest point (ICP) [26] in general. However, perfect geometric registration by ICP is theoretically impossible with real systems due to noise in depth frames. It results
in blurry reconstruction [18].
Second, to handle noise and inaccurate registration of
depth information, the truncated signed distance function

15970

