Unsupervised Human Pose Estimation through Transforming Shape Templates
Luca Schmidtke1 , Athanasios Vlontzos1 , Simon Ellershaw1 , Anna Lukens3 ,
Tomoki Arichi2 , and Bernhard Kainz1
1

Imperial College London, 2 King’s College London, 3 Evelina London Children’s Hospital

Abstract
Human pose estimation is a major computer vision problem with applications ranging from augmented reality and
video capture to surveillance and movement tracking. In the
medical context, the latter may be an important biomarker
for neurological impairments in infants. Whilst many methods exist, their application has been limited by the need
for well annotated large datasets and the inability to generalize to humans of different shapes and body compositions, e.g. children and infants. In this paper we present
a novel method for learning pose estimators for human
adults and infants in an unsupervised fashion. We approach this as a learnable template matching problem facilitated by deep feature extractors. Human-interpretable
landmarks are estimated by transforming a template consisting of predefined body parts that are characterized by
2D Gaussian distributions. Enforcing a connectivity prior
guides our model to meaningful human shape representations. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on
two different datasets including adults and infants. Project
page: infantmotion.github.io

1. Introduction
In today’s digitized world, images and videos are an almost endless source of unlabeled, but inherently structured
data. Tapping into this reserve of information and knowledge requires the ability to reason in an unsupervised capacity; one of the most compelling and fundamental open
problems in machine learning and computer vision.
Self-supervision approaches have shown evidence that
they can provide a good supervisory signal for video
data [24]. In video recordings an object usually maintains
its intrinsic feature distribution but changes its predominantly linear relationships between localized features [23].
In this paper we consider the problem of human pose estimation. Motivated by a wide range of applications includ-

Figure 1. Schematic overview of our approach. Top: We define
a part-based human template consisting of 2D Gaussian ellipses
and estimate the transformation parameters to estimate the pose of
humans with any body composition. Anchor-points are defined
between adjacent body parts in order to enforce a connectivity
constraint. Bottom: We also evaluate downstream applicability
by estimating 3D body poses.

ing motion capture, visual surveillance and robot control, a
continuous effort has been put into generating datasets and
models where a manually annotated ground truth pose and
key points are available as labels for full supervision. These
are currently the most attractive approaches for industrial
applications due to their promise of higher accuracy.
However, ground truth generation is laborious and often
limited to a narrow domain, for example, standard poses of
healthy adults. In domains with limited demand or special
requirements, extensive labeling efforts are often not jus-

2484

