FESTA: Flow Estimation via Spatial-Temporal Attention for Scene Point Clouds
Haiyan Wang1,2∗

Jiahao Pang1 *
1
InterDigital

Muhammad A. Lodhi1
Yingli Tian2
2
The City College of New York

Dong Tian1

hwang005@citymail.cuny.edu, jiahao.pang@interdigital.com
muhammad.lodhi@interdigital.com, ytian@ccny.cuny.edu, dong.tian@interdigital.com

Abstract
Scene flow depicts the dynamics of a 3D scene, which is
critical for various applications such as autonomous driving,
robot navigation, AR/VR, etc. Conventionally, scene flow
is estimated from dense/regular RGB video frames. With
the development of depth-sensing technologies, precise 3D
measurements are available via point clouds which have
sparked new research in 3D scene flow. Nevertheless, it
remains challenging to extract scene flow from point clouds
due to the sparsity and irregularity in typical point cloud
sampling patterns. One major issue related to irregular
sampling is identified as the randomness during point set abstraction/feature extraction—an elementary process in many
flow estimation scenarios. A novel Spatial Abstraction with
Attention (SA2 ) layer is accordingly proposed to alleviate
the unstable abstraction problem. Moreover, a Temporal
Abstraction with Attention (TA2 ) layer is proposed to rectify attention in temporal domain, leading to benefits with
motions scaled in a larger range. Extensive analysis and
experiments verified the motivation and significant performance gains of our method, dubbed as Flow Estimation
via Spatial-Temporal Attention (FESTA), when compared to
several state-of-the-art benchmarks of scene flow estimation.

1. Introduction
Our world is dynamic. To promptly predict and respond
to the ever changing surroundings, humans are able to perceive a moving scene and decipher the 3D motion of individual objects. This capability to capture and infer from
scene dynamics is also desirable for computer vision applications. For instance, a self-driving car can maneuver its
actions upon perceiving the motions in its surroundings [19];
whereas a robot can exploit the scene dynamics to facilitate
its localization and mapping process [2]. Moreover, with advances in depth-sensing technologies, especially the LiDAR
technologies [7], point cloud data have become a common
configuration in such applications.
* Authors contributed equally. Work done while Haiyan Wang was an
intern at InterDigital.

1st PC

1st PC

1st PC

1st PC

2nd PC

2nd PC

2nd PC

2nd PC

(a) FPS

(b) Grouping

(c) AP

(d) Regrouping

Figure 1: Given two consecutive point clouds, down-sampled
points produced by (a) Farthest Point Sampling (FPS, in dark red)
are different which make them intractable in scene flow estimation. However, by appending our (c) Aggregate Pooling (AP),
stable corresponding points (in blue) are synthesized for scene flow
estimation.

To describe the motion of individual points in the 3D
world, scene flow extends 2D optical flow to the 3D vector
field representing the 3D scene dynamics [28]. Hence, just
like 2D optical flow needs to be estimated from video frames
comprising images [31, 10], 3D scene flow needs to be inferred from point cloud data [9]. However, it is non-trivial
to accurately estimate scene flow from point clouds.
Unstable abstraction: Pioneered by PointNet [25]
and its extension, PointNet++ [26], deep neural networks
(DNNs) have recently been enabled to directly consume 3D
point clouds for various vision tasks. As shown in Figure 1a
and Figure 1b, the grouping based on the Farthest Point
Sampling (FPS) is widely utilized during the feature extraction process. It is treated as a basic point set abstraction
unit for segmentation as well as scene flow estimation, e.g.,
FlowNet3D [16] and MeteorNet [17]. The naive FPS is simple and computationally affordable, but problematic. Given
two object point clouds, both representing the same manifold, FPS would likely down-sample them differently [21]
(see Figure 1a). This inconsistency due to randomness in
naive FPS is undesired for vision and machine tasks. With

14173

