Holistic 3D Scene Understanding from a Single Image
with Implicit Representation
Cheng Zhang2∗ Zhaopeng Cui1∗ Yinda Zhang3 * Bing Zeng2 Marc Pollefeys4 Shuaicheng Liu2†
1
State Key Lab of CAD & CG, Zhejiang University
2
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China 3 Google 4 ETH Zürich

Abstract
We present a new pipeline for holistic 3D scene understanding from a single image, which could predict object
shapes, object poses, and scene layout. As it is a highly
ill-posed problem, existing methods usually suffer from inaccurate estimation of both shapes and layout especially
for the cluttered scene due to the heavy occlusion between
objects. We propose to utilize the latest deep implicit representation to solve this challenge. We not only propose an
image-based local structured implicit network to improve
the object shape estimation, but also refine the 3D object
pose and scene layout via a novel implicit scene graph neural network that exploits the implicit local object features.
A novel physical violation loss is also proposed to avoid
incorrect context between objects. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-theart methods in terms of object shape, scene layout estimation, and 3D object detection.

1. Introduction
3D indoor scene understanding is a long-lasting computer vision problem and has tremendous impact on several applications, e.g., robotics, virtual reality. Given a single color image, the goal is to reconstruct the room layout
as well as each individual object and estimate its semantic type in the 3D space. Over decades, there are plenty
of works consistently improving the performance of such a
task over two focal points of the competition. One is the
3D shape representation preserving fine-grained geometry details, evolving from the 3D bounding box, 3D volume, point cloud, to the recent triangulation mesh. The
other is the joint inference of multiple objects and layout in
the scene leveraging contextual information, such as cooccurring or relative locations among objects of multiple
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Project webpage: https://chengzhag.github.io/publication/im3d/

Figure 1: Our proposed pipeline takes a single image as input, estimates layout and object poses, then reconstructs the
scene with Signed Distance Function (SDF) representation.
categories. However, the cluttered scene is a double-blade
sword, which unfortunately increases the complexity of 3D
scene understanding by introducing large variations in object poses and scales, and heavy occlusion. Therefore, the
overall performance is still far from satisfactory.
In this work, we propose a deep learning system for
holistic 3D scene understanding, which predicts and refines
object shapes, object poses, and scene layout jointly with
deep implicit representation. At first, similar to previous
methods, we exploit standard Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN) to learn an initial estimation of 3D object
poses, scene layout as well as 3D shapes. Different from
previous methods using explicit 3D representation like volume or mesh, we utilize the local structured implicit representation of shapes motivated by [12]. Instead of taking
depth images as input like [12], we design a new local implicit shape embedding network to learn the latent shape
code directly from images, which can be further decoded
to generate the implicit function for 3D shapes. Due to the
power of implicit representation, the 3D shape of each object can be reconstructed with higher accuracy and finer surface details compared to other representations.
Then, we propose a novel graph-based scene context network to gather information from local objects, i.e., bottomup features extracted from the initial predictions, and learn
to refine the initial 3D pose and scene layout via scene context information with the implicit representation. Being one
of the core topics studied in scene understanding, the context has been achieved in the era of deep learning mainly

8833

