Interactive Self-Training with Mean Teachers for Semi-supervised Object
Detection
Qize Yang1 , Xihan Wei1 , Biao Wang1 , Xian-Sheng Hua1 , Lei Zhang1,2
1
Alibaba Group,2 Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{qize.yqz,xihan.wxh,wb.wangbiao,xiansheng.hxs}@alibaba-inc.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
The goal of semi-supervised object detection is to learn
a detection model using only a few labeled data and
large amounts of unlabeled data, thereby reducing the
cost of data labeling. Although a few studies have proposed various self-training-based methods or consistency
regularization-based methods, they ignore the discrepancies among the detection results in the same image that occur during different training iterations. Additionally, the
predicted detection results vary among different detection
models. In this paper, we propose an interactive form
of self-training using mean teachers for semi-supervised
object detection. Specifically, to alleviate the instability
among the detection results in different iterations, we propose using nonmaximum suppression to fuse the detection
results from different iterations. Simultaneously, we use
multiple detection heads that predict pseudo labels for each
other to provide complementary information. Furthermore,
to avoid different detection heads collapsing to each other,
we use a mean teacher model instead of the original detection model to predict the pseudo labels. Thus, the object detection model can be trained on both labeled and unlabeled
data. Extensive experimental results verify the effectiveness
of our proposed method.

1. Introduction
Object detection has undergone substantial progress in
recent years since the successful application of deep convolutional neural network (CNN) models. These methods
generally fall into two categories: single-stage [25, 26, 20,
36] and two-stage methods [27, 9, 8, 10, 18]. However,
these methods require large amounts of training samples annotated with instance-level labels, which limits their scalability. To reduce the cost of labeling, weakly supervised
learning and semi-supervised learning methods have gradually attracted attention recently. Weakly supervised object detection methods [47, 31, 14, 37] require image-level
annotations, while semi-supervised methods [38, 22, 29]
require large quantities of unlabeled data but only a few

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation: (a) and (b) show detection results from different iterations. These changes in the detection results hinder the convergence of self-training-based semisupervised learning models; (c) and (d) show the detection results
from different ROI heads.

instance-level labeled data. The weakly semi-supervised
object detection methods [34, 42] use both fully labeled data
and weakly labeled data. In this paper, we aim to leverage
unlabeled data to further improve the object detection performance using semi-supervised learning.
Although semi-supervised learning has been widely explored in tasks such as image classification [1, 15, 30, 40,
44, 2, 35], only a few works [13, 32] have focused on how
to apply semi-supervised learning to object detection. The
challenges in applying semi-supervised learning to object
detection include the fact that each image may have multiple object instances and object detection methods must
regress the location for each object, as shown in Figure 1.
Currently, the semi-supervised object detection methods for
solving this problem can be divided into two categories:
self-training-based methods and consistency regularizationbased methods. The self-training-based methods [32] estimates the pseudo labels for unlabeled images using a pretrained model and then jointly trains the model with both
labeled and unlabeled data. However, the pseudo labels are
generated only once, and they remain fixed during the semi-

5941

