Bilevel Online Adaptation for Out-of-Domain Human Mesh Reconstruction
Shanyan Guan∗ , Jingwei Xu*, Yunbo Wang†, Bingbing Ni† , Xiaokang Yang
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
{shyanguan,xjwxjw,yunbow,nibingbing,xkyang}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Human mesh reconstruction is a hot topic in computer
vision, where improving the generalization ability is one of
the major challenges at present. We observe that previous
models [21, 38, 25, 26, 1, 59, 15, 43] are prone to overfit the
training dataset and usually underperform in out-of-domain
testing scenarios. As shown in Figure 1, between different datasets, there usually exist large domain gaps in camera parameters, lengths of body bones, backgrounds, and
occlusions, whose negative impact becomes even more severe when we apply the model to streaming data due to the
rapidly changing environment of the test domain. In this
work, we are interested in finding a good solution to adapting human mesh reconstruction models to out-of-domain
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding authors: Yunbo Wang, Bingbing Ni
1 The project website with code and video results is at https://
sites.google.com/view/humanmeshboa

Human 3.6M

Test Set

3DPW

Streaming Data

Bone Length (m) Focal Length (pixel) Camera Height (m)
Domain Gap

This paper considers a new problem of adapting a pretrained model of human mesh reconstruction to out-ofdomain streaming videos. However, most previous methods
based on the parametric SMPL model [36] underperform in
new domains with unexpected, domain-specific attributes,
such as camera parameters, lengths of bones, backgrounds,
and occlusions. Our general idea is to dynamically finetune the source model on test video streams with additional
temporal constraints, such that it can mitigate the domain
gaps without over-fitting the 2D information of individual
test frames. A subsequent challenge is how to avoid conflicts between the 2D and temporal constraints. We propose
to tackle this problem using a new training algorithm named
Bilevel Online Adaptation (BOA), which divides the optimization process of overall multi-objective into two steps
of weight probe and weight update in a training iteration.
We demonstrate that BOA leads to state-of-the-art results
on two human mesh reconstruction benchmarks1 .

Training Set

Human 3.6M

3DPW

MPI-INF-3DHP

Figure 1. Top: Learning to reconstruct human meshes from outof-domain streaming videos. The main challenges include the
domain gaps of plain/crowded backgrounds, with/without occlusions, etc. Bottom: Statistics of other typical domain gaps. Here,
the bone length refers to the sum of lengths between body joints,
whose topology is shared across datasets.

video frames that arrive in a sequential order, which is a
practical task in many downstream, real applications, e.g.,
augmented reality [3], and human-robot interaction [48].
The most serious technical challenge of this task is the
lack of 3D annotations of test data. To cope with this problem, some optimization-based approaches [20, 36, 42] learn
to update the model on each test frame using frame-wise
losses, such as the pose re-projection loss [21, 26] of 2D
keypoints2 . However, the imperfect frame-based loss functions do not always lead to effective online learning directions as expected by the 3D evaluation metric. There is a severe gap between them. As shown in Figure 2, it may cause
severe ambiguity in the estimation of depth information,
2 It is a common practice to use the ground-truth 2D keypoints for crossdomain human mesh/pose reconstruction

10472

