Deep Perceptual Preprocessing for Video Coding
Aaron Chadha

Yiannis Andreopoulos
iSIZE, isize.co

Figure 1: Left: Frame segments of encoder vs. DPP+encoder at the same bitrate. Right: Bjontegaard delta-rate vs. runtime
(in multiples of x264 slow preset runtime on CPU) for codec only (red) and DPP+codec (green). More negative BD-rates correspond to higher average bitrate savings for the same visual quality. x264: AVC/H.264, aomenc: AV1, vvenc: VVC/H.266).

Abstract
We introduce the concept of rate-aware deep perceptual
preprocessing (DPP) for video encoding. DPP makes a single pass over each input frame in order to enhance its visual
quality when the video is to be compressed with any codec
at any bitrate. The resulting bitstreams can be decoded
and displayed at the client side without any post-processing
component. DPP comprises a convolutional neural network
that is trained via a composite set of loss functions that incorporates: (i) a perceptual loss based on a trained noreference image quality assessment model, (ii) a referencebased fidelity loss expressing L1 and structural similarity aspects, (iii) a motion-based rate loss via block-based
transform, quantization and entropy estimates that converts
the essential components of standard hybrid video encoder
designs into a trainable framework. Extensive testing using
multiple quality metrics and AVC, AV1 and VVC encoders
shows that DPP+encoder reduces, on average, the bitrate
of the corresponding encoder by 11%. This marks the first
time a server-side neural processing component achieves
such savings over the state-of-the-art in video coding.

1. Introduction
Streaming high-resolution video comes with an inevitable trade-off between available bandwidth and visual
quality. In recent years, many video compression standards have been developed, such as Advanced Video Coding (AVC) and AOMedia Video 1 (AV1), which offer a
number of advanced coding and prediction tools for efficient video encoding and transmission. While these codecs
are widely deployed in industry, with AVC still accounting
for the largest share of video streaming volume worldwide,
the encoding tools are handcrafted and not entirely data dependent. This has led to an increased interest in learned
video compression methods [24, 13, 11, 35], which claim
to offer better encoding efficiency by training deep neural
networks to improve the rate-distortion performance. However, these methods come with their own pitfalls; typically
they require bespoke encoder, bitstream and decoder components for end-to-end optimization. The decoder is typically computationally heavy and not viable for deployment
on CPU-based commodity devices such as mobile phones.
Additionally, work in learned video compression [24, 45]
tends to be benchmarked against codecs with limited tools
enabled: ‘very fast’ preset, low-latency mode and GOP

14852

