Exploring Sparsity in Image Super-Resolution for Efficient Inference
Longguang Wang1 , Xiaoyu Dong2,3 , Yingqian Wang1 , Xinyi Ying1 , Zaiping Lin1 , Wei An1 , Yulan Guo1∗
1
3
National University of Defense Technology 2 The University of Tokyo
RIKEN AIP
{wanglongguang15,yulan.guo}@nudt.edu.cn

Abstract

# Params.
38.00

1. Introduction
The goal of single image super-resolution (SR) is to
recover a high-resolution (HR) image from a single lowresolution (LR) observation. Due to the powerful feature
representation and model fitting capabilities of deep neural networks, CNN-based SR methods have achieved significant performance improvements over traditional ones.
Recently, many efforts have been made towards real-world
applications, including few-shot SR [38, 39], blind SR
[12, 49, 42], and scale-arbitrary SR [15, 43]. With the popularity of intelligent edge devices (such as smartphones and
VR glasses), performing SR on these devices is highly demanded. Due to the limited resources of edge devices1 , efficient SR is crucial to the applications on these devices.
1 For example, the computational performance of Kirin 990 and RTX
2080Ti are 0.9 and 13.4 tFLOPS, respectively.

SMSR (Ours)

37.95
250K 500K 1M

PSNR

Current CNN-based super-resolution (SR) methods process all locations equally with computational resources being uniformly assigned in space. However, since missing
details in low-resolution (LR) images mainly exist in regions of edges and textures, less computational resources
are required for those flat regions. Therefore, existing CNNbased methods involve redundant computation in flat regions, which increases their computational cost and limits their applications on mobile devices. In this paper, we
explore the sparsity in image SR to improve inference efficiency of SR networks. Specifically, we develop a Sparse
Mask SR (SMSR) network to learn sparse masks to prune
redundant computation. Within our SMSR, spatial masks
learn to identify “important” regions while channel masks
learn to mark redundant channels in those “unimportant”
regions. Consequently, redundant computation can be accurately localized and skipped while maintaining comparable performance. It is demonstrated that our SMSR
achieves state-of-the-art performance with 41%/33%/27%
FLOPs being reduced for ×2/3/4 SR. Code is available at:
https://github.com/LongguangWang/SMSR.

2M

37.90
37.85

IDN

FALSR-A

37.80
CARN

MemNet

SRFBN-S

37.75
37.70

100

200

300
400
GFLOPs

500

600

Figure 1. Trade-off between PSNR performance, number of parameters and FLOPs. Results are achieved on Set5 for ×2 SR.

Since the pioneering work of SRCNN [8], deeper networks have been extensively studied for image SR. In
VDSR [19], SR network is first deepened to 20 layers.
Then, a very deep and wide architecture with over 60 layers is introduced in EDSR [29]. Later, Zhang et al. further
increased the network depth to over 100 and 400 in RDN
[51] and RCAN [50], respectively. Although a deep network usually improves SR performance, it also leads to high
computational cost and limits the applications on mobile devices. To address this problem, several efforts have been
made to reduce model size through information distillation
[17] and efficient feature reuse [2]. Nevertheless, these networks still involve redundant computation. Compared to an
HR image, missing details in its LR image mainly exist in
regions of edges and textures. Consequently, less computational resources are required in those flat regions. However,
these CNN-based SR methods process all locations equally,
resulting in redundant computation within flat regions.
In this paper, we explore the sparsity in image SR to improve inference efficiency of SR networks. We first study
the intrinsic sparsity of the image SR task and then investigate the feature sparsity in existing SR networks. To fully
exploit the sparsity for efficient inference, we propose a
sparse mask SR (SMSR) network to dynamically skip redundant computation at a fine-grained level. Our SMSR
learns spatial masks to identify “important” regions (e.g.,
edge and texture regions) and uses channel masks to mark
redundant channels in those “unimportant” regions. These

4917

