ReMix: Towards Image-to-Image Translation with Limited Data
Jie Cao1,2 , Luanxuan Hou1,2 , Ming-Hsuan Yang3,4,5 , Ran He1,2∗, Zhenan Sun1,2
1
NLPR, CRIPAC & CEBSIT, CASIA 2 AIR, UCAS
3
University of California at Merced 4 Google Research 5 Yonsei University
{jie.cao, luanxuan.hou}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, mhyang@ucmerced.edu
{rhe, znsun}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Image-to-image (I2I) translation methods based on generative adversarial networks (GANs) typically suffer from
overﬁtting when limited training data is available. In this
work, we propose a data augmentation method (ReMix) to
tackle this issue. We interpolate training samples at the feature level and propose a novel content loss based on the
perceptual relations among samples. The generator learns
to translate the in-between samples rather than memorizing the training set, and thereby forces the discriminator
to generalize. The proposed approach effectively reduces
the ambiguity of generation and renders content-preserving
results. The ReMix method can be easily incorporated into
existing GAN models with minor modiﬁcations. Experimental results on numerous tasks demonstrate that GAN models equipped with the ReMix method achieve signiﬁcant improvements.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [11] have shown much progress in numerous tasks
including image-to-image translation. Well-designed adversarial losses [11, 27, 25, 1, 12, 26] provide effective domainlevel supervision, making the translated results indistinguishable from the real samples. The GAN-based methods
heavily rely on vast quantities of training examples. For
instance, Karras et al. [19, 20] use 70K high-quality face
images to train their models. However, collecting a large
amount of image data can be prohibitively expensive or implausible (e.g., for masterpieces by artists). This issue highlights the importance of training GANs with limited data.
Unfortunately, reducing the amount of training data often
leads to severe model overﬁtting. Recent ﬁndings [18, 42]
reveal that GANs easily memorize a small training set and
then render drastically degraded results in the testing set.
∗ corresponding author

Figure 1. Overview of the proposed data augmentation method.
We use the image reconstruction task as an example. The input
x is ﬁrst encoded into representation e and then decoded into the
output y, and superscript indicates the index of samples. The interpolated data e′ is the convex combination of e1 and e2 . In this
case, we have d(e′ , e1 ) < d(e′ , e2 ), where d denotes the disctance function. We propose to maintain s(y′ , x1 ) > s(y′ , x2 ),
where s is the similarity measure. Here we omit the outputs from
x1 and x2 for clarity.

Some efforts have recently been made to tackle this problem. The adaption-based approaches [24, 30] use external datasets as an alternative. They ﬁrst learn a semantically related translation and then adapt it to the translation
of interest. Despite the effectiveness, these approaches require additional image collection. Several data augmentation schemes [40, 18, 35, 42, 43] tailored for GANs have
been developed to alleviate the need for additional datasets.
They use groups of image transformations (e.g., cropping,
resizing, and cutout [10]) to augment the inputs of the discriminator. Even with limited data, these methods can prevent the discriminator from overﬁtting, allowing effective
adversarial supervision. However, augmenting data for the
generator is infeasible due to the problem of leaking [18].
For the image-to-image translation tasks, these methods
cannot prevent the generator from memorizing how to trans-

15018

