Deep Homography for Efficient Stereo Image Compression
Xin Deng1 , Wenzhe Yang2 , Ren Yang3 , Mai Xu2, * , Enpeng Liu2 , Qianhan Feng2 , Radu Timofte3
1
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Computer Vision Lab, D-ITET, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
{cindydeng, ywzsunny}@buaa.edu.cn, ren.yang@vision.ee.ethz.ch, MaiXu@buaa.edu.cn,
{liuepbuaa, fqhank}@gmail.com, radu.timofte@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
...

1. Introduction
Stereo image compression (SIC) aims to jointly compress
a pair of stereoscopic left and right images, to achieve high
compression rate for both the two images. In the fields
of autonomous driving [45], virtual reality [19] and video
surveillance [12], SIC has become one of the most critical techniques, which recently attracts increasing attention
from both academic and industrial communities. By fully
exploiting the mutual information in the two images, SIC
can potentially achieve higher compression rate than compressing each image independently.
Compared with single image compression [4], SIC is
more challenging, which needs to fully exploit and utilize
* Corresponding author.

Input L

H

Bitstream

...

H

Output L
Output R

Encoder

...

Input R
...

In this paper, we propose HESIC, an end-to-end trainable
deep network for stereo image compression (SIC). To fully
explore the mutual information across two stereo images,
we use a deep regression model to estimate the homography
matrix, i.e., H matrix. Then, the left image is spatially transformed by the H matrix, and only the residual information
between the left and right images is encoded to save bitrates. A two-branch auto-encoder architecture is adopted in
HESIC, corresponding to the left and right images, respectively. For entropy coding, we use two conditional stereo
entropy models, i.e., Gaussian mixture model (GMM) based
and context based entropy models, to fully explore the correlation between the two images to reduce the coding bit-rates.
In decoding, a cross quality enhancement module is proposed
to enhance the image quality based on inverse H matrix. Experimental results show that our HESIC outperforms stateof-the-art SIC methods on InStereo2K and KITTI datasets
both quantitatively and qualitatively. Code is available at
https://github.com/ywz978020607/HESIC.

Decoder

Figure 1. Brief framework of the proposed HESIC approach for
stereo image compression. Here, the “H” indicates homography
transformation.

the inner relationship between the left and right stereo images. There have been many research works on traditional
stereo image compression [18, 8, 27]. However, they rely on
hand-crafted features and the traditional optimization theory
to minimize the rate-distortion loss, which have limited compression efficiency. Recently, Liu et al. [32] proposed the
first deep learning based stereo image compression method
named DSIC, which exploits the content redundancy between the stereo pair to reduce the joint bit-rate. However,
it has very high computational complexity due to the dense
warp scheme. In addition, it requires that the left and right
images must stand in the same horizontal line, which is
actually not feasible in practical applications.
In this paper, we propose an efficient stereo image compression network based on homography transformation,
namely HESIC, which overcomes all the aforementioned
drawbacks of DSIC. As shown in Fig. 1, we use homography
transformation [35] to replace the dense warp module in
DSIC [32], which can significantly decrease the computational complexity. In addition, since homography transformation has no requirement for the relative position of the
two images, our method can cope with the case when the two
stereo images are not in the same horizontal line. Finally, our
HESIC approach not only outperforms the state-of-the-art

1492

