Projecting Your View Attentively: Monocular Road Scene Layout Estimation via
Cross-view Transformation
Weixiang Yang1 ,Qi Li1 ,Wenxi Liu1∗ ,Yuanlong Yu1∗ ,Yuexin Ma2,3 ,Shengfeng He4 ,Jia Pan5
1
College of Mathematics and Computer Science, Fuzhou University*
2
ShanghaiTech University 3 Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
5
Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
Abstract
HD map reconstruction is crucial for autonomous driving. LiDAR-based methods are limited due to the deployed expensive sensors and time-consuming computation.
Camera-based methods usually need to separately perform
road segmentation and view transformation, which often
causes distortion and the absence of content. To push the
limits of the technology, we present a novel framework that
enables reconstructing a local map formed by road layout and vehicle occupancy in the bird’s-eye view given a
front-view monocular image only. In particular, we propose
a cross-view transformation module, which takes the constraint of cycle consistency between views into account and
makes full use of their correlation to strengthen the view
transformation and scene understanding. Considering the
relationship between vehicles and roads, we also design
a context-aware discriminator to further refine the results.
Experiments on public benchmarks show that our method
achieves the state-of-the-art performance in the tasks of
road layout estimation and vehicle occupancy estimation.
Especially for the latter task, our model outperforms all
competitors by a large margin. Furthermore, our model
runs at 35 FPS on a single GPU, which is efficient and applicable for real-time panorama HD map reconstruction.

1. Introduction
With the rapid progress of autonomous driving technologies, many recent efforts have been spent on the related research topics, e.g., scene layout estimation [11, 22, 24, 36,
38, 42, 48], 3D object detection [5, 6, 21, 37, 40, 41], vehicle behavior prediction [15, 19, 26, 30], and lane detection [16, 33, 57], etc.
Among these tasks, high-definition map (HD map) reconstruction is fundamental and critical for perception, prediction, and planning of autonomous driving. Its major issues are concerned with the estimation of a local map in* Wenxi Liu and Yuanlong Yu are the corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Given a frontal view monocular image, we propose to
leverage a cycle structure that bridges the features of frontal view
and top view in their respective domains, as well as a cross-view
transformer that correlates views attentively in order to facilitate
the road layout estimation.

cluding the road layout as well as the occupancies of nearby
vehicles in the 3D world. Existing techniques rely on expensive sensors like LiDAR and require time-consuming
computation for cloud point data. Besides, the camerabased techniques usually need to separately perform road
segmentation and view transformation, which thus causes
distortion and the absence of content.
To push the limits of the technology, our work aims to
address this realistic yet challenging problem of estimating the road layout and vehicle occupancy in top view or
bird’s-eye view (BEV), given a single monocular front-view
image (see Fig. 1). However, due to the large view gap
and severe view deformation, understanding and estimating the top-view scene layout from the front-view image is
an extremely difficult problem even for a human observer.
Particularly, the same scene has significantly different appearances in the images of bird’s-eye view and frontal view.
Thus, parsing and projecting the road scenes of frontal view
to top view require the ability of fully exploiting the information of the frontal view image and innate reasoning the
unseen regions.
Traditional methods (e.g. [23,45]) focus on investigating
the perspective transformation by estimating the camera parameters and performing image coordinate transformation,
but but gaps in the resulting BEV feature maps caused by
geometric warping lead to poor results. Recent deep learning based approaches [35, 56] mainly rely on the hallucination capability of deep Convolutional Neural Networks
115536

