Detection, Tracking, and Counting Meets Drones in Crowds: A Benchmark
Longyin Wen1,∗ , Dawei Du2,∗, Pengfei Zhu3,†, Qinghua Hu3 , Qilong Wang3 , Liefeng Bo1 , Siwei Lyu2
1
JD Finance America Corporation, Mountain View, CA, USA
2
University at Albany, State University of New York, Albany, NY, USA
3
Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
https://github.com/VisDrone/DroneCrowd

Abstract
To promote the developments of object detection, tracking and counting algorithms in drone-captured videos, we
construct a benchmark with a new drone-captured largescale dataset, named as DroneCrowd, formed by 112 video
clips with 33, 600 HD frames in various scenarios. Notably,
we annotate 20, 800 people trajectories with 4.8 million
heads and several video-level attributes. Meanwhile, we
design the Space-Time Neighbor-Aware Network (STNNet)
as a strong baseline to solve object detection, tracking and
counting jointly in dense crowds. STNNet is formed by the
feature extraction module, followed by the density map estimation heads, and localization and association subnets.
To exploit the context information of neighboring objects,
we design the neighboring context loss to guide the association subnet training, which enforces consistent relative
position of nearby objects in temporal domain. Extensive
experiments on our DroneCrowd dataset demonstrate that
STNNet performs favorably against the state-of-the-arts.

1. Introduction
Drones, or general unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs),
equipped with cameras have been fast deployed to a wide
range of applications, such as video surveillance for crowd
control [45] and public safety [22]. In recent years, many
massive stampedes have taken place around the world that
claimed many victims, making the automatic density map
estimation, counting and tracking in crowds on drones important tasks, which draw great attention from the computer
vision community.
∗ Both authors contributed equally to this work.
† Corresponding author.
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant
2018AAA0102402, the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 61732011, 61876127, and 61925602, Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin under Grant 17JCZDJC30800, the Applied Basic Research
Program of Qinghai (2019-ZJ-7017).

Despite significant progress, crowd counting and tracking algorithms still have room for improvement to deal with
drone-captured videos due to various challenges, such as
view point and scale variations, background clutter, and
small scales. Developing and evaluating these algorithms
for drones are impeded by the lack of publicly available
large-scale benchmarks. Some recent efforts [40, 44, 10, 41,
5, 35] have devoted to construct datasets for crowd counting. However, the majority of them focus on crowd counting with still images or inconsistent frames by surveillance
cameras, due to difficulties in data collection and annotation
for drone-based crowd counting and tracking.
To fill this gap, we collect a large-scale drone-based
dataset for density map estimation, crowd localization and
tracking. Our DroneCrowd dataset consists of 112 video
clips formed by total 33, 600 frames, captured by various
drone-mounted cameras, in 70 different scenarios across 4
different cities in China (i.e., Tianjin, Guangzhou, Daqing,
and Hong Kong). These video clips are annotated with more
than 4.8 million head annotations and several video-level
attributes. To the best of our knowledge, this is the largest
and most thoroughly annotated density map estimation, localization, and tracking dataset to date, see Table 1.
To handle this challenging dataset, we design a SpaceTime Neighbor-Aware Network (STNNet) as a strong baseline, which solves the density map estimation, localization,
and tracking simultaneously. Specifically, the proposed
STNNet is formed by four modules, i.e., the feature extraction subnetwork, followed by the density map estimation
heads, the localization, and the association subnets. The
feature extraction subnetwork first uses two-branch CNNs
to extract multi-scale features, and then computes the correlations between the extracted features in consecutive two
frames to exploit the temporal relations. Using density map
estimation heads, we can estimate the density of objects in
video frames to perform crowd counting. Inspired by object
detection [25, 26, 42], we introduce the localization subnet,
formed by the classification and regression branches, to output accurate locations of targets in each individual frames.

7812

