Recognizing Actions in Videos from Unseen Viewpoints
AJ Piergiovanni
Indiana University

Michael S. Ryoo
Stony Brook University

ajpiergi@indiana.edu

mryoo@cs.stonybrook.edu

MLB-YouTube
Seen View

Abstract
Standard methods for video recognition use large CNNs
designed to capture spatio-temporal data. However, training
these models requires a large amount of labeled training
data, containing a wide variety of actions, scenes, settings
and camera viewpoints. In this paper, we show that current
convolutional neural network models are unable to recognize
actions from camera viewpoints not present in their training
data (i.e., unseen view action recognition). To address this,
we develop approaches based on 3D representations and
introduce a new geometric convolutional layer that can learn
viewpoint invariant representations. Further, we introduce
a new, challenging dataset for unseen view recognition and
show the approaches ability to learn viewpoint invariant
representations.

1. Introduction
Activity recognition with convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) has been very successful [2, 41, 13] when provided
sufficient diverse labeled data, like Kinetics [21]. However,
one major limitation of these CNNs is that they are unable
to recognize actions/data that are outside of the training
data distribution. This is most notably observed for unseen
classes (objects, activities, etc.) which has been heavily
studied in zero-shot and few-shot learning literature. In this
work, we look at a related, but different problem of unseen
viewpoint activity recognition, where the actions are the
same, but occur from different camera angles.
To motivate this problem, let us consider an example.
Given a labeled dataset of a person performing actions with
one camera angle, we train a CNN to recognize this action.
Now, suppose we have new videos to recognize, but from a
different camera view. This could be as simple as a different
camera placement in the environment, or an entirely different
camera and setting (e.g., Fig. 1). In this case, a trained CNN,
in general, fails to recognize the action. As a simple experiment, we use the Human3.6M dataset [14], which contains
videos of a person performing an action from 4 different
camera angles. As shown in Table 1, when training on one

New Unseen Views

Figure 1: Examples of the seen, static broadcast camera in
MLB-YouTube and examples of the new, unseen viewpoints
of the same actions. This dataset is quite challenging, adding
new views, people, etc.
view and testing on another, the model is unable to recognize
the action. However, humans are able to recognize these
actions regardless of viewpoint and studies have found that
this is likely because humans build invariant representations
of actions in their minds [39] .
Further, this problem frequently occurs in real data (e.g.,
YouTube videos). Existing smaller datasets such as Toyota
SmartHome [8], Charades-Ego [38], NTU [35] and others
all provide videos in multiple viewpoints to study this effect.
Large video datasets like Kinetics [21] naturally contain
many views, however, there is no annotation of the view
and each video only provides a single view. Other datasets
like MLB-YouTue [31] only contains the single broadcast
camera view baseball games. As collecting video data is
already challenging, designing CNNs that generalize to unseen viewpoints is critical, especially for applications where
diverse view data is limited or unavailable. It would be practically impossible to build datasets for many desirable settings
that enumerate all possible (or sufficiently large number of)
viewpoints to fully model activities.
There are many potential ways to address this problem.
One hypothesis is that by training on a large-scale video
datasets, such as Kinetics, the model could implicitly learn
multi-view representations of actions. However, as shown
in Table 1, we empirically find that while it improves per14124

