Boosting Monocular Depth Estimation Models to High-Resolution via
Content-Adaptive Multi-Resolution Merging
S. Mahdi H. Miangoleh∗1
1

Long Mai2

Sebastian Dille∗1

2

Simon Fraser University

Sylvain Paris2

Yağız Aksoy1

Adobe Research

Figure 1: We propose a method that can generate highly detailed high-resolution depth estimations from a single image. Our
method is based on optimizing the performance of a pre-trained network by merging estimations in different resolutions and
different patches to generate a high-resolution estimate. We show our results above using MiDaS [35] in our pipeline.

Abstract
Neural networks have shown great abilities in estimating depth from a single image. However, the inferred
depth maps are well below one-megapixel resolution and
often lack fine-grained details, which limits their practicality. Our method builds on our analysis on how the input
resolution and the scene structure affects depth estimation
performance. We demonstrate that there is a trade-off between a consistent scene structure and the high-frequency
details, and merge low- and high-resolution estimations to
take advantage of this duality using a simple depth merging network. We present a double estimation method that
improves the whole-image depth estimation and a patch selection method that adds local details to the final result.
We demonstrate that by merging estimations at different
resolutions with changing context, we can generate multimegapixel depth maps with a high level of detail using a
pre-trained model.

(∗ ) denotes equal contribution.

1. Introduction
Monocular or single-image depth estimation aims to extract the structure of the scene from a single image. Unlike in settings where raw depth information is available
from depth sensors or multi-view data with geometric constraints, monocular depth estimation has to rely on highlevel monocular depth cues such as occlusion boundaries
and perspective. Data-driven techniques based on deep neural networks have thus become the standard solutions in
modern monocular depth estimation methods [11, 13, 14,
15, 29]. Despite recent developments in the field including
in network design [12, 18, 21, 33], incorporation of highlevel constraints [43, 50, 56, 58], and supervision strategies [14, 15, 16, 20, 23], achieving high-resolution depth estimates with good boundary accuracy and a consistent scene
structure remains a challenge. State-of-the-art methods are
based on fully-convolutional architectures which in principle can handle inputs of arbitrary sizes. However, practical constraints such as available GPU memory, lack of diverse high-resolution datasets, and the receptive field size
of CNN’s limit the potential of current methods.

9685

