Back to Event Basics: Self-Supervised Learning of
Image Reconstruction for Event Cameras via Photometric Constancy
Federico Paredes-Vallés
Guido C. H. E. de Croon
Micro Air Vehicle Laboratory, Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands

Abstract

û
E

Event cameras are novel vision sensors that sample, in
an asynchronous fashion, brightness increments with low
latency and high temporal resolution. The resulting streams
of events are of high value by themselves, especially for high
speed motion estimation. However, a growing body of work
has also focused on the reconstruction of intensity frames
from the events, as this allows bridging the gap with the existing literature on appearance- and frame-based computer
vision. Recent work has mostly approached this problem
using neural networks trained with synthetic, ground-truth
data. In this work we approach, for the first time, the intensity reconstruction problem from a self-supervised learning
perspective. Our method, which leverages the knowledge
of the inner workings of event cameras, combines estimated
optical flow and the event-based photometric constancy to
train neural networks without the need for any ground-truth
or synthetic data. Results across multiple datasets show
that the performance of the proposed self-supervised approach is in line with the state-of-the-art. Additionally, we
propose a novel, lightweight neural network for optical flow
estimation that achieves high speed inference with only a
minor drop in performance.

1. Introduction
Unlike conventional cameras recording intensity frames
at fixed time intervals, event cameras sample light based
on scene dynamics by asynchronously measuring per-pixel
brightness1 changes at the time they occur [1]. This results
in streams of sparse events encoding the polarity of the perceived changes. Because of this paradigm shift, event cameras offer several advantages over their frame-based counterparts, namely low power consumption, high dynamic
range (HDR), low latency and high temporal resolution.
Despite the advantages, the novel output format of event
cameras poses new challenges in terms of algorithm design.
Unless working with spiking neural networks [2], events are
.
1 Defined as the logarithm of the pixel intensity, i.e., L =
log(I).

Events

FlowNet

Contrast
Maximization

ReconNet

Photometric
Constancy
L̂

Event accumulation
P
pi C

∆L

i∈ε

Figure 1: Overview of the proposed framework. Our model
is trained in a self-supervised fashion to perform optical
flow estimation and image reconstruction from event data
using the contrast maximization proxy loss and the eventbased photometric constancy, respectively. Colored reverse
arrows indicate error propagation for each loss.

usually converted into intermediate representations that facilitate the extraction of information [1]. Among others, intensity frames are an example of a powerful representation
since they allow the evaluation of the appearance of a visual
scene, thus bridging the gap between event cameras and the
existing frame-based computer vision literature [3, 4]. For
this reason, there has been a significant research drive to develop new methods to reconstruct images from events with
similar statistics to those captured by standard cameras.
Recent work has mostly approached this problem from
a machine learning perspective. With their E2VID artificial
neural network, Rebecq et al. [3, 4] were the first to show
that learning-based methods trained to maximize perceptual
similarity via supervised learning outperform hand-crafted
techniques by a large margin in terms of image quality.
Later, Scheerlinck et al. [5] achieved high speed inference
with FireNet, a simplified model of E2VID. Despite the
high levels of accuracy reported, these architectures were
trained with large sets of synthetic data from event camera simulators [6], which adds extra complexity to the reconstruction problem due to the simulator-to-reality gap.
In fact, Stoffregen, Scheerlinck et al. [7] recently showed

3446

