Learning to Aggregate and Personalize 3D Face
from In-the-Wild Photo Collection
Zhenyu Zhang1,2 , Yanhao Ge1 , Renwang Chen1 , Ying Tai1 , Yan Yan2 , Jian Yang2 ,
Chengjie Wang1 , Jilin Li1 , Feiyue Huang1
Tencent Youtu Lab, Shanghai, China
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, China
zhangjesse@foxmail.com

yanyan, csjyang@njust.edu.cn

halege, renwangchen, yingtai, jasoncjwang, jerolinli, garyhuang@tencent.com

Abstract
Non-parametric face modeling aims to reconstruct 3D
face only from images without shape assumptions. While
plausible facial details are predicted, the models tend to
over-depend on local color appearance and suffer from
ambiguous noise. To address such problem, this paper
presents a novel Learning to Aggregate and Personalize
(LAP) framework for unsupervised robust 3D face modeling. Instead of using controlled environment, the proposed
method implicitly disentangles ID-consistent and scenespecific face from unconstrained photo set. Specifically, to
learn ID-consistent face, LAP adaptively aggregates intrinsic face factors of an identity based on a novel curriculum learning approach with relaxed consistency loss. To
adapt the face for a personalized scene, we propose a novel
attribute-refining network to modify ID-consistent face with
target attribute and details. Based on the proposed method,
we make unsupervised 3D face modeling benefit from meaningful image facial structure and possibly higher resolutions. Extensive experiments on benchmarks show LAP recovers superior or competitive face shape and texture, compared with state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods with or without
prior and supervision.

1. Introduction
Monocular 3D reconstruction of human face is a longstanding problem with potential applications including animation, biometrics and human digitalization. It is an essentially ill-posed problem requiring strong assumption, e.g.,
shape-from-shading approaches [67]. With 3D Morphable
Model (3DMM) [4] proposed, the reconstruction can be
achieved through optimization on low-dimensional parameters [38, 37, 73]. Recently, deep neural networks are introduced to regress 3DMM parameters from 2D images with

Target Image

Ours
256 x 256

Unsup3D
64 x 64

Unsup3D-re
256 x 256

(a) Qualitative Comparison

DF2Net
512 x 512
(b) Histogram of Parameter Difference

Figure 1. (a) Qualitative comparison between our method and Unsup3D [59] and DF2Net [65]. Our results show better shape of
organs with finer details and less noise. (b) Distribution of parameter difference in expression basis [5] between all single-ID
image pairs on face dataset [30, 61]. With the manually computed
threshold of 0.04, it reveals that quite amounts (about 70%) of image pairs have similar expressions and non-rigid difference. Such
conclusion inspires us to approximate expressions by mean conditions with reasonable relaxations, and learn a multi-image consistent face without 3DMM prior. Better showed by zooming in.

supervision [71, 35, 9, 12, 28] or improve 3DMM with
non-linearity [49, 36, 51, 14, 48, 70]. Meanwhile, as these
single-view guided methods may suffer from 2D ambiguity,
other 3DMM-based works are proposed to leverage multiview consistency [53, 47, 62, 57, 2]. While 3DMM provides
reliable priors for 3D face modeling, it also brings potential
drawbacks: as built from a small amount of subjects (e.g.,
BFM [33] with 200 subjects) and rigidly controlled conditions, models may be fragile to large variations of identity [72], and have limitations on building teeth, skin details
or anatomic grounded muscles [10].
Due to the aforementioned limitations, an alternative approach is learning to model 3D face without 3DMM assumption, e.g., regressing face normal or depth directly
from an input image [18, 52, 42, 65, 1] with ground truth
scans and pseudo labels. Despite the efficiency of these
approaches, they cannot model facial texture or a canon114214

