SKFAC: Training Neural Networks with
Faster Kronecker-Factored Approximate Curvature
Zedong Tang1,2 *, Fenlong Jiang1* , Maoguo Gong1†, Hao Li1 , Yue Wu3
Fan Yu4 , Zidong Wang4 , Min Wang4
1
School of Electronic and Engineering, Xidian University
2
Academy of Advanced Interdisciplinary Research, Xidian University
3
School of Computer Science and Technology, Xidian University
tangzedong@hotmail.com,jiangfenlong@outlook.com,gong@ieee.org
ywu@xidian.edu.cn,omegalihao@gmail.com
4
Central Software Institute, 2012 Lab, Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd
{fan.yu,wang1,wangmin10}@huawei.com
Abstract
The bottleneck of computation burden limits the
widespread use of the 2nd order optimization algorithms for
training deep neural networks. In this paper, we present a
computationally efficient approximation for natural gradient descent, named Swift Kronecker-Factored Approximate
Curvature (SKFAC), which combines Kronecker factorization and a fast low-rank matrix inversion technique. Our research aims at both fully connected and convolutional layers. For the fully connected layers, by utilizing the low-rank
property of Kronecker factors of Fisher information matrix,
our method only requires inverting a small matrix to approximate the curvature with desirable accuracy. For convolutional layers, we propose a way with two strategies to
save computational efforts without affecting the empirical
performance by reducing across the spatial dimension or
receptive fields of feature maps. Specifically, we propose
two effective dimension reduction methods for this purpose:
Spatial Subsampling and Reduce Sum. Experimental results
of training several deep neural networks on Cifar-10 and
ImageNet-1k datasets demonstrate that SKFAC can capture
the main curvature and yield comparative performance to
K-FAC. The proposed method bridges the wall-clock time
gap between the 1st and 2nd order algorithms.

* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding Author

This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science
Foundation of China under Grant 62036006 and Grant 61906146, in part
by CAAI Huawei MindSpore Open Fund, and in part by the Key Research
and Development Program of Shaanxi Province under Grant 2018ZDXMGY-045.

1. Introduction
Deep learning, whose success is inseparable from the
support of enormous computing power, has achieved fruitful results in many fields, such as computer vision [6][21]
and natural language processing [1][11]. However, for
large-scale tasks, effective training of neural networks is
usually time-consuming [8], resulting in a new request for
fast and efficient training methods.
In general, the training of neural networks is a process to
optimize the network parameters θ by minimizing the regularized empirical loss function L(θ), and the parameters
are updated as: θ ← θ−ηG−1 ∇θ L(θ), where G is a positive definite preconditioner of the gradient and η represents
a positive learning rate. In particular, if G is an identity
matrix, it will degrade to the classical 1st order optimization algorithm, namely Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD).
It and its variants with momentum term are current mainstream in neural network training. SGD adopts consistent
update step size for all parameters. As for 2nd order optimization, in this case, G contains more curvature or correlation information, such as the Hessian matrix in Newton’s
method or Fisher Information Matrix (FIM) in natural gradient method (NG). For a network with massive parameters,
G has a gigantic size of nθ ×nθ , where nθ is the dimensions
of θ, which renders it impractical to compute and invert it
directly. Only if we can get huge time savings at the expense of a little information integrity, 2nd order algorithms
will show more potential than the 1st order ones to fasten
the training.
This has motivated researches into finding the approximation of G and its inverse G−1 with low computational
cost. For instance, the well-known and widely used Ada113479

