The Translucent Patch: A Physical and Universal Attack on Object Detectors
Alon Zolfi, Moshe Kravchik, Yuval Elovici, Asaf Shabtai
Department of Software and Information Systems Engineering
Ben-Gurion University of the Negev
{zolfi,moshekr}@post.bgu.ac.il, {elovici,shabtaia}@bgu.ac.il

Abstract
Physical adversarial attacks against object detectors
have seen increasing success in recent years. However,
these attacks require direct access to the object of interest in
order to apply a physical patch. Furthermore, to hide multiple objects, an adversarial patch must be applied to each
object. In this paper, we propose a contactless translucent
physical patch containing a carefully constructed pattern,
which is placed on the camera’s lens, to fool state-of-theart object detectors. The primary goal of our patch is to
hide all instances of a selected target class. In addition,
the optimization method used to construct the patch aims to
ensure that the detection of other (untargeted) classes remains unharmed. Therefore, in our experiments, which are
conducted on state-of-the-art object detection models used
in autonomous driving, we study the effect of the patch on
the detection of both the selected target class and the other
classes. We show that our patch was able to prevent the
detection of 42.27% of all stop sign instances while maintaining high (nearly 80%) detection of the other classes.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep neural networks (DNNs) and particularly convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have become
a state-of-the-art solution for computer vision tasks, such
as image classification [13, 8], object detection [23, 24],
and image segmentation [2, 1]. This is mainly due to
DNNs’ ability to accurately model complex multivariate
data. However, such models’ effectiveness depends heavily on their robustness to attacks that target the model itself;
i.e., adversarial learning attacks.
Adversarial attacks have become a major focus of the
machine learning research community, primarily in the
computer vision domain [30, 25]. Recent studies have
demonstrated the ability to implement evasion attacks (i.e.,
misclassification of an object) by applying a physical patch
on the targeted object. Some examples include hiding a
person using a small printed cardboard plate [33] or wearable clothes [34, 35, 10], concealing a stop sign by attaching small black and white stickers to it [6], or crafting a

Figure 1: Illustrating the physical translucent patch, placed
on the camera lens, which results in the failure to detect the
stop sign while correctly identifying the other objects.
new stop sign with specific patterns on its background [3].
However, the main limitation of those physical attacks is
that they require access to the object itself (to apply the adversarial patch). Furthermore, to hide multiple objects, an
adversarial patch must be applied to each object.
We propose a novel physical attack aimed at fooling
common object detection models by mounting a carefully
crafted patch on the camera lens. Our attack (patch) is calculated by a gradient-based optimization process which results in a universal adversarial patch that takes the following
goals into consideration: 1) successfully hide all instances
of a target class from the object detector, 2) minimize the attack’s impact on the detection of untargeted classes, and 3)
produce a printable patch that is as unnoticeable as possible.
To the best of our knowledge, the only study that attempted to implement a camera-based physical attack is the
work performed by Li et al. [15], in which an image classification model was targeted. Unlike an image classification
model, which predicts the class of a single (dominant) object in the image, an object detection model is capable of
i) detecting and classifying multiple objects regardless of
their location and dominance within the image, and ii) processing thousands of candidate bounding boxes centered on
each output pixel. Thus, in our attack all of the candidate

15232

