DriveGAN: Towards a Controllable High-Quality Neural Simulation
Seung Wook Kim1,2,3
Jonah Philion1,2,3
1
2
NVIDIA
University of Toronto

Antonio Torralba4
3
Vector Institute

{seungwookk,jphilion,sfidler}@nvidia.com

Sanja Fidler1,2,3
4
MIT

torralba@mit.edu

Abstract

Weather
Control
Content
Control

Realistic simulators are critical for training and verifying robotics systems. While most of the contemporary simulators are hand-crafted, a scaleable way to build simulators
is to use machine learning to learn how the environment behaves in response to an action, directly from data. In this
work, we aim to learn to simulate a dynamic environment
directly in pixel-space, by watching unannotated sequences
of frames and their associated actions. We introduce a novel
high-quality neural simulator referred to as DriveGAN that
achieves controllability by disentangling different components without supervision. In addition to steering controls,
it also includes controls for sampling features of a scene,
such as the weather as well as the location of non-player
objects. Since DriveGAN is a fully differentiable simulator,
it further allows for re-simulation of a given video sequence,
offering an agent to drive through a recorded scene again,
possibly taking different actions. We train DriveGAN on
multiple datasets, including 160 hours of real-world driving data. We showcase that our approach greatly surpasses
the performance of previous data-driven simulators, and allows for new key features not explored before.

1. Introduction
The ability to simulate is a key component of intelligence. Consider how animals make thousands of decisions
each day. Some of the decisions are critical for survival,
such as deciding to step away from an approaching car.
Mentally simulating the future given the current situation
is key in planning successfully. In robotic applications such
as autonomous driving, simulation is also a scaleable, robust and safe way of testing self-driving vehicles in safetycritical scenarios before deploying them in the real world.
Simulation further allows for a fair comparison of different
autonomous driving systems since one has control over the
repeatability of the scenarios.
Desired properties of a good robotic simulator include
accepting an action from an agent and generating a plausible next world state, allowing for user control over the scene
elements, and the ability to re-simulate an observed scenario

Synthesize!

Driving Control

DriveGAN
Neural
Simulator

Figure 1: We aim to learn a controllable neural simulator that
can generate high-fidelity real-world scenes. DriveGAN takes user
controls (e.g. steering weel, speed) as input and renders the next
screen. It allows users to control different aspects of the scene,
such as weather and objects.

with plausible variations. This is no easy feat as the world
is incredibly rich in situations one can encounter. Most of
the existing simulators [9, 41, 30, 46] are hand-designed in
a game engine, which involves significant effort in content
creation, and designing complex behavior models to control
non-player objects. Grand Theft Auto, one of the most realistic driving games to date, set in a virtual replica of Los
Angeles, took several years to create and involved hundreds
of artists and engineers. In this paper, we advocate for datadriven simulation as a way to achieve scaleability.
Data-driven simulation has recently gained attention. LidarSim [36] used a catalog of annotated 3D scenes to sample layouts into which reconstructed objects obtained from
a large number of recorded drives are placed, in the quest
to achieve diversity for training and testing a LIDAR-based
perception system. [24, 8, 43], on the other hand, learn
to synthesize road-scene 3D layouts directly from images
without supervision. These works do not model the dynamics of the environment and object behaviors.
As a more daring alternative, recent works attempted to
create neural simulators [27, 14] that learn to simulate the
environment in response to the agent’s actions directly in
pixel-space by digesting large amounts of video data along
with actions. This line of work provides a scaleable way to
simulation, as we do not rely on any human-provided annotations, except for the agent’s actions which are cheap
to obtain from odometry sensors. It is also a more chal15820

