Weakly-Supervised Physically Unconstrained Gaze Estimation
Rakshit Kothari1,2 * Shalini De Mello1 Umar Iqbal1
Wonmin Byeon1 Seonwook Park3 Jan Kautz1
1
2
3
NVIDIA
Rochester Institute of Technology
Lunit Inc.
rsk3900@rit.edu; spark@lunit.io
{shalinig, uiqbal, wbyeon, jkautz}@nvidia.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Much progress has been made recently in the task of
remote 3D gaze estimation from monocular images, but
most of these methods are constrained to largely frontal
subjects viewed by cameras located within a meter of
them [46, 20]. To go beyond frontal faces, a few recent
works explore the more challenging problem of so-called
“physically unconstrained gaze estimation”, where larger
camera-to-subject distances and higher variations in head
pose and eye gaze angles are present [17, 44, 8]. A significant challenge there is in acquiring training data with 3D
gaze labels, generally and more so outdoors. Fortunately,
several 3D gaze datasets with large camera-to-subject dis* Rakshit Kothari was an intern at NVIDIA during the project.

'Looking At Each Other (LAEO)'
collection

Supervised losses

LAEO constraints

Input

Weakly-supervised training

Output

Gaze estimation network
Inference

A major challenge for physically unconstrained gaze estimation is acquiring training data with 3D gaze annotations for in-the-wild and outdoor scenarios. In contrast,
videos of human interactions in unconstrained environments are abundantly available and can be much more easily annotated with frame-level activity labels. In this work,
we tackle the previously unexplored problem of weaklysupervised gaze estimation from videos of human interactions. We leverage the insight that strong gaze-related geometric constraints exist when people perform the activity
of “looking at each other” (LAEO). To acquire viable 3D
gaze supervision from LAEO labels, we propose a training
algorithm along with several novel loss functions especially
designed for the task. With weak supervision from two large
scale CMU-Panoptic and AVA-LAEO activity datasets, we
show significant improvements in (a) the accuracy of semisupervised gaze estimation and (b) cross-domain generalization on the state-of-the-art physically unconstrained
in-the-wild Gaze360 gaze estimation benchmark. We
open source our code at https://github.com/NVlabs/weaklysupervised-gaze.

Faces w/ gaze labels

Figure 1. Overview of our weakly-supervised gaze estimation approach. We employ large collections of videos of people “looking
at each other” (LAEO) curated from the Internet without any explicit 3D gaze labels, either by themselves or in a semi-supervised
manner to learn 3D gaze in physically unconstrained settings.

tances and variability in head pose have been collected recently in indoor laboratory environments using specialized
multi-cameras setups [43, 8, 44, 28]. In contrast, the recent Gaze360 dataset [17] was collected both indoors and
outdoors, at greater distances to subjects. While the approach of Gaze360 advances the field significantly, it nevertheless requires expensive hardware and many co-operative
subjects and hence can be difficult to scale.
Recently “weakly-supervised” approaches have been
demonstrated on various human perception tasks, such as
body pose estimation via multi-view constraints [35, 14],
hand pose estimation via bio-mechanical constraints [37],
and face reconstruction via differentiable rendering [6].
Nevertheless, little attention has been paid to exploring
methods with weak supervision for frontal face gaze estimation [42] and none at all for physically unconstrained
gaze estimation. Eye gaze is a natural and strong nonverbal form of human communication [27]. For instance,
babies detect and follow a caregiver’s gaze from as early
as four months of age [38]. Consequently, videos of hu-

9980

