Hallucination Improves Few-Shot Object Detection
Weilin Zhang
Yu-Xiong Wang
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
{weilinz2, yxw}@illinois.edu

Abstract
Learning to detect novel objects from few annotated examples is of great practical importance. A particularly
challenging yet common regime occurs when there are extremely limited examples (less than three). One critical factor in improving few-shot detection is to address the lack
of variation in training data. We propose to build a better model of variation for novel classes by transferring the
shared within-class variation from base classes. To this end,
we introduce a hallucinator network that learns to generate additional, useful training examples in the region of interest (RoI) feature space, and incorporate it into a modern object detection model. Our approach yields significant
performance improvements on two state-of-the-art few-shot
detectors with different proposal generation procedures. In
particular, we achieve new state of the art in the extremelyfew-shot regime on the challenging COCO benchmark.

1. Introduction
Modern deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) rely
heavily on large amounts of annotated images [29]. This
data-hungry nature limits their applicability to some practical scenarios such as autonomous driving, where the cost
of annotating examples is prohibitive, or which involve
never-before-seen concepts [9,51]. By contrast, humans can
rapidly grasp a new concept and make meaningful generalizations, even from a single example [31]. To bridge this
gap, there has been a recent resurgence of interest in fewshot or low-shot learning that aims to learn novel concepts
from very few labeled examples [8, 10, 34, 37, 42].
Despite notable successes, most of the existing work has
focused on simple classification tasks with artificial settings
and small-scale datasets [34, 37]. However, few-shot object
detection, a task of great practical importance that learns an
object detector from only a few annotated bounding box examples [18, 38, 39], is far less explored. Few-shot detection
requires determining where an object is as well as what it
is (and handling distracting background regions [13], etc.),
and is much harder than few-shot classification. The most

Hallucinator

Region
Proposal
Network

Test

Figure 1. Learning to detect a novel class, fennec fox, from a single training example (i.e., 1-shot detection) using a serial detector. The region proposal network (RPN) generates a few high
intersection-over-union (IoU) boxes for the detector’s classifier.
The pink circle represents the classifier decision boundary learned
from these boxes. Due to a lack of sample variation, the decision
boundary is not accurately estimated. With hallucinated examples
(image in backslash) produced by our hallucinator, the classifier
learns a better decision boundary (the dotted circle), thus being
able to potentially correct previously misclassified instances.

difficult regime occurs when there are very limited examples (less than 3) for novel classes (Figure 1), which is a
common yet extremely challenging case in the real world.
While few-shot classification approaches are helpful
(e.g., [2, 4, 18, 33, 41]), few-shot detection is much more
than a straightforward application of few-shot classification
approaches. The state-of-the-art two-stage fine-tuning approach (TFA) [38] learns a better representation for fewshot detection, through (1) pre-training on base classes with
abundant data and then only fine-tuning the box classifier
and regressor on novel classes, and (2) introducing instancelevel feature normalization to the box classifier during finetuning. Despite the improvement, its performance in the
extremely low-data regime is still far from satisfying.
We argue that, to fully improve extremely-few-shot detection performance, a key factor is to effectively deal with
the lack of variation in training data. This is because for an
object detector to be accurate, its classifier must build a useful model of variation in appearance with very few examples. More concretely, a modern object detector first finds
promising image locations, typically boxes, using a region
proposal network (RPN) [28], then passes promising boxes

13008

