Patch2Pix: Epipolar-Guided Pixel-Level Correspondences
Qunjie Zhou1 Torsten Sattler2 Laura Leal-Taixé1
1
Technical University of Munich 2 CIIRC, Czech Technical University in Prague ∗

Abstract
The classical matching pipeline used for visual localization typically involves three steps: (i) local feature detection and description, (ii) feature matching, and (iii) outlier
rejection. Recently emerged correspondence networks propose to perform those steps inside a single network but suffer from low matching resolution due to the memory bottleneck. In this work, we propose a new perspective to estimate correspondences in a detect-to-refine manner, where
we first predict patch-level match proposals and then refine them. We present Patch2Pix, a novel refinement network that refines match proposals by regressing pixel-level
matches from the local regions defined by those proposals and jointly rejecting outlier matches with confidence
scores. Patch2Pix is weakly supervised to learn correspondences that are consistent with the epipolar geometry of
an input image pair. We show that our refinement network significantly improves the performance of correspondence networks on image matching, homography estimation, and localization tasks. In addition, we show that our
learned refinement generalizes to fully-supervised methods
without re-training, which leads us to state-of-the-art localization performance. The code is available at https:
//github.com/GrumpyZhou/patch2pix.

1. Introduction
Finding image correspondences is a fundamental step
in several computer vision tasks such as Structure-fromMotion (SfM) [36, 41] and Simultaneous Localization and
Mapping (SLAM) [8, 24]. Given a pair of images, pixellevel correspondences are commonly established through a
local feature matching pipeline, which involves the following three steps: i) detecting and describing local features,
ii) matching the nearest neighbors using the feature descriptors, and iii) rejecting outlier matches.
Traditional hand-crafted local features such as SIFT [15]
∗ This research was funded by the Humboldt Foundation through the

Sofja Kovalevskaya Award, the EU Horizon 2020 project RICAIP (grant
agreeement No. 857306), and the European Regional Development Fund
under project IMPACT (No. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15 003/0000468).

Figure 1. An example of Patch2Pix correspondences. In the top
figure, the matches refined by Patch2Pix are coloured according
to the predicted confidence scores. The less confident matches (in
blue) appear mostly on the road or the blank wall. In the bottom
figure, we show that the inlier matches can well handle the large
viewpoint change. We show more quantitative results for handling
various challenging conditions in the supp. mat (c.f . Sec. D).

or SURF [2] are vulnerable to extreme illumination
changes, motion blur and repetitive and weakly textured
scenes. Therefore, recent works [5–7, 16, 17, 28, 40] propose to learn to detect and describe local features using neural networks, showing that learned features can be robustly
matched under challenging conditions [6, 17, 28, 40]. Instead of focusing on improving local features, [3,22,38,42]
suggest to learn a filtering function from sets of correspondences to reject outlier matches. A recent method [33] further proposes to jointly learn the matching function and outlier rejection via graph neural networks and the Sinkhorn
algorithm [4, 37]. Combining a learned feature [5] and
learned matcher [33] has set the state-of-the-art results on
several geometry tasks, showing a promising direction towards a full learnable matching pipeline.
Learning the whole matching pipeline has already been
investigated in several works [13, 30, 31], where a single
network directly outputs correspondences from an input
image pair. The main challenge faced with those correspondence networks is how to efficiently perform matching
while reaching pixel-level accuracy. In order to keep computation speed and memory footprint manageable, [29] has

4669

