DSC-PoseNet: Learning 6DoF Object Pose Estimation via Dual-scale Consistency
1

Zongxin Yang1,2 , Xin Yu2 , Yi Yang2∗
Baidu Research 2 ReLER, University of Technology Sydney

zongxin.yang@student.uts.edu.au, {xin.yu,yi.yang}@uts.edu.au

Abstract
Compared to 2D object bounding-box labeling, it is very
difficult for humans to annotate 3D object poses, especially
when depth images of scenes are unavailable. This paper
investigates whether we can estimate the object poses effectively when only RGB images and 2D object annotations
are given. To this end, we present a two-step pose estimation framework to attain 6DoF object poses from 2D object
bounding-boxes. In the first step, the framework learns to
segment objects from real and synthetic data in a weaklysupervised fashion, and the segmentation masks will act as
a prior for pose estimation. In the second step, we design a dual-scale pose estimation network, namely DSCPoseNet, to predict object poses by employing a differential
renderer. To be specific, our DSC-PoseNet firstly predicts
object poses in the original image scale by comparing the
segmentation masks and the rendered visible object masks.
Then, we resize object regions to a fixed scale to estimate
poses once again. In this fashion, we eliminate large scale
variations and focus on rotation estimation, thus facilitating
pose estimation. Moreover, we exploit the initial pose estimation to generate pseudo ground-truth to train our DSCPoseNet in a self-supervised manner. The estimation results
in these two scales are ensembled as our final pose estimation. Extensive experiments on widely-used benchmarks
demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art
models trained on synthetic data by a large margin and even
is on par with several fully-supervised methods.

1. Introduction
The goal of object pose estimation is to estimate 6 degrees of freedom (DoF) of a given object, including 3D
orientations and 3D translations, with respect to a camera. Considering an object may undergo various lighting
changes and severe occlusions, estimating accurate poses
from a single RGB image is quite challenging.
Thanks to the recent advance of deep neural networks,
many deep learning based pose estimation algorithms
(e.g., [47, 49]) have been proposed recently and achieved
* This work was done when Zongxin Yang interned at Baidu Research.
Yi Yang is the corresponding author.

promising performance. However, due to the notorious
data-hunger nature of deep networks, state-of-the-art methods usually require a large number of real images with 3D
pose annotations for training. Unlike 2D image labeling
tasks, annotating 3D object poses is difficult, especially
when only RGB images are provided to labelers. However,
without sufficient accurately annotated 3D poses of RGB
images, pose estimation methods may suffer severe performance degradation [41].
Different from real images of which poses are very difficult to obtain, pose labels in synthetic data are easily accessible. However, due to the domain gap between synthetic and real data, such as illumination variations and
smoothed 3D reconstructed models, state-of-the-art fullysupervised pose estimation approaches would suffer drastic
performance degradation when they are trained on synthesized images [41]. Therefore, we attempt to use minimal
annotation efforts, i.e., 2D bounding boxes, to reduce the
domain gap between real and synthetic images for pose estimation. We employ bounding-boxes to ensure objects of
interest are correctly identified in images rather than highly
relying on synthesized data’s photorealism.
In this paper, we present a two-step object pose estimation framework to predict object poses by only leveraging
easily obtained 2D annotations. In the first step, we employ a weakly supervised segmentation method to distinguish object pixels from background ones. Specifically, we
firstly initialize a segmentation network by training it on
synthetic images. Motivated by [4, 48], we use the segmentation network to predict pseudo masks for the unlabeled real data and re-train the network on both synthetic
and pseudo-labeled data. Since some pixels in the background might be recognized as foreground ones, we fully
exploit our 2D bounding-boxes to remove outliers and thus
facilitate learning segmentation. The segmentation results,
in return, provide a strong prior for pose estimation.
In the second step, we present a dual-scale pose estimation network, dubbed DSC-PoseNet. Our DSC-PoseNet is
firstly initialized by training on synthetic images. Then,
we employ DSC-PoseNet to estimate object poses in the
original image scale. DSC-PoseNet regresses an offset of
each pixel to an object keypoint and employs an attention
map to obtain the keypoint locations. We adopt differen-

3907

