Auto-Exposure Fusion for Single-Image Shadow Removal
Lan Fu1 ,* Changqing Zhou2∗ , Qing Guo2†, Felix Juefei-Xu3 , Hongkai Yu4 ,
Wei Feng5 , Yang Liu2 , Song Wang1
1

3

University of South Carolina, USA, 2 Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
Alibaba Group, USA, 4 Cleveland State University, USA, 5 Tianjin University, China

Abstract
Shadow removal is still a challenging task due to its inherent background-dependent1 and spatial-variant properties,
leading to unknown and diverse shadow patterns. Even
powerful deep neural networks could hardly recover traceless shadow-removed background. This paper proposes a
new solution for this task by formulating it as an exposure
fusion problem to address the challenges. Intuitively, we
first estimate multiple over-exposure images w.r.t. the input
image to let the shadow regions in these images have the
same color with shadow-free areas in the input image. Then,
we fuse the original input with the over-exposure images
to generate the final shadow-free counterpart. Nevertheless, the spatial-variant property of the shadow requires
the fusion to be sufficiently ‘smart’, that is, it should automatically select proper over-exposure pixels from different
images to make the final output natural. To address this challenge, we propose the shadow-aware FusionNet that takes
the shadow image as input to generate fusion weight maps
across all the over-exposure images. Moreover, we propose
the boundary-aware RefineNet to eliminate the remaining
shadow trace further. We conduct extensive experiments on
the ISTD, ISTD+, and SRD datasets to validate our method’s
effectiveness and show better performance in shadow regions and comparable performance in non-shadow regions
over the state-of-the-art methods. We release the code
in https://github.com/tsingqguo/exposurefusion-shadow-removal.

1. Introduction
Shadows are present in most natural images where the
light source is blocked. Spatial-variant color and illumination distortion presented in the shadow region can
* Lan Fu and Changqing Zhou are co-first authors and contribute equally.
† Corresponding author: Qing Guo (tsingqguo@ieee.org)
1 Background means the shadow-covered context in this paper.

Figure 1: A: Illustration of the proposed auto-exposure fusion for shadow
removal. B: Visualization results of our shadow removal results with the
state-of-the-art methods. a) and b) are the shadow removal results of SP+MNet [17] and DSC [14], respectively.

hinder the performance of other computer vision tasks
[3, 16, 24, 29, 36], such as object detection and tracking,
object recognition, semantic segmentation, etc.
Previous shadow removal works either model this task
based on physical shadow models for paired shadow and
shadow-free images [17] or model it as an image-to-image
translation problem based on the generative adversarial networks (GAN) for unpaired shadow and shadow-free images
[15]. However, the learned shadow removal transformations by GAN-based methods, e.g., MaskShadowGAN [15],
tend to generate artifacts and image blur. They also suffer
from data distribution requirements, where they expect the
unpaired shadow and shadow-free image sets to share sta-

10571

