Delving Deep into Many-to-many Attention for
Few-shot Video Object Segmentation

1

Haoxin Chen1 , Hanjie Wu1 , Nanxuan Zhao2 , Sucheng Ren1 , Shengfeng He1 *
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong

Test video

Abstract
This paper tackles the task of Few-Shot Video Object
Segmentation (FSVOS), i.e., segmenting objects in the query
videos with certain class specified in a few labeled support
images. The key is to model the relationship between the
query videos and the support images for propagating the
object information. This is a many-to-many problem and
often relies on full-rank attention, which is computationally
intensive. In this paper, we propose a novel Domain Agent
Network (DAN), breaking down the full-rank attention into
two smaller ones. We consider one single frame of the query
video as the domain agent, bridging between the support
images and the query video. Our DAN allows a linear space
and time complexity as opposed to the original quadratic
form with no loss of performance. In addition, we introduce
a learning strategy by combining meta-learning with online learning to further improve the segmentation accuracy.
We build a FSVOS benchmark on the Youtube-VIS dataset
and conduct experiments to demonstrate that our method
outperforms baselines on both computational cost and accuracy, achieving the state-of-the-art performance. Code is
available at https://github.com/scutpaul/DANet.

1. Introduction
With the number of online videos increasing rapidly,
Video Object Segmentation (VOS) attracts more and more
attention as an important step to various video applications,
such as video retrieval and editing [52]. Based on the user
interaction, existing VOS algorithms have two common settings: unsupervised VOS and semi-supervised VOS. As
shown in Fig. 1, unsupervised VOS [1, 17, 47, 13, 19, 23]
directly segments primary objects in the videos without any
human intervention. The objects often localize in salient
regions. In contrast, semi-supervised VOS [2, 39, 5, 27]
* Corresponding author (hesfe@scut.edu.cn).

First frame

Query video

(a) Unsupervised VOS

(b) Semi-supervised VOS

Support set

Query video

(c) Few-shot VOS

Figure 1: Problem settings for different VOS tasks. (a)
Unsupervised VOS segments salient objects without guidance. (b) Semi-supervised VOS segments specified objects
in a video given the segmentation mask for the first frame.
(c) Few-shot VOS segments objects across videos with the
same category as objects in the labeled support set.

gives the ground truth segmentation of the first frame and
propagates the labeled object information into subsequent
frames. However, it requires pixel-level annotation of the
first frame for each individual video, which limits the scalability for processing massive amount of videos. While interactive VOS [28, 11] further reduces the required human
efforts to a few strokes, the provided information may be too
coarse for cross-frame segmentation. To trade-off between

14040

