Learning Scene Structure Guidance via Cross-Task Knowledge Transfer for
Single Depth Super-Resolution
Baoli Sun1 , Xinchen Ye1,2 ,* Baopu Li3 , Haojie Li1,2 , Zhihui Wang1,2 , Rui Xu1,2
1

International School of Information Science & Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, China
2
Key Laboratory for Ubiquitous Network and Service Software of Liaoning Province, China
3
Baidu Research, USA

Abstract
Existing color-guided depth super-resolution (DSR) approaches require paired RGB-D data as training samples
where the RGB image is used as structural guidance to recover the degraded depth map due to their geometrical similarity. However, the paired data may be limited or expensive
to be collected in actual testing environment. Therefore, we
explore for the first time to learn the cross-modality knowledge at training stage, where both RGB and depth modalities are available, but test on the target dataset, where only
single depth modality exists. Our key idea is to distill the
knowledge of scene structural guidance from RGB modality
to the single DSR task without changing its network architecture. Specifically, we construct an auxiliary depth estimation (DE) task that takes an RGB image as input to estimate a depth map, and train both DSR task and DE task
collaboratively to boost the performance of DSR. Upon this,
a cross-task interaction module is proposed to realize bilateral cross-task knowledge transfer. First, we design a
cross-task distillation scheme that encourages DSR and DE
networks to learn from each other in a teacher-student roleexchanging fashion. Then, we advance a structure prediction (SP) task that provides extra structure regularization
to help both DSR and DE networks learn more informative
structure representations for depth recovery. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our scheme achieves superior
performance in comparison with other DSR methods.

1. Introduction
To better understand a scene image, depth information
is supplemented to the RGB images, providing the key clue
* Corresponding author: yexch@dlut.edu.cn. This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grant
61702078, 61772108, 61976038, 61772106.

about the scene and enabling wide applications in 3D reconstruction [9], autonomous navigation [20], monitoring [2],
and so on. However, acquiring depth information for indoor
and outdoor scenes needs expensive cost and great efforts,
especially for high-quality and high-resolution (HR) depth
maps. As such, one of the effective post processing techniques, Depth Super-Resolution (DSR), is greatly desired
to yield HR depth maps to alleviate this problem. Many efforts have been taken along the direction of DSR. Usually,
fine scene structures are easily lost or severely destroyed in
low-resolution (LR) depth map because of the limited spatial resolution. An RGB image and its associated depth map
are the photometric and geometrical representations of the
same scene, and have a strong structural similarity. Most existing DSR methods learn structural complementarity from
RGB images to recover the degraded depth maps.
Previous color-guided DSR methods take advantage of
RGB-D image pairs via a two-way fusion architecture, in
which an extra branch is required to extract structural guidance from RGB image. As illustrated in Figure 1 (a), RGB
image and LR depth map are often processed by separate
branches and filtered together through a joint branch to output the HR result [26, 31, 4, 21]. However, due to the simple
feature aggregation at a specific layer in the middle of the
network, high-frequency structure information from RGB
image is more likely to be lost in the process of feature extraction. Therefore, as shown in Figure 1 (b), some novel
methods [18, 12, 49] incorporate a new paradigm of feature
aggregation, i.e, multi-scale fusion, to allow the network to
learn rich hierarchical features at different levels. This in
turn makes the network to retain more spatial details for recovering both fine-scale and large-scale structures.
Although existing color-guided DSR methods have
demonstrated remarkable progress, several limitations still remain. First, these methods require paired RGB-D data
as training examples to jointly recover the degraded depth

7792

