Dynamic Metric Learning: Towards a Scalable Metric Space
to Accommodate Multiple Semantic Scales
Yifan Sun1,3 , Yuke Zhu1 , Yuhan Zhang2 , Pengkun Zheng1 , Xi Qiu1 , Chi Zhang1 , Yichen Wei1
1
Megvii Technology 2 Beihang University 3 Baidu Research
sunyf15@tsinghua.org.cn

{zhangchi,weiyichen}@megvii.com

Abstract
This paper introduces a new fundamental characteristic, i.e., the dynamic range, from real-world metric tools to
deep visual recognition. In metrology, the dynamic range
is a basic quality of a metric tool, indicating its flexibility to accommodate various scales. Larger dynamic range
offers higher flexibility. In visual recognition, the multiple scale problem also exist. Different visual concepts may
have different semantic scales. For example, “Animal” and
“Plants” have a large semantic scale while “Elk” has a
much smaller one. Under a small semantic scale, two different elks may look quite different to each other . However,
under a large semantic scale (e.g., animals and plants),
these two elks should be measured as being similar.
Introducing the dynamic range to deep metric learning,
we get a novel computer vision task, i.e., the Dynamic Metric Learning. It aims to learn a scalable metric space
to accommodate visual concepts across multiple semantic
scales. Based on three types of images, i.e., vehicle, animal and online products, we construct three datasets for
Dynamic Metric Learning. We benchmark these datasets
with popular deep metric learning methods and find Dynamic Metric Learning to be very challenging. The major
difficulty lies in a conflict between different scales: the discriminative ability under a small scale usually compromises
the discriminative ability under a large one, and vice versa.
As a minor contribution, we propose Cross-Scale Learning
(CSL) to alleviate such conflict. We show that CSL consistently improves the baseline on all the three datasets.
The datasets and the code will be publicly available at
https://github.com/SupetZYK/DynamicMetricLearning.

1. Introduction
This papers consider the deep metric learning for visual
recognition and supplements it with an important concept
in metrology, i.e., the dynamic range. In metrology, the
dynamic range is defined as the ratio between the largest

similar elks?
dissimilar

similar animals?
similar

Figure 1. Visual concepts have various semantic scales, which impact on the similarity measuring result. Under the small scale of
“Elk”, these two elks look quite different. Under the large scale of
“Animal”, they should be measured as being similar.

and the smallest scale that a metric tool can provide. It is
a basic quality of a metric, indicating the flexibility to accommodate various scales. We argue that such flexibility
is also important for deep metric learning, because different visual concepts indeed correspond to different semantic scales. However, after a rethink on current deep metric
learning tasks, we find that they all give NO consideration
to the dynamic range. Therefore, we introduce the dynamic
range to endow a single deep metric with flexibility among
multiple semantic granularities. Potentially, it may reveal a
new perspective in understanding the generalization ability
of deep visual recognition.
We explain the importance of “dynamic range” with a
comparison between the deep metric learning and the realworld metric tools. In real world, a metric tool typically has
a dynamic range. For example, a ruler has a lot of markings to indicate different lengths ranged from “1 mm” to
“10 cm” or even to several meters. Rulers with only one
single scale in “1 mm” or “10 cm” would have no use in
daily life. Arguably, the dynamic range is essential to a metric tool, enabling it to measure objects of different sizes. In
visual recognition, the visual concepts also have various semantic scales. For example, “Animals” and “Plants” have a
large semantic scale, while “Elk” has a much smaller one.
When we try to measure the similarity between two images,
which is the aim of metric learning, the underlying semantic scales impact on the result. In Fig. 1, the two elks look
quite different to each other. However, under the large scale

5393

