BasicVSR: The Search for Essential Components in
Video Super-Resolution and Beyond
Kelvin C.K. Chan1 Xintao Wang2 Ke Yu3 Chao Dong4,5 Chen Change Loy1∗
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Applied Research Center, Tencent PCG
3
CUHK – SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
4
Shenzhen Key Lab of Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, SIAT-SenseTime Joint Lab,
Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
5
SIAT Branch, Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society
1

{chan0899, ccloy}@ntu.edu.sg
yk017@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

xintao.wang@outlook.com
chao.dong@siat.ac.cn

Abstract
Video super-resolution (VSR) approaches tend to have
more components than the image counterparts as they need
to exploit the additional temporal dimension. Complex designs are not uncommon. In this study, we wish to untangle
the knots and reconsider some most essential components
for VSR guided by four basic functionalities, i.e., Propagation, Alignment, Aggregation, and Upsampling. By reusing
some existing components added with minimal redesigns,
we show a succinct pipeline, BasicVSR, that achieves appealing improvements in terms of speed and restoration
quality in comparison to many state-of-the-art algorithms.
We conduct systematic analysis to explain how such gain
can be obtained and discuss the pitfalls. We further show
the extensibility of BasicVSR by presenting an informationrefill mechanism and a coupled propagation scheme to facilitate information aggregation. The BasicVSR and its extension, IconVSR, can serve as strong baselines for future
VSR approaches.

1. Introduction
Compared to single-image super-resolution, which focuses on the intrinsic properties of a single image for the
upscaling task, video super-resolution (VSR) poses an extra challenge as it involves aggregating information from
multiple highly-related but misaligned frames in video sequences.
Various approaches have been proposed to address the
challenge. Some designs can be highly complex. For instance, in the representative method EDVR [32], a multiscale deformable alignment module and multiple attention
layers are adopted for aligning and integrating the features
∗ Corresponding author

BasicVSR
(ours)

IconVSR
(ours)

EDVR
(CVPRW19)

RSDN
(ECCV20)

RLSP
(ICCVW19)

FRVSR
(CVPR18)

RBPN
(CVPR19)
PFNL
(ICCV19)

DUF
(CVPR18)
# Params

5M 10M 15M

20M

Figure 1. Speed and performance comparison. Without bells
and whistles, BasicVSR outperforms state-of-the-art methods with
high efficiency. Built upon BasicVSR, IconVSR further improves the performance. Comparisons are performed on UDM10
dataset [34].

from different frames. In RBPN [9], multiple projection
modules are used to sequentially aggregate features from
multiple frames. Such designs are effective but inevitably
increase the runtime and model complexity (see Fig. 1).
In addition, unlike SISR, the potentially complex and dissimilar designs of VSR methods pose difficulties in implementing and extending existing approaches, hampering reproducibility and fair comparisons.
There is a need to step back and reconsider the diverse designs of VSR models, with the aim to search for
a more generic, efficient, and easy-to-implement baseline
for VSR. We start our search by decomposing popular VSR
approaches into submodules based on functionalities. As
summarized in Table 1, most existing methods entail four
inter-related components, namely, propagation, alignment,
aggregation, and upsampling. Such a decomposition allows

4947

