Light Field Super-Resolution with Zero-Shot Learning
Zhen Cheng

Zhiwei Xiong* Chang Chen Dong Liu Zheng-Jun Zha
University of Science and Technology of China

Abstract
Deep learning provides a new avenue for light field
super-resolution (SR). However, the domain gap caused by
drastically different light field acquisition conditions poses
a main obstacle in practice. To fill this gap, we propose
a zero-shot learning framework for light field SR, which
learns a mapping to super-resolve the reference view with
examples extracted solely from the input low-resolution
light field itself. Given highly limited training data under
the zero-shot setting, however, we observe that it is difficult
to train an end-to-end network successfully. Instead, we
divide this challenging task into three sub-tasks, i.e., preupsampling, view alignment, and multi-view aggregation,
and then conquer them separately with simple yet efficient
CNNs. Moreover, the proposed framework can be readily extended to finetune the pre-trained model on a source
dataset to better adapt to the target input, which further
boosts the performance of light field SR in the wild. Experimental results validate that our method not only outperforms classic non-learning-based methods, but also generalizes better to unseen light fields than state-of-the-art deeplearning-based methods when the domain gap is large.

1. Introduction
The 4D light field that records both angular and spatial
information of light has been playing an increasing role in
computer vision [33,36,43]. The commercialized light field
cameras generally adopt micro-lens-array in front of the
sensor, which poses an essential trade-off between the angular and spatial resolutions [16, 24]. The limited spatial resolution restricts the capability of light field in practical applications. Therefore, light field super-resolution (SR) has
been an important and popular topic in the research community and attracts a lot of attention since the emergence
of light field cameras [1, 2]. Recently, due to the prosperity of deep learning techniques, convolutional neural network (CNN) based methods have demonstrated promising
performance for light field SR [10, 13, 23, 38, 39, 44, 45, 46,
* Correspondence should be addressed to zwxiong@ustc.edu.cn

49,52], and the state-of-the-art methods exceed classic nonlearning-based methods [4, 18, 30] with notable gains. Such
performance boost is obtained by training well-engineered
CNNs on a large external dataset to explore the 4D light
field structures. However, these deep-learning-based methods inevitably face the domain shift problem [6], which hinders their capability of generalizing to unseen light fields
with a large domain gap from the training set.
Domain shift, which means the performance drop when
a deep neural network is trained on one dataset (source) but
tested on another dataset (target), is much more severe in
light field SR than that in single image SR. The underlying
reason is that, light field SR exploits not only the 2D spatial
correlation within each view, but also the 2D angular correspondence among different views (also called across-view
redundancy). Such a 4D spatio-angular structure varies a lot
between light fields captured by different acquisition systems and configurations. Take cameras using micro-lensarray for example, the baselines between the micro lens can
be quite different in different types of cameras, resulting in
distinct angular correspondences. Therefore, the network
trained with a certain light field dataset could easily overfit
to the spatio-angular structure within the given dataset and
thus may not perform well on light fields in the wild.
To address this problem, we propose a zero-shot learning framework for light field SR, which learns a mapping to
super-resolve the reference view with examples extracted
solely from the input low-resolution (LR) light field itself. This work is inspired by the recently proposed zeroshot single image SR (ZSSR) method [34], which exploits
across-scale recurrence within a single image and trains an
SR network with paired examples extracted from the input LR image and its downscaled version. In this way,
the input-specific model can generalize well on real images
with unknown acquisition process, where abundant data for
external training are not available. However, given highly
limited training data under the zero-shot setting, we observe that it is difficult to train end-to-end SR networks
successfully. Through a comparative study, we then find
that a divide-and-conquer strategy, which explicitly divides
the SR task into several sub-tasks and conquers them separately, can facilitate the learning of the SR mapping.

10010

