OBoW: Online Bag-of-Visual-Words Generation for Self-Supervised Learning
Spyros Gidaris1 , Andrei Bursuc1 , Gilles Puy1 , Nikos Komodakis2 , Matthieu Cord1,3 , Patrick Pérez1
1
2
3
valeo.ai
University of Crete
Sorbonne Université

Abstract
Learning image representations without human supervision is an important and active research field. Several
recent approaches have successfully leveraged the idea of
making such a representation invariant under different types
of perturbations, especially via contrastive-based instance
discrimination training. Although effective visual representations should indeed exhibit such invariances, there are
other important characteristics, such as encoding contextual
reasoning skills, for which alternative reconstruction-based
approaches might be better suited.
With this in mind, we propose a teacher-student scheme
to learn representations by training a convolutional net to
reconstruct a bag-of-visual-words (BoW) representation of
an image, given as input a perturbed version of that same
image. Our strategy performs an online training of both the
teacher network (whose role is to generate the BoW targets)
and the student network (whose role is to learn representations), along with an online update of the visual-words
vocabulary (used for the BoW targets). This idea effectively
enables fully online BoW-guided unsupervised learning. Extensive experiments demonstrate the interest of our BoWbased strategy, which surpasses previous state-of-the-art
methods (including contrastive-based ones) in several applications. For instance, in downstream tasks such Pascal
object detection, Pascal classification and Places205 classification, our method improves over all prior unsupervised
approaches, thus establishing new state-of-the-art results
that are also significantly better even than those of supervised pre-training. We provide the implementation code at
https://github.com/valeoai/obow.

1. Introduction
Learning unsupervised image representations based on
convolutional neural nets (convnets) has attracted a significant amount of attention recently. Many different types of
convnet-based methods have been proposed in this regard,
including methods that rely on using annotation-free pretext tasks [15, 27, 43, 48, 52, 76], generative methods that
model the image data distribution [16, 17, 20], as well as

clustering-based approaches [4, 6, 7].
Several recent methods opt to learn representations via
instance-discrimination training [9, 19, 33, 71], typically
implemented in a contrastive learning framework [12, 32].
The primary focus here is to learn low-dimensional image /
instance embeddings that are invariant to intra-image variations while being discriminative among different images. Although these methods manage to achieve impressive results,
they focus less on other important aspects in representation
learning, such as contextual reasoning, for which alternative
reconstruction-based approaches [14, 52, 76, 77] might be
better suited. For instance, the task of predicting from an
image region the contents of the entire image requires to recognize the visual concepts depicted in the provided region
and then to infer from them the structure of the entire scene.
So, training for such a task has the potential of squeezing out
more information from the training images and of learning
richer and more powerful representations.
However, reconstructing image pixels is an ambiguous
and hard-to-optimize task that forces the convnet to spend a
lot of capacity on modeling low-level pixel details. It is all
the more unnecessary when the final goal deals with highlevel image understanding, such as image classification. To
leverage the advantages of the reconstruction principle without focusing on unimportant pixel details, one can focus on
reconstruction over high-level visual concepts, referred to as
visual words. For instance, BoWNet [25] derived a teacherstudent learning scheme following this principle. In this
teacher-student setting, given an image, the teacher extracts
feature maps that are then quantized in a spatially-dense way
over a vocabulary of visual words. Then, the resulting visual words-based image description is exploited for training
the student on the self-supervised task of reconstructing the
distribution of the visual words of an image, i.e., its bag-ofwords (BoW) representation [72], given as input a perturbed
version of that same image. By solving this reconstruction
task the student is forced to learn perturbation-invariant and
context-aware representations while “ignoring” pixel details.
Despite its advantages, the BoWNet approach exhibits
some important limitations that do not allow it to fully exploit
the potential of the BoW-based reconstruction task. One of
them is that it relies on the availability of an already pre-

6830

