The Heterogeneity Hypothesis: Finding Layer-Wise Differentiated Network
Architectures
Yawei Li1 , Wen Li2 , Martin Danelljan1 , Kai Zhang1 , Shuhang Gu3 , Luc Van Gool1,4 , Radu Timofte1
1
Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zürich, 2 UESTC, 3 The University of Sydney, 4 KU Leuven
{yawei.li, martin.danelljan, kai.zhang, vangool, radu.timofte}@vision.ee.ethz.ch
{liwenbnu,shuhanggu}@gmail.com

Abstract
In this paper, we tackle the problem of convolutional neural network design. Instead of focusing on the design of
the overall architecture, we investigate a design space that
is usually overlooked, i.e. adjusting the channel configurations of predefined networks. We find that this adjustment
can be achieved by shrinking widened baseline networks
and leads to superior performance. Based on that, we articulate the “heterogeneity hypothesis”: with the same training protocol, there exists a layer-wise differentiated network architecture (LW-DNA) that can outperform the original network with regular channel configurations but with a
lower level of model complexity.
The LW-DNA models are identified without extra computational cost or training time compared with the original network. This constraint leads to controlled experiments which direct the focus to the importance of layerwise specific channel configurations. LW-DNA models
come with advantages related to overfitting, i.e. the relative relationship between model complexity and dataset
size. Experiments are conducted on various networks
and datasets for image classification, visual tracking
and image restoration. The resultant LW-DNA models
consistently outperform the baseline models. Code is
available at https://github.com/ofsoundof/
Heterogeneity_Hypothesis.git.

1. Introduction
Since the advent of the deep learning era, convolutional neural network (CNN) [21] design has replaced the
role of feature design in various computer vision tasks.
Recently, neural network design has also evolved from
manual design [44, 14, 18] to neural architecture search
(NAS) [31, 45] and semi-automation [49, 16, 38]. Stateof-the-art network designs focus on discovering the overall
network architecture with regularly repeated convolutional

layers. This has been the golden standard of current CNN
designs. For example, Ma et al. mentioned that a network
should have equal channel width [33]. But their analysis
is limited to minimizing the memory access cost given the
FLOPs for a single pointwise convolution.
The motivation of this paper kind of contradicts the previous design heuristics. It investigates a design space that
is usually overlooked and thus not fully explored, namely
adjusting the layer-wise channel configurations. In this paper, the channel configuration of a network is defined as the
vector that summarizes the output channels of the convolutional layers. We try to answer three questions: 1) whether
there exists a layer-wise differentiated network architecture
(LW-DNA) that can outperform the original one; 2) if so,
how to identify it efficiently; and 3) why it can beat the regular configuration.
Question 1: The existence of LW-DNA. To answer the
first question, we formally articulate the following hypothesis. The Heterogeneity Hypothesis: For a CNN, when
trained with exactly the same training protocol (e.g. number of epochs, batch size, learning rate schedule), there
exists a layer-wise differentiated network architecture (LWDNA) that can outperform the original network with regular
layer-wise channel configurations but with a lower model
complexity in term of FLOPs and parameters.
To be specific, we aim at adjusting the numbers of
channels of the convolutional layers in predefined CNNs.
The other layer configurations such as kernel size and
stride are not changed. Formally, consider an L-layer
CNN f (X; Θ, c), where c = (c1 , c2 , · · · , cL ) is the channel configuration of all of the convolutional layers, Θ denotes the parameters in the network, and X is the input of the network. The heterogeneity hypothesis implies that there should exist a new channel configuration c′ = (c′1 , c′2 , · · · , c′L ) such that the new architecture
f ′ (X; Θ′ , c′ ) performs no worse than the original one. After the adjustment, the channel configurations c′l could be
either larger or smaller than the original cl . We try to answer this question by empirical experiments.

2144

