Intrinsic Image Harmonization
Zonghui Guo1 Haiyong Zheng1, * Yufeng Jiang1 Zhaorui Gu1 Bing Zheng1,2
1
Underwater Vision Lab (http://ouc.ai), Ocean University of China
2
Sanya Oceanographic Institution, Ocean University of China
{guozonghui,jiangyufeng7526}@stu.ouc.edu.cn, {zhenghaiyong,guzhaorui,bingzh}@ouc.edu.cn

Abstract
Compositing an image usually inevitably suffers from
inharmony problem that is mainly caused by incompatibility of foreground and background from two different
images with distinct surfaces and lights, corresponding
to material-dependent and light-dependent characteristics,
namely, reflectance and illumination intrinsic images, respectively. Therefore, we seek to solve image harmonization via separable harmonization of reflectance and illumination, i.e., intrinsic image harmonization. Our method
is based on an autoencoder that disentangles composite
image into reflectance and illumination for further separate harmonization. Specifically, we harmonize reflectance
through material-consistency penalty, while harmonize illumination by learning and transferring light from background to foreground, moreover, we model patch relations
between foreground and background of composite images
in an inharmony-free learning way, to adaptively guide
our intrinsic image harmonization. Both extensive experiments and ablation studies demonstrate the power of our
method as well as the efficacy of each component. We
also contribute a new challenging dataset for benchmarking illumination harmonization. Code and dataset are at
https://github.com/zhenglab/IntrinsicHarmony.

1. Introduction
The visual appearance of two images will be distinct
due to different light and scene while imaging [54, 60].
Thus, compositing an image, i.e., extracting a foreground
region in one image and pasting it with the background of
another image, will inevitably suffer from the inharmony
problem caused by distinct appearance between the two images (see Figure 1 for example), which significantly de* Corresponding author (zhenghaiyong@ouc.edu.cn).

This work was supported in part by the Finance Science and Technology Project of Hainan Province under Grant ZDKJ202017, and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61771440 and
Grant 41776113.

Real

Composite

DoveNet

Ours

Figure 1. Thanks to separate intrinsic image harmonization, our
method can adjust the illumination of foreground to make it compatible with background while keep reflectance constant. We show
examples from iHarmony4 [11] (top) and our HVIDIT (bottom).

grades the quality of composite result [49, 12, 11]. Besides, many computer vision tasks, especially image/video
synthesis, such as image editing [38, 2, 44], image inpainting [34, 55, 41], and image stitching [9, 56, 57], will also encounter this inharmony problem because of the compositing
process. However, human visual system is very sensitive to
the inharmony in appearance, e.g., human eyes can identify very subtle distinctions in color and contrast [30, 54].
Therefore, image harmonization, which aims to make the
appearance of foreground and background in the composite
image compatible [47, 49, 11, 12], is full of challenges.
Essentially, the appearance of a natural image depends
on various factors in the scene, such as illumination, material, and shape [58, 3]. Moreover, human visual system
is remarkable in its ability to estimate characteristics intrinsic to the scene, such as color, size, shape, or illumination, where each intrinsic characteristic corresponds to
one intrinsic image [4]. Thus, humans are able to distinguish composite images, mainly owing to the apparent ability to estimate intrinsic characteristics in unfamiliar scenes.
Besides, the light intensity values represented in an image
actually encode all the characteristics of the corresponding
scene points [4]. Hence, harmonizing each intrinsic image
separately, rather than adjusting intensity values for harmonization, is essential and crucial for image harmonization.
The inharmony in composite images is caused by the incompatibility of foreground and background from two dif-

16367

