Equalization Loss v2:
A New Gradient Balance Approach for Long-tailed Object Detection
Jingru Tan1 Xin Lu2 Gang Zhang3
Changqing Yin1 Quanquan Li2
1
Tongji University 2 SenseTime Research 3 Tsinghua University
{tjr120,yinchangqing}@tongji.edu.cn, {luxin,liquanquan}@sensetime.com
zhang-g19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Recently proposed decoupled training methods emerge
as a dominant paradigm for long-tailed object detection.
But they require an extra fine-tuning stage, and the disjointed optimization of representation and classifier might
lead to suboptimal results. However, end-to-end training
methods, like equalization loss (EQL), still perform worse
than decoupled training methods. In this paper, we reveal the main issue in long-tailed object detection is the
imbalanced gradients between positives and negatives, and
find that EQL does not solve it well. To address the problem of imbalanced gradients, we introduce a new version
of equalization loss, called equalization loss v2 (EQL v2),
a novel gradient guided reweighing mechanism that rebalances the training process for each category independently and equally. Extensive experiments are performed
on the challenging LVIS benchmark. EQL v2 outperforms
origin EQL by about 4 points overall AP with 14 ∼ 18
points improvements on the rare categories. More importantly, it also surpasses decoupled training methods. Without further tuning for the Open Images dataset, EQL v2
improves EQL by 7.3 points AP, showing strong generalization ability. Codes have been released at https:
//github.com/tztztztztz/eqlv2

1. Introduction
Object detection is a fundamental computer vision task
that aims to recognize and locate objects of a set of predefined categories. Modern object detectors [31, 30, 27, 24,
25, 1] have shown promising results on some conventional
benchmarks such as COCO [26] and PASCAL VOC [9].
Collected images in these datasets have been carefully selected and the quantities of each category are relatively balanced. However, in natural images, quantities of categories
subject to a long-tailed Zipfian distribution. It means that, in

Figure 1: Visualization of accumulative gradients ratio of
different trained models. Best view in color. The x-axis
is the sorted category index of 1203 categories of LVIS
dataset. The y-axis is the accumulative gradient ratio of
positives to negatives. Here gradient is the gradient of the
output logits with respect to classification loss. APr and
APc are the AP for rare and common categories.

a realistic scenario, we are confronted with a more complex
situation that the obtained objects show an extreme imbalance in different categories.
The difficulty of training detectors on a long-tailed
dataset mainly comes from two aspects. First, deep learning
methods are hungry for data, but annotations of tail classes
(classes with few samples) might be insufficient for training. Second, the model tends to bias towards head classes
(classes with many samples) since the head class objects are
the overwhelming majority in the entire datasets.
Current state-of-the-art approaches are based on decoupled training schema [18, 23, 39]. In general, decoupled
training involves a two-stage pipeline that learns representations under the imbalance dataset at the first stage, then

1685

