Dense Relation Distillation with Context-aware Aggregation for
Few-Shot Object Detection
Hanzhe Hu1 , Shuai Bai2 , Aoxue Li1 , Jinshi Cui1 *, Liwei Wang1 *
1
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
2
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
{huhz, lax}@pku.edu.cn baishuai@bupt.edu.cn {cjs, wanglw}@cis.pku.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
With the success of deep convolutional neural works,
object detection has made great progress these years [20,
23, 8]. The success of deep CNNs, however, heavily relies on large-scale datasets such as ImageNet [2] that enable the training of deep models. When the labeled data
becomes scarce, CNNs can severely overfit and fail to generalize. While in contrast, human beings have exhibited
* Corresponding authors.

Prediction

Ground Truth

“car”

“cow”

“cat”

Query Image

“bus”

Conventional deep learning based methods for object detection require a large amount of bounding box annotations
for training, which is expensive to obtain such high quality annotated data. Few-shot object detection, which learns
to adapt to novel classes with only a few annotated examples, is very challenging since the fine-grained feature of
novel object can be easily overlooked with only a few data
available. In this work, aiming to fully exploit features of
annotated novel object and capture fine-grained features of
query object, we propose Dense Relation Distillation with
Context-aware Aggregation (DCNet) to tackle the few-shot
detection problem. Built on the meta-learning based framework, Dense Relation Distillation module targets at fully exploiting support features, where support features and query
feature are densely matched, covering all spatial locations
in a feed-forward fashion. The abundant usage of the guidance information endows model the capability to handle
common challenges such as appearance changes and occlusions. Moreover, to better capture scale-aware features,
Context-aware Aggregation module adaptively harnesses
features from different scales for a more comprehensive feature representation. Extensive experiments illustrate that
our proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art results on
PASCAL VOC and MS COCO datasets. Code will be made
available at https://github.com/hzhupku/DCNet.

Support Images

Figure 1. Two challenges for few-shot object detection. a) Appearance changes between support and query images are common, which results in a misleading manner. b) Occlusion problem brings about incomplete feature representation, causing false
classification and missing detection.

strong performance in learning a new concept with only a
few examples available. Since some object categories naturally have scarce examples or bounding box annotations are
laborsome to obtain such as medical data. These problems
have triggered increasing attentions to deal with learning
models with limited examples. Few-shot learning aims to
train models to generalize well with a few examples provided. However, most existing few-shot learning works focus on image classification [29, 26, 27] problem and only
a few focus on few-shot object detection problem. Since
object detection not only requires class prediction, but also
demands localization of the object, making it much more
difficult than few-shot classification task.
Prior studies in few-shot object detection mainly consist
of two groups. Most of them [13, 35, 34] adopt a metalearning [5] based framework to perform feature reweighting for a class-specific prediction. While Wang et al.
[31] adopt a two-stage fine-tuning approach with only finetuning the last layer of detectors and achieve state-of-the-art

10185

