VIGOR: Cross-View Image Geo-localization beyond One-to-one Retrieval
Sijie Zhu, Taojiannan Yang, Chen Chen
University of North Carolina at Charlotte
{szhu3, tyang30, chen.chen}@uncc.edu

Abstract
Cross-view image geo-localization aims to determine the
locations of street-view query images by matching with
GPS-tagged reference images from aerial view. Recent
works have achieved surprisingly high retrieval accuracy
on city-scale datasets. However, these results rely on the
assumption that there exists a reference image exactly centered at the location of any query image, which is not applicable for practical scenarios. In this paper, we redefine
this problem with a more realistic assumption that the query
image can be arbitrary in the area of interest and the reference images are captured before the queries emerge. This
assumption breaks the one-to-one retrieval setting of existing datasets as the queries and reference images are not
perfectly aligned pairs, and there may be multiple reference images covering one query location. To bridge the
gap between this realistic setting and existing datasets, we
propose a new large-scale benchmark –VIGOR– for crossView Image Geo-localization beyond One-to-one Retrieval.
We benchmark existing state-of-the-art methods and propose a novel end-to-end framework to localize the query
in a coarse-to-fine manner. Apart from the image-level retrieval accuracy, we also evaluate the localization accuracy
in terms of the actual distance (meters) using the raw GPS
data. Extensive experiments are conducted under different application scenarios to validate the effectiveness of the
proposed method. The results indicate that cross-view geolocalization in this realistic setting is still challenging, fostering new research in this direction. Our dataset and code
will be released at https://github.com/JeffZilence/VIGOR.

1. Introduction
The objective of image-based geo-localization is to determine the location of a query image by finding the most
similar image in a GPS-tagged reference database. Such
technologies have proven useful for accurate localization
with noisy GPS signals [4, 26] and navigation in crowded
cities [12, 9]. Recently, there has been a surge of interest

in cross-view geo-localization [24, 22, 7, 17, 29, 21], which
uses GPS-tagged aerial-view images as reference for streetview queries. However, the performance may suffer from a
large appearance gap between query and reference images.
Recent works [7, 17, 29] have shown that the performance of cross-view image matching can be significantly
improved by feature aggregation and sample mining strategies. When the orientation of street-view (or ground-view)
image is available (provided by phone-based compass),
state-of-the-art methods can achieve a top-1 retrieval accuracy over 80% [17], which shows the possibility of accurate geo-localization in real-world settings. However, existing datasets [24, 27, 11] simply assume that each query
ground-view image has one corresponding reference aerialview image whose center is exactly aligned at the location
of the query image. We argue this is not practical for realworld applications, because the query image can occur at
arbitrary locations in the area of interest and the reference
images should be captured before the queries emerge. In
this case, perfectly aligned one-to-one correspondence is
not guaranteed.
In light of the novelty of this problem, we propose
a new benchmark (VIGOR) to evaluate cross-view geolocalization in a more realistic setting. Briefly, given an area
of interest (AOI), the reference aerial images are densely
sampled to achieve a seamless coverage of the AOI and the
street-view queries are captured at arbitrary locations. In
total, 90, 618 aerial images and 238, 696 street panoramas
are collected from 4 major cities in the United States (see
details in Sec. 3). The new dataset gives rise to two fundamental differences between this work and prior research.
Beyond One-to-one: Previous research mainly focuses
on the one-to-one correspondence because existing datasets
consider perfectly aligned image pairs as default. However,
VIGOR enables us to explore the effect of reference samples that are not centered at the locations of queries but still
cover the query area. As a result, there could be multiple
reference images partially covering the same query location, breaking the one-to-one correspondence. In our geolocalization method, we design a novel hybrid loss to take
advantage of multiple reference images during training.

3640

