Exemplar-Based Open-Set Panoptic Segmentation Network
Jaedong Hwang1∗

1

Seoung Wug Oh2
Joon-Young Lee2
1
ECE and ASRI, Seoul National University
2
Adobe Research

Bohyung Han1

{jd730, bhhan}@snu.ac.kr, 2 {seoh, jolee}@adobe.com

Abstract
We extend panoptic segmentation to the open-world and
introduce an open-set panoptic segmentation (OPS) task.
This task requires performing panoptic segmentation for
not only known classes but also unknown ones that have
not been acknowledged during training. We investigate
the practical challenges of the task and construct a benchmark on top of an existing dataset, COCO. In addition,
we propose a novel exemplar-based open-set panoptic segmentation network (EOPSN) inspired by exemplar theory.
Our approach identifies a new class based on exemplars,
which are identified by clustering and employed as pseudoground-truths. The size of each class increases by mining
new exemplars based on the similarities to the existing ones
associated with the class. We evaluate EOPSN on the proposed benchmark and demonstrate the effectiveness of our
proposals. The primary goal of our work is to draw the
attention of the community to the recognition in the openworld scenarios. The implementation of our algorithm is
available on the project webpage1 .

Input image

Ground-truth for closed-set

Open-set prediction

Ground-truth for open-set

Figure 1: For a given image, we show the ground-truth for
closed-set and open-set panoptic segmentation, where unlabeled regions are in black. In open-set panoptic segmentation, a model needs to find the unknown class instances,
which are not annotated in training data. We assume that
“car” is an unknown class in the open-set visualization.

1. Introduction
For deeper visual understanding, researchers have constructed large-scale image-based benchmarks [6, 18, 24, 33,
43] and have studied various tasks such as image classification [14, 47], object detection [10, 23, 41, 42], semantic
segmentation [4, 27, 34], instance segmentation [3, 13], and
many others. Recently, researchers are getting more interested in finding the location and shape of instances and estimating semantic labels from natural scenes since they are
critical for high-level understanding of visual content.
Since Kirillov et al. [17] recently formulated a panoptic
segmentation task, which is a combination of instance segmentation and semantic segmentation, a number of studies [5, 9, 16, 20, 22, 25, 38, 51, 48] have been proposed
∗ This work was done during an internship at Adobe Research.
1 https://cv.snu.ac.kr/research/EOPSN

and achieved substantial performance improvements. However, one drawback of the panoptic segmentation task is
the excessive cost of dataset construction. The annotation
of pixel-level panoptic segmentation labels requires significant human efforts, and is even harder than semantic segmentation. It is challenging to create a large-scale dataset
containing such comprehensive annotations. There are two
potential ways to tackle this problem. The first approach
is to develop a weakly supervised panoptic segmentation
model [21] that is free from pixel-level annotations. The
other is to build a generalized model that identifies segments
of not only trained classes but also unseen ones. The second
approach is closely related to open-set recognition [44] that
admits the existence of unknown class in testing.
In this paper, we extend panoptic segmentation to the
open-world. Unlike the closed-set counterpart, the new

1175

