Read Like Humans: Autonomous, Bidirectional and Iterative Language
Modeling for Scene Text Recognition
Shancheng Fang

Hongtao Xie* Yuxin Wang Zhendong Mao Yongdong Zhang
University of Science and Technology of China

{fangsc, htxie, zdmao, zhyd73}@ustc.edu.cn, wangyx58@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Linguistic knowledge is of great benefit to scene text
recognition. However, how to effectively model linguistic
rules in end-to-end deep networks remains a research challenge. In this paper, we argue that the limited capacity
of language models comes from: 1) implicitly language
modeling; 2) unidirectional feature representation; and 3)
language model with noise input. Correspondingly, we propose an autonomous, bidirectional and iterative ABINet for
scene text recognition. Firstly, the autonomous suggests to
block gradient flow between vision and language models
to enforce explicitly language modeling. Secondly, a novel
bidirectional cloze network (BCN) as the language model
is proposed based on bidirectional feature representation.
Thirdly, we propose an execution manner of iterative correction for language model which can effectively alleviate the
impact of noise input. Additionally, based on the ensemble
of iterative predictions, we propose a self-training method
which can learn from unlabeled images effectively. Extensive
experiments indicate that ABINet has superiority on lowquality images and achieves state-of-the-art results on several mainstream benchmarks. Besides, the ABINet trained
with ensemble self-training shows promising improvement
in realizing human-level recognition. Code is available at
https://github.com/FangShancheng/ABINet.

1. Introduction
Possessing the capability of reading text from scene images is indispensable to artificial intelligence [24, 41, 45].
To this end, early attempts regard characters as meaningless
symbols and recognize the symbols by classification models [42, 15, 46]. However, when confronted with challenging
environments such as occlusion, blur, noise, etc., it becomes
faint due to out of visual discrimination. Fortunately, as
text carries rich linguistic information, characters can be
reasoned according to the context. Therefore, a bunch of
* The corresponding author

methods [16, 14, 29, 48] turn their attention to language
modeling and achieve undoubted improvement.
However, how to effectively model the linguistic behavior
in human reading is still an open problem. From the observations of psychology, we can make three assumptions about
human reading that language modeling is autonomous, bidirectional and iterative: 1) as both deaf-mute and blind people
could have fully functional vision and language separately,
we use the term autonomous to interpret the independence of
learning between vision and language. The autonomous also
implies a good interaction between vision and language that
independently learned language knowledge could contribute
to the recognition of characters in vision. 2) The action of
reasoning character context behaves like cloze task since
illegible characters can be viewed as blanks. Thus, prediction can be made using the cues of legible characters on the
left side and right side of the illegible characters simultaneously, which is corresponding to the bidirectional. 3) The
iterative describes that under the challenging environments,
humans adopt a progressive strategy to improve prediction
confidence by iteratively correcting the recognized results.
Firstly, applying the autonomous principle to scene
text recognition (STR) means that recognition models
should be decoupled into vision model (VM) and language
model (LM), and the sub-models could be served as functional units independently and learned separately. Recent
attention-based methods typically design LMs based on
RNNs or Transformer [39], where the linguistic rules are
learned implicitly within a coupled model [19, 36, 33]
(Fig. 1a). Nevertheless, whether and how well the LMs
learn character relationship is unknowable. Besides, this
kind of methods is infeasible to capture rich prior knowledge
by directly pre-training LM from large-scale unlabeled text.
Secondly, compared with the unidirectional LMs [38],
LMs with bidirectional principle capture twice the amount
of information. A straightforward way to construct a bidirectional model is to merge a left-to-right model and a right-toleft model [28, 5], either in probability-level [44, 36] or in
feature-level [52] (Fig. 1e). However, they are strictly less
powerful as their language features are unidirectional repre-

7098

