Lite-HRNet: A Lightweight High-Resolution Network
Changqian Yu1,2 Bin Xiao2 Changxin Gao1 Lu Yuan2 Lei Zhang2 Nong Sang1∗ Jingdong Wang2∗
1

Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Microsoft
{changqian yu,cgao,nsang}@hust.edu.cn, {bixi, luyuan, leizhang, jingdw}@microsoft.com

Abstract
We present an efficient high-resolution network, LiteHRNet, for human pose estimation. We start by simply
applying the efficient shuffle block in ShuffleNet to HRNet
(high-resolution network), yielding stronger performance
over popular lightweight networks, such as MobileNet,
ShuffleNet, and Small HRNet.
We find that the heavily-used pointwise (1 × 1) convolutions in shuffle blocks become the computational bottleneck. We introduce a lightweight unit, conditional channel weighting, to replace costly pointwise (1 × 1) convolutions in shuffle blocks. The complexity of channel weighting is linear w.r.t the number of channels and lower than
the quadratic time complexity for pointwise convolutions.
Our solution learns the weights from all the channels and
over multiple resolutions that are readily available in the
parallel branches in HRNet. It uses the weights as the
bridge to exchange information across channels and resolutions, compensating the role played by the pointwise
(1 × 1) convolution. Lite-HRNet demonstrates superior results on human pose estimation over popular lightweight
networks. Moreover, Lite-HRNet can be easily applied to
semantic segmentation task in the same lightweight manner. The code and models have been publicly available at
https://github.com/HRNet/Lite-HRNet.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation requires high-resolution representation [3, 2, 26, 41] to achieve high performance. Motivated by the increasing demand for model efficiency, this
paper studies the problem of developing efficient highresolution models under computation-limited resources.
Existing efficient networks [5, 6, 50] are mainly designed
from two perspectives. One is to borrow the design from
∗ Corresponding author. This work is done when C. Yu was an intern at

Microsoft Research, Beijing, P.R. China.

classification networks, such as MobileNet [17, 16] and
ShuffleNet [28, 53], to reduce the redundancy in matrixvector multiplication, where convolution operations dominate the cost. The other is to mediate the spatial information
loss with various tricks, such as encoder-decoder architectures [2, 26], and multi-branch architectures [50, 55].
We first study a naive lightweight network by simply
combining the shuffle block in ShuffleNet and the highresolution design pattern in HRNet [41]. HRNet has
shown a stronger capability among large models in positionsensitive problems, e.g., semantic segmentation, human
pose estimation, and object detection. It remains unclear
whether high resolution helps for small models. We empirically show that the direct combination outperforms ShuffleNet, MobileNet, and Small HRNet1 .
To further achieve higher efficiency, we introduce an efficient unit, named conditional channel weighting, performing information exchange across channels, to replace the
costly pointwise (1 × 1) convolution in a shuffle block. The
channel weighting scheme is very efficient: the complexity is linear w.r.t the number of channels and lower than
the quadratic time complexity for the pointwise convolution. For example, with the multi-resolution features of
64 × 64 × 40 and 32 × 32 × 80, the conditional channel
weighting unit can reduce the shuffle block’s whole computation complexity by 80%.
Unlike the regular convolutional kernel weights learned
as model parameters, the proposed scheme weights are conditioned on the input maps and computed across channels
through a lightweight unit. Thus, they contain the information in all the channel maps and serve as a bridge
to exchange information through channel weighting. Furthermore, we compute the weights from parallel multiresolution channel maps that are readily available HRNet so
that the weights contain richer information and are strengthened. We call the resulting network, Lite-HRNet.
1 Small HRNet is available at https://github.com/HRNet/
HRNet-Semantic-Segmentation. It simply reduces the depth and
the width of the original HRNet.

10440

