Recorrupted-to-Recorrupted: Unsupervised Deep Learning for Image Denoising
Tongyao Pang1 , Huan Zheng1 , Yuhui Quan2 , and Hui Ji1
1

Department of Mathematics, National University of Singapore, 119076, Singapore
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
matpt@nus.edu.sg, huan zheng@u.nus.edu,csyhquan@scut.edu.cn, and matjh@nus.edu.sg
2

Abstract
Deep denoiser, the deep network for denoising, has been
the focus of the recent development on image denoising. In
the last few years, there is an increasing interest in developing unsupervised deep denoisers which only call unorganized noisy images without ground truth for training. Nevertheless, the performance of these unsupervised deep denoisers is not competitive to their supervised counterparts.
Aiming at developing a more powerful unsupervised deep
denoiser, this paper proposed a data augmentation technique, called recorrupted-to-recorrupted (R2R), to address
the overfitting caused by the absence of truth images. For
each noisy image, we showed that the cost function defined on the noisy/noisy image pairs constructed by the R2R
method is statistically equivalent to its supervised counterpart defined on the noisy/truth image pairs. Extensive experiments showed that the proposed R2R method noticeably
outperformed existing unsupervised deep denoisers, and is
competitive to representative supervised deep denoisers.

1. Introduction
Image denoising is one fundamental problem in image processing which receives an enduring interest in last
decades. It aims at removing random noise from the input images to improve their signal-to-noise-ratios (SNRs).
Image denoising is not only an important problem itself but
also serves as a basic module in many image recovery methods. A noisy image is usually formulated as
y = x + n,

to its clean counterpart by training a deep neural network
(DNN) on many clean/noisy image pairs. However, in order to have a trained model that generalizes well, a large
number of such noisy/clean image pairs are needed to sufficiently cover the variations on image content and measurement noise. Fulfilling such a demanding requirement
on training samples may be costly and sometimes challenging. For example, it is non-trivial to collect real-world
noisy/clean image pairs; see e.g. [25, 33, 3]. For scientific
images and medical images, the task is more challenging.
Recently, it is receiving an increasing interest on relaxing the prerequisite of supervised learning on training samples. Lehtinen et al. [21] presented a weakly supervised
learning method, the so-called Noise2Noise method, which
directly trains the DNN on the pairs of two noisy images of
the same scene. As the noise of such image pairs is independent, the expectation of the cost function of Noise2Noise is
then the same as that of the supervised one defined on the
noisy/truth image pairs. However, collecting noisy image
pairs of the same scene remains highly non-trivial as image alignment can be an issue, and it is not possible for
the images of dynamic scenes. More recent works on unsupervised deep denoisers have been focusing on training
DNNs using a noisy image dataset without pair-wise correspondence, or even training DNNs only using the input
noisy image itself. These methods can be categorized to
two classes.
• Data augmentation methods. Noise2Void [17] and
Noise2Self [5] adopt the blind-spot strategy to avoid
overfitting (convergence to identity map) when training a DNN to map a noisy image to itself, while
Noiser2Noise [23] and Noise-as-Clean [32] add additional noise to the original noisy image to generate image pairs which are then used to train the DNN.
• Regularized denoising DNN. The Stein’s Unbiased Risk
Estimator (SURE) [29, 22] regularizes the DNN by penalizing the divergence of the prediction. Deep image
prior [30] uses early-stopping to avoid the overfitting. In
Self2Self [26], a dropout-based training/testing scheme
is introduced to reduce the bias and variance of the pre-

(1)

where y denotes the noisy image, x the noise-free image for
recovery, and n measurement noise. The noise n is often
assumed to be the instance drawn from some distribution.
In recent years, deep learning is the main driving force
in the development of image denoisers. A majority of existing deep-learning-based denoisers (e.g. [31, 36, 37]) are
supervised, which learn the mapping from the noisy input

2043

