Robust Audio-Visual Instance Discrimination
Pedro Morgado*
UC San Diego

Ishan Misra
Facebook AI Research

Nuno Vasconcelos
UC San Diego

Abstract
We present a self-supervised learning method to learn
audio and video representations. Prior work uses the natural correspondence between audio and video to define a
standard cross-modal instance discrimination task, where
a model is trained to match representations from the two
modalities. However, the standard approach introduces
two sources of training noise. First, audio-visual correspondences often produce faulty positives since the audio
and video signals can be uninformative of each other. To
limit the detrimental impact of faulty positives, we optimize
a weighted contrastive learning loss, which down-weighs
their contribution to the overall loss. Second, since selfsupervised contrastive learning relies on random sampling
of negative instances, instances that are semantically similar
to the base instance can be used as faulty negatives. To alleviate the impact of faulty negatives, we propose to optimize
an instance discrimination loss with a soft target distribution
that estimates relationships between instances. We validate
our contributions through extensive experiments on action
recognition tasks and show that they address the problems of
audio-visual instance discrimination and improve transfer
learning performance.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised representation learning aims to learn
feature representations that can transfer to downstream
tasks without costly human annotations. Many recent selfsupervised methods [11, 36, 51, 14, 78, 74] use a variant
of the instance discrimination framework [81, 22], which
matches features from multiple views/augmentations of the
same instance, while distinguishing these features from those
of other instances. This often relies on a contrastive loss [31],
where different augmentations are considered ‘positives’ and
other samples ‘negatives.’
Cross-modal instance discrimination (xID) extends instance discrimination to the realm of multiple modalities,
where data modalities, such as video, audio, or text, act as the
* Contacting author.

Faulty Negative

Faulty
Positive

⋯
Background
music

Base

Stadium
ovation

Reporter
narration

Silence

Cooking
instructions

Negatives

Figure 1: Example of a positive audio/video pair and negative instances
used for contrastive learning. Audio-visual signals may not semantically
correspond to each other, such as the pairing weightlifting video/background
music shown in green, which leads to faulty positives. Due to random
sampling, semantically similar instances can also appear as faulty negatives,
e.g. a second weightlifting video in yellow. Faulty positive and negative
samples are a common occurrence in audio-visual contrastive learning and
hurt representation learning.

different ‘views’ of an instance. Since there is a strong correlation between audio and visual events (e.g., the sound of an
instrument or a baseball match), audio-visual instance discrimination has gained popularity [5, 58, 41, 56, 64, 3, 61, 2].
Representations learned by these methods show promising
performance on tasks like action recognition and environmental sound classification. xID methods rely on two key
assumptions - (1) the audio and video of a sample are informative of each other, i.e., positives; (2) the audio and
video of all other samples are not related, i.e., negatives. In
practice, both these assumptions are too strong and do not
hold for a significant amount of real-world data. This results
in faulty positive samples that are not related to each other
and faulty negative samples that are semantically related.
Figure 1 shows examples of these faulty correspondences.
Videos where the audio is uninformative of the visual content can lead to faulty positives, e.g., videos containing audio
from sources outside of the camera field-of-view or containing post-edited sounds like a soundtrack. Similarly, random
negative sampling can produce faulty negatives, i.e., negative samples that are semantically related to the positive.
These faulty correspondences undermine the primary goal of
representation learning, i.e., to ensure that similar instances
have similar feature representations. As we show empirically in Figure 7 and Table 1, they can hurt representation
learning and degrade downstream performance. Thus, we
believe cross-modal learning should be seen as a problem

12934

