Learning Progressive Point Embeddings for 3D Point Cloud Generation
Cheng Wen
Baosheng Yu
Dacheng Tao
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering,
The University of Sydney, 6 Cleveland St, Darlington, NSW 2008, Australia
{cwen6671@uni., baosheng.yu@, dacheng.tao@}sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Generative models for 3D point clouds are extremely important for scene/object reconstruction applications in autonomous driving and robotics. Despite recent success of
deep learning-based representation learning, it remains a
great challenge for deep neural networks to synthesize or
reconstruct high-fidelity point clouds, because of the difficulties in 1) learning effective pointwise representations;
and 2) generating realistic point clouds from complex distributions. In this paper, we devise a dual-generators framework for point cloud generation, which generalizes vanilla
generative adversarial learning framework in a progressive
manner. Specifically, the first generator aims to learn effective point embeddings in a breadth-first manner, while the
second generator is used to refine the generated point cloud
based on a depth-first point embedding to generate a robust
and uniform point cloud. The proposed dual-generators
framework thus is able to progressively learn effective point
embeddings for accurate point cloud generation. Experimental results on a variety of object categories from the
most popular point cloud generation dataset, ShapeNet,
demonstrate the state-of-the-art performance of the proposed method for accurate point cloud generation.

1. Introduction
3D data representation has received increasing attention
from the community due to the rapid development of robot
perception and scene/object reconstruction technologies,
especially in autonomous driving, robotics, and augmented
reality applications [29, 24]. As a simple yet effective 3D
data format, 3D point clouds can capture much more sophisticated surface geometry of different objects than voxel
grids and are suitable for large-scale rendering [13]. However, the surface-centric nature of point clouds also poses
challenges to scanning the objects, such as the issues of
occlusion and distance. Therefore, high-fidelity 3D point
cloud generation is of great importance for a variety of 3D
applications. For example, the generated large-scale 3D

Figure 1. The proposed dual-generators framework for 3D point
cloud generation. The overall pipeline mainly consists of two
generators accompanying with a shared discriminator to generate
point clouds in a progressive manner.

data can be used in the learning of different 3D tasks, such
as segmentation [29, 21], volumetric shape estimation [44],
object detection [28], and scene understanding [26].
With the great success of deep learning in 2D image
data, deep learning-based 3D data generation has attracted
increasing attention, and a wide range of generative approaches have been intensively investigated from different
perspectives, such as image to point cloud [7, 16], image to voxel [42, 45], image to mesh [39, 41], image to
SDF [27], point cloud to voxel [51], and point cloud to
point cloud [47, 48, 35, 14]. With a better prior of point
clouds, a point cloud generation model can benefit a variety of synthesis tasks such as reconstruction and superresolution. Recently, several typical deep architectures such
as auto-encoders [19] and generative adversarial networks
(GANs) [11] have been very successful in learning effective
representations and generating realistic samples from complex distributions. For example, GAN-based methods have
been explored in transforming random latent codes into 3D
point clouds [1, 37]. In this paper, we focus on the learning of point cloud generation models under the generative
adversarial learning framework: given a sparse, noisy, and
non-uniform latent code, the target is then to generate point
clouds that are dense, complete, and uniform, as a faithful
representation of the underlying 3D object surface.
To generate high-quality point clouds, we progressively
learn effective point embeddings and generate point clouds
in a coarse-to-fine manner. Specifically, the idea of pro-

10266

