Learning a Proposal Classifier for Multiple Object Tracking
Peng Dai1

1

Renliang Weng2

Wongun Choi2
Changshui Zhang1
Wei Ding2
2
1
Tsinghua University, Beijng, China.
Aibee Inc

{daip2020, zcs}@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The recent trend in multiple object tracking (MOT) is
heading towards leveraging deep learning to boost the
tracking performance. However, it is not trivial to solve
the data-association problem in an end-to-end fashion. In
this paper, we propose a novel proposal-based learnable
framework, which models MOT as a proposal generation,
proposal scoring and trajectory inference paradigm on an
affinity graph. This framework is similar to the two-stage
object detector Faster RCNN, and can solve the MOT problem in a data-driven way. For proposal generation, we
propose an iterative graph clustering method to reduce the
computational cost while maintaining the quality of the
generated proposals. For proposal scoring, we deploy a
trainable graph-convolutional-network (GCN) to learn the
structural patterns of the generated proposals and rank
them according to the estimated quality scores. For trajectory inference, a simple deoverlapping strategy is adopted
to generate tracking output while complying with the constraints that no detection can be assigned to more than
one track. We experimentally demonstrate that the proposed method achieves a clear performance improvement
in both MOTA and IDF1 with respect to previous state-ofthe-art on two public benchmarks. Our code is available at
https://github.com/daip13/LPC_MOT.git.

1. Introduction
Tracking multiple objects in videos is an important problem in many application domains. Particularly, estimating
humans location and their motion is of great interest in
surveillance, business analytics, robotics and autonomous
driving. Accurate and automated perception of their whereabouts and interactions with others or environment can help
identifying potential illegal activities, understanding customer interactions with retail spaces, planning the pathway
of robots or autonomous vehicles.
The ultimate goal of multiple object tracking (MOT) is
to estimate the trajectory of each individual person as one

2

Zhangping He2

{rlweng, wgchoi, zphe, weiding}@aibee.com

complete trajectory over their whole presence in the scene
without having any contamination by the others. Much research is done in this domain to design and implement robust and accurate MOT algorithms in the past [7, 28, 47].
However, the problem still remains unsolved as reported
in the latest results in various public benchmarks [14, 16,
18, 37]. The key challenges in MOT are mostly due to occlusion and scene clutter, as in any computer vision problem. Consider the case when two people (yellow and purple
boxes in Figure 1) are walking together in a spatial neighborhood. At one point, both people are visible to the camera
and recent object detection algorithms like [33, 42, 43], can
easily detect them. When the two people become aligned
along the camera axis, however, one is fully occluded by
another, and later both become visible when one passes the
other. Since the visual appearance may have subtle difference between the two targets due to various reasons like
illumination, shading, similar clothing, etc, estimating the
trajectory accurately without contamination (often called as
identity transfer) remains as the key challenge. In more
crowded scenes, such occlusion can happen across multiple peoples which pose significant troubles to any MOT
algorithm. Moreover, the MOT problem naturally has an
exponentially large search space for the solution 1 which
prohibits us from using complicated mechanisms.
Traditional approaches focus on solving the problem by
employing various heuristics, hand-defined mechanisms to
handle occlusions [8, 28]. Multiple Hypotheses Tracking
(MHT [28]) is one of the earliest successful algorithms for
MOT. A key strategy in MHT to handle occlusions is to
delay data-association decisions by keeping multiple hypotheses active until data-association ambiguities are resolved. Network flow-based methods [8, 9] have recently
become a standard approach for MOT due to their computational efficiency and optimality. In this framework, the
data-association problem is modeled as a graph, where each
1 The tracking-by-detection approach, which is the de-facto framework

in MOT domain, needs to solve the data-association problem given detections at each timestamp. The size of hypothesis space is exponential to the
number of detections [28].

2443

