Enhancing the Transferability of Adversarial Attacks through Variance Tuning
Xiaosen Wang Kun He *
School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
{xiaosen,brooklet60}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract
Deep neural networks are vulnerable to adversarial examples that mislead the models with imperceptible perturbations. Though adversarial attacks have achieved incredible success rates in the white-box setting, most existing adversaries often exhibit weak transferability in the black-box
setting, especially under the scenario of attacking models
with defense mechanisms. In this work, we propose a new
method called variance tuning to enhance the class of iterative gradient based attack methods and improve their attack transferability. Specifically, at each iteration for the
gradient calculation, instead of directly using the current
gradient for the momentum accumulation, we further consider the gradient variance of the previous iteration to tune
the current gradient so as to stabilize the update direction
and escape from poor local optima. Empirical results on
the standard ImageNet dataset demonstrate that our method
could significantly improve the transferability of gradientbased adversarial attacks. Besides, our method could be
used to attack ensemble models or be integrated with various input transformations. Incorporating variance tuning with input transformations on iterative gradient-based
attacks in the multi-model setting, the integrated method
could achieve an average success rate of 90.1% against
nine advanced defense methods, improving the current best
attack performance significantly by 85.1% . Code is available at https://github.com/JHL-HUST/VT.

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are known to be vulnerable to adversarial examples [31, 8], which are indistinguishable from legitimate ones by adding small perturbations, but
lead to incorrect model prediction. In recent years, it has
garnered an increasing interest to craft adversarial examples
[22, 3, 14, 1, 16], because it not only can identify the model
vulnerability [3, 1], but also can help improve the model
robustness [8, 21, 32, 37]. Moreover, adversarial examples
* Corresponding author.

MI-FGSM

VMI-FGSM

NI-FGSM

VNI-FGSM

Raw Image

Figure 1: Adversarial examples crafted by MI-FGSM [6],
NI-FGSM [18], the proposed VMI-FGSM and VNI-FGSM
on the Inc-v3 model [30] with the maximum perturbation
of ǫ = 16. VMI-FGSM and VNI-FGSM generate visually
similar adversaries as other attacks but lead to much higher
transferability.
also exhibit good transferability across the models [25, 19],
i.e. the adversaries crafted for one model can still fool other
models, which enables black-box attacks in the real-world
applications without any knowledge of the target model.
In the white-box setting that the attacker can access the
architecture and parameters of the target model, existing adversarial attacks have exhibited great effectiveness [14, 3, 1]
but with low transferability, especially for models equipped
with defense mechanisms [32, 34, 17, 23]. To address this
issue, recent works focus on improving the transferability of
adversarial examples by advanced gradient calculation (e.g.
Momentum, Nesterov’s accelerated gradient, etc.) [6, 18],
attacking multiple models [19], or adopting various input
transformations (e.g. random resizing and padding, translation, scale, admix, etc.) [35, 7, 18, 33]. However, there
still exists a big gap between white-box attacks and transferbased black-box attacks with regard to attack performance.
In this work, we propose a novel variance tuning iterative gradient-based method to enhance the transferability of
the generated adversarial examples. Different from existing

1924

