SelfAugment: Automatic Augmentation Policies for Self-Supervised Learning
* , Sean Metzger∗‡ , Aravind Srinivas† , Trevor Darrell† , Kurt Keutzer†
Colorado J Reed∗†
† BAIR, Department of Computer Science, UC Berkeley
‡ Graduate Group in Bioengineering (Berkeley/UCSF), Weill Neurosciences Institute & UCSF Neurological Surgery

Abstract

Fully Unsupervised Training
T∗

A common practice in unsupervised representation learning is to use labeled data to evaluate the quality of the
learned representations. This supervised evaluation is then
used to guide critical aspects of the training process such
as selecting the data augmentation policy. However, guiding an unsupervised training process through supervised
evaluations is not possible for real-world data that does
not actually contain labels (which may be the case, for example, in privacy sensitive fields such as medical imaging).
Therefore, in this work we show that evaluating the learned
representations with a self-supervised image rotation task is
highly correlated with a standard set of supervised evaluations (rank correlation > 0.94). We establish this correlation
across hundreds of augmentation policies, training settings,
and network architectures and provide an algorithm (SelfAugment) to automatically and efficiently select augmentation policies without using supervised evaluations. Despite
not using any labeled data, the learned augmentation policies perform comparably with augmentation policies that
were determined using exhaustive supervised evaluations.

1. Introduction
Self-supervised learning, a type of unsupervised learning
that creates target objectives without human annotation, has
led to a dramatic increase in the ability to capture salient feature representations from unlabeled visual data. So much so,
that in an increasing number of cases these representations
outperform representations learned from the same data with
labels [1, 2, 3]. At the center of these advances is a form of
instance contrastive learning where a single image is augmented using two separate data augmentations, and then a
network is trained to distinguish which augmented images
originated from the same image when contrasted with other
randomly sampled augmented images, see [1, 3, 4, 5].
As illustrated in Figure 1, recent works [1, 4, 6] have
used extensive supervised evaluations to determine which
* equal contribution; correspondence to cjrd@cs.berkeley.edu

D

Data Augmentation
Policy

T (D)

T∗

Self-Supervised Evaluation
(this paper)
Encoder
Network

H

Projection
Head

Supervised Evaluation
(prior work)

Figure 1: The blue box highlights our fully unsupervised
training pipeline for instance contrastive representation learning: data D are augmented with policy T , then encoded into
representations, H, which are fed into a projection head yielding features that determine the InfoNCE loss (Eq. 1). As
shown by the red arrow, prior work uses supervised evaluations of the representations, F to inform the training process,
e.g. to update the augmentation policy T → T ∗ . In this paper,
we show that self-supervised evaluation can be used in lieu
of supervised evaluation and show how to use this evaluation
for automatic and efficient augmentation selection.

augmentation policies to use for training. The best policies
obtain a sweet spot, where the augmentations make it difficult
for the contrastive task to determine the corresponding image
pairs while retaining salient image features; finding this
sweet spot can be the difference between state-of-the-art
performance or poor performance for various tasks [6].
However, it is often difficult or impossible to obtain accurately labeled data in privacy sensitive fields (e.g. medical imaging [7]), applications with highly ambiguous label
definitions (e.g. fashion or retail categorization [8]), or not
practical when one set of representations is used for a diverse
set of downstream tasks (e.g. in autonomous driving systems [9]). This leads to the open question: How can we evaluate self-supervised models, especially to efficiently select
augmentation policies, when labeled data is not available?
We address this question via the following contributions:
• We show that a linear, image-rotation-prediction evaluation task is highly correlated with the downstream supervised performance (rank correlation ρ > 0.94) on six stan-

2674

