Multimodal Motion Prediction with Stacked Transformers
Yicheng Liu1⋆ Jinghuai Zhang2⋆ Liangji Fang2 Qinhong Jiang2 Bolei Zhou1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong1
SenseTime Research2
{moooooore66, 728970038zjh}@gmail.com,
{fangliangji, jiangqinhong}@senseauto.com, bzhou@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Predicting multiple plausible future trajectories of the
nearby vehicles is crucial for the safety of autonomous
driving. Recent motion prediction approaches attempt to
achieve such multimodal motion prediction by implicitly
regularizing the feature or explicitly generating multiple
candidate proposals. However, it remains challenging since
the latent features may concentrate on the most frequent
mode of the data while the proposal-based methods depend
largely on the prior knowledge to generate and select the
proposals. In this work, we propose a novel transformer
framework for multimodal motion prediction, termed as
mmTransformer. A novel network architecture based on
stacked transformers is designed to model the multimodality at feature level with a set of fixed independent proposals. A region-based training strategy is then developed to
induce the multimodality of the generated proposals. Experiments on Argoverse dataset show that the proposed
model achieves the state-of-the-art performance on motion prediction, substantially improving the diversity and
the accuracy of the predicted trajectories. Demo video
and code are available at https://decisionforce.
github.io/mmTransformer.

1. Introduction
Predicting the future trajectories of nearby vehicles is
critical for the Autonomous Vehicle systems to understand
the surrounding and make informative decisions. Multimodal prediction, which aims to generate multiple plausible
trajectories of the target vehicle, plays a key role to handle
the uncertainty in motion prediction and improve the safety
of motion planning. Due to the uncertain future events, traffic vehicles could perform differently even under the same
scene. However, there is only one ground truth trajectory
collected in each driving scene. Hence one challenge for
⋆ Co-first authors with equal contributions.

Figure 1. Examples of multimodal motion prediction in complex
driving scenarios. For each moving vehicle near the ego car, three
plausible future trajectories are predicted by the proposed model.

enabling multimodal prediction lies in how to learn to cover
all the possible outcomes in a given scene with limited training samples.
Recent motion prediction methods mainly follow probabilistic approaches [19, 16, 28] or proposal-based approaches [33, 26, 5, 11] to address the aforementioned issue. The probabilistic approaches implicitly model the uncertainty of the trajectory through defining the underlying
possible models as a latent variable. They either achieve the
multimodal prediction with generator conditioned on different latent variables, or directly constrain the output over a
probability distribution(e.g., GMM) to get diverse results.
These methods depend heavily on the predefined prior distribution and the well-designed loss function, which might
be prone to the optimization instability and the mode collapse issue. Unlike probabilistic approaches which generate multimodal outputs through modeling the latent distribution of the modality, the proposal-based approaches
[11, 33, 5, 25] perform in an alternative way, which first defines candidate points or trajectories as proposals, and then
regress or classify these proposals to the ground truth. With
predefined proposals, these methods alleviate optimization
burden and narrow down the feasible space of solutions. Although these methods achieve good performance, they still
have the following two issues: 1) The result relies heavily
on the quality of the predefined anchors since the heuristic
methods are applied to sample the candidate points. 2) The
17577

