Recurrent Multi-view Alignment Network for Unsupervised Surface Registration
Wanquan Feng1
1

Juyong Zhang1 * Hongrui Cai1
2

University of Science and Technology of China

Haofei Xu1

City University of Hong Kong

{lcfwq@mail., juyong@, hrcai@mail., xhf@mail.}ustc.edu.cn

Stage 1

Mask & Depth

Stage 3

3

Hujun Bao3

Zhejiang University

jh.hou@cityu.edu.hk

Stage 6

Iteration Stages

Source

Junhui Hou2

bao@cad.zju.edu.cn

Mask & Depth

Target

Figure 1. We propose RMA-Net for non-rigid registration. With a recurrent unit, the network iteratively deforms the input surface shape
stage by stage until converging to the target. RMA-Net is totally trained in an unsupervised manner by aligning the source and target shapes
via our proposed multi-view 2D projection loss.

Abstract
Learning non-rigid registration in an end-to-end manner is challenging due to the inherent high degrees of freedom and the lack of labeled training data. In this paper, we resolve these two challenges simultaneously. First,
we propose to represent the non-rigid transformation with
a point-wise combination of several rigid transformations.
This representation not only makes the solution space wellconstrained but also enables our method to be solved iteratively with a recurrent framework, which greatly reduces
the difficulty of learning. Second, we introduce a differentiable loss function that measures the 3D shape similarity
on the projected multi-view 2D depth images so that our
full framework can be trained end-to-end without ground
truth supervision. Extensive experiments on several different datasets demonstrate that our proposed method outperforms the previous state-of-the-art by a large margin.

1. Introduction
Surface registration, which aims to find the spatial transformation and correspondences between two surfaces, is a
fundamental problem in computer vision and graphics. It
has wide applications in many fields such as 3D reconstruction [32, 31], tracking [33, 48] and medical imag*Corresponding author

ing [63, 39]. According to the type of transformation that
deforms the source surface to the target, registration algorithms can be categorized as rigid [3, 2, 53, 28, 61, 12, 21]
and non-rigid [30, 51, 50, 20, 27] methods. Rigid registration estimates a global rotation and translation that aligns
two surfaces, while non-rigid registration has much more
freedoms, and thus is more complex and challenging.
Traditional optimization based methods [3, 30] usually
handle this problem by iteratively alternating a correspondence step and an alignment step. The correspondence step
is to find corresponding points between the source and target surfaces, while the alignment step estimates the transformation based on the current correspondences. However,
it is not easy to construct reliable correspondences solely
based on heuristics (e.g., nearest neighbor search) or handcrafted features like SHOT [45] and FPFH [36].
Recently, learning based methods have demonstrated
promising results by leveraging the strong representation
learning abilities of neural networks, but most of them are
limited to rigid registration [2, 53, 28, 61, 12, 21]. Only a
few learning based non-rigid registration methods [50, 51]
exists and they are only applicable to small-scale non-rigid
deformations that are synthesized by the thin plate spline
(TPS) [5] transformation. It is not straightforward to design
a learning based non-rigid registration framework that can
produce very accurate results.
The challenges of learning non-rigid registration lie in
two aspects. First, unlike a single global rigid transforma-

10297

