Depth-Aware Mirror Segmentation
Haiyang Mei1 Bo Dong2,⋆ Wen Dong1 Pieter Peers3 Xin Yang1,⋆ Qiang Zhang1 Xiaopeng Wei1,⋆
1
Dalian University of Technology 2 SRI International 3 College of William & Mary
https://mhaiyang.github.io/CVPR2021_PDNet/index

Abstract
We present a novel mirror segmentation method that
leverages depth estimates from ToF-based cameras as an
additional cue to disambiguate challenging cases where the
contrast or relation in RGB colors between the mirror reflection and the surrounding scene is subtle. A key observation is that ToF depth estimates do not report the true depth
of the mirror surface, but instead return the total length of
the reflected light paths, thereby creating obvious depth discontinuities at the mirror boundaries. To exploit depth information in mirror segmentation, we first construct a largescale RGB-D mirror segmentation dataset, which we subsequently employ to train a novel depth-aware mirror segmentation framework. Our mirror segmentation framework first
locates the mirrors based on color and depth discontinuities
and correlations. Next, our model further refines the mirror
boundaries through contextual contrast taking into account
both color and depth information. We extensively validate
our depth-aware mirror segmentation method and demonstrate that our model outperforms state-of-the-art RGB and
RGB-D based methods for mirror segmentation. Experimental results also show that depth is a powerful cue for
mirror segmentation.

1. Introduction
Mirrors are commonly present in human-made scenes,
e.g., as personal grooming aids, to create the illusion of
enlarged room size, or to enhance safety to enable looking around corners or behind the viewer. Yet, mirrors confuse many vision systems as they are unable to distinguish
real from reflected scenes. Hence, the ability to segment
mirrors is essential for better scene understanding and to
improve practical applications. Automatic mirror segmentation is a challenging task as mirrors do not exhibit relatively fixed patterns or salient features, making it fundamentally different from other objects/saliency based segmentation/detection problems [18, 37, 59, 64]. Early mir⋆ Xin Yang (xinyang@dlut.edu.cn) and Xiaopeng Wei are the corresponding authors. Xin Yang and Bo Dong lead this project.

RGB Image

Depth Map

MirrorNet

PMD

Ours

GT

Figure 1. Existing mirror segmentation methods such as MirrorNet [55] and PMD [25] often fail when there is a large variation
in contextual contrast/correlation inside the mirror (1st row, blue
arrow), large variation outside the mirror in a mirror-like region
(2nd row, red arrow), or when the differences are too subtle (3rd
row). In contrast, our depth-aware solution is able to accurately
segment the mirrors.

ror segmentation solutions relied on user interaction [2] or
specialized hardware [50]. Recently, Yang et al. [55] introduced MirrorNet, a convolutional neural network, that
leverages contextual contrasted features to detect content
discontinuities inside and outside the mirror. Lin et al. [25]
further boost performance by looking at relation and edge
cues. However, these learning based methods often fail
when the mirror or mirror-like regions exhibit large variations or when the contextual contrast and correlations are
too subtle (Figure 1).
Just as 3D perception plays an important role in scene
understanding in the human visual system [7], so can depth
information help in computer vision for mirror segmentation. A key observation is that mirrors yield an apparent depth that is inconsistent with their true depth and the
depth of the surrounding environment; the observed apparent depth is the depth of the reflected scene. As a result,
this creates obvious depth discontinuities at mirror boundaries (e.g., Figure 1, 2nd column), providing a strong cue
for delineating mirrors.
To leverage depth information for mirror segmentation
and to stimulate further research in depth-aware mirror segmentation, we present the first RGB-D mirror segmentation
dataset of 3, 049 exemplars. To promote diversity and quality, we curate our RGB-D mirror segmentation dataset from

3044

