Adaptive Methods for Real-World Domain Generalization
Abhimanyu Dubey∗
MIT

Vignesh Ramanathan
Facebook AI

Alex Pentland
MIT

Dhruv Mahajan
Facebook AI

dubeya@mit.edu

vigneshr@fb.com

pentland@mit.edu

dhruvm@fb.com

Abstract
Invariant approaches have been remarkably successful
in tackling the problem of domain generalization, where
the objective is to perform inference on data distributions
different from those used in training. In our work, we investigate whether it is possible to leverage domain information from the unseen test samples themselves. We propose a domain-adaptive approach consisting of two steps:
a) we first learn a discriminative domain embedding from
unsupervised training examples, and b) use this domain embedding as supplementary information to build a domainadaptive model, that takes both the input as well as its
domain into account while making predictions. For unseen domains, our method simply uses few unlabelled test
examples to construct the domain embedding. This enables adaptive classification on any unseen domain. Our
approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on various
domain generalization benchmarks. In addition, we introduce the first real-world, large-scale domain generalization
benchmark, Geo-YFCC, containing 1.1M samples over 40
training, 7 validation and 15 test domains, orders of magnitude larger than prior work. We show that the existing
approaches either do not scale to this dataset or underperform compared to the simple baseline of training a model
on the union of data from all training domains. In contrast,
our approach achieves a significant 1% improvement.

1. Introduction
Domain generalization refers to the problem of learning a classifier from a heterogeneous collection of distinct
training domains that can generalize to new unseen test domains [7]. Among the various formalizations proposed for
the problem [19, 6], the most effective is domain-invariant
learning [4, 15]. It learns feature representations invariant
to the underlying domain, providing a universal classifier
that can generalize to new domains [26, 26, 33, 25, 16].
It can be demonstrated that domain-invariant classifiers
∗ Work done while visiting Facebook AI.

“adaptivity gap”

Figure 1: A visual for adaptive domain generalization. Here
we denote by fˆi the optimal classifier in a class F for domain i (out of 8). For test domain DT , the optimal universal
classifier fˆ∗ may be far from the optimal classifier for DT .
minimize the average risk across domains [33]. However,
this may not guarantee good performance for any specific
test domain, particularly if the distribution of domains has
high variance, as visualized heuristically in Figure 1. In this
case, the optimal classifier for a target domain can lie far
from the optimal universal classifier. In our work, we propose an adaptive classifier that can be adapted to any new
domain using very few unlabelled samples without any further training. Unlike invariant approaches, this requires a
few unsupervised samples from any domain while testing1 .
However, this requirement is trivial, since this set is available by definition in all practical settings.
Our approach consists of two steps. We first embed each
domain into a vector space using very few unlabelled samples from the domain. Next, we leverage these domain
embeddings as supplementary signals to learn a domainadaptive classifier. During testing, the classifier is supplied
the corresponding embedding obtained from test samples.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows.
1. We adapt low-shot prototypical learning [39] to construct domain embeddings from unlabelled samples of each
domain. We also provide an algorithm to use these embeddings as supplementary signals to train adaptive classifiers.
2. We justify our design choices with novel theoreti1 This does not correspond to unsupervised domain adaptation, where
unsupervised samples are assumed to be present during training.

114340

