Nighttime Visibility Enhancement by Increasing the Dynamic Range and
Suppression of Light Effects

1

Aashish Sharma1 , and Robby T. Tan1,2
National University of Singapore, 2 Yale-NUS College

aashish.sharma@u.nus.edu, robby.tan@{nus,yale-nus}.edu.sg

Abstract
Most existing nighttime visibility enhancement methods
focus on low light. Night images, however, do not only suffer from low light, but also from man-made light effects
such as glow, glare, floodlight, etc. Hence, when the existing nighttime visibility enhancement methods are applied
to these images, they intensify the effects, degrading the visibility even further. High dynamic range (HDR) imaging
methods can address the low light and over-exposed regions, however they cannot remove the light effects, and
thus cannot enhance the visibility in the affected regions.
In this paper, given a single nighttime image as input, our
goal is to enhance its visibility by increasing the dynamic
range of the intensity, and thus can boost the intensity of the
low light regions, and at the same time, suppress the light
effects (glow, glare) simultaneously. First, we use a network to estimate the camera response function (CRF) from
the input image to linearise the image. Second, we decompose the linearised image into low-frequency (LF) and highfrequency (HF) feature maps that are processed separately
through two networks for light effects suppression and noise
removal respectively. Third, we use a network to increase
the dynamic range of the processed LF feature maps, which
are then combined with the processed HF feature maps to
generate the final output that has increased dynamic range
and suppressed light effects. Our experiments show the effectiveness of our method in comparison with the state-ofthe-art nighttime visibility enhancement methods.

1. Introduction
Due to varying illumination and multiple man-made
light sources, night images not only contains low-light
regions but also glow, glare, floodlight, etc., which can
severely degrade the visibility of the images. This degradation poses challenges for many vision algorithms when
applied to nighttime conditions. Hence, enhancing the visi† This work is supported by MOE2019-T2-1-130.

Input

Our Method

SingleHDR [19]

EnlightenGAN [13]

Figure 1. For the input nighttime image with glow/glare light effects, existing visibility enhancement [13] and HDR [19] imaging
methods cannot handle the light effects and incorrectly intensify
them. In contrast, our method suppresses the light effects and generates better visibility enhancement results.

bility of night images by boosting the intensity of low light
regions, yet at the same time suppressing the night light effects (glow, glare) is an important task.
Existing nighttime visibility enhancement methods [11,
3, 13, 26, 10] assume that the input image is under-exposed
and has low-light regions. Hence, to improve the visibility, these methods perform intensity boosting and denoising. Night images, however, also suffer from over-exposed
regions as well as glow, glare, etc. which get intensified
upon intensity boosting, and this further degrades the visibility. Fig. 1 shows an example. As can be observed, the
existing visibility enhancement method EnlightenGAN [13]
incorrectly intensifies the glow/glare light effects.
HDR imaging methods [19, 6], to some extent, can improve the visibility of night images. They take a single

11977

