PVGNet: A Bottom-Up One-Stage 3D Object Detector
with Integrated Multi-Level Features
Zhenwei Miao1 *, Jikai Chen1 , Hongyu Pan1 , Ruiwen Zhang1,2 , Kaixuan Liu1 ,
Peihan Hao1 , Jun Zhu1 , Yang Wang1 , Xin Zhan1
1
Alibaba Group, 2 Tsinghua University

Abstract
Quantization-based methods are widely used in LiDAR
points 3D object detection for its efficiency in extracting
context information. Unlike image where the context information is distributed evenly over the object, most LiDAR
points are distributed along the object boundary, which
means the boundary features are more critical in LiDAR
points 3D detection. However, quantization inevitably introduces ambiguity during both the training and inference
stages. To alleviate this problem, we propose a one-stage
and voting-based 3D detector, named Point-Voxel-Grid Network (PVGNet). In particular, PVGNet extracts point, voxel
and grid-level features in a unified backbone architecture
and produces point-wise fusion features. It segments LiDAR points into foreground and background, predicts a
3D bounding box for each foreground point, and performs
group voting to get the final detection results. Moreover,
we observe that instance-level point imbalance due to occlusion and observation distance also degrades the detection performance. A novel instance-aware focal loss is proposed to alleviate this problem and further improve the detection ability. We conduct experiments on the KITTI and
Waymo datasets. Our proposed PVGNet outperforms previous state-of-the-art methods and ranks at the top of KITTI
3D/BEV detection leaderboards.

1. Introduction
In autonomous driving, 3D object detection is a critical
task that has received significant attention from both industry and academia [8, 10, 11, 20, 24]. LiDAR sensors are the
most widely used 3D sensors. The generated point clouds
provide accurate distance measurements and geometric information for environment understanding. Different from
2D images, 3D point clouds are irregular, sparse, and unevenly distributed. As shown in Fig. 1, the LiDAR points
are mainly located along the object boundary. Therefore,
* corresponding author: zhenwei.mzw@alibaba-inc.com

Figure 1. An example of an object with representation of (a) image,
(b) grid-quantization of LiDAR points, (c) raw LiDAR points.

it is important to extract the boundary feature. Moreover,
compared with images, the boundary of an object in LiDAR
points is crystally clear with its background without ambiguity. Under such LiDAR points merits, effectively extracting the object boundary features is critical for 3D detection.
According to the type of input point cloud representation, 3D object detectors can be divided into two categories:
point-based and quantization-based methods. Point-based
detectors [18, 19] extract local features by searching for local neighborhoods from a set of specifically selected key
points. This local search process is time-consuming, preventing point-based detectors from being widely adopted in
real-time autonomous driving systems. Quantization-based
methods include voxel-based and grid-based ones. Voxelbased detectors [32] split point clouds into evenly spaced
voxels and use sparse 3D convolution [7] for computational
acceleration. Grid-based detectors [10] project point clouds
onto 2D grids and utilize 2D convolution for feature extraction. The quantization inevitably loses detailed geometric
information and leads to an ambiguous object boundary.
This ambiguity will introduce training uncertainty and degrade the discrimination of object boundary representation.
To alleviate the above quantization problem and take advantage of the efficient feature representation, we propose a
unified architecture Point-Voxel-Grid Network (PVGNet).
As illustrated in Fig. 2, PVGNet extracts these multi-level
features simultaneously and applies a point-wise supervision signal on the point-level fusion feature. As a result,
detailed geometric information and rich semantic information are integrated into a single feature vector. The crystallized object boundary in LiDAR points is preserved in the
PVGNet from the supervision signal. A bottom-up detection head is used to predict a 3D bounding box for each

3279

