Bayesian Nested Neural Networks for
Uncertainty Calibration and Adaptive Compression
Yufei Cui, Ziquan Liu, Qiao Li, Antoni B. Chan, Chun Jason Xue
Department of Computer Science, City University of Hong Kong
{yufeicui3-c, ziquanliu2-c, qiaoli7-c}@my.cityu.edu.hk, {abchan,jasonxue}@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Nested networks or slimmable networks are neural networks whose architectures can be adjusted instantly during testing time, e.g., based on computational constraints.
Recent studies have focused on a “nested dropout” layer,
which is able to order the nodes of a layer by importance during training, thus generating a nested set of subnetworks that are optimal for different configurations of resources. However, the dropout rate is fixed as a hyperparameter over different layers during the whole training
process. Therefore, when nodes are removed, the performance decays in a human-specified trajectory rather than
in a trajectory learned from data. Another drawback is the
generated sub-networks are deterministic networks without
well-calibrated uncertainty. To address these two problems, we develop a Bayesian approach to nested neural networks. We propose a variational ordering unit that draws
samples for nested dropout at a low cost, from a proposed
Downhill distribution, which provides useful gradients to
the parameters of nested dropout. Based on this approach,
we design a Bayesian nested neural network that learns
the order knowledge of the node distributions. In experiments, we show that the proposed approach outperforms
the nested network in terms of accuracy, calibration, and
out-of-domain detection in classification tasks. It also outperforms the related approach on uncertainty-critical tasks
in computer vision.

works are often composed of a nested set of smaller subnetworks, we refer to them as nested nets in this paper.
As many problems are safety-critical, such as object recognition [9, 12], medical-image segmentation [24, 18] and
crowd counting [33, 45], the adopted DNNs are required to
provide well-calibrated uncertainty in addition to high prediction performance, as erroneous predictions could result
in disastrous consequences. However, the measure of uncertainty was not considered in previous designs of nested
nets, which leads to over- or under-confident predictions.

1. Introduction

One basis for creating nested nets is to order the network
components (e.g., convolution channels) such that less important components can be removed first when creating the
sub-network. A unit for neural networks, nested dropout,
was developed to order the latent feature representation for
the encoder-decoder models [37, 1]. Specifically, a discrete
distribution is assigned over the indices of the representations, and the operation of nested dropout samples an index
then drops the representations with larger indices. Recent
studies show that the nested dropout is able to order the
network components during training such that nested nets
can be obtained [6, 7]. The ordering layout is applicable to
different granularity levels of network components: single
weights, groups of weights, convolutional channels, residual blocks, network layers, and even quantization bits. We
refer to the partitions of the network components as nodes
in this paper. However, the probability that an index is sampled is specified by hand as a hyperparameter, and does not
change during training. Thus, the importance of a node is
pre-determined by hand rather than learned from data.

Modern deep neural networks (DNNs) have achieved
great success in fields of computer vision and related areas. In the meantime, they are experiencing rapid growth
in model size and computation cost, which makes it difficult to deploy on diverse hardware platforms. Recent
works study how to develop a network with flexible size
during test time [20, 50, 49, 4, 6, 47], to reduce the cost
in designing [44], training [21], compressing [13] and deploying [36] a DNN on various platforms. As these net-

To enhance predictive uncertainty and to allow the
dropout rate to be learned, in this paper, we propose a fully
Bayesian treatment for constructing nested nets. We propose a new nested dropout, based on a chain of interdependent Bernoulli variables. The chain simulates the Bernoulli
trials and can be understood as a special case of a two-state
Markov chain, which intuitively generates order information. To save the time cost for sampling during training,
we propose a variational ordering unit that approximates

2392

