WOAD: Weakly Supervised Online Action Detection in Untrimmed Videos
Mingfei Gao, Yingbo Zhou, Ran Xu, Richard Socher, Caiming Xiong
Salesforce Research
{mingfei.gao,yingbo.zhou,ran.xu,rsocher,cxiong}@salesforce.com

Abstract
Online action detection in untrimmed videos aims to identify an action as it happens, which makes it very important for real-time applications. Previous methods rely on
tedious annotations of temporal action boundaries for training, which hinders the scalability of online action detection
systems. We propose WOAD, a weakly supervised framework
that can be trained using only video-class labels. WOAD
contains two jointly-trained modules, i.e., temporal proposal
generator (TPG) and online action recognizer (OAR). Supervised by video-class labels, TPG works offline and targets at
accurately mining pseudo frame-level labels for OAR. With
the supervisory signals from TPG, OAR learns to conduct action detection in an online fashion. Experimental results on
THUMOS’14, ActivityNet1.2 and ActivityNet1.3 show that
our weakly-supervised method largely outperforms weaklysupervised baselines and achieves comparable performance
to the previous strongly-supervised methods. Beyond that,
WOAD is flexible to leverage strong supervision when it is
available. When strongly supervised, our method obtains the
state-of-the-art results in the tasks of both online per-frame
action recognition and online detection of action start.

1. Introduction
Temporal Action Localization aims to detect temporal
action boundaries in long, untrimmed videos. Most previous
methods are under offline settings [2, 4, 5, 10, 25, 31], where
they can observe the entire action before making decisions.
However, applications such as surveillance systems and autonomous cars, are required to interact with the world in real
time based on their accumulative observations up to now. Online Action Detection [6] is proposed to address this problem,
where methods need to identify occurring actions moment-tomoment without access to future information. With different
focuses, recent online action detectors consider two subtasks: (1) online per-frame action recognition [6, 9, 28] and
(2) online detection of action start [11, 24]. The former task
focuses on the general capability of recognizing the action
category of each coming frame. On the other hand, detecting

video-level anno.

segment-level anno.

previous methods

our method

segment √ mixed × video ×

segment √ mixed √ video √

Figure 1. Comparison between previous methods and our approach.
Previous methods require segment-level annotations (start and end
times of actions) during training, which leads to high human labeling cost. In contrast, our method can be trained with video-level
annotations (video-level action labels) and is flexible to utilize (full/
partial) segment-level supervision when it is available.

action starts in a timely manner is more important to some
real-world applications. For example, an autonomous car
needs to recognize “line merging” of another vehicle as soon
as it starts. While, it is challenging to detect action starts
due to the similar appearances near the start points and the
lack of training data. The later task specially targets on this
problem. Our method jointly addresses these two tasks.
Although previous methods have achieved promising
progress, they rely on segment-level annotations of action
boundaries for training (see Fig. 1). However, annotating
action boundaries in long, untrimmed videos involves possibly ambiguous decisions and requires significant amount
of human labor. This hinders the scalability of model learning, particularly for videos embodying complex semantics.
Compared to the segment-level boundaries, video-level action classes are much easier to acquire. With the help of
text-based video retrieval techniques, video-class labels may
be obtained almost for free from the internet at a large scale.
To take advantage of the easy-to-obtain video-level annotations, we propose WOAD, a Weakly supervised Online
Action Detection framework, that can be trained with videoclass labels only. Detecting actions using weak supervision
in an online scenario is challenging since (1) online action
detectors generally require per-frame labels for training, so
it is hard to utilize video-level labels as supervision and (2) it
is not trivial for a model to be accurate for action recognition
and sensitive to action starts without access to future information. As shown in Fig. 2, our proposed WOAD contains

1915

