Farewell to Mutual Information: Variational Distillation for Cross-Modal Person
Re-Identification
Xudong Tian1 , Zhizhong Zhang1( ) , Shaohui Lin1 , Yanyun Qu2 , Yuan Xie1( ) , Lizhuang Ma1,3
1
East China Normal University, 2 Xiamen University, 3 Shanghai Jiao Tong University
txd51194501066@gmail, zzzhang@cs.ecnu.edu.cn, shaohuilin007@gmail.com,
yyqu@xmu.edu.cn, xieyuan8589@foxmail.com, ma-lz@cs.sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
The Information Bottleneck (IB) provides an information
theoretic principle for representation learning, by retaining
all information relevant for predicting label while minimizing the redundancy. Though IB principle has been applied
to a wide range of applications, its optimization remains a
challenging problem which heavily relies on the accurate
estimation of mutual information. In this paper, we present
a new strategy, Variational Self-Distillation (VSD), which
provides a scalable, flexible and analytic solution to essentially fitting the mutual information but without explicitly
estimating it. Under rigorously theoretical guarantee, VSD
enables the IB to grasp the intrinsic correlation between
representation and label for supervised training. Furthermore, by extending VSD to multi-view learning, we introduce two other strategies, Variational Cross-Distillation
(VCD) and Variational Mutual-Learning (VML), which significantly improve the robustness of representation to viewchanges by eliminating view-specific and task-irrelevant information. To verify our theoretically grounded strategies,
we apply our approaches to cross-modal person Re-ID, and
conduct extensive experiments, where the superior performance against state-of-the-art methods are demonstrated.
Our intriguing findings highlight the need to rethink the way
to estimate mutual information.

1. Introduction
The Information Bottleneck (IB) [35] has made remarkable progress in the development of modern machine perception systems such as computer vision [6], speech processing [21], neuroscience [30] and natural language processing [18]. It is essentially an information-theoretic principle that transforms raw observation into a, typically lowerdimensional, representation and this principle is naturally
extended to representation learning or understanding Deep
Neural Networks (DNNs) [31, 24, 9].

By fitting mutual information (MI), IB allows the learned
representation to preserve complex intrinsic correlation
structures over high dimensional data and contain the information relevant with downstream task [35]. However,
despite successful applications, there is a significant drawback in conventional IB hindering its further development
(i.e., estimation of mutual information).
In practice, mutual information is a fundamental quantity for measuring the statistical dependencies [2] between
random variables, but its estimation remains a challenging
problem. To address this, traditional approaches [7, 5, 33,
16, 23, 15, 8, 14, 32, 22] mainly resort to non-parametric estimator under very limited problem setting where the probability distributions are known or the variables are discrete
[29, 2]. To overcome this constraint, some works [13, 6, 29]
adopt the trainable parametric neural estimators involving
reparameterization, sampling, estimation of posterior distribution [2], which, unfortunately, practically has very poor
scalability. Besides, the estimation of posterior distribution
would become intractable when the network is complicated.
Another obvious drawback of the conventional IB is that,
the optimization of IB is essentially a tradeoff between
having a concise representation and one with good predictive power, which makes it impossible to achieve both
high compression and accurate prediction [35, 1, 28, 38].
Consequently, the optimization of conventional IB becomes
tricky, and its robustness is also seriously compromised due
to the mentioned reasons.
In this paper, we propose a new strategy for the information bottleneck named as Variational Self-Distillation
(VSD), which enables us to preserve sufficient task-relevant
information while simultaneously discarding task-irrelevant
distractors. We should emphasize here that our approach
essentially fits the mutual information but without explicitly estimating it. To achieve this, we use variational
inference to provide a theoretical analysis which obtains an
analytical solution to VSD. Different from traditional methods that attempt to develop estimators for mutual information, our method avoids all complicated designs and allows

1522

