Deep Optimized Priors for 3D Shape Modeling and Reconstruction

1

Mingyue Yang1 *, Yuxin Wen1∗ , Weikai Chen2 , Yongwei Chen1 , Kui Jia134†
South China University of Technology, 2 Tencent Game AI Research Center
3
Pazhou Laboratory, 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory
{eemingyueyang,wen.yuxin}@mail.scut.edu.cn,
chenwk891@gmail.com, eecyw@mail.scut.edu.cn, kuijia@scut.edu.cn
Learned Shape Prior

Abstract
Many learning-based approaches have difficulty scaling
to unseen data, as the generality of its learned prior is limited to the scale and variations of the training samples.
This holds particularly true with 3D learning tasks, given
the sparsity of 3D datasets available. We introduce a new
learning framework for 3D modeling and reconstruction
that greatly improves the generalization ability of a deep
generator. Our approach strives to connect the good ends
of both learning-based and optimization-based methods. In
particular, unlike the common practice that fixes the pretrained priors at test time, we propose to further optimize
the learned prior and latent code according to the input
physical measurements after the training. We show that
the proposed strategy effectively breaks the barriers constrained by the pre-trained priors and could lead to highquality adaptation to unseen data. We realize our framework using the implicit surface representation and validate
the efficacy of our approach in a variety of challenging tasks
that take highly sparse or collapsed observations as input.
Experimental results show that our approach compares favorably with the state-of-the-art methods in terms of both
generality and accuracy.

1. Introduction
Deep generative models have brought impressive advances to the state-of-the-art across a wide variety of generative tasks, including 2D image synthesis and 3D shape
reconstruction. At the moment, it is widely believed that
these leaps in performance come primarily from the realistic priors learned from a large amount of training data.
Based on this observation, most of the previous 3D learning
approaches focus on learning stronger priors during training
and strictly respecting the learned prior at test time. Specifically, there are two common ways to leverage the learned
* Equal contribution
† Correspondence to Kui Jia <kuijia@scut.edu.cn>

(b)

Real Distribution

(a)

(c)

Ground-truth Mesh

Figure 1: The shape prior learned from the limited training data cannot capture the full landscape of the real data
distribution. Common practice that uses a ﬁxed pre-trained
generator is constrained within the prior (path a) and thus
fails to model the unseen data lying outside the prior, even
with latent code optimization at test time. Optimizing a randomly initialized generator, on the other hand, is prone to be
trapped in a local minimum due to the complex energy landscape (path b). Whereas the pre-train prior could provide
a good initialization in a forward pass, we propose to further optimize the parameters of the prior and the latent code
according to the task-speciﬁc constraints at test time. We
show in this work that the proposed framework can effectively break the barriers of pre-trained prior and generalize
to the unseen data that is out of the prior domain (path c).
Hence, our approach can generate results (ending point of
path c) closest to the ground truth (star point on the real data
manifold) compared to the other learning methods.
shape priors. One is to train an encoder to retrieve the most
likely prior by mapping the input into the latent code, which
is a low-dimensional representation of the shape prior. The
other is to optimize the latent code until its decoded output achieves a minimal loss. Note that both methods ﬁx
the learned prior/generator once the training is completed
as the prior is considered to be the most valuable asset in a
learning-based approach. However, is this the best strategy
of using the prior in a 3D learning task?

3269

