Counterfactual VQA: A Cause-Effect Look at Language Bias
Yulei Niu1
1

Kaihua Tang1

Hanwang Zhang1

Zhiwu Lu2,3

Xian-Sheng Hua4

Ji-Rong Wen2,3

Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 2 Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
3

Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods 4 Damo Academy, Alibaba Group

yn.yuleiniu@gmail.com, {kaihua001@e., hanwangzhang@}ntu.edu.sg, {luzhiwu, jrwen}@ruc.edu.cn

Abstract
VQA models may tend to rely on language bias as a
shortcut and thus fail to sufficiently learn the multi-modal
knowledge from both vision and language. Recent debiasing methods proposed to exclude the language prior during inference. However, they fail to disentangle the “good”
language context and “bad” language bias from the whole.
In this paper, we investigate how to mitigate language bias
in VQA. Motivated by causal effects, we proposed a novel
counterfactual inference framework, which enables us to
capture the language bias as the direct causal effect of questions on answers and reduce the language bias by subtracting the direct language effect from the total causal effect.
Experiments demonstrate that our proposed counterfactual
inference framework 1) is general to various VQA backbones and fusion strategies, 2) achieves competitive performance on the language-bias sensitive VQA-CP dataset
while performs robustly on the balanced VQA v2 dataset
without any augmented data. The code is available at
https://github.com/yuleiniu/cfvqa.

1. Introduction
Visual Question Answering (VQA) [8, 4] has become the
fundamental building block that underpins many frontier
interactive AI systems, such as visual dialog [15], visionand-language navigation [6], and visual commonsense reasoning [51]. VQA systems are required to perform visual
analysis, language understanding, and multi-modal reasoning. Recent studies [19, 3, 8, 19, 25] found that VQA models may rely on spurious linguistic correlations rather than
multi-modal reasoning. For instance, simply answering
“tennis” to the sport-related questions and “yes” to the questions “Do you see a ...” can achieve approximately 40% and
90% accuracy on the VQA v1.0 dataset. As a result, VQA
models will fail to generalize well if they simply memorize
the strong language priors in the training data [2, 19], especially on the recently proposed VQA-CP [3] dataset where
the priors are quite different in the training and test sets.

One straightforward solution to mitigate language bias
is to enhance the training data by using extra annotations or data augmentation. In particular, visual [14] and
textual [23] explanations are used to improve the visual
grounding ability [37, 44]. Besides, counterfactual training samples generation [11, 1, 55, 18, 28] helps to balance
the training data, and outperform other debiasing methods
by large margins on VQA-CP. These methods demonstrate
the effect of debiased training to improve the generalizability of VQA models. However, it is worth noting that
VQA-CP was proposed to validate whether VQA models
can disentangle the learned visual knowledge and memorized language priors [3]. Therefore, how to make unbiased
inference under biased training still remains a major challenge in VQA. Another popular solution [10, 13] is using a
separate question-only branch to learn the language prior in
the training set. During the test stage, the prior is mitigated
by excluding the extra branch. However, we argue that the
language prior consists of both “bad” language bias (e.g.,
binding the color of bananas with the major color “yellow”)
and “good” language context (e.g., narrowing the answer
space based on the question type “what color”). Simply excluding the extra branch cannot make use of the good context. Indeed, it is still challenging for recent debiasing VQA
methods to disentangle the good and bad from the whole.
Motivated by counterfactual reasoning and causal effects [29, 30, 31], we propose a novel counterfactual inference framework called CF-VQA to reduce language bias
in VQA. Overall, we formulate language bias as the direct causal effect of questions on answers, and mitigate the
bias by subtracting the direct language effect from the total
causal effect. As illustrated in Figure 1, we introduce two
scenarios, conventional VQA and counterfactual VQA, to
estimate the total causal effect and direct language effect,
respectively. These two scenarios are defined as follows:
Conventional VQA: What will answer A be, if machine
hears question Q, sees image V , and extracts the multimodal knowledge K?
Counterfactual VQA: What would A be, if machine hears
Q, but had not extracted K or seen V ?
112700

