Discovering Interpretable Latent Space Directions of GANs
Beyond Binary Attributes
Huiting Yang1 , Liangyu Chai1 , Qiang Wen1 , Shuang Zhao2 , Zixun Sun2 , Shengfeng He1 *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Interactive Entertainment Group, Tencent Inc.

Style Manipulation: Supermodel Style

Style Manipulation: Comic Style

Multi-attribute Manipulation: Female + Smile

Multi-attribute Manipulation: Pink Hair + Open Mouth + Chibi Maruko Style

Figure 1: We propose an adversarial method, AdvStyle, to interpret the latent space of GANs for semantics editing. It allows
manipulation of arbitrary semantics, beyond the restriction of binary attributes. Our method, to the best of our knowledge,
is the first latent space exploration method enables style editing. Meanwhile, we discover disentangled semantic directions,
leading to accurate multi-attribute manipulation.

Abstract
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) learn to map
noise latent vectors to high-ﬁdelity image outputs. It is
found that the input latent space shows semantic correlations with the output image space. Recent works aim to
interpret the latent space and discover meaningful directions that correspond to human interpretable image transformations. However, these methods either rely on explicit
scores of attributes (e.g., memorability) or are restricted
to binary ones (e.g., gender), which largely limits the applicability of editing tasks, especially for free-form artistic tasks like style/anime editing. In this paper, we propose an adversarial method, AdvStyle, for discovering interpretable directions in the absence of well-labeled scores
or binary attributes. In particular, the proposed adversarial method simultaneously optimizes the discovered directions and the attribute assessor using the target attribute
data as positive samples, while the generated ones being
negative. In this way, arbitrary attributes can be edited
by collecting positive data only, and the proposed method
learns a controllable representation enabling manipulation
* Corresponding author (hesfe@scut.edu.cn).

of non-binary attributes like anime styles and facial characteristics. Moreover, the proposed learning strategy attenuates the entanglement between attributes, such that multiattribute manipulation can be easily achieved without any
additional constraint. Furthermore, we reveal several interesting semantics with the involuntarily learned negative
directions. Extensive experiments on 9 anime attributes and
7 human attributes demonstrate the effectiveness of our adversarial approach qualitatively and quantitatively. Code is
available at https://github.com/BERYLSHEEP/AdvStyle.

1. Introduction
Generative adversarial networks (GANs) [6, 11, 19,
20] have been demonstrated power in generating highresolution photo-realistic images by training with massive
diverse data. The rationale of GANs is to learn a nonlinear mapping function from the input noise latent codes to
output images that conform to real data distributions. Several works reveal the vector arithmetic property of the latent
space, e.g., adding a learned vector to the latent code [29]
or combining the latent code of two images [20], result
in modifying image semantics. Although it is still uncer-

12177

