Multiple Instance Captioning: Learning Representations from Histopathology
Textbooks and Articles
Jevgenij Gamper
University of Warwick, UK
j.gamper@warwick.ac.uk

Nasir Rajpoot
University of Warwick, UK
n.m.rajpoot@warwick.ac.uk

Figure 1: Four samples from ARCH, a multiple instance captioning computational pathology dataset. Samples on the left and
right each consist of four image instances with a single caption; top-middle shows an image-caption pair while bottom-middle
contains two image instances with a single caption. Labeled in color are examples of common tasks within computational
pathology: diagnostic (orange); detection & classification (cyan); descriptive (yellow); special cell detection (red).

Abstract
We present ARCH, a computational pathology (CP) multiple instance captioning dataset to facilitate dense supervision of CP tasks. Existing CP datasets focus on narrow
tasks; ARCH on the other hand contains dense diagnostic and morphological descriptions for a range of stains,
tissue types and pathologies. Using intrinsic dimensionality estimation, we show that ARCH is the only CP dataset
to (ARCH-)rival its computer vision analog MS-COCO
Captions. We conjecture that an encoder pre-trained on
dense image captions learns transferable representations
for most CP tasks. We support the conjecture with evidence
that ARCH representation transfers to a variety of pathology sub-tasks better than ImageNet features or representations obtained via self-supervised or multi-task learning on
pathology images alone. We release our best model and invite other researchers to test it on their CP tasks.

1. Introduction
The success of an intelligent system depends on having the right representation of data. Computer vision community has gradually moved from engineering features to
letting the deep neural networks learn data representations,
given a differentiable task objective [1, 18].
Computational pathology (CP), a sub-field of medical
imaging that entails quantitative profiling of spatial patterns
in multi-gigapixel whole-slide images (WSIs) of patient tissue slides, has followed these developments closely [10].
Deep Learning (DL) has been applied to detecting cancerous regions [34], classifying tissue sub-types [28], identifying diagnostically relevant structures such as glands [21],
nuclei [17], vessels and nerves [15], quantifying spatial patterns of tumor infiltrating lymphocytes [53] and histology
image retrieval [23]. More recently, DL been used to learn
representations for challenging tasks of predicting genetic
sub-types [16, 31].
With recent advances in weak and unsupervised learning,

16549

