End-to-End Human Object Interaction Detection with HOI Transformer
Cheng Zou,* Bohan Wang∗ , Yue Hu, Junqi Liu, Qian Wu, Yu Zhao, Boxun Li,
Chenguang Zhang, Chi Zhang, Yichen Wei, Jian Sun
MEGVII Technology
{zoucheng,wangbohan,huyue,liujunqi,wuqian,zhaoyu03,liboxun
zhangchenguang,zhangchi,weiyichen,sunjian}@megvii.com

Abstract
We propose HOI Transformer to tackle human object interaction (HOI) detection in an end-to-end manner. Current approaches either decouple HOI task into separated
stages of object detection and interaction classification
or introduce surrogate interaction problem. In contrast,
our method, named HOI Transformer, streamlines the HOI
pipeline by eliminating the need for many hand-designed
components. HOI Transformer reasons about the relations of objects and humans from global image context and
directly predicts HOI instances in parallel. A quintuple
matching loss is introduced to force HOI predictions in a
unified way. Our method is conceptually much simpler
and demonstrates improved accuracy. Without bells and
whistles, HOI Transformer achieves 26.61% AP on HICODET and 52.9% AProle on V-COCO, surpassing previous
methods with the advantage of being much simpler. We
hope our approach will serve as a simple and effective alternative for HOI tasks. Code is available at https:
//github.com/bbepoch/HoiTransformer.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection plays an important role in the high level human-centric scene understanding, and has attracted considerable research interest recently. The HOI research can also contribute to other tasks,
such as action analysis, weakly-supervised object detection,
and visual question answering, etc.
The goal of HOI detection aims at localizing human and
object, as well as recognizing the interaction between them.
Previous studies [7, 6, 9, 22, 19, 3] present promising results
on HOI detection by decouple this task into object detection and interaction classification (Fig. 1(a)). More specifically, human and object detection results is first obtained by
pre-trained object detector, then interaction classification is
* Equal contribution.

Human
Stream

Feature
Extraction

Object
Stream

HOI
Category

Pairwise
Stream

Object
Detection

Pairs
Enumerate
Interaction(Point)
Detection

Object
Detection

Two-stage(a)

Matching

Pairs Enumerate One-stage

Feature
Extraction

(b)

HOI
Transformer

End-to-End(c)

Figure 1: Comparison of recent approaches on HOI detection. (a) two-stage methods, typically use pre-trained detectors to generate human, object proposal and enumerate all
(human, object) pairs, followed by a multi-stream architecture to classify interactions. (b) one-stage methods, detect
interaction point/box and object proposals simultaneously,
followed by complex matching process to assign interactions to object pairs. (c) our end-to-end method, input an
image and predict HOI instances directly.

conducted on the pair-wisely combined human-object proposals. The limitations of these methods are mainly caused
by the separated two stages. The independent optimization
on two sub-problems may lead to sub-optimal solution. The
generated human-object proposals have relatively low quality for interaction classification [19], because only objectlevel confidence has been taken into account. Moreover,
all pair-wise proposals need to be processed, which brings

11825

