GIRAFFE: Representing Scenes as
Compositional Generative Neural Feature Fields

1

Michael Niemeyer1,2 Andreas Geiger1,2
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
University of Tübingen
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

Output Image

Abstract
Implicit 3D Scene
Representation

Shape and
Appearance

Deep generative models allow for photorealistic image
synthesis at high resolutions. But for many applications,
this is not enough: content creation also needs to be controllable. While several recent works investigate how to disentangle underlying factors of variation in the data, most
of them operate in 2D and hence ignore that our world
is three-dimensional. Further, only few works consider
the compositional nature of scenes. Our key hypothesis is
that incorporating a compositional 3D scene representation
into the generative model leads to more controllable image
synthesis. Representing scenes as compositional generative neural feature fields allows us to disentangle one or
multiple objects from the background as well as individual
objects’ shapes and appearances while learning from unstructured and unposed image collections without any additional supervision. Combining this scene representation
with a neural rendering pipeline yields a fast and realistic
image synthesis model. As evidenced by our experiments,
our model is able to disentangle individual objects and allows for translating and rotating them in the scene as well
as changing the camera pose.

1. Introduction
The ability to generate and manipulate photorealistic image content is a long-standing goal of computer vision and
graphics. Modern computer graphics techniques achieve
impressive results and are industry standard in gaming and
movie productions. However, they are very hardware expensive and require substantial human labor for 3D content
creation and arrangement.
In recent years, the computer vision community has
made great strides towards highly-realistic image generation. In particular, Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs) [24] emerged as a powerful class of generative
models. They are able to synthesize photorealistic images
at resolutions of 10242 pixels and beyond [6, 14, 15, 39, 40].

Pose

Decoder
2D CNN

Shape and
Appearance

Pose

Feature Image

Pose
Shape and
Appearance

Camera

Pose

Sampled
Feature Fields

Posed
Feature Fields

Volume Rendering
of Feature Image

Neural Rendering
of Output Image

Figure 1: Overview. We represent scenes as compositional
generative neural feature fields. For a randomly sampled
camera, we volume render a feature image of the scene
based on individual feature fields. A 2D neural rendering
network converts the feature image into an RGB image.
While training only on raw image collections, at test time
we are able to control the image formation process wrt.
camera pose, object poses, as well as the objects’ shapes
and appearances. Further, our model generalizes beyond
the training data, e.g. we can synthesize scenes with more
objects than were present in the training images. Note that
for clarity we visualize volumes in color instead of features.
Despite these successes, synthesizing realistic 2D images is not the only aspect required in applications of generative models. The generation process should also be controllable in a simple and consistent manner. To this end,
many works [9, 25, 39, 43, 44, 48, 54, 71, 74, 97, 98] investigate how disentangled representations can be learned from
data without explicit supervision. Definitions of disentanglement vary [5, 53], but commonly refer to being able to
control an attribute of interest, e.g. object shape, size, or
pose, without changing other attributes. Most approaches,
however, do not consider the compositional nature of scenes
and operate in the 2D domain, ignoring that our world is
three-dimensional. This often leads to entangled representations (Fig. 2) and control mechanisms are not built-in, but
need to be discovered in the latent space a posteriori. These
properties, however, are crucial for successful applications,
e.g. a movie production where complex object trajectories

11453

