Learning Parallel Dense Correspondence from Spatio-Temporal Descriptors
for Efficient and Robust 4D Reconstruction
Jiapeng Tang1,4 , Dan Xu2 , Kui Jia ∗1,5,6 , and Lei Zhang3,4
1

School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, HKUST, HK
3
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, HK
4
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
5
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
6
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China

msjptang@mail.scut.edu.cn, danxu@cse.ust.hk, kuijia@scut.edu.cn, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Time

Abstract
This paper focuses on the task of 4D shape reconstruction from a sequence of point clouds. Despite the recent
success achieved by extending deep implicit representations
into 4D space [29], it is still a great challenge in two respects, i.e. how to design a flexible framework for learning robust spatio-temporal shape representations from 4D
point clouds, and develop an efﬁcient mechanism for capturing shape dynamics. In this work, we present a novel
pipeline to learn a temporal evolution of the 3D human
shape through spatially continuous transformation functions among cross-frame occupancy ﬁelds. The key idea is
to parallelly establish the dense correspondence between
predicted occupancy ﬁelds at different time steps via explicitly learning continuous displacement vector ﬁelds from robust spatio-temporal shape representations. Extensive comparisons against previous state-of-the-arts show the superior accuracy of our approach for 4D human reconstruction in the problems of 4D shape auto-encoding and completion, and a much faster network inference with about 8
times speedup demonstrates the signiﬁcant efﬁciency of our
approach. The trained models and implementation code are
available at https://github.com/tangjiapeng/
LPDC-Net.

1. Introduction
We are surrounded by spatio-temporally changing environments that consist of various dynamics, such as observer
∗ Corresponding author

(a) Input

(b) OFlow
IoU: 76.0%
Corr: 0.090
Time: 1.850s

(c) Ours

IoU: 79.5%
Corr: 0.077
Time: 0.247s

Figure 1: Given a sequence of 3D point clouds sampled in
space and time, our goal is to reconstruct time-varying surfaces with dense correspondences. Compared to the stateof-the-art, i.e. OFlow [29], our approach can obtain more
accurate geometries (higher IoU), better coherence (lower
correspondence error) while supporting 8x faster inference.
movements, object motions, and human articulations. Reconstructing the human bodies evolving over time is vital

6022

