MetaSCI: Scalable and Adaptive Reconstruction for Video Compressive Sensing
Zhengjue Wang† , Hao Zhang† , Ziheng Cheng, Bo Chen*

Xin Yuan*

National Laboratory of Radar Signal Processing, Xidian University, Xian, China

Bell Labs, NJ USA

{zhengjuewang,zhanghao xidian,zhchengxd}@163.com,bchen@mail.xidian.edu.cn

xyuan@bell-labs.com

Completely adapted

Abstract
To capture high-speed videos using a two-dimensional
detector, video snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) is a
promising system, where the video frames are coded by different masks and then compressed to a snapshot measurement. Following this, efficient algorithms are desired to reconstruct the high-speed frames, where the state-of-the-art
results are achieved by deep learning networks. However,
these networks are usually trained for specific small-scale
masks and often have high demands of training time and
GPU memory, which are hence not flexible to i) a new mask
with the same size and ii) a larger-scale mask. We address
these challenges by developing a Meta Modulated Convolutional Network for SCI reconstruction, dubbed MetaSCI.
MetaSCI is composed of a shared backbone for different
masks, and light-weight meta-modulation parameters to
evolve to different modulation parameters for each mask,
thus having the properties of fast adaptation to new masks
(or systems) and ready to scale to large data. Extensive simulation and real data results demonstrate the superior performance of our proposed approach. Our code is available
at https://github.com/xyvirtualgroup/MetaSCICVPR2021.

(a) Adaptation to a new mask
Training sub-tasks
Fast adaptation
Other sub-tasks
Large-scale video
Large-scale SCI

Large-scale mask

∑

2D
Snapshot measurement

(b) MetaSCI for large-scale SCI reconstruction by fast adaptation

Figure 1: Illustration of the fast adaptation property of MetaSCI,

1. Introduction
High-speed video imaging system is desirable in our
daily life, which often faces challenges in capturing and
saving high-dimensional (HD) data, e.g., high memory,
bandwidth and power demand. Inspired by compressive
sensing (CS) [2, 5] techniques, video snapshot compressive imaging (SCI) has attracted much attention, which enjoys the advantages of low memory, low bandwidth, low
power and potentially low cost [40]. The video SCI system constructs a pipeline of an optical hardware encoder
and a software decoder [39]. In one exposure time, the
optical encoder modulates the HD data via dynamic masks
and then compresses multiple high-speed frames into a twodimensional (2D) snapshot measurement. The decoder, on
the other hand, aims to recover or reconstruct the high† Equal contributions.

Still adapting

* Corresponding authors.

as training on 256 × 256 measurements and adapted to (a) a new
256 × 256 measurement compressed by different masks, and (b) a
768 × 1792 measurement compressed by large masks. The results
in (a) is evaluated on a benchmark data, Kobe [15]. Compared
with BIRNAT [4], a SOTA deep model, MetaSCI realizes much
faster adaptation. In (b), we decompose the large-scale SCI reconstruction task into 21 sub-tasks without overlap. MetaSCI is
trained on 4 sub-tasks, and then fast adapted to the others. After
the adaptation stage, MetaSCI can realize real-time reconstruction
using feed-forward mapping. By contrast, PnP [40] and GAP-TV
[38], the only two existing methods suitable for large-scale SCI,
need iterative optimization for every measurement.

speed video frames using advanced algorithms. This paper
focuses on video SCI reconstruction. More specifically, we
develop a fast adaptive decoder motivated by meta learning, which is flexible to different systems and ready to scale
to large data.

2083

