Learning the Predictability of the Future
Dı́dac Surı́s*, Ruoshi Liu*, Carl Vondrick
Columbia University
hyperfuture.cs.columbia.edu

Abstract
We introduce a framework for learning from unlabeled
video what is predictable in the future. Instead of committing up front to features to predict, our approach learns from
data which features are predictable. Based on the observation that hyperbolic geometry naturally and compactly encodes hierarchical structure, we propose a predictive model
in hyperbolic space. When the model is most confident, it
will predict at a concrete level of the hierarchy, but when
the model is not confident, it learns to automatically select
a higher level of abstraction. Experiments on two established datasets show the key role of hierarchical representations for action prediction. Although our representation is
trained with unlabeled video, visualizations show that action hierarchies emerge in the representation.

1. Introduction
The future often has narrow predictability. No matter
how much you study Fig. 1, you will not be able to anticipate the exact next action with confidence. Go ahead and
study it. Will they shake hands or high five?1
For the past decade, predicting the future has been a core
computer vision problem [79, 31, 34, 69, 48, 54, 15, 65, 66]
with a number of applications in robotics, security, and
health. Since large amounts of video are available for learning, the temporal structure in unlabeled video provides excellent incidental supervision for learning rich representations [50, 14, 38, 51, 78, 71, 61, 21, 65, 67, 13, 72, 74].
While visual prediction is challenging because it is an underconstrained problem, a series of results in neuroscience
have revealed a biological basis in the brain for how humans
anticipate outcomes in the future [35, 3, 60].
However, the central issue in computer vision has been
selecting what to predict in the future. The field has investigated a spectrum of options, ranging from generating pixels
and motions [70, 36, 37] to forecasting activities [1, 65, 68]
in the future. However, most representations are not adaptive to the fundamental uncertainties in video. While we
cannot forecast the concrete actions in Fig. 1 nor generate its
motions, all hope is not lost. Instead of forecasting whether
the people will high five or shake hands, there is something
else predictable here. We can “hedge the bet” and predict

Figure 1: The future is often uncertain. Are they going to shake
hands or high five?1 Instead of answering this question, we should
“hedge the bet” and predict the hyperonym that they will at least
greet each other. In this paper, we introduce a hierarchical predictive model for learning what is predictable from unlabeled video.

the abstraction that they will at least greet each other.
This paper introduces a framework for learning from unlabeled video what is predictable. Instead of committing
up front to a level of abstraction to predict, our approach
learns from data which features are predictable. Motivated
by how people organize action hierarchically [4], we propose a hierarchical predictive representation. Our approach
jointly learns a hierarchy of actions while also learning to
anticipate at the right level of abstraction.
Our method is based on the observation that hyperbolic geometry naturally and compactly encodes hierarchical structure. Unlike Euclidean geometry, hyperbolic space
can be viewed as the continuous analog of a tree [53] because tree-like graphs can be embedded in finite-dimension
with minimal distortion [19]. We leverage this property
and learn predictive models in hyperbolic space. When the
model is confident, it will predict at the concrete level of the
hierarchy, but when the model is not confident, it learns to
automatically select a higher-level of abstraction.
Experiments and visualizations show the pivotal role of
hierarchical representations for prediction. On two established video datasets, our results show predictive hyperbolic
representations are able to both recognize actions from partial observations as well as forecast them in the future better
than baselines. Although our representation is trained with
unlabeled video, visualizations also show action hierarchies
1 The answer is in Season 2, Episode 16 of the The Office.

*Equal contribution

12607

