Consensus Maximisation Using Influences of Monotone Boolean Functions
Ruwan Tennakoon† , David Suter‡ , Erchuan Zhang‡ , Tat-Jun Chin§ and Alireza Bab-Hadiashar†
†
RMIT University, Melbourne Australia. ‡ Edith Cowen University, Perth Australia.
§
University of Adelaide, Adelaide Australia.
{ruwan.tennakoon, abh}@rmit.edu.au, {d.suter, erchuan.zhang}@ecu.edu.au,
tat-jun.chin@adelaide.edu.au

Abstract
Consensus maximisation (MaxCon), which is widely
used for robust fitting in computer vision, aims to find the
largest subset of data that fits the model within some tolerance level. In this paper, we outline the connection between MaxCon problem and the abstract problem of finding
the maximum upper zero of a Monotone Boolean Function
(MBF) defined over the Boolean Cube. Then, we link the
concept of influences (in a MBF) to the concept of outlier
(in MaxCon) and show that influences of points belonging
to the largest structure in data would generally be smaller
under certain conditions. Based on this observation, we
present an iterative algorithm to perform consensus maximisation. Results for both synthetic and real visual data
experiments show that the MBF based algorithm is capable of generating a near optimal solution relatively quickly.
This is particularly important where there are large number
of outliers (gross or pseudo) in the observed data.

1. Introduction
The popular Maximum Consensus (MaxCon) criterion
for robust fitting (as typified by that of RANSAC [11]),
seeks the maximum sized feasible set. Here feasible means
that all data points belonging to a “structure” (the inlier set)
fits its model within a tolerance level.
n
Given a set of n data points D = {pi }i=1 and a tolerance level ǫ, the MaxCon criterion for robust fitting can be
written as:
max |I|

θ, I⊆D

subject to rpi (θ) ≤ ǫ

∀pi ∈ I

where rpi (θ) is the distance of pi from the model θ.
A subset I can be represented by length-n bit-vector, x,
where the i’th position of the bit vector denote the inclusion (xi = 1) or exclusion (xi = 0) of the data point i.

The above shows that, each subset can be represented by
a vertex of the n-dimensional Boolean Cube. Therefore,
any statement about which of the subsets are feasible, is
a statement on the evaluation of a Boolean function over
the n-dimensional Boolean Cube. This Boolean function
n
f : {0, 1} → {0, 1}, outputs 1 (for infeasible), or 0 (for
feasible) for any vertex of the Boolean Cube. Since MaxCon is a search for the maximum sized feasible subset of
the data, it is inherently a search on the Boolean Cube.
Such a view immediately opens the huge theory and very
many associated mathematical tools, developed during the
study of Boolean functions; for the purposes of the analysis of the MaxCon problem and for devising algorithms to
solve this problem.
Also, there is an additional significant observation. The
Boolean function associated with a MaxCon problem belongs to a special class of Boolean functions called the
Monotone Boolean Functions (MBF) [15].
Definition 1.1. A MBF of n variables is a mapping f :
n
{0, 1} → {0, 1} such that α ≺ β implies that f (α) ≤
f (β). Here we apply the natural ordering relation on ndimensional Boolean Cube: β follows α (α ≺ β) if for any
i, the equality αi ⩽ βi is satisfied.
This is easy to see: If a subset is feasible, then adding
more data to that subset can only move the function towards infeasibility and once infeasible adding more points
will not change the subset back to feasible. Likewise, deleting points from a subset can move only towards feasible.
MaxCon, when viewed in the above sketched framework, is
nothing more than the search for the maximum upper zero
(see the definition below) of the above-mentioned monotone infeasibility function.
Definition 1.2 (Upper zero of a MBF). Upper zero of the
MBF f (·) is a vertex α for which f (α) = 0 and, for all
α ≺ β the relation f (β) = 1 is satisfied.
Definition 1.3 (Maximum Upper zero of a MBF [16]).
Maximum Upper zero of the MBF f (·) is a vertex α for

2866

