Lighting, Reflectance and Geometry Estimation from 360◦ Panoramic Stereo
Junxuan Li1,2
1
Australian National University

Hongdong Li1
2
Data61-CSIRO, Australia

{junxuan.li; hongdong.li}@anu.edu.au

Abstract

1. Introduction
Intrinsic decomposition of scene properties is a longstanding and essential task in computer vision. It includes
the estimation of lighting, geometry, and reflectance of an
arbitrary scene. Inferring the above properties of a scene enables us to develop various novel applications, especially in
augmented reality, such as object insertion and scene modification. It is a challenging and extremely under-constrained
problem because of the complexity of light transportation
on complicated geometry and various material reflectances
in real-world. The majority of previous methods used perspective cameras for solving this problem. However, the
limited field of view of a perspective camera results in the
lack of observation of the entire scene, making this inverse
problem even more intractable.
To overcome the problem, we propose a method that uses
a pair of 360◦ images under equirectangular projection as
input. Our method utilizes this input to bring up many advantages that the perspective approach does not. Firstly, the
360◦ image captures the entire scene at once, offering us
an adequate observation for lighting estimation. Secondly,

yasumat@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp

360° Stereo
System

We propose a method for estimating high-definition
spatially-varying lighting, reflectance, and geometry of a
scene from 360◦ stereo images. Our model takes advantage
of the 360◦ input to observe the entire scene with geometric detail, then jointly estimates the scene’s properties with
physical constraints. We first reconstruct a near-field environment light for predicting the lighting at any 3D location
within the scene. Then we present a deep learning model
that leverages the stereo information to infer the reflectance
and surface normal. Lastly, we incorporate the physical
constraints between lighting and geometry to refine the reflectance of the scene. Both quantitative and qualitative experiments show that our method, benefiting from the 360◦
observation of the scene, outperforms prior state-of-the-art
methods and enables more augmented reality applications
such as mirror-objects insertion.

Yasuyuki Matsushita3
3
Osaka University, Japan

Stereo View 1

Stereo View 2

Reflectance

Object Insertion

Normal

Figure 1. Our system consists of two 360◦ cameras in a top-bottom
setting. We present the predicted reflectance and surface normal of
the scene at the bottom-left of this figure. The bottom-right are virtual mirror-objects relighted by our illumination map at two different locations. Our method can recognize the geometric difference
among 3D locations and preserve high-frequency information of
the lighting, enabling us to insert mirror-objects around the entire
scene with appealing reflection effects.

the stereo input naturally encodes the depth information,
making the geometry estimation possible. Furthermore, by
jointly leveraging the physical constraints between lighting
and geometry, the reflectance can be revealed. Figure. 1 illustrates the camera setting for capturing 360◦ stereo input
and the estimated results of our method.
Leveraging 360◦ stereo input, we achieve two strengths
in lighting estimation: (i) our lighting is spatially-varying
and 3D coherent, which means the lighting will be different and changing smoothly for different 3D locations condition on the scene geometry; (ii) our lighting is in highdefinition, which means it is generated in high-resolution
and contains high-frequency details of the scene to enable
mirror-like objects insertion. The lighting estimated by
110591

