Discrimination-Aware Mechanism for Fine-grained Representation Learning
Furong Xu, Meng Wang, Wei Zhang, Yuan Cheng, and Wei Chu
Ant Financial Services Group
{booyoungxu.xfr,darren.wm,ivy.zw,chengyuan.c,weichu.cw}@antgroup.com

Abstract
Recently, with the emergence of retrieval requirements
for certain individual in the same superclass, e.g., birds,
persons, cars, fine-grained recognition task has attracted a
significant amount of attention from academia and industry.
In fine-grained recognition scenario, the inter-class differences are quite diverse and subtle, which makes it challenging to extract all the discriminative cues. Traditional training mechanism optimizes the overall discriminativeness of
the whole feature. It may stop early when some feature elements has been trained to distinguish training samples well,
leaving other elements insufficiently trained for a feature.
This would result in a less generalizable feature extractor
that only captures major discriminative cues and ignores
subtle ones. Therefore, there is a need for a training mechanism that enforces the discriminativeness of all the elements in the feature to capture more the subtle visual cues.
In this paper, we propose a Discrimination-Aware Mechanism (DAM) that iteratively identifies insufficiently trained
elements and improves them. DAM is able to increase the
number of well learned elements, which captures more visual cues by the feature extractor. In this way, a more informative representation is learned, which brings better generalization performance. We show that DAM can be easily
applied to both proxy-based and pair-based loss functions,
and thus can be used in most existing fine-grained recognition paradigms. Comprehensive experiments on CUB200-2011, Cars196, Market-1501, and MSMT17 datasets
demonstrate the advantages of our DAM based loss over
the related state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
Fine-grained recognition aims at distinguishing each
subclasses on a specific superclass dataset, such as birds,
persons, cars. There are only a few effective cues that can
distinguish samples of different classes due to the samples
belong to a superclass. Meanwhile, images are usually captured at different times/places, resulting in various visual
differences appear in the same subclass. The extremely low

Feature Embedding

𝑥!

𝑓!

𝑥#

𝑓#

𝑥"

𝑓"

Original Feature Space

𝑓# 𝑤

!

𝑓"
𝑤"

DAM Feature Space

𝐹#
Optimization
Proxy-based
Loss

𝑓!

Pair-based
Loss

𝑤!

𝐹!

𝐹"
𝑤"

Figure 1. Illustration of DAM for representation learning. On top
left, a triplet (xa , xp , xn ) and their features fa , fp , fn are shown in
different colors. On top right, black vectors indicate class centers,
and the dotted circles indicate class distributions. On bottom right,
fa , fp and fn are mapped to a harder DAM feature space as Fa ,
Fp and Fn . Inter-class samples (Fa and Fn ) are pushed close and
intra-class samples (Fa and Fp ) are pushed away, as well as the
distributions of intra-class are enlarged. Then the new features by
DAM are inputed to loss function. The pipeline runs iteratively
and leads to a better generalization performance.

intra-class similarity and high inter-class similarity make
fine-grained recognition very challenging. Recently, with
the popularity of retrieving examples of a specific subclass
from the superclass database, this topic has been attracting a
significant amount of attention from academia and industry.
Current representation learning methods mainly focus on
three directions: (1) Designing powerful loss function to
extract robust feature embeddings [18, 29, 52, 53, 44], such
as proxy-based loss and pair-based loss. (2) Constructing
attention module to resolve local regions [15, 3, 24, 62, 66].
(3) Randomly erasing parameters or feature values during
training for better generalization performance [67, 10, 43,
13, 9]. With the powerful deep networks and large-scale
labeled benchmarks, these methods can obtain a relevant

813

