Orthogonal Over-Parameterized Training
Weiyang Liu1,2,* Rongmei Lin3,* Zhen Liu4 James M. Rehg5 Liam Paull4 Li Xiong3 Le Song5 Adrian Weller1,6
1

4

University of Cambridge 2 Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems 3 Emory University
Mila, Université de Montréal 5 Georgia Institute of Technology 6 Alan Turing Institute * Equal Contribution

Abstract
{v1,...,vn}
stay fixed

The inductive bias of a neural network is largely determined by the architecture and the training algorithm. To
achieve good generalization, how to effectively train a neural
network is of great importance. We propose a novel orthogonal over-parameterized training (OPT) framework that can
provably minimize the hyperspherical energy which characterizes the diversity of neurons on a hypersphere. By maintaining the minimum hyperspherical energy during training, OPT can greatly improve the empirical generalization.
Specifically, OPT fixes the randomly initialized weights of
the neurons and learns an orthogonal transformation that
applies to these neurons. We consider multiple ways to learn
such an orthogonal transformation, including unrolling orthogonalization algorithms, applying orthogonal parameterization, and designing orthogonality-preserving gradient
descent. For better scalability, we propose the stochastic
OPT which performs orthogonal transformation stochastically for partial dimensions of neurons. Interestingly, OPT
reveals that learning a proper coordinate system for neurons
is crucial to generalization. We provide some insights on
why OPT yields better generalization. Extensive experiments
validate the superiority of OPT over the standard training.

1. Introduction
The inductive bias encoded in a neural network is generally determined by two major aspects: how the neural
network is structured (i.e., network architecture) and how
the neural network is optimized (i.e., training algorithm). For
the same network architecture, using different training algorithms could lead to a dramatic difference in generalization
performance [36, 60] even if the training loss is close to zero,
implying that different training procedures lead to different
inductive biases. Therefore, how to effectively train a neural
network that generalize well remains an open challenge.
Recent theories [16, 15, 34, 45] suggest the importance
of over-parameterization in linear neural networks. For
example, [16] shows that optimizing an underdetermined
quadratic objective over a matrix M with gradient descent

Output

Input

{v1,...,vn}
Random initialized neurons
in the same layer

Hyperspherical energy
characterizes relative positions
Learnable
orthogonal R

{Rv1,...,Rvn}
Final neurons
in the same layer

Learning the coordinate system

Figure 1: Overview of the orthogonal over-parameterized training framework. OPT learns an orthogonal transformation for each layer in the neural
network, while keeping the randomly initialized neuron weights fixed.

on a factorization of M leads to an implicit regularization
that may improve generalization. There is also strong empirical evidence [11, 51] that over-parameterzing the convolutional filters under some regularity is beneficial to generalization. Our paper aims to leverage the power of overparameterization and explore more intrinsic structural priors
in order to train a well-performing neural network.
Motivated by this goal, we propose a generic orthogonal over-parameterized training (OPT) framework for neural networks. Different from conventional neural training,
OPT over-parameterizes a neuron w ∈ Rd with the multiplication of a learnable layer-shared orthogonal matrix
R ∈ Rd×d and a fixed randomly-initialized weight vector
v ∈ Rd , and it follows that the equivalent weight for the neuron is w = Rv. Once each element of the neuron weight
v has been randomly initialized by a zero-mean Gaussian
distribution [20, 14], we fix them throughout the entire training process. Then OPT learns a layer-shared orthogonal
transformation R that is applied to all the neurons (in the
same layer). An illustration of OPT is given in Fig. 1. In
contrast to standard neural training, OPT decomposes the
neuron into an orthogonal transformation R that learns a
proper coordinate system, and a weight vector v that controls the specific position of the neuron. Essentially, the
weights {v1 , · · · , vn ∈ Rd } of different neurons determine
the relative positions, while the layer-shared orthogonal matrix R specifies the coordinate system. Such a decoupled
parameterization enables strong modeling flexibility.
Another motivation of OPT comes from an empirical observation that neural networks with lower hyperspherical

7251

