Bidirectional Projection Network for Cross Dimension Scene Understanding
Wenbo Hu1,3 * Hengshuang Zhao2 * Li Jiang1 Jiaya Jia1 Tien-Tsin Wong1,3†
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 University of Oxford
3
Shenzhen Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality and Human Interaction Technology, SIAT, CAS
{wbhu, lijiang, leojia, ttwong}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
2D image representations are in regular grids and can be
processed efficiently, whereas 3D point clouds are unordered
and scattered in 3D space. The information inside these two
visual domains is well complementary, e.g., 2D images have
fine-grained texture while 3D point clouds contain plentiful
geometry information. However, most current visual recognition systems process them individually. In this paper, we
present a bidirectional projection network (BPNet) for joint
2D and 3D reasoning in an end-to-end manner. It contains
2D and 3D sub-networks with symmetric architectures, that
are connected by our proposed bidirectional projection module (BPM). Via the BPM, complementary 2D and 3D information can interact with each other in multiple architectural
levels, such that advantages in these two visual domains can
be combined for better scene recognition. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experimental evaluations show that
joint reasoning over 2D and 3D visual domains can benefit
both 2D and 3D scene understanding simultaneously. Our
BPNet achieves top performance on the ScanNetV2 benchmark for both 2D and 3D semantic segmentation. Code is
available at https://github.com/wbhu/BPNet.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding is a fundamental while challenging
problem in computer vision. Multiple sensors are used to
capture the scene information. The 2D camera is the most
common sensor in our daily life. It projects the 3D space to
image planes with plenty of fine-grained textures captured.
2D images with pixels densely arranged in regular grids can
be processed efficiently with deep convolutional neural networks. We have witnessed remarkable improvements on 2D
visual reasoning, e.g., image classification [28, 53, 48, 17]
and semantic segmentation [35, 4, 66, 72]. 3D sensors, on
the other hand, can provide important geometry information
of the scene. 3D data is usually represented in points that
* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

hengshuang.zhao@eng.ox.ac.uk

are unordered and irregularly scattered in 3D space. Conventional convolution that relies on ordered grids can not be
directly adapted to 3D data. Hence, several tailor-made neural networks [41, 32, 12] have been proposed for 3D scene
recognition and understanding.
We observe that the information inside 2D and 3D data is
well complementary. 2D images provide detailed texture and
color information while 3D point clouds contain strong shape
and geometry knowledge. Although the techniques for individual 2D and 3D reasoning are studied a lot in the literature,
the exploration of combining both 2D and 3D data for recognition is very limited. Existing methods that utilize both 2D
and 3D data for recognition mostly adopt the unidirectional
scheme. For example, to incorporate 3D information for
2D scene understanding, some methods either encode depth
into geocentric inputs [13] or incorporate it into convolution
operations [44, 60]. But depth map only contains limited
geometry information as it is view-dependent. The occluded
part under the viewpoint together with the global context is
missing. In the other aspect, 3DMV [8] and MVPNet [24]
utilize 2D information to assist the 3D recognition by first
extracting multi-view image features and then lifting them
into 3D space for fusing with the 3D features. However, we
argue that the unidirectional scheme cannot fully leverage
the complementary information inside the 2D and 3D data,
bidirectionally interacting and fusing 2D and 3D features can
better combine the advantages of these two visual domains
as evidenced by our experiments.
In this paper, we present a Bidirectional Projection Network (BPNet) to enable information inside the 2D and 3D
domains to flow bidirectionally at the network architectural
level. Such that the complementary information can be well
combined for joint 2D and 3D scene understanding in an
end-to-end manner. Our method adopts two similar U-Net
structures to process 2D and 3D data and introduces a Bidirectional Projection Module (BPM) to bidirectionally fuse
the multi-view 2D and 3D features. In this way, both 2D
and 3D sides can benefit from each other. The overall framework is shown in Figure 1. To be mentioned, we employ
BPM at multiple pyramid levels, such that the features from

14373

