KSM: Fast Multiple Task Adaption via Kernel-wise Soft Mask Learning
Li Yang, Zhezhi He, Junshan Zhang, Deliang Fan
School of Electrical, Computer and Energy Engineering, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ
{lyang166, zhezhihe, Junshan.Zhang, dfan}@asu.edu

Abstract

updated over a sequence of tasks, performing knowledge
transfer from old tasks to the new one.

Deep Neural Networks (DNN) could forget the knowledge about earlier tasks when learning new tasks, which is
known as catastrophic forgetting. To learn new task without forgetting, recently, the mask-based learning method
(e.g. piggyback [10]) is proposed to address this issue by
learning only a binary element-wise mask, while keeping
the backbone model fixed. However, the binary mask has
limited modeling capacity for new tasks. A more recent
work [5] proposes a compress-grow-based method (CPG)
to achieve better accuracy for new tasks by partially training backbone model, but with order-higher training cost,
which makes it infeasible to be deployed into popular stateof-the-art edge-/mobile-learning. The primary goal of this
work is to simultaneously achieve fast and high-accuracy
multi task adaption in continual learning setting. Thus motivated, we propose a new training method called Kernelwise Soft Mask (KSM), which learns a kernel-wise hybrid
binary and real-value soft mask for each task. Such a hybrid
mask can be viewed as a superposition of a binary mask and
a properly scaled real-value tensor, which offers a richer
representation capability without low-level kernel support
to meet the objective of low hardware overhead. We validate KSM on multiple benchmark datasets against recent
state-of-the-art methods (e.g. Piggyback, Packnet, CPG,
etc.), which shows good improvement in both accuracy and
training cost.

The typical way to alleviate the catastrophic forgetting
issue is to ﬁne-tune the backbone model w.r.t the new task
with regularization [8, 6, 14, 1], thus preventing drastic
weight update. Nevertheless, such method has limited success when many new tasks need to be learned. Different
from that, Piggyback [10], a mask-based continual learning method, is proposed to address this issue by learning
only binary (i.e., 0,1) element-wise masks w.r.t the weights,
while keeping the backbone model ﬁxed. Such mask is then
multiplied by the ﬁxed network weights, determining relevant or irrelevant for the current task. Since it only updates
binary masks for each new task during training, it can be
trained in fast manner, but with limited modeling capacity. To further improve the adaption capacity without forgetting, the compress-grow-based approach (e.g., CPG [5])
compresses (via pruning) and selectively expands the model
iteratively. After punning, it utilizes the Piggyback method
to learn a mask for the preserved weights as shown in Fig.1,
and also retrains the released weights for current task. If
the accuracy goal is not attained, it will expand the model
by adding new ﬁlters. Such method outperforms Piggyback [10], as it involves additional task-speciﬁc parameters,
but with order-higher training cost.

1. Introduction
It is well-known that human and animals can learn new
tasks without forgetting old ones. However, a practical limitation of Deep Neural Network (DNN) is their high degree
of specialization to a single task and domain. For example,
given a backbone DNN model, conventional ﬁne-tuning of
the model for new tasks could easily result in the forgetting of old knowledge upon earlier tasks, thus degrading the
performance. Such phenomenon is known as catastrophic
forgetting, which widely exists in continual learning [6].
The continual learning refers that a model is incrementally

Motivation: Although Piggyback could learn new tasks
in a fast manner, the binary mask has limited representation
capacity, which gets non-ideal accuracy gain. As the countermeasure, CPG improves the representation capacity via
combining the mask learning and additional task-speciﬁc
parameters retraining. However, such complex training procedure suffers from extremely high training cost (i.e., training time and computing resources) that makes it impossible
to deploy into state-of-the-art popular edge based or mobile
computing based continual learning domain. These limitations motivate us to explore a new mask-based learning
method that can rich the representation capacity, and more
importantly, without involving additional training cost.
Contribution: In this work, we propose a new learning method called Kernel-wise Soft Mask (KSM), which
learns a kernel-wise hybrid binary and real-value soft mask
113845

