Slimmable Compressive Autoencoders for Practical Neural Image Compression
Fei Yang1,2 , Luis Herranz2 , Yongmei Cheng1 , Mikhail G. Mozerov2
1
School of Automation, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
2
Computer Vision Center, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain
{fyang,lherranz,mozerov}@cvc.uab.es, chengym@nwpu.edu.cn

Variable
Rate-dist. Total
Training
Method
perform. memory Rate Memory FLOPs time
JPEG,JP2K
Low Very low Yes
BPG
High
Low Yes
Single CAE
Optimal Medium No
No
No
Low
Multiple CAEs Optimal High Yes
Yes
Yes
High
BScale[36]
Medium Medium Yes
No
No
Low
No
No
Low
MAE[42],cAE[10] High Medium Yes
SlimCAE
Optimal Medium Yes
Yes
Yes
Low

Abstract

1. Introduction
Visual information (e.g. images, videos) plays a central
role in human content creation, communication and interaction. Efficient storage and transmission through constrained
channels requires compression. We can thus consider the
basic (lossy) image compression problem, where the goal
is to obtain the shortest binary representation (i.e. lowest
rate bitstream) that can represent the input image at a certain level of fidelity (i.e. minimum distortion). Thus, low
rate and low distortion are fundamentally opposing objectives, in practice involving a rate-distortion (RD) tradeoff.
The more challenging problem of practical image compression further includes real-world constraints such as memory, computation and latency, related with their implementation in resource-constrained devices (e.g. mobile phones)
and networks. Similarly, video compression addresses the
same problem for sequences of images, where low complexity and latency become even more critical [41]. Many
applications also require dynamic control of the RD tradeoff

Table 1: Comparison of compression methods.
Encoder

Bitstream

Decoder

Optimal
Distortion (PSNR)

Neural image compression leverages deep neural networks to outperform traditional image codecs in ratedistortion performance. However, the resulting models are
also heavy, computationally demanding and generally optimized for a single rate, limiting their practical use. Focusing on practical image compression, we propose slimmable
compressive autoencoders (SlimCAEs), where rate (R) and
distortion (D) are jointly optimized for different capacities.
Once trained, encoders and decoders can be executed at
different capacities, leading to different rates and complexities. We show that a successful implementation of SlimCAEs requires suitable capacity-specific RD tradeoffs. Our
experiments show that SlimCAEs are highly flexible models
that provide excellent rate-distortion performance, variable
rate, and dynamic adjustment of memory, computational
cost and latency, thus addressing the main requirements of
practical image compression.

Naive
ity
plex )
Com FLOPs
,
B
(M
Rate (bpp)

Figure 1: Variable rate and complexity adaptive image compression with a slimmable compressive autoencoder.
to adapt to specific rate requirements (i.e. variable rate).
Traditional methods (e.g. JPEG [40], JPEG2000 [25,
31], BPG [32]) follow the transform coding paradigm with
carefully designed linear transforms and coding tools, to effectively address practical image compression. Encoding is
block-based and iterative. RD is optimized during encoding
by exhaustively searching optimal block partitions and coding and prediction modes. Complexity can be controlled by
limiting the range of coding and prediction modes, or using
heuristics. The rate can be estimated from previous blocks,
and controlled by adjusting quantization parameters.
A more recent paradigm is neural image compression
(NIC) [37, 6, 11, 38, 36, 15, 20, 21, 22, 19] (or learned image compression), which exploits flexible nonlinear transforms and entropy models parametrized as deep neural networks. The framework typically consists of an autoencoder followed by quantization and entropy coding (henceforth a compressive autoencoder -CAE- [36]). While they
can outperform traditional image codecs in RD, they are

4998

