Adaptive Image Transformer for One-Shot Object Detection
Ding-Jie Chen1 , He-Yen Hsieh1 , and Tyng-Luh Liu1,2
1

Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taiwan
2

Taiwan AI Labs

Abstract
One-shot object detection tackles a challenging task that
aims at identifying within a target image all object instances
of the same class, implied by a query image patch. The
main difficulty lies in the situation that the class label of
the query patch and its respective examples are not available in the training data. Our main idea leverages the concept of language translation to boost metric-learning-based
detection methods. Specifically, we emulate the language
translation process to adaptively translate the feature of
each object proposal to better correlate the given query
feature for discriminating the class-similarity among the
proposal-query pairs. To this end, we propose the Adaptive
Image Transformer (AIT) module that deploys an attentionbased encoder-decoder architecture to simultaneously explore intra-coder and inter-coder (i.e., each proposal-query
pair) attention. The adaptive nature of our design turns
out to be flexible and effective in addressing the one-shot
learning scenario. With the informative attention cues, the
proposed model excels in predicting the class-similarity between the target image proposals and the query image patch.
Though conceptually simple, our model significantly outperforms a state-of-the-art technique, improving the unseenclass object classification from 63.8 mAP and 22.0 AP50
to 72.2 mAP and 24.3 AP50 on the PASCAL-VOC and MSCOCO benchmark datasets, respectively.

1. Introduction
Object detection is considered one of the core techniques
in computer vision. Learning such a system [24, 27, 28, 35]
reliably often requires a large amount of labeled training
data over a wide range of object categories . These days a
state-of-the-art object detector is expected to perform well
in localizing those objects in a scene, whose class labels
have been seen in training, but it can still be easily confused
by those of unseen classes. To alleviate the predicament,
the task of One-Shot object Detection (OSD) [2, 12, 26]

Figure 1: Adaptive Image Transformer (AIT): The proposed
AIT module can adaptively represent each region proposal
so that the similarity to the query patch can be properly evaluated. Specifically, AIT translates the feature of a region
proposal to match the query feature. The adaptive mechanism can improve the similarity measurement and boost the
performance of our metric-learning based one-shot object
detector. Here the illustrated visual features are selected
from the 508th channel of ResNet-50 stage-4.

is introduced to extend the system to detect objects of an
arbitrary unseen class, which is implicitly hinted by a given
inference query often in the form of an image patch.
Understandably, the OSD problem leads to a challenging task as on-line model fine-tuning is not performed and
less feasible under the one-shot setting. In addition, even
of the same object class, the query and the corresponding
objects in a target image could differ substantially in size,
shape, color, texture and appearance. To account for such
unforeseen variations, we aim to develop a neural network
approach that explores the multi-head attention mechanism
to adaptively represent each potential region (i.e., a region
proposal in our formulation) so that its relatedness to the
query patch can be properly evaluated. Like in most of the
attention-based architectures, the proposed network design
may appear to be engineered solely for better performance. It

12247

