Learning to Associate Every Segment for Video Panoptic Segmentation
Sanghyun Woo1

Dahun Kim1
1

KAIST

Joon-Young Lee2
2

In So Kweon1

Adobe Research

Abstract
Temporal correspondence - linking pixels or objects
across frames - is a fundamental supervisory signal for the
video models. For the panoptic understanding of dynamic
scenes, we further extend this concept to every segment.
Specifically, we aim to learn coarse segment-level matching
and fine pixel-level matching together. We implement this
idea by designing two novel learning objectives. To validate
our proposals, we adopt a deep siamese model and train the
model to learn the temporal correspondence on two different
levels (i.e., segment and pixel) along with the target task.
At inference time, the model processes each frame independently without any extra computation and post-processing.
We show that our per-frame inference model can achieve
new state-of-the-art results on Cityscapes-VPS and VIPER
datasets. Moreover, due to its high efficiency, the model
runs in a fraction of time (3×) compared to the previous
state-of-the-art approach.

1. Introduction
A holistic understanding of a video requires pixel-level
information of different semantics, object instances, background stuffs as well as their temporal changes. Despite
being very challenging, having such video understanding is
crucial for various vision applications such as autonomous
driving, robot control, video editing, and augmented reality. Video semantic segmentation has been regarded as one
of the representative proxies for this ambitious goal. The
community has proposed a large number of learning-based
approaches under two main research directions of improving
accuracy [9,11,12,21,31,50] and efficiency [20,27,30,38,51].
While there has been a flurry of advances in model designs,
significantly less effort has been made to the training objectives. The main bottleneck of developing a useful supervision signal is the scarcity of video annotations available.
Most video segmentation benchmarks [7, 49] provide annotations for only a single frame per video clip, which limits
these annotations still to an image level.
In line with the growing importance of the field and to

Figure 1: Overview of our approach. Temporal correspondence
learning is fundamental for video understanding. In this work,
we extend this concept to every segment in a video. Specifically,
given a pair of frames, It and It+δ , a siamese model, f , learns to
associate every segment at two different levels jointly: segmentlevel via contrastive loss and pixel-level via tube-matching loss.

meet the high demand for video labels, Kim et al. [24] recently presented a new challenging dense video understanding problem called video panoptic segmentation (VPS) and
presented a pair of video annotations: Cityscapes-VPS and
VIPER datasets. The problem unifies the existing video
semantic segmentation [11, 38, 50] and video instance segmentation [2, 48]. It aims at a simultaneous prediction of
object classes, masks, instance id associations, and semantic segmentation for all pixels in a video. The two VPS
benchmarks provide real-world and simulation-based video
datasets, opening up the possibilities to probe new videospecific training signals.
Identifying temporal correspondence - “what went
where” - in a video is a crucial requirement of robust visual
reasoning in space and time. Numerous methods for learning temporal correspondences, from pixel-level to object-

2705

