DeepSurfels: Learning Online Appearance Fusion
Marko Mihajlovic1
1

Silvan Weder1

Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich

Marc Pollefeys1,2
2

Martin R. Oswald1

Microsoft Mixed Reality and AI Zurich Lab

OnlineReconstruction.github.io/DeepSurfels

Abstract
We present DeepSurfels, a novel hybrid scene representation for geometry and appearance information. DeepSurfels combines explicit and neural building blocks to jointly
encode geometry and appearance information. In contrast
to established representations, DeepSurfels better represents high-frequency textures, is well-suited for online updates of appearance information, and can be easily combined with machine learning methods. We further present
an end-to-end trainable online appearance fusion pipeline
that fuses information from RGB images into the proposed
scene representation and is trained using self-supervision
imposed by the reprojection error with respect to the input
images. Our method compares favorably to classical texture mapping approaches as well as recent learning-based
techniques. Moreover, we demonstrate lower runtime, improved generalization capabilities, and better scalability to
larger scenes compared to existing methods.

1. Introduction
Realistic 3D model reconstruction from images and
depth sensors has been a central and long-studied problem
in computer vision. Appearance mapping is often treated
as a separate post-processing step that follows 3D surface
reconstruction and is usually approached using batch-based
optimization methods [18, 19, 23, 87] that are unsuitable
for many applications that do not have access to the entire dataset at processing time, for instance, robot navigation [8, 9, 26], augmented reality [51, 68], and virtual reality [14, 43, 44] applications, Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping (SLAM) systems [93], online scene perception methods [28, 69], and many others.
Common online fusion methods like KinectFusion [50]
are well suited for online geometry fusion and can efficiently handle noise and topological changes. However,
due to their high memory requirements at high voxel resolutions, they have strong limitations when it comes to
encoding high-frequency appearance details on the surface. On the other hand, meshes with high-resolution tex-

ture maps [19, 23, 87] are well-suited for encoding highfrequency appearance information in an efficient manner,
but they have difficulties in handling topology changes in
an online reconstruction setting. Moreover, recent learningbased approaches [49, 54, 72, 73] have achieved highquality results by learning geometry and texture mapping
directly from RGB images. However, they are not well
suited for local online updates, do not scale to large-scale
scenes, and easily overfit to the training data.
In this paper, we approach the problem of online appearance reconstruction from RGB-D images by combining the
advantages of 1) implicit grids, which easily handle topological changes and where low resolution is often sufficient
to encode the scene topology, 2) scalable high-frequency
appearance along the surface via texture maps or learned
feature maps, and 3) a learned scene representation to build
a framework for learning-based appearance fusion that allows for online processing and scalability to large scenes.
To this end, we propose a novel scene representation DeepSurfels and an efficient learning-based online appearance
fusion pipeline which is illustrated in Figure 1.
Our DeepSurfels representation is a hybrid between
an implicit surface that encodes the topology and lowfrequency geometric details and a surfel representation that
encodes high-frequency geometry and appearance information in form of surface-aligned patches. These patches are
arranged in a sparse grid and consist of surface-aligned texels that encode appearance information either in the classical form of RGB color values or, as proposed, via learned
feature vectors. The sparse grid allows for efficient volumetric rendering and enables explicit scene updates that
are crucial for online fusion, while the 2D patches enable
quadratic memory storage complexity like meshes or sparse
grid structures. Depending on the DeepSurfel parameters
it can approximate between simple colored voxels (high
grid resolution, 1 × 1 patches) and textured meshes with
high texture atlas resolutions (lower grid resolution, higher
patch resolution). Our online appearance fusion pipeline iteratively fuses RGB-D frames into estimated DeepSurfels
geometry and is optimized by using a differentiable renderer for self-supervision and the reprojection error as train-

14524

