Style-based Point Generator with Adversarial Rendering for
Point Cloud Completion
Chulin Xie1∗
Chuxin Wang2∗
Bo Zhang3
Hao Yang3
Dong Chen3
Fang Wen3
1
2
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
University of Science and Technology of China
3
Microsoft Research Asia
chulinx2@illinois.edu

wcx0602@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we proposed a novel Style-based Point
Generator with Adversarial Rendering (SpareNet) for point
cloud completion. Firstly, we present the channel-attentive
EdgeConv to fully exploit the local structures as well as the
global shape in point features. Secondly, we observe that
the concatenation manner used by vanilla foldings limits its
potential of generating a complex and faithful shape. Enlightened by the success of StyleGAN, we regard the shape
feature as style code that modulates the normalization layers during the folding, which considerably enhances its capability. Thirdly, we realize that existing point supervisions,
e.g., Chamfer Distance or Earth Mover’s Distance, cannot
faithfully reﬂect the perceptual quality of the reconstructed
points. To address this, we propose to project the completed points to depth maps with a differentiable renderer
and apply adversarial training to advocate the perceptual
realism under different viewpoints. Comprehensive experiments on ShapeNet and KITTI prove the effectiveness of our
method, which achieves state-of-the-art quantitative performance while offering superior visual quality.

1. Introduction
As the 3D scanning devices such as depth camera and
LiDAR become ubiquitous, point clouds get easier to acquire and have recently attracted a surge of research interest
in the vision and robotics community. However, raw points
directly captured by those devices are usually sparse and
incomplete due to the limited sensor resolution and occlusions. Hence, it is essential to infer the complete shape from
the partial observation so as to facilitate various downstream
tasks [12] such as classiﬁcation and shape manipulation as
required in real-world applications.
∗ Equal contribution. Authors did this work during the internship at
Microsoft Research Asia.

{zhanbo,haya,doch,fangwen}@microsoft.com

Due to the irregularity and unorderedness of point
clouds, one workaround is to leverage intermediate representations, e.g., depth map [15] or voxels [35], that are
more amenable to neural networks. However, the representation transform may result in information loss, so the detailed structures can not be well preserved. With the emergence of point-based networks [25, 26, 29, 32, 12], predominant methods [37, 39, 11, 33, 21, 28, 5, 31, 17, 41] nowadays digest the partial inputs directly and estimate the complete point clouds in an end-to-end manner. These methods
typically follow the encoder-decoder paradigm and adopt
permutation invariant losses [8], e.g., Chamfer Distance or
Earth Mover’s Distance, for regressing the groundtruth.
Ideally, the point completion network should simultaneously meet the following needs: 1) The output is desired to
faithfully preserve the detailed structures of the partial input; 2) The network has a strong imaginative power to infer
the global shape from the partial clue; 3) the local structure should be sharp, accurate, and free from the corruption
by the noise points. Nonetheless, existing methods fail to
achieve the above goals because of the neglecting of the
global context during the feature extraction, the insufﬁcient
capability of modeling the structural details, and the lack of
perceptual metrics for measuring the visual quality.
In this paper, we propose Style-based Point generator
with Adversarial REndering, i.e., the SpareNet, to circumvent the above issues. We have made improvements from
encoder, generator, and loss function, and proposed 3 new
modules: channel-attentive EdgeConv, Style-based Point
Generator, and Adversarial Point Rendering. Firstly, while
previous works employ PointNet or PointNet++ to learn
point-wise or local features, we propose channel-attentive
EdgeConv (Section 3.1), which not only considers the local
information within the k -nearest neighbors but also wisely
leverages the global context by aggregating the global features and weighting the feature channel attention for each
point accordingly. The fusion of local and global context

4619

