Fostering Generalization in Single-view 3D Reconstruction by Learning a
Hierarchy of Local and Global Shape Priors
Jan Bechtold12
1

Maxim Tatarchenko1

Volker Fischer1

Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence

2

Thomas Brox2

University of Freiburg

Abstract
Single-view 3D object reconstruction has seen much
progress, yet methods still struggle generalizing to novel
shapes unseen during training. Common approaches predominantly rely on learned global shape priors and, hence,
disregard detailed local observations. In this work, we address this issue by learning a hierarchy of priors at different
levels of locality from ground truth input depth maps. We
argue that exploiting local priors allows our method to efficiently use input observations, thus improving generalization in visible areas of novel shapes. At the same time, the
combination of local and global priors enables meaningful
hallucination of unobserved parts resulting in consistent 3D
shapes. We show that the hierarchical approach generalizes
much better than the global approach. It generalizes not
only between different instances of a class but also across
classes and to unseen arrangements of objects.

1. Introduction
The usual problem setting of single-view 3D reconstruction assumes an input image with a single dominant object,
where the geometry of both the visible and the invisible
part of this object shall be reconstructed. For the invisible parts, reconstruction must rely on shape priors, which
can be based on the object class, symmetry, or smoothness.
The geometry of the visible parts can be obtained, at least
partially, from sensing data (e.g., depth, texture, shading).
Most existing approaches are encoder-decoder networks [7, 10, 12, 19, 27, 30, 34] and have been shown to
barely generalize to novel shape categories [38]. Only few
works have targeted generalization explicitly [3, 32, 38].
They argue that, for better generalization, the problem
should be split into two parts: (1) prediction of a geometric
representation of the visible parts from a single RGB image
and (2) prediction of the final shape from the geometric representation. In this paper, we focus on the prediction of the
object shape and assume the ground truth depth map to be

Input depth

Ground truth

Global prior (ONet)

Hierarchical prior (HPN, ours)

Figure 1. We employ a hierarchical shape prior to enable recombination of partial shapes observed during training. This significantly improves generalization compared to conventional global
shape priors.

already given as input. This reflects the argument that an intermediate depth map helps generalization [38] and should
make the reconstruction of the visible parts almost trivial.
Surprisingly, however, existing approaches fail to generalize even in the visible areas, despite the perfect input.
Consider the example in Fig. 1: ONet [19] trained on single chairs uses its learned prior to reconstruct the shape for
an input with two chairs. Although the required shape prior
(chairs) has been seen during training, the approach cannot
use this knowledge to explain the clean observation of two
chairs (Fig. 1 top left), which leads to an unresolved competition between observation and prior (Fig. 1 bottom left).
This reveals a general problem of existing approaches: not
only do they not generalize to new object classes, they even
do not generalize to new combinations of the same training

15880

