Scalable Differential Privacy with Sparse Network Finetuning
Zelun Luo

Daniel J. Wu
Ehsan Adeli
Stanford University

Li Fei-Fei

Abstract

1. Introduction
As computer vision becomes increasingly ubiquitous,
the robustness and privacy of vision models are a growing
concern. In fact, there are ample examples of privacy attacks on standard deep learning models successfully revealing the contents of training data [40, 16, 35] – one attack
was able to reconstruct credit card and social security numbers [7]. This is particularly concerning in the field of computer vision, where many applications, e.g., medical imaging, work with sensitive and legally-protected data. The
onus of protecting private data falls upon machine learning practitioners, and, indeed, this responsibility may be
encoded into law by regulations such as the EU’s General
Data Privacy Regulation (GDPR) and the California Consumer Privacy Act [11].
Although many notions of privacy have been proposed,
notably including k-anonymity [43], and its extension l-

Shallow network,

easy task

Shallow network, difficult task
Deep network,
easy task
Deep network, difficult task

Utility

We propose a novel method for privacy-preserving training of deep neural networks leveraging public, out-domain
data. While differential privacy (DP) has emerged as a
mechanism to protect sensitive data in training datasets,
its application to complex visual recognition tasks remains challenging. Traditional DP methods, such as
Differentially-Private Stochastic Gradient Descent (DPSGD), perform well only on simple datasets and shallow
networks, while recent transfer learning-based DP methods often make unrealistic assumptions about the availability and distribution of public data. In this work, we argue
that minimizing the number of trainable parameters is the
key to improving the privacy-performance tradeoff of DP
on complex visual recognition tasks. Inspired by this argument, we also propose a novel transfer learning paradigm
that finetunes a very sparse subnetwork with DP. We conduct extensive experiments and ablation studies on two visual recognition tasks: CIFAR-100 ! CIFAR-10 (standard
DP setting) and the CD-FSL challenge (few-shot, multiple
levels of domain shifts) and demonstrate competitive experimental performance.

Our paradigm

Privacy

Figure 1. We propose a training framework that improves the
privacy-utility trade-off for deep neural networks on complex visual recognition tasks. By introducing a novel transfer learning
paradigm, our model trained with differential privacy is able to
achieve a performance comparable to its non-private counterpart.

diversity [31], differential privacy [13] has emerged as the
gold-standard for the field. Differential privacy is a formalization of the notion of data privacy, providing strict upper
bounds on the information about a data record, which may
be obtained from resulting models [13, 9]. This is an attractive guarantee – many applications of computer vision
involve sensitive datasets, which carry a strong obligation
to protect user data in which the exposure of even singular
data records is problematic [42, 3]. Differentially private
models also benefit from several auxiliary guarantees, such
as robustness to adversarial examples [27], and compliance
under data privacy laws [11]. Although differential privacy
is not a concept native to machine learning research, arising
instead from research into database privacy [13], differentially private machine learning has been a burgeoning field
of research [1].
In practice, there are many obstacles to building powerful differentially private machine learning systems. There
is an inherent tradeoff between model utility and privacy
[18] – larger networks, in particular, suffer from far greater
disruption during training compared to their non-private

5059

