On Learning the Geodesic Path for Incremental Learning
Christian Simon†,§ ,
†

Piotr Koniusz§,† ,

The Australian National University

♣

Mehrtash Harandi♣,§

Monash University

§

Data61-CSIRO

firstname.lastname@{anu.edu.au,monash.edu,data61.csiro.au}

Abstract
Neural networks notoriously suffer from the problem of
catastrophic forgetting, the phenomenon of forgetting the
past knowledge when acquiring new knowledge. Overcoming catastrophic forgetting is of significant importance to emulate the process of “incremental learning”, where the model
is capable of learning from sequential experience in an efficient and robust way. State-of-the-art techniques for incremental learning make use of knowledge distillation towards
preventing catastrophic forgetting. Therein, one updates the
network while ensuring that the network’s responses to previously seen concepts remain stable throughout updates. This
in practice is done by minimizing the dissimilarity between
current and previous responses of the network one way or
another. Our work contributes a novel method to the arsenal
of distillation techniques. In contrast to the previous state
of the art, we propose to firstly construct low-dimensional
manifolds for previous and current responses and minimize
the dissimilarity between the responses along the geodesic
connecting the manifolds. This induces a more formidable
knowledge distillation with smooth properties which preserves the past knowledge more efficiently as observed by
our comprehensive empirical study. 1

1. Introduction
Humans are able to gather and grow their knowledge gradually and effortlessly while preserving their past knowledge.
In pursuing a similar capability at an algorithmic level and in
the so-called Incremental Learning (IL), an artificial machine
must learn and remember various tasks or concepts [22] to
accomplish a more broadened set of objectives. Formally,
a learning algorithm in IL will receive its objectives (e.g.,
recognizing new classes) gradually. This is in contrast to conventional learning paradigm where the objectives and data
are available from the beginning to the learning algorithm.
1 Our code is available at https://github.com/chrysts/
geodesic_continual_learning

Feature
Extractor

Old Model

Classifier

Input

Source

Subspaces
Target

Feature
Extractor

Current Model

Classifier

Figure 1: The visualization of our proposed method. To
regularize the network for incoming tasks, knowledge from
previous tasks is preserved by distilling the features following the geodesic path between two subspaces of different
models. The distillation is based on the projection of two
sets of features from two different networks.
The gradual nature of learning in IL poses serious difficulties as now the model has to sequentially learn and adapt
to new tasks, while being vigilant to its needs and requirements (e.g., limited memory to preserve the knowledge). As
shown in the seminal works of Kirkpatrick et al. [20] and
Rebuffi [34], the gradual nature of learning plus the presence
of constraints and limitations in IL can degrade the performance of the model drastically, which is formally known as
“Catastrophic forgetting” [7, 28, 29]. The phenomenon refers
to a neural network experiencing performance degradation
at previously learned concepts when trained sequentially on
learning new concepts. This forgetting problem appears even
worse when the model is sequentially updated for new tasks
without considering the previous tasks as shown in [20, 23]
i.e., learning new tasks overrides the knowledge from previous tasks. Finding the balance among tasks, also known as
the stability-plasticity dilemma in [33], is crucial to achieve
the IL ultimate goal.
In classical classification on visual data, a Convolutional
Neural Network (CNN) is used to encode the input images
11591

