Neural Lumigraph Rendering
Petr Kellnhofer1,2 , Lars C. Jebe1 , Andrew Jones1 , Ryan Spicer1 , Kari Pulli1 , Gordon Wetzstein2,1
1
2
Raxium
Stanford University
{pkellnhofer,ljebe,ajones,rspicer,kpulli,gwetzstein}@raxium.com

Real-time CG Rendering

Neural Rendering

Abstract
Novel view synthesis is a challenging and ill-posed inverse rendering problem. Neural rendering techniques
have recently achieved photorealistic image quality for this
task. State-of-the-art (SOTA) neural volume rendering approaches, however, are slow to train and require minutes of
inference (i.e., rendering) time for high image resolutions.
We adopt high-capacity neural scene representations with
periodic activations for jointly optimizing an implicit surface and a radiance field of a scene supervised exclusively
with posed 2D images. Our neural rendering pipeline accelerates SOTA neural volume rendering by about two orders of magnitude and our implicit surface representation is
unique in allowing us to export a mesh with view-dependent
texture information. Thus, like other implicit surface representations, ours is compatible with traditional graphics
pipelines, enabling real-time rendering rates, while achieving unprecedented image quality compared to other surface
methods. We assess the quality of our approach using existing datasets as well as high-quality 3D face data captured
with a custom multi-camera rig.

1. Introduction
Novel view synthesis and 3D shape estimation from 2D
images are inverse problems of fundamental importance in
applications as diverse as photogrammetry, remote sensing,
visualization, AR/VR, teleconferencing, visual effects, and
games. While traditional 3D computer vision pipelines have
been studied for decades, only emerging neural rendering
techniques have been able to achieve photorealistic quality
for novel view synthesis (e.g., [38, 56]).
State-of-the-art neural rendering approaches, such as
neural radiance fields [38], however, do not offer real-time
framerates, which severely limits their applicability to the
aforementioned problems. This limitation is primarily imposed by the choice of implicit neural scene representation
and rendering algorithm, namely a volumetric representation that requires a custom neural volume renderer. Neural

ro
rd

S(·)

E(·)

Shape (SDF)

Appearance

x

Export

Figure 1. Overview of our framework. Given a set of multi-view
images, we optimize representation networks modeling shape and
appearance of a scene end to end using a differentiable sphere
tracer. The resulting models can be exported to enable viewdependent real-time rendering using traditional graphics pipelines.

surface representations, for example using signed distance
functions (SDFs) [41, 18, 2, 60], occupancy fields [35], or
feature-based representations [54], on the other hand implicitly model the surface of objects, which can be extracted
using the marching cubes algorithm [32] and exported into
traditional mesh-based representations for real-time rendering. Although implicit neural surface representations have
recently demonstrated impressive performance on shape reconstruction [60], their performance on view interpolation
and synthesis tasks is limited. Thus, SOTA neural rendering approaches either perform well for view synthesis [38]
or 3D shape estimation [60], but not both.
Here, we adopt an SDF-based sinusoidal representation

4287

