D-NeRF: Neural Radiance Fields for Dynamic Scenes
Albert Pumarola1

Enric Corona1
Gerard Pons-Moll2,3
Francesc Moreno-Noguer1
1
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC
2
University of Tübingen
3
Max Planck Institute for Informatics

Point of View & Time
Figure 1: We propose D-NeRF, a method for synthesizing novel views, at an arbitrary point in time, of dynamic scenes with complex
non-rigid geometries. We optimize an underlying deformable volumetric function from a sparse set of input monocular views without
the need of ground-truth geometry nor multi-view images. The figure shows two scenes under variable points of view and time instances
synthesised by the proposed model.

Abstract
Neural rendering techniques combining machine learning with geometric reasoning have arisen as one of the most
promising approaches for synthesizing novel views of a
scene from a sparse set of images. Among these, stands out
the Neural radiance fields (NeRF) [31], which trains a deep
network to map 5D input coordinates (representing spatial
location and viewing direction) into a volume density and
view-dependent emitted radiance. However, despite achieving an unprecedented level of photorealism on the generated images, NeRF is only applicable to static scenes, where
the same spatial location can be queried from different images. In this paper we introduce D-NeRF, a method that
extends neural radiance fields to a dynamic domain, allowing to reconstruct and render novel images of objects under
rigid and non-rigid motions from a single camera moving
around the scene. For this purpose we consider time as an
additional input to the system, and split the learning process
in two main stages: one that encodes the scene into a canonical space and another that maps this canonical represen-

tation into the deformed scene at a particular time. Both
mappings are simultaneously learned using fully-connected
networks. Once the networks are trained, D-NeRF can render novel images, controlling both the camera view and the
time variable, and thus, the object movement. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on scenes with objects under rigid, articulated and non-rigid motions. Code,
model weights and the dynamic scenes dataset will be available at [1].

1. Introduction
Rendering novel photo-realistic views of a scene from
a sparse set of input images is necessary for many applications in e.g. augmented reality, virtual reality, 3D content production, games and the movie industry. Recent
advances in the emerging field of neural rendering, which
learn scene representations encoding both geometry and
appearance [31, 28, 24, 58, 34, 41], have achieved results that largely surpass those of traditional Structure-

10318

