BRepNet: A topological message passing system for solid models
Joseph G. Lambourne
Autodesk Research
Aditya Sanghi
Autodesk Research

Karl D.D. Willis
Autodesk Research

Pradeep Kumar Jayaraman
Autodesk Research

Peter Meltzer
UCL, Computer Science

Hooman Shayani
Autodesk Research

Abstract
Boundary representation (B-rep) models are the standard way 3D shapes are described in Computer-Aided Design (CAD) applications. They combine lightweight parametric curves and surfaces with topological information
which connects the geometric entities to describe manifolds. In this paper we introduce BRepNet, a neural network architecture designed to operate directly on B-rep
data structures, avoiding the need to approximate the model
as meshes or point clouds. BRepNet defines convolutional
kernels with respect to oriented coedges in the data structure. In the neighborhood of each coedge, a small collection of faces, edges and coedges can be identified and
patterns in the feature vectors from these entities detected
by specific learnable parameters. In addition, to encourage further deep learning research with B-reps, we publish the Fusion 360 Gallery segmentation dataset. A collection of over 35,000 B-rep models annotated with information about the modeling operations which created each
face. We demonstrate that BRepNet can segment these models with higher accuracy than methods working on meshes,
and point clouds.

1. Introduction
Boundary representation (B-rep) models are the de facto
standard for describing 3D objects in commercial Computer
Aided Design (CAD) software. They consist of collections
of trimmed parametric surfaces along with the adjacency
relationships between them [44]. Prismatic shapes can be
represented using lightweight primitive curves and surfaces
while free-form objects can be defined using NURBS [33].
Although this makes the representation both compact and
expressive, the complexity of the data structures and limited
availability of labelled datasets has presented a high barrier
to entry for researchers.
The problem of segmenting B-rep models, based on

Segmentation
ExtrudeEnd
Fillet
CutSide
CutEnd

BRepNet Kernel

ExtrudeSide

...
BRepNet Convolution

Figure 1: BRepNet convolutional kernels are defined with
respect to topological entities called coedges (dashed arrows). Feature vectors from a small collection of faces
(grey), edges (black) and coedges (blue) adjacent to each
coedge (red) are multiplied by the learnable parameters in
the kernel. The hidden states arising from the convolution
can then be pooled to perform face segmentation.

learned patterns, is of particular interest as it allows the automation of many laborious manual tasks in CAD, Computer Aided Engineering (CAE) and Computer Aided Process Planning (CAPP) [6, 45, 1, 38]. Currently these require
a user to repeatedly select groups of faces and/or edges as
input for the modeling or manufacturing operation. Examples include model simplification in preparation for finite
element analysis [12] and segmenting a model according to
the manufacturing process or machining toolpath strategy
required to make the object [1, 45].
In addition, parametric feature history is often lost when
models are exchanged between different CAD applications
[23] and many commercial CAD systems use segmentation
algorithms to recover this information [5, 13].

12773

