Network Quantization with Element-wise Gradient Scaling
Junghyup Lee

Dohyung Kim

Bumsub Ham∗

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University

Abstract
Network quantization aims at reducing bit-widths of
weights and/or activations, particularly important for implementing deep neural networks with limited hardware
resources. Most methods use the straight-through estimator (STE) to train quantized networks, which avoids a
zero-gradient problem by replacing a derivative of a discretizer (i.e., a round function) with that of an identity function. Although quantized networks exploiting the STE have
shown decent performance, the STE is sub-optimal in that
it simply propagates the same gradient without considering discretization errors between inputs and outputs of the
discretizer. In this paper, we propose an element-wise gradient scaling (EWGS), a simple yet effective alternative to
the STE, training a quantized network better than the STE
in terms of stability and accuracy. Given a gradient of
the discretizer output, EWGS adaptively scales up or down
each gradient element, and uses the scaled gradient as the
one for the discretizer input to train quantized networks via
backpropagation. The scaling is performed depending on
both the sign of each gradient element and an error between
the continuous input and discrete output of the discretizer.
We adjust a scaling factor adaptively using Hessian information of a network. We show extensive experimental results on the image classification datasets, including CIFAR10 and ImageNet, with diverse network architectures under
a wide range of bit-width settings, demonstrating the effectiveness of our method.

1. Introduction
Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown remarkable advances in many computer vision tasks, such
as image classification [16, 24, 36], semantic segmentation [15, 28], object detection [13, 27], and image restoration [9], while at the cost of large amounts of weights and
operations. Network quantization lowers bit-precision of
weights and/or activations in a network. It is effective in
particular to reduce the memory and computational cost of
∗ Corresponding author.

copy
copy

𝐱𝐱 𝑛𝑛

round

𝐱𝐱 𝑞𝑞

−𝓖𝓖𝐱𝐱𝑛𝑛
−𝓖𝓖𝐱𝐱𝑞𝑞

(a) Gradient propagation using STE [3].

scale up
scale down

𝐱𝐱 𝑛𝑛

round

𝐱𝐱 𝑞𝑞

−𝓖𝓖𝐱𝐱𝑛𝑛

−𝓖𝓖𝐱𝐱𝑞𝑞

(b) Gradient propagation using EWGS.

Figure 1: Comparison of STE [3] and EWGS. We visualize discrete levels and a loss landscape by straight lines and a contour
plot, respectively. In a forward pass, a continuous latent point xn
is mapped to a discrete point xq using a round function. Training
a quantized network requires backpropagating a gradient from xq
to xn . (a) The STE propagates the same gradient i.e., Gxn = Gxq
without considering the value of xn , where we denote by Gxn
and Gxq the gradients of xn and xq , respectively. (b) Our approach, on the other hand, scales up or down each element of the
gradient during backpropagation, while taking into account discretization errors i.e., xn − xq . (Best viewed in color.)

CNNs, and thus network quantization could be a potential
solution for implementing CNNs with limited hardware resources. For example, binarized neural networks [19, 34]
use 32× less memory compared to the full-precision (32bit) counterparts, and the binarization techniques allow to
replace multiplication and addition with XNOR and bitcount operations, respectively.
Quantized networks involve weight and/or activation
quantizers in convolutional or fully-connected layers. The
quantizers take full-precision weights or activations, and
typically perform normalization, discretization, and denor-

6448

