LayoutGMN: Neural Graph Matching for Structural Layout Similarity
Akshay Gadi Patil 1
1

Manyi Li1†

Matthew Fisher2
2

Simon Fraser University

Manolis Savva1

Hao Zhang1

Adobe Research

Abstract
We present a deep neural network to predict structural
similarity between 2D layouts by leveraging Graph Matching Networks (GMN). Our network, coined LayoutGMN,
learns the layout metric via neural graph matching, using
an attention-based GMN designed under a triplet network
setting. To train our network, we utilize weak labels obtained by pixel-wise Intersection-over-Union (IoUs) to define the triplet loss. Importantly, LayoutGMN is built with
a structural bias which can effectively compensate for the
lack of structure awareness in IoUs. We demonstrate this
on two prominent forms of layouts, viz., floorplans and UI
designs, via retrieval experiments on large-scale datasets.
In particular, retrieval results by our network better match
human judgement of structural layout similarity compared
to both IoUs and other baselines including a state-of-theart method based on graph neural networks and image convolution. In addition, LayoutGMN is the first deep model
to offer both metric learning of structural layout similarity
and structural matching between layout elements.

1. Introduction
Two-dimensional layouts are ubiquitous visual abstractions in graphic and architectural designs. They typically
represent blueprints or conceptual sketches for such data
as floorplans, documents, scene arrangements, and UI designs. Recent advances in pattern analysis and synthesis
have propelled the development of generative models for
layouts [11, 25, 47, 15, 26] and led to a steady accumulation
of relevant datasets [48, 42, 10, 46]. Despite these developments however, there have been few attempts at employing
a deeply learned metric to reason about layout data, e.g.,
for retrieval, data embedding, and evaluation. For example,
current evaluation protocols for layout generation still rely
heavily on segmentation metrics such as intersection-overunion (IoU) [15, 30] and human judgement [15, 26].
The ability to compare data effectively and efficiently is
† Corresponding Author:manyil@sfu.ca

Figure 1. LayoutGMN learns a structural layout similarity metric
between floorplans and other 2D layouts, through attention-based
neural graph matching. The learned attention weights (numbers
shown in the boxes) can be used to match the structural elements.

arguably the most foundational task in data analysis. The
key challenge in comparing layouts is that it is not purely a
task of visual comparison — it depends critically on inference and reasoning about structures, which are expressed
by the semantics and organizational arrangements of the elements or subdivisions which compose a layout. Hence,
none of the well-established image-space metrics, whether
model-driven, perceptual, or deeply learned, are best suited
to measure structural layout similarity. Frequently applied
similarity measures for image segmentation such as IoUs
and F1 scores all perform pixel-level matching “in place”
— they are not structural and can be sensitive to element
misalignments which are structure-preserving.
In this work, we develop a deep neural network to predict
structural similarity between two 2D layouts, e.g., floorplans or UI designs. We take a predominantly structural
view of layouts for both data representation and layout comparison. Specifically, we represent each layout using a directed, fully connected graph over its semantic elements.
Our network learns structural layout similarity via neural
graph matching, where an attention-based graph matching
network [27] is designed under a triplet network setting.
The network, coined LayoutGMN, takes as input a triplet
of layout graphs, composed together by one pair of anchorpositive and one pair of anchor-negative graphs, and performs intra-graph message passing and cross-graph information communication per pair, to learn a graph embedding

11048

