Bottom-Up Human Pose Estimation Via Disentangled Keypoint Regression
Zigang Geng1,3 *, Ke Sun1 *, Bin Xiao3 , Zhaoxiang Zhang2 , Jingdong Wang3†
1
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Automation, CAS, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Centre for Artificial Intelligence and Robotics, HKISI CAS
3
Microsoft
{zigang,sunk}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhaoxiang.zhang@ia.ac.cn, {bixi,jingdw}@microsoft.com

Abstract
In this paper, we are interested in the bottom-up
paradigm of estimating human poses from an image. We
study the dense keypoint regression framework that is previously inferior to the keypoint detection and grouping framework. Our motivation is that regressing keypoint positions
accurately needs to learn representations that focus on the
keypoint regions.
We present a simple yet effective approach, named disentangled keypoint regression (DEKR). We adopt adaptive
convolutions through pixel-wise spatial transformer to activate the pixels in the keypoint regions and accordingly
learn representations from them. We use a multi-branch
structure for separate regression: each branch learns a representation with dedicated adaptive convolutions and regresses one keypoint. The resulting disentangled representations are able to attend to the keypoint regions, respectively, and thus the keypoint regression is spatially more accurate. We empirically show that the proposed direct regression method outperforms keypoint detection and grouping methods and achieves superior bottom-up pose estimation results on two benchmark datasets, COCO and CrowdPose. The code and models are available at https:
//github.com/HRNet/DEKR.

1. Introduction
Human pose estimation is a problem of predicting the
keypoint positions of each person from an image, i.e., localize the keypoints as well as identify the keypoints belonging to the same person. There are broad applications,
including action recognition, human-computer interaction,
smart photo editing, pedestrian tracking, etc.
* This work was done when Zigang Geng and Ke Sun were interns at
Microsoft Research, Beijing, P.R. China
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Illustration of the salient regions for regressing the keypoints. We take three keypoints, nose and two ankles, as an example for illustration clarity. Left: baseline. Right: our approach
DEKR. It can be seen that our approach is able to focus on the keypoint regions. The salient regions are generated using the tool [46].

There are two main paradigms: top-down and bottomup. The top-down paradigm first detects the person and
then performs single-person pose estimation for each detected person. The bottom-up paradigm either directly regresses the keypoint positions belonging to the same person, or detects and groups the keypoints, such as affinity
linking [7, 31], associative embedding [40], HGG [27] and
HigherHRNet [11]. The top-down paradigm is more accurate but more costly due to an extra person detection process, and the bottom-up paradigm, the interest of this paper,
is more efficient.
The recently-developed pixel-wise keypoint regression
approach, CenterNet [78], estimates the K keypoint positions together for each pixel from the representation at the
pixel. Direct regression to keypoint positions in CenterNet [78] performs reasonably. But the regressed keypoints
are spatially not accurate and the performance is worse than
the keypoint detection and grouping scheme. Figure 1 (left)
shows two examples in which the salient areas for keypoint

14676

