DeFMO: Deblurring and Shape Recovery of Fast Moving Objects
Denys Rozumnyi1,4
1

Martin R. Oswald1

Vittorio Ferrari2

Jiřı́ Matas4

Marc Pollefeys1,3

3
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
Microsoft Mixed Reality and AI Zurich Lab
2
4
Google Research
Visual Recognition Group, Czech Technical University in Prague

1. Introduction
Object blurring is a challenging problem in many image
processing and computer vision tasks. The primary sources
of image blur are rapid camera motion and object motion
combined with long exposure time. Many methods were
proposed to address the deblurring task, ranging from image
deblurring [14, 35] to video temporal super-resolution [19,
31, 34]. However, they consider only low to medium blur,
emerging from global camera blur due to camera motion,
defocused camera, or objects moving at moderate speed.
Only recently, specialized algorithms for the deblurring
of fast moving objects (FMOs) have been introduced [10,
11, 27]. FMOs are defined as objects that move over a
distance larger than their size within the camera exposure
time (or within a single time frame in video). FMO detection is important in tracking sports with fast object motion
like soccer, tennis, or badminton. It is also beneficial in au-

eraser
aerobie
mic

lighter

volleyball

⇒

cap

Objects moving at high speed appear significantly
blurred when captured with cameras. The blurry appearance is especially ambiguous when the object has complex
shape or texture. In such cases, classical methods, or even
humans, are unable to recover the object’s appearance and
motion. We propose a method that, given a single image
with its estimated background, outputs the object’s appearance and position in a series of sub-frames as if captured by
a high-speed camera (i.e. temporal super-resolution). The
proposed generative model embeds an image of the blurred
object into a latent space representation, disentangles the
background, and renders the sharp appearance. Inspired by
the image formation model, we design novel self-supervised
loss function terms that boost performance and show good
generalization capabilities. The proposed DeFMO method
is trained on a complex synthetic dataset, yet it performs
well on real-world data from several datasets. DeFMO outperforms the state of the art and generates high-quality temporal super-resolution frames.

key

pen

Abstract

B

I

I0/7 I1/7 I2/7 I3/7 I4/7 I5/7 I6/7 I7/7 GT

Figure 1. Temporal super-resolution. Given an input image I
depicting a blurred fast moving object and an estimated background B, DeFMO decomposes the image into a series of deblurred sub-frames with sharp object contours. Examples are from
test datasets [10, 11, 27], mobile device footage (lighter), and
YouTube videos (mic, cap). Ground truth (GT) corresponds either to the high-speed camera frame or a static image. Deblurred
images It are sharper than the ’GT’, e.g.’pen’ or ’key’.

tonomous driving to detect impacts with stones, birds, or
other wildlife. FMOs are frequently found when capturing
falling or thrown objects like pieces of fruit, leaves, flying
insects, hailstorm, or rain. Any moving object becomes an
FMO in low-light conditions or for long exposure. In other
words, one needs to increase the exposure time or the speed
of the object to observe an FMO.
We consider a setting where the input is an image with an
object moving fast and thus appearing blurred. The task is
to reconstruct the hypothetical sub-frames that would have
been there if this was a short video captured by a high-speed

3456

