pixelNeRF: Neural Radiance Fields from One or Few Images
Alex Yu
Input

Vickie Ye

Novel views

Matthew Tancik
UC Berkeley

Input

Novel views

Angjoo Kanazawa
Input

Novel views

pixelNeRF

Input: 3 views of held-out scene

NeRF

Output: Rendered new views

Figure 1: NeRF from one or few images. We present pixelNeRF, a learning framework that predicts a Neural Radiance Field (NeRF)
representation from a single (top) or few posed images (bottom). PixelNeRF can be trained on a set of multi-view images, allowing it to
generate plausible novel view synthesis from very few input images without test-time optimization (bottom left). In contrast, NeRF has no
generalization capabilities and performs poorly when only three input views are available (bottom right).

Abstract
We propose pixelNeRF, a learning framework that predicts a continuous neural scene representation conditioned
on one or few input images. The existing approach for
constructing neural radiance fields [27] involves optimizing the representation to every scene independently, requiring many calibrated views and significant compute time.
We take a step towards resolving these shortcomings by introducing an architecture that conditions a NeRF on image inputs in a fully convolutional manner. This allows
the network to be trained across multiple scenes to learn
a scene prior, enabling it to perform novel view synthesis in
a feed-forward manner from a sparse set of views (as few as
one). Leveraging the volume rendering approach of NeRF,
our model can be trained directly from images with no explicit 3D supervision. We conduct extensive experiments
on ShapeNet benchmarks for single image novel view synthesis tasks with held-out objects as well as entire unseen
categories. We further demonstrate the flexibility of pixelNeRF by demonstrating it on multi-object ShapeNet scenes
and real scenes from the DTU dataset. In all cases, pixelNeRF outperforms current state-of-the-art baselines for
novel view synthesis and single image 3D reconstruction.
For the video and code, please visit the project website:
https://alexyu.net/pixelnerf.

1. Introduction
We study the problem of synthesizing novel views of a
scene from a sparse set of input views. This long-standing
problem has recently seen progress due to advances in differentiable neural rendering [27, 20, 24, 39]. Across these
approaches, a 3D scene is represented with a neural network, which can then be rendered into 2D views. Notably,
the recent method neural radiance fields (NeRF) [27] has
shown impressive performance on novel view synthesis of
a specific scene by implicitly encoding volumetric density
and color through a neural network. While NeRF can render photorealistic novel views, it is often impractical as it
requires a large number of posed images and a lengthy perscene optimization.
In this paper, we address these shortcomings by proposing pixelNeRF, a learning framework that enables predicting NeRFs from one or several images in a feed-forward
manner. Unlike the original NeRF network, which does not
make use of any image features, pixelNeRF takes spatial
image features aligned to each pixel as an input. This image conditioning allows the framework to be trained on a
set of multi-view images, where it can learn scene priors
to perform view synthesis from one or few input views. In
contrast, NeRF is unable to generalize and performs poorly
when few input images are available, as shown in Fig. 1.

4578

