Multi-shot Temporal Event Localization: a Benchmark
Xiaolong Liu1 * Yao Hu2 Song Bai2,3† Fei Ding2 Xiang Bai1 Philip H.S. Torr3
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Alibaba Group 3 University of Oxford
{liuxl, xbai}@hust.edu.cn, songbai.site@gmail.com

{feifei.df, yaoohu}@alibaba-inc.com, philip.torr@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Current developments in temporal event or action localization usually target actions captured by a single camera. However, extensive events or actions in the wild may
be captured as a sequence of shots by multiple cameras
at different positions. In this paper, we propose a new
and challenging task called multi-shot temporal event localization, and accordingly, collect a large-scale dataset
called MUlti-Shot EventS (MUSES). MUSES has 31,477
event instances for a total of 716 video hours. The core
nature of MUSES is the frequent shot cuts, for an average
of 19 shots per instance and 176 shots per video, which induces large intra-instance variations. Our comprehensive
evaluations show that the state-of-the-art method in temporal action localization only achieves an mAP of 13.1%
at IoU=0.5. As a minor contribution, we present a simple baseline approach for handling the intra-instance variations, which reports an mAP of 18.9% on MUSES and
56.9% on THUMOS14 at IoU=0.5. To facilitate research in
this direction, we release the dataset and the project code at
https://songbai.site/muses/.

1. Introduction
Driven by the increasing number of videos generated,
shared and consumed every day, video understanding has
attracted greater attention in computer vision especially in
recent years. As one of the pillars in video understanding, temporal event (or action) localization [10, 47, 61,
77, 84, 85, 87, 88] is a challenging task that aims to predict the semantic label of an action, and in the meantime,
locate its start time and end time in a long video. Automating this process is of great importance for many applications, e.g., security surveillance, home care, humancomputer interaction, and sports analysis.
* Work done during an internship at Alibaba Group.
† Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Different types of shot cuts, such as cutting on action (a),
dissolve (b), cut-in (c), and cross-cut (d). Clickable: best viewed
with Adobe Acrobat Reader; click to watch the animation.

While fruitful progress has been made in this field, our
work focuses on a real-world scenario that has not been seriously treated so far, that is, localizing events in TV shows
and movies. We cast it as a new research topic named multishot temporal event localization, which is detailed below:
1) Motivation: Our work is motivated by some commercial applications of multi-shot temporal event localization,
where truncated videos are automatically generated from
TV shows and movies. For example, a trailer is generated
for presenting the highlight to tease the audience, a video
summary is generated to help the viewer grasp the important plot points and characters, or a mashup is generated
for blending multiple clips of the same theme. To achieve
this, a basic but time-consuming step is to find the materials, i.e., the video segments of interest, while the development of multi-shot temporal event localization will enable
efficient material extraction and greatly improve the productivity of video content generation.
2) Characteristic: Compared with user-generated
videos or surveillance videos, a unique characteristic of TV
shows and movies is the highly frequent shot cuts. Herein,

12596

