Learning To Count Everything
Viresh Ranjan1

Udbhav Sharma1 Thu Nguyen2
1
Stony Brook University, USA
2
VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam

Minh Hoai1,2

Abstract
Existing works on visual counting primarily focus on one
specific category at a time, such as people, animals, and
cells. In this paper, we are interested in counting everything, that is to count objects from any category given only a
few annotated instances from that category. To this end, we
pose counting as a few-shot regression task. To tackle this
task, we present a novel method that takes a query image
together with a few exemplar objects from the query image
and predicts a density map for the presence of all objects of
interest in the query image. We also present a novel adaptation strategy to adapt our network to any novel visual category at test time, using only a few exemplar objects from the
novel category. We also introduce a dataset of 147 object
categories containing over 6000 images that are suitable
for the few-shot counting task. The images are annotated
with two types of annotation, dots and bounding boxes, and
they can be used for developing few-shot counting models.
Experiments on this dataset shows that our method outperforms several state-of-the-art object detectors and few-shot
counting approaches. Our code and dataset can be found
at https://github.com/cvlab- stonybrook/
LearningToCountEverything.

1. Introduction
Humans can count objects from most of the visual object
categories with ease, while current state-of-the-art computational methods [29, 48, 55] for counting can only handle
a limited number of visual categories. In fact, most of the
counting neural networks [4, 48] can handle a single category at a time, such as people, cars, and cells.
There are two major challenges preventing the Computer Vision community from designing systems capable of
counting a large number of visual categories. First, most
of the contemporary counting approaches [4, 48, 55] treat
counting as a supervised regression task, requiring thousands of labeled images to learn a fully convolutional regressor that maps an input image to its corresponding density map, from which the estimated count is obtained by
summing all the density values. These networks require dot

Figure 1: Few-shot counting—the objective of our work.
Given an image from a novel class and a few exemplar objects from the same image delineated by bounding boxes,
the objective is to count the total number of objects of the
novel class in the image.
annotations for millions of objects on several thousands of
training images, and obtaining this type of annotation is a
costly and laborious process. As a result, it is difficult to
scale these contemporary counting approaches to handle a
large number of visual categories. Second, there are not any
large enough unconstrained counting datasets with many
visual categories for the development of a general counting method. Most of the popular counting datasets [14–
16, 43, 49, 55] consist of a single object category.
In this work, we address both of the above challenges. To
handle the first challenge, we take a detour from the existing
counting approaches which treat counting as a typical fully
supervised regression task, and pose counting as a few shot
regression task, as shown in Fig. 1. In this few-shot setting,
the inputs for the counting task are an image and few examples from the same image for the object of interest, and the
output is the count of object instances. The examples are
provided in the form of bounding boxes around the objects
of interest. In other words, our few shot counting task deals
with counting instances within an image which are similar to the exemplars from the same image. Following the
convention from the few-shot classification task [9, 20, 46],
the classes at test time are completely different from the
ones seen during training. This makes few-shot counting
very different from the typical counting task, where the
training and test classes are the same. Unlike the typical
counting task, where hundreds [55] or thousands [16] of labeled examples are available for training, a few-shot counting method needs to generalize to completely novel classes

3394

