Weakly Supervised Learning of Rigid 3D Scene Flow
Zan Gojcic1,2

Or Litany 2,3
1

Andreas Wieser1

ETH Zurich

2

Leonidas J. Guibas2

Stanford University

3

Tolga Birdal2

NVIDIA

3dsceneflow.github.io

Abstract
We propose a data-driven scene flow estimation algorithm exploiting the observation that many 3D scenes can
be explained by a collection of agents moving as rigid bodies. At the core of our method lies a deep architecture able
to reason at the object-level by considering 3D scene flow
in conjunction with other 3D tasks. This object level abstraction enables us to relax the requirement for dense scene
flow supervision with simpler binary background segmentation mask and ego-motion annotations. Our mild supervision requirements make our method well suited for recently
released massive data collections for autonomous driving,
which do not contain dense scene flow annotations. As output, our model provides low-level cues like pointwise flow
and higher-level cues such as holistic scene understanding
at the level of rigid objects. We further propose a test-time
optimization refining the predicted rigid scene flow. We
showcase the effectiveness and generalization capacity of
our method on four different autonomous driving datasets.
We release our source code and pre-trained models under
github.com/zgojcic/Rigid3DSceneFlow.

1. Introduction
Understanding dynamic 3D environments is a core challenge in computer vision and robotics. In particular, applications such as self-driving and robot navigation rely upon
a robust perception of dynamically changing 3D scenes.
To equip autonomous agents with the ability to infer spatiotemporal geometric properties, there has recently been
an increased interest in 3D scene flow as a form of lowlevel dynamic scene representation [37, 67, 73, 51, 49, 54].
Scene flow is the 3D motion field of points in the scene [69]
and is a generalization of 2D optical flow. In fact, optical flow [3, 24] can be understood as the projection of the
scene flow onto a camera image plane [14]. Such dense motion fields can serve bottom-up approaches for high-level
dynamic scene understanding tasks like semantic segmentation [38] or motion perception. However, representing
dynamics via a free form velocity field has two major disadvantages. First, in most applications of interest, dynamics
are attributed to rigid object motion [9, 42]. This notion

Figure 1: Our network takes two successive frames as input
(a), and outputs a set of transformation parameters for each
segmented rigid agent (c) which are used to recover perpoint rigid scene flow. After applying the predicted flow to
the first point cloud, the two frames are aligned (b, d).
has been extensively exploited in robotics [8, 13, 7, 6] and
holds especially for vehicles in autonomous driving. Predicting unconstrained per-point flow may lead to non-viable
results, e.g. parts of the same car might move in different directions. Second, accurately learning direct flow estimation
necessitates dense supervision that is expensive to acquire
and prone to annotation errors. As a result, many methods have resorted to training on simulated data [41, 73, 51],
yet this comes at the price of a non-negligible domain gap.
Other methods have attempted to solve the problem in a
completely unsupervised manner [67, 75, 44], however they
fail to provide competitive performance. In Fig. 2 we illustrate these two extremes of no- and full-supervision while
spanning the many intermediate possibilities, sorted according to the annotation effort1 .
Based on this observation, we seek a sweet spot between
supervision effort and performance. To this end, we propose a scene abstraction approach that uses rigid objects as
the basic components. More specifically, by splitting the
scene into foreground (movable objects) and background
(static objects), we explain the background (BG) flow as
1 Note that no prior work exists at different points on the spectrum given
in Fig. 2. This leaves ample room for future exploration.

5692

