Progressive Contour Regression for Arbitrary-Shape Scene Text Detection
Pengwen Dai1,2 , Sanyi Zhang1,4 , Hua Zhang1 , Xiaochun Cao1,2,3∗
1
SKLOIS, Institute of Information Engineering, CAS, Beijing, China
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
3
Cyberspace Security Research Center, Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
School of Electrical and Information Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin, China
{daipengwen,zhanghua,caoxiaochun}@iie.ac.cn,zhangsanyi@tju.edu.cn

Abstract
State-of-the-art scene text detection methods usually
model the text instance with local pixels or components
from the bottom-up perspective and, therefore, are sensitive to noises and dependent on the complicated heuristic
post-processing especially for arbitrary-shape texts. To relieve these two issues, instead, we propose to progressively evolve the initial text proposal to arbitrarily shaped text
contours in a top-down manner. The initial horizontal text
proposals are generated by estimating the center and size
of texts. To reduce the range of regression, the first stage
of the evolution predicts the corner points of oriented text proposals from the initial horizontal ones. In the second
stage, the contours of the oriented text proposals are iteratively regressed to arbitrarily shaped ones. In the last iteration of this stage, we rescore the confidence of the final
localized text by utilizing the cues from multiple contour
points, rather than the single cue from the initial horizontal proposal center that may be out of arbitrary-shape text
regions. Moreover, to facilitate the progressive contour evolution, we design a contour information aggregation mechanism to enrich the feature representation on text contours
by considering both the circular topology and semantic context. Experiments conducted on CTW1500, Total-Text, ArT,
and TD500 have demonstrated that the proposed method especially excels in line-level arbitrary-shape texts. Code is
available at https://github.com/dpengwen/PCR.

1. Introduction
Scene text detection has attracted increasing attention in
the computer vision community for its ubiquitous applications [46, 11, 10], such as scene understanding, visual
search, automatic driving, etc. However, it is a challenging task, due to the effect of scene factors (e.g., complex
∗ Corresponding Author.

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1: Illustration of the contour evolution. It evolves
the contour of the horizontal text proposal (a) to the corner
points (cyan) of the oriented text proposal (b), and then the
contour of the oriented text proposal is further evolved to
close to the ground-truth contour (green) for multiple times
(c). The red point and dash lines are the center and size of
the axis-aligned box of the arbitrary-shape text. Yellow arrows on the contours indicate the information passing.
background, perspective distortion, and various illumination) and the specific characteristics of scene texts (e.g.,
arbitrary-shape layout, no well-defined closed boundaries,
and various aspect ratios).
To exploit an arbitrary-shape scene text detector that
requires localizing explicit contours of text instances, the
bottom-up methods [6, 27, 42, 43, 51, 38, 44, 7, 53, 17, 59]
have become the dominant mainstream. These methods perform the pixel-wise semantic segmentation on the entire or
shrunk text regions, and simultaneously predict the auxiliary information of each pixel for clustering text pixels into
different instances [6, 42, 53, 51, 38, 43, 44, 17, 63] or local components [27, 1, 7, 59]. However, due to the huge
number of pixels in the image, it would involve complicated post-processings to achieve the accurate bounding box
for arbitrary-shape texts. Furthermore, the pixels are easy
to generate ambiguous predictions when two scene texts are
too close or the space between characters in each text is too
large. Though the local components are more robust to the
pixel-wise noises, they still need to be linked to different
text instances by the heuristic rules [27, 7] or the relational

7393

