Learning Probabilistic Ordinal Embeddings for Uncertainty-Aware Regression
Wanhua Li1,2 , Xiaoke Huang1,2,3 , Jiwen Lu1,2,∗ , Jianjiang Feng1,2 , Jie Zhou1,2
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
2
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing Normal University
li-wh17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
xiaokehuang@mail.bnu.edu.cn

{lujiwen,jfeng,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

60

49

Uncertainty is the only certainty there is. Modeling data
uncertainty is essential for regression, especially in unconstrained settings. Traditionally the direct regression formulation is considered and the uncertainty is modeled by modifying the output space to a certain family of probabilistic
distributions. On the other hand, classification based regression and ranking based solutions are more popular in
practice while the direct regression methods suffer from the
limited performance. How to model the uncertainty within
the present-day technologies for regression remains an open
issue. In this paper, we propose to learn probabilistic ordinal embeddings which represent each data as a multivariate
Gaussian distribution rather than a deterministic point in
the latent space. An ordinal distribution constraint is proposed to exploit the ordinal nature of regression. Our probabilistic ordinal embeddings can be integrated into popular
regression approaches and empower them with the ability of
uncertainty estimation. Experimental results show that our
approach achieves competitive performance. Code is available at https://github.com/Li-Wanhua/POEs.

1. Introduction
Regression, as a fundamental machine learning problem,
requires to predict a continuous target value y for a given
data x. It is also extensively studied due to many important
applications, such as age estimation [32, 43, 56], historical image dating [37, 41], and image aesthetic assessment [25, 29, 42]. Recent years have witnessed the enormous
success [31, 33, 44] of Deep Neural Networks (DNNs).
Therefore, dominant approaches [27, 42, 56] for regression
employ DNNs to leverage the powerful feature representations. As the most natural choice for regression, the direct
regression method predicts a scalar value y given an input
∗ Corresponding author

35

𝒛 = 𝑓(𝒙)

49

10

35

60 𝒛~𝑝(𝒛|𝒙)

10

21

21

(a) Deterministic Unordered Embeddings

(b) Probabilistic Ordinal Embeddings

Figure 1. The key difference between deterministic unordered embeddings and probabilistic ordinal embeddings. We consider the
problem of age estimation and display age labels next to the images. Deterministic unordered embeddings represent each facial
image as a point in the latent space without considering the data uncertainty and the ordinal property. By contrast, probabilistic
ordinal embeddings learn a distribution following the ordinal constraint in the embedding space. We see that the highly blurred
image exhibits high uncertainty and the ordinal relations are preserved with our probabilistic ordinal embeddings.

x and the model is trained with L1 or L2 loss.
Modeling data uncertainty is quite important for regression since it gives a clear probabilistic interpretation of the
predictions. In fact, humans usually associate confidence
in their judgments. For example, if a person is required to
estimate the age of a highly blurred facial image, he will
give an estimation with high uncertainty. However, DNNs
do not necessarily grasp the data uncertainty which captures the noise inherent in the data [36]. Many recent works [12, 20, 36, 55] have been proposed to model the uncertainty, which consider the direct regression solutions and
replace the point estimation with a probabilistic distribution
p(y|x) in the output space. For simplicity, they usually consider a certain family of distributions, such as Gaussian or
Laplace, which naturally limits the expressiveness.
Meanwhile, many advanced methods [43, 57, 58] have
been presented for regression, which significantly surpass
the direct regression approach. Some of the dominant ap-

13896

