Robust Multimodal Vehicle Detection in Foggy Weather
Using Complementary Lidar and Radar Signals
Kun Qian1 , Shilin Zhu1 , Xinyu Zhang1 , Li Erran Li2
1
University of California San Diego 2 Columbia University
{kuq002,xyzhang,shz338}@eng.ucsd.edu

erranli@gmail.com

Abstract
Vehicle detection with visual sensors like lidar and camera is one of the critical functions enabling autonomous
driving. While they generate fine-grained point clouds
or high-resolution images with rich information in good
weather conditions, they fail in adverse weather (e.g., fog)
where opaque particles distort lights and significantly reduce visibility. Thus, existing methods relying on lidar or
camera experience significant performance degradation in
rare but critical adverse weather conditions. To remedy
this, we resort to exploiting complementary radar, which
is less impacted by adverse weather and becomes prevalent
on vehicles. In this paper, we present Multimodal Vehicle
Detection Network (MVDNet), a two-stage deep fusion detector, which first generates proposals from two sensors and
then fuses region-wise features between multimodal sensor streams to improve final detection results. To evaluate MVDNet, we create a procedurally generated training
dataset based on the collected raw lidar and radar signals
from the open-source Oxford Radar Robotcar. We show
that the proposed MVDNet surpasses other state-of-the-art
methods, notably in terms of Average Precision (AP), especially in adverse weather conditions. The code and data are
available at https://github.com/qiank10/MVDNet.

1. Introduction
As the holy grail of autonomous driving technology, Full
Driving Automation (Level 5) [20] relies on robust allweather object detection, which provides accurate bounding boxes of surrounding objects even in the challenging
adverse foggy weather condition. Nowadays, autonomous
vehicles are equipped with multiple sensor modalities, such
as camera, lidar, and radar [12, 6, 48, 3]. Fusing multimodal
sensors overcomes any individual sensor’s occasional failures and potentially yields more accurate object detection
than using only a single sensor. Existing object detectors [10, 21, 52, 38] mainly fuse lidar and camera, which
normally provide rich and redundant visual information.
However, these visual sensors are sensitive to weather conditions and are not expected to work fully in harsh weather
like fog [4, 26], making the autonomous perception systems
unreliable. For example, Fig. 1a shows an example of a
driving scenario with ground-truth vehicles labeled. Fig. 1b
shows the detected vehicles using only lidar point cloud that

(a) Ground-truth (clear weather)

(b) MVDNet (lidar-only)

(c) MVDNet (radar-only)

(d) Complete MVDNet (Ours)

Figure 1. Performance overview of our proposed MVDNet. (a)
360◦ bird’s eye view of the 3D lidar point cloud and ground-truth
labels (colors represent different vehicles). The vehicle equipped
with lidar and radar is at the center. In foggy weather, (b) lidaronly MVDNet misses vehicles at farthest range due to fog occlusion and misclassiﬁes background points as vehicles; (c) radaronly MVDNet produces false alarms and inaccurate bounding
boxes due to noisy radar data; (d) By deeply fusing lidar and radar,
the complete MVDNet correctly detects vehicles.

is deteriorated by fog. Two farthest vehicles at the top are
missing due to the occlusion of fog.
Aside from lidar and camera, radar has been widely deployed on autonomous vehicles [6, 3, 58] and has the potential to overcome foggy weather. Speciﬁcally, radar uses
millimeter-wave signals whose wavelength is much larger
than the tiny particles forming fog, rain, and snow [14, 1],
and hence easily penetrates or diffracts around them. However, radars in the existing autonomous driving datasets are
still underexplored, mainly due to their signiﬁcant data sparsity, as compared with camera and lidar. For example, the
nuScenes dataset [6] has about 35K lidar points but only 200
radar points on average in each data frame. The main reason
is that its radars use conventional electronically steerable

444

