Dictionary-guided Scene Text Recognition
Nguyen Nguyen1 , Thu Nguyen1,2,4 , Vinh Tran6 ,
Minh-Triet Tran3,4 , Thanh Duc Ngo2,4 , Thien Huu Nguyen1,5 , Minh Hoai1,6
1

VinAI Research, Hanoi, Vietnam; 2 University of Information Technology, VNU-HCM, Vietnam;
3
University of Science, VNU-HCM, Vietnam;
4
Vietnam National University, Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam;
5
University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA; 6 Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, NY, USA
{v.nguyennm, v.thunm15, v.thiennh4, v.hoainm}@vinai.io
thanhnd@uit.edu.vn, tmtriet@fit.hcmus.edu.vn, tquangvinh@cs.stonybrook.edu

Abstract
Language prior plays an important role in the way humans detect and recognize text in the wild. Current scene
text recognition methods do use lexicons to improve recognition performance, but their naive approach of casting the
output into a dictionary word based purely on the edit distance has many limitations. In this paper, we present a novel
approach to incorporate a dictionary in both the training
and inference stage of a scene text recognition system. We
use the dictionary to generate a list of possible outcomes
and find the one that is most compatible with the visual appearance of the text. The proposed method leads to a robust scene text recognition model, which is better at handling ambiguous cases encountered in the wild, and improves the overall performance of state-of-the-art scene text
spotting frameworks. Our work suggests that incorporating
language prior is a potential approach to advance scene
text detection and recognition methods. Besides, we contribute VinText, a challenging scene text dataset for Vietnamese, where some characters are equivocal in the visual form due to accent symbols. This dataset will serve
as a challenging benchmark for measuring the applicability and robustness of scene text detection and recognition
algorithms. Code and dataset are available at https:
//github.com/VinAIResearch/dict-guided.

1. Introduction
Scene text detection and recognition is an important research problem with a wide range of applications, from
mapping and localization to robot navigation and accessibility enhancement for the visually impaired. However, many
text instances in the wild are inherently ambiguous due to
artistic styles, weather degradation, or adverse illumination
conditions. In many cases, the ambiguity cannot be resolved
without reasoning about the language of the text.

In fact, one popular approach to improve the performance of a scene text recognition system is to use a dictionary and cast the predicted output as a word from the dictionary. The normal pipeline for processing an input image
consists of: (1) detect text instances, (2) for each detected
text instance, generate the most probable sequence of characters, based on local appearance of the text instance without a language model, and (3) find the word in the dictionary
that has smallest edit distance (also called Levenshtein distance [14]) to the generated sequence of characters and use
this word as the final recognition output.
However, the above approach has three major problems.
First, many text instances are foreign or made-up words that
are not in the dictionary so forcing the output to be a dictionary word will yield wrong outcomes in many cases. Second, there is no feedback loop in the above feed-forward
processing pipeline; the language prior is not used in the
second step for scoring and generating the most probable
sequence of characters. Third, edit distance by itself is indeterminate and ineffective in many cases. It is unclear what
to output when multiple dictionary words have the same
edit distance to the intermediate output character sequence.
Moreover, many languages have special symbols that have
different roles than the main characters of the alphabet, so
the uniform treatment of the symbols and characters in edit
distance is inappropriate.
In this paper, we address the problems of the current
scene text recognition pipeline by introducing a novel approach to incorporate a dictionary into the pipeline. Instead
of forcing the predicted output to be a dictionary word, we
use the dictionary to generate a list of candidates, which will
subsequently be fed back into a scoring module to find the
output that is most compatible with the appearance feature.
One additional benefit of our approach is that we can incorporate the dictionary into the end-to-end training procedure,

7383

