Image De-raining via Continual Learning
Man Zhou1† , Jie Xiao1† , Yifan Chang1 , Xueyang Fu1 ,* Aiping Liu1 , Jinshan Pan2 , Zheng-Jun Zha1
1
University of Science and Technology of China, China
2
Nanjing University of Science and Technology, China
{manman,ustchbxj,cyflz}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {xyfu,aipingl,zhazj}@ustc.edu.cn, sdluran@gmail.com

Abstract
While deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved great success on image de-raining task, most existing methods can only learn fixed mapping rules between
paired rainy/clean images on a single dataset. This limits
their applications in practical situations with multiple and
incremental datasets where the mapping rules may change
for different types of rain streaks. However, the catastrophic
forgetting of traditional deep CNN model challenges the design of generalized framework for multiple and incremental
datasets. A strategy of sharing the network structure but independently updating and storing the network parameters
on each dataset has been developed as a potential solution.
Nevertheless, this strategy is not applicable to compact systems as it dramatically increases the overall training time
and parameter space. To alleviate such limitation, in this
study, we propose a parameter importance guided weights
modification approach, named PIGWM. Specifically, with
new dataset (e.g. new rain dataset), the well-trained network weights are updated according to their importance
evaluated on previous training dataset. With extensive experimental validation, we demonstrate that a single network
with a single parameter set of our proposed method can
process multiple rain datasets almost without performance
degradation. The proposed model is capable of achieving
superior performance on both inhomogeneous and incremental datasets, and is promising for highly compact systems to gradually learn myriad regularities of the different
types of rain streaks. The results indicate that our proposed
method has great potential for other computer vision tasks
with dynamic learning environments.

1. Introduction
In recent years, remarkable progress has been achieved
on single image de-raining and other low-level vision tasks
due to the rapid growth of deep learning [32, 9, 5, 35,
45, 18, 50, 43, 27, 8, 44, 41, 33, 23, 13, 37, 3, 6, 30].
* † Co-first authors contributed equally, * corresponding author.

(a) Input

(b) SI

(c) PIGWM

(d) Clean

Figure 1: Deraining results of PreNet [29] trained sequentially on task sequence Rain100H [40]-Rain100L [40] from
test dataset of Rain100H. (a) Input image with rain streaks.
(b) Result of the model trained sequentially and independently (SI). (c) Result of the model trained sequentially with
our PIGWM. (d) The clean image. This figure presents the
de-raining network sufffers from catastrophic forgetting and
PIGWM is capable of maintaining the performance on previous task.
Single image rain removal aims to recover the clean image from its rain-polluted version, which is the basis for
other downstream computer vision tasks, e.g. object detection, image classification, person identification, and more
[20, 12, 4, 24, 19, 31, 34]. Despite increasing attentions
and great improvements on image de-raining tasks, existing deep CNN-based rain removal methods can only learn
fixed mapping rules between paired rainy/clean images on
a single type of dataset due to catastrophic forgetting problem. In addition, with sequential training on multiple
datasets, current deep neural network leads to almost complete forgetting of former knowledge and largely degrades
the model’s performance on previous tasks, after the model
being trained on the new task.
Aforementioned problems limit their applications in real
dynamic situations where the mapping rules do not remain
the same but change according to different types of rain
streaks. Although haven’t explored for de-raining task,
a strategy of sharing network structure but independently
updating and storing network parameters on each dataset
can be adopted. However, this strategy is not suitable for
compact systems design, since it dramatically increases the
overall training time and parameter space. This hinders the
practical implementation of de-raining algorithms on edge
devices, e.g. mobile phone with limited storage.
In this paper, we aim to solve the catastrophic forgetting

4907

