Weakly Supervised Action Selection Learning in Video
Junwei Ma*
Layer6 AI

Satya Krishna Gorti*
Layer6 AI

Maksims Volkovs
Layer6 AI

Guangwei Yu
Layer6 AI

jeremy@layer6.ai

satya@layer6.ai

maks@layer6.ai

guang@layer6.ai

Abstract
Localizing actions in video is a core task in computer vision. The weakly supervised temporal localization problem
investigates whether this task can be adequately solved with
only video-level labels, significantly reducing the amount
of expensive and error-prone annotation that is required.
A common approach is to train a frame-level classifier
where frames with the highest class probability are selected to make a video-level prediction. Frame-level activations are then used for localization. However, the absence of frame-level annotations cause the classifier to impart class bias on every frame. To address this, we propose the Action Selection Learning (ASL) approach to capture the general concept of action, a property we refer to
as “actionness”. Under ASL, the model is trained with
a novel class-agnostic task to predict which frames will
be selected by the classifier. Empirically, we show that
ASL outperforms leading baselines on two popular benchmarks THUMOS-14 and ActivityNet-1.2, with 10.3% and
5.7% relative improvement respectively. We further analyze the properties of ASL and demonstrate the importance
of actionness. Full code for this work is available here:
https://github.com/layer6ai-labs/ASL.

1. Introduction
Temporal action localization is a fundamental task in
computer vision with important applications in video understanding and modelling. The weakly supervised localization problem investigates whether this task can be
adequately solved with only video-level labels instead of
frame-level annotations. This significantly reduces the expensive and error-prone labelling required in the fully supervised setting [39, 29], but considerably increases the
difficulty of the problem. A standard approach is to apply multiple instance learning to learn a classifier over instances, where an instance is typically a frame or a short
segment [23, 26, 14]. The classifier is trained using the top* Authors contributed equally to this work.

(a) Context error

(b) Actionness error

Figure 1: (a) Context error for the “Cricket Shot” action due
to the presence of all cricket artifacts but absence of action.
(b) Actionness error for the “Cricket Bowling” action due
to the atypical scene despite the presence of action.
k aggregation over the instance class activation sequence
to generate video probabilities. Localization is then done
by leveraging the class activation sequence to generate start
and end predictions. However, in many cases, the instances
that are selected in the top-k contain useful information for
prediction but not the actual action. Furthermore, with topk selection the classification loss encourages the classifier
to ignore action instances that are difficult to classify. Both
of these problems can significantly hamper localization accuracy and stem from the general inability of the classifier to capture the intrinsic property of action in instances.
This property is known as “actionness” in the existing literature [7, 21].
Ignoring actionness can lead to two major types of error:
context error and actionness error. Context error occurs
when the classifier activates on instances that do not contain
actions but contain context indicative of the overall video
class [19, 14]. Figure 1 (a) shows an example of context error. Here, cricket players are inspecting a cricket pitch. The
instance clearly indicates that the video is about cricket and
the classifier predicts “Cricket Shot” with high confidence.
However, no shot happens in this particular instance and including it in the localization for “Cricket Shot” would lead
to an error. Actionness error occurs when the classifier fails
to activate on instances that contain actions. This generally
occurs in difficult instances that have significant occlusion
or uncommon settings. An example of this is shown in Figure 1 (b). The action is “Cricket Bowling”, but the classifier

7587

