Pixel-aligned Volumetric Avatars
Amit Raj1 Michael Zollhöfer 2 Tomas Simon 2 Jason Saragih 2
Shunsuke Saito 2 James Hays 1 Stephen Lombardi 2
1

Georgia Institute of Technology

2

Facebook Reality Labs Research

Figure 1: We present a novel approach for the prediction of volumetric avatars of human heads from a small number of
example views. Our model enables view synthesis for unseen identities and is able to generate faithful facial expressions.

Abstract
Acquisition and rendering of photo-realistic human
heads is a highly challenging research problem of particular importance for virtual telepresence. Currently, the highest quality is achieved by volumetric approaches trained in
a person-specific manner on multi-view data. These models better represent fine structure, such as hair, compared
to simpler mesh-based models. Volumetric models typically
employ a global code to represent facial expressions, such
that they can be driven by a small set of animation parameters. While such architectures achieve impressive rendering quality, they can not easily be extended to the multiidentity setting. In this paper, we devise a novel approach
for predicting volumetric avatars of the human head given
just a small number of inputs. We enable generalization
across identities by a novel parameterization that combines
neural radiance fields with local, pixel-aligned features extracted directly from the inputs, thus side-stepping the need
for very deep or complex networks. Our approach is trained
in an end-to-end manner solely based on a photometric rerendering loss without requiring explicit 3D supervision.
We demonstrate that our approach outperforms the existing
state of the art in terms of quality and is able to generate
faithful facial expressions in a multi-identity setting.

1. Introduction
The acquisition and rendering of photo-realistic human
heads is a highly challenging research problem with high
significance for virtual telepresence applications. Human
heads are challenging to model and render due to their complex geometry and appearance properties: sub-surface scattering of skin, fine-scale surface detail, thin-structured hair,
and the human eyes as well as the teeth are both specular
and translucent. Most existing approaches require complex
and expensive multi-view capture rigs (with up to hundreds
of cameras) to reconstruct even a person-specific model of
a human head.
Currently, the highest-quality approaches are those that
employ volumetric models rather than a textured mesh,
since they can better learn to represent fine structures on
the face like hair, which is critical to achieving a photorealistic appearance. These volumetric models [13] typically employ a global code to represent facial expressions
or only work for static scenes [16, 9]. While such architectures achieve impressive rendering quality, they can not
easily be adapted to a multi-identity setting. A global code,
as is used to control expression, is not sufficient for modeling identity variation across subjects. There has been significant progress of late in using implicit models to represent scenes and objects. These models have the advantage

11733

