Reinforced Attention for Few-Shot Learning and Beyond
Jie Hong*1,2 , Pengfei Fang1,2 , Weihao Li2 , Tong Zhang* 3 , Christian Simon1,2 ,
Mehrtash Harandi4 , Lars Petersson2
1
Australian National University, 2 Data61-CSIRO, 3 EPFL, 4 Monash University
jie.hong@anu.edu.au, pengfei.fang@anu.edu.au, weihao.li@data61.csiro.au, tong.zhang@epfl.ch,
christian.simon@anu.edu.au, mehrtash.harandi@monash.edu, lars.petersson@data61.csiro.au

Abstract
Few-shot learning aims to correctly recognize query
samples from unseen classes given a limited number of support samples, often by relying on global embeddings of images. In this paper, we propose to equip the backbone network with an attention agent, which is trained by reinforcement learning. The policy gradient algorithm is employed
to train the agent towards adaptively localizing the representative regions on feature maps over time. We further design a reward function based on the prediction of the heldout data, thus helping the attention mechanism to generalize better across the unseen classes. The extensive experiments show, with the help of the reinforced attention, that
our embedding network has the capability to progressively
generate a more discriminative representation in few-shot
learning. Moreover, experiments on the task of image classification also show the effectiveness of the proposed design.

1. Introduction
The success of deep learning models rely heavily on a
significant amount of labeled data, but the availability of
large datasets is still limited due to the labor-intensive data
preparation, which motivates the significant interest in fewshot learning [22, 40, 49, 11, 51, 47, 45]. Few-shot learning
aims to enable the model to classify unlabeled query examples of unseen classes, utilizing a very small number of
labeled support examples. One prominent category of methods is the model-initialization based approach [40, 11, 47].
It temporarily updates the model parameter using support
examples via gradient descent steps for the training tasks,
and seeks a representation that generalizes well in the testing phase. Another line of work, the metric-learning based
methods [22, 49, 51], is based on the complex manipulation
of global embeddings learned by the backbone network.
* corresponding author

Figure 1. Few-shot learning processes. (a) Vanilla few-shot learning. (b) Few-shot learning with RAP. The learning process has
been formulated as a Markov Decision Process (MDP).

Even though the traditional approaches work well for the
task of few-shot learning, they are likely to ignore the spatial information encoded within feature maps, which make
the model very sensitive to the background clutter on image
examples [62]. To fully make use of the available spatial
information, attention-oriented designs are recently developed for few-shot learning [53, 55, 7, 62, 42, 16, 9]. Using word embeddings as auxiliary data, semantics-guided
attention modules are proposed to capture the relevant visual features among query samples [55, 7, 62]. In addition
to the semantics-guided attention, the sample-guided attention designs are able to further explore the feature relevance
between support samples and query samples [53, 42, 16].
While these attention models effectively make class features
more representative, they tend to focus too much on designing a complex meta-learner.
In order to address the aforementioned weakness, in
this work, we propose a reinforced-attention policy (RAP)

913

