CoMoGAN: continuous model-guided image-to-image translation
Fabio Pizzati
Inria, Vislab

Pietro Cerri
Vislab

Raoul de Charette
Inria

fabio.pizzati@inria.fr

pcerri@ambarella.com

raoul.de-charette@inria.fr

Abstract
CoMoGAN is a continuous GAN relying on the unsupervised reorganization of the target data on a functional
manifold. To that matter, we introduce a new Functional Instance Normalization layer and residual mechanism, which
together disentangle image content from position on target
manifold. We rely on naive physics-inspired models to guide
the training while allowing private model/translations features. CoMoGAN can be used with any GAN backbone and
allows new types of image translation, such as cyclic image translation like timelapse generation, or detached linear translation. On all datasets, it outperforms the literature. Our code is available in this page:
https://github.com/cv-rits/CoMoGAN .

1. Introduction
Image-to-image (i2i) translation networks learn translations between domains, applying to the context of source
images a target appearance learned from a dataset. This
enables applications such as neural photo editing [75, 32,
21, 48, 6], along with robotics-oriented tasks as time-ofday or weather selection [74, 47, 46, 13, 61], domain adaptation [18, 40, 29, 60], or others. Despite impressive leaps
forward with unpaired [75, 32], multi-target [9, 65], or continuous [64, 14] i2i, there are still important limitations.
Specifically, to learn complex continuous translations existing works require supervision on intermediate domain
points. Also, they assume piece-wise or entire linearity
of the domain manifold. Such constraints can hardly meet
cyclic translations (e.g. daytime) or continuous ones costly
or impractical to label (e.g. fog, rain).
Instead, we introduce CoMoGAN, the first i2i framework learning non-linear continuous translations with unsupervised target data. It is trained using simple physicsinspired models for guidance, while relaxing model dependency via continuous disentanglement of domain features. An interesting resulting property is that CoMoGAN
discovers the target data manifold ordering, unsupervised.
For evaluation we propose new translation tasks, shown in
Fig. 1, being either cyclic/linear, attached/detached from

Figure 1: Detaching from traditional i2i translation, we
are interested in continuous mapping from source domain
(green point) to a target domain (red lines), in single- or
multi- modal setup. A key feature of our proposal, is unsupervised reorganization of the data along a functional manifold (top: cyclic, middle/bottom: linear). We leverage lighting translations from day images (top), shallower depth of
field from in-focus images (middle), or synthetic clear images to realistic foggy images (bottom).
source. Our contributions are:
• a novel model-guided setting for continuous i2i,
• CoMoGAN: an unsupervised framework for disentanglement of continuously evolving features in generated
images, using simple model guidance,
• a novel Functional Instance Normalization (FIN) layer,
• the evaluation of CoMoGAN against recent baselines
and new tasks, outperforming the literature on all.

2. Related works
Differently from early i2i [22], the seminal work in
[75, 70] enabled unpaired source/target training. Building
on it, multi-modal [21, 76] or multi-target [8, 9, 65, 2] i2i
appeared. Performance was also boosted with additional
supervision [55, 5, 39, 27, 58, 7, 78, 77, 30, 36, 45, 41, 35].

14288

