Domain Adaptation with Auxiliary Target Domain-Oriented Classifier *

1

Jian Liang 1
Dapeng Hu 1
National University of Singapore (NUS)

liangjian92@gmail.com

Jiashi Feng 2,1
2
Sea AI Lab (SAIL)

dapeng.hu@u.nus.edu

Abstract
Domain adaptation (DA) aims to transfer knowledge
from a label-rich but heterogeneous domain to a label-scare
domain, which alleviates the labeling efforts and attracts
considerable attention. Different from previous methods
focusing on learning domain-invariant feature representations, some recent methods present generic semi-supervised
learning (SSL) techniques and directly apply them to DA
tasks, even achieving competitive performance. One of the
most popular SSL techniques is pseudo-labeling that assigns pseudo labels for each unlabeled data via the classiﬁer
trained by labeled data. However, it ignores the distribution
shift in DA problems and is inevitably biased to source data.
To address this issue, we propose a new pseudo-labeling
framework called Auxiliary Target Domain-Oriented Classiﬁer (ATDOC). ATDOC alleviates the classiﬁer bias by
introducing an auxiliary classiﬁer for target data only, to
improve the quality of pseudo labels. Speciﬁcally, we employ the memory mechanism and develop two types of nonparametric classiﬁers, i.e. the nearest centroid classiﬁer and
neighborhood aggregation, without introducing any additional network parameters. Despite its simplicity in a pseudo
classiﬁcation objective, ATDOC with neighborhood aggregation signiﬁcantly outperforms domain alignment techniques
and prior SSL techniques on a large variety of DA benchmarks and even scare-labeled SSL tasks.

1. Introduction
Despite remarkable progress in classiﬁcation tasks over
the past decades, deep neural network models still suffer
poor generalization performance to another new domain e.g.
classifying real-world object images using a classiﬁcation
model trained on simulated object images [54], due to the
well-known dataset shift [55] or domain shift [66] problem.
Hence, to avoid expensive human labeling and utilize prior
related labeled datasets, lots of research efforts have been
devoted to developing domain adaptation (DA) methods
* This work was partially supported by AISG-100E-2019-035,
MOE2017-T2-2-151, NUS_ECRA_FY17_P08 and CRP20-2017-0006.

elefjia@nus.edu.sg

[21, 20, 27, 67, 59, 29, 40] to transfer knowledge in the
label-rich dataset to a label-scare scenario. Depending on
the availability of labeled data in the target domain, one can
further divide existing DA methods into two categories, i.e.,
unsupervised DA [20] and semi-supervised DA [59].
This paper mainly focuses on unsupervised DA where no
labeled data is available in the target domain during training.
Recently, deep unsupervised DA approaches have almost
dominated this ﬁeld with promising results [47, 20, 48, 37,
31, 14], and most of them focus on learning domain-invariant
feature representations that achieve a small error on the
source domain at the same time. With the assumption about
covariate shift in [2], the learned representations together
with the classiﬁer built on the source domain are able to generalize well to the target domain. However, the strict assumption does not always hold in real-world applications. Another
line of research ignores transferable representation learning
but directly resorts to semi-supervised learning (SSL) techniques for the DA problems [18, 8, 57, 16, 30], where the
target domain could be readily treated as the unlabeled set in
SSL. For instance, MixMatch [3], a popular SSL approach,
has been successfully applied by [57] that wins prizes of the
VisDA 2019 Challenge. But these SSL-based DA methods
may fail to classify target samples far away from the source
domain due to the ignorance of domain shift.
One of the most popular SSL techniques—pseudo labeling [38] iteratively assigns pseudo labels corresponding to
the maximum prediction scores for each unlabeled data in
the target domain and then retrains the network with the
pseudo-labeled data in a supervised manner. However, the
network is inevitably biased to the labeled source data during
training, giving low-quality pseudo labels and propagating
errors in the target domain. To tackle this issue, we propose a new pseudo-labeling framework termed Auxiliary
Target Domain-Oriented Classiﬁer (ATDOC) for DA problems. Generally, ATDOC attempts to alleviate the labeling
bias by introducing an auxiliary classiﬁer for target data only.
In particular, we design two types of non-parametric classiﬁers, i.e., nearest centroid classiﬁer (NC) and neighborhood
aggregation (NA), to avoid additional network parameters.
Both class centroids and local neighborhood structures are

16632

