Offboard 3D Object Detection from Point Cloud Sequences
Charles R. Qi

Yin Zhou Mahyar Najibi

Pei Sun Khoa Vo

Boyang Deng Dragomir Anguelov

Waymo LLC

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen a rapid progress of 3D object
recognition with advances in 3D deep learning and strong
application demands. However, most 3D perception research has been focusing on real-time, onboard use cases
and only considers sensor input from the current frame or
a few history frames. Those models are sub-optimal for
many offboard use cases where the best perception quality
is needed. Among them, one important direction is to have
machines “auto label” the data to save the cost of human labeling. High quality perception can also be used for simulation or to build datasets to supervise or evaluate downstream
modules such as behavior prediction.
In this paper, we propose a novel pipeline for offboard
3D object detection with a modular design and a series of
tailored deep network models. The offboard pipeline makes
use of the whole sensor sequence input (such video data
is common in applications of autonomous driving and aug-

'$YHUDJH3UHFLVLRQ
3D Average Precision

While current 3D object recognition research mostly focuses on the real-time, onboard scenario, there are many
offboard use cases of perception that are largely underexplored, such as using machines to automatically generate
high-quality 3D labels. Existing 3D object detectors fail to
satisfy the high-quality requirement for offboard uses due
to the limited input and speed constraints. In this paper,
we propose a novel offboard 3D object detection pipeline
using point cloud sequence data. Observing that different
frames capture complementary views of objects, we design
the offboard detector to make use of the temporal points
through both multi-frame object detection and novel objectcentric refinement models. Evaluated on the Waymo Open
Dataset, our pipeline named 3D Auto Labeling shows significant gains compared to the state-of-the-art onboard detectors and our offboard baselines. Its performance is even
on par with human labels verified through a human label
study. Further experiments demonstrate the application of
auto labels for semi-supervised learning and provide extensive analysis to validate various design choices.

'$YHUDJH3UHFLVLRQ

PointPillar
PVRCNN
3D
Auto
Labeling
3RLQW3LOODU
395&11
'$XWR/DEHOLQJ
2XUV
3RLQW3LOODU
395&11
'$XWR/DEHOLQJ
2XUV(Ours)
+11.4%
1.0 

+19.9%
+20.7%
+40.2%
0.8 

+47.7%
+108.9%
0.6 


Abstract

0.4




0.2



0.5 


0.6 
0.7 


3D IoU Threshold
',R87KUHVKROG
',R87KUHVKROG

0.8




Figure 1. Our offboard 3D Auto Labeling achieved significant
gains over two representative onboard 3D detectors (the efficient PointPillar [20] and the top-performing PVRCNN [45]).
The relative gains (the percentage numbers) are higher under more
strict standard (higher IoU thresholds). The metric is 3D AP (L1)
for vehicles on the Waymo Open Dataset [52] val set.

mented reality). With no constraints on the model causality
and little constraint on model inference speed, we are able
to greatly expand the design space of 3D object detectors
and achieve significantly higher performance.
We design our offboard 3D detector based on a key observation: different viewpoints of an object, within a point
cloud sequence, contain complementary information about
its geometry (Fig. 2). An immediate baseline design is
to extend the current detectors to use multi-frame inputs.
However, as multi-frame detectors are effective they are still
limited in the amount of context they can use and are not
naively scalable to more frames – gains from adding more
frames diminish quickly (Table 5).
In order to fully utilize temporal point clouds (e.g. 10
or more seconds), we step away from the common framebased input structure where the entire frames of point clouds
are merged. Instead, we turn to an object-centric design.
We first leverage a top-performing multi-frame detector to
give us initial object localization. Then, we link objects
detected at different frames through multi-object tracking.
Based on the tracked boxes and the raw point cloud sequences, we can extract the entire track data of an object,
including all of its sensor data (point clouds) and detector boxes, which is 4D: 3D spatial plus 1D temporal. We

6134

