Invertible Image Signal Processing
Yazhou Xing∗
Zian Qian∗
Qifeng Chen
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
Unprocessed RAW data is a highly valuable image format for image editing and computer vision. However, since
the file size of RAW data is huge, most users can only get access to processed and compressed sRGB images. To bridge
this gap, we design an Invertible Image Signal Processing
(InvISP) pipeline, which not only enables rendering visually
appealing sRGB images but also allows recovering nearly
perfect RAW data. Due to our framework’s inherent reversibility, we can reconstruct realistic RAW data instead
of synthesizing RAW data from sRGB images without any
memory overhead. We also integrate a differentiable JPEG
compression simulator that empowers our framework to reconstruct RAW data from JPEG images. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments on two DSLR demonstrate that our method obtains much higher quality in both
rendered sRGB images and reconstructed RAW data than
alternative methods.

1. Introduction
Professional photographers can choose to process RAW
images by themselves instead of RGB images to produce
images with better visual effects as the RAW data captures
unprocessed scene irradiance at each in 12-14 bits by a camera. Due to its linear relationship with scene irradiance,
raw sensor data is also a better choice than RGB images
for many image editing and computer vision tasks, such
as photometric stereo, intrinsic image decomposition, image denoising, reflection removal, and image super resolution [4, 7, 27, 16, 30, 39, 40, 45]. However, accessing RAW
images can be quite hard due to their memory-demanding
property: RAW images may be discarded during the process of data storing, transferring, and sharing. In this paper,
we are interested in the question: can users get access to the
real RAW data without explicitly storing it?
Due to the great advantages of RAW images, there have
been many approaches to provide the mapping from sRGB
images to their RAW counterparts [2, 7, 29, 31, 36, 44].
Nguyen et al. [31] suggest explicitly storing the parameters
∗ Joint first authors

of sRGB-RAW mapping functions into the JPEG metadata
for the prospective RAW reconstruction. Brooks et al. [7]
use the prior information of the cameras (e.g., color correction matrices and digital gains) to reverse the ISP stepby-step. Another line of work [29, 36, 44] follows the inverse order of ISP and proposes learning-based methods to
synthesize RAW data from sRGB images. However, these
methods still rely on the underlying lossy in-camera ISP
pipeline, and the recovered RAW images are inaccurate and
may be different from the original ones.
In this work, we propose a novel and effective learned
solution by redesigning the camera image signal processing pipeline as an invertible one, which can be aptly called
Invertible ISP (InvISP). Our learning-based InvISP enables
rendering visually appealing RGB images in the forward
process, and recovering nearly perfect quality raw sensor
data from compressed RGB images through the inverse
process. Our reconstructed RAW data is nearly identical
with real RAW data and enables computer vision applications, such as image retouching and HDR reconstruction, as
shown in Figure 1.
Designing an invertible ISP is not a trivial task for at
least three reasons. First, some steps in the traditional ISP,
such as denoising, tone mapping, and quantization, can lead
to inevitable information lost from wide-range (12-bit or
14-bit) raw sensor data to 8-bit RGB images. Second, the
invertible ISP should not produce visual artifacts such as
halo and ghosting artifacts [18]. To render visually appealing sRGB images, denoising, demosaicing, color correction, white balance gain, tone mapping, and color enhancement must be designed carefully in ISP. Third, modern digital cameras store RGB images in the JPEG format, where
the lossy compression process makes reconstructing highquality RAW data highly challenging.
To overcome these challenges, we take advantage of
the inherent reversibility of normalizing-flow-based models [12, 25] and design both the RAW-to-RGB and RGBto-RAW mapping in our invertible ISP with one single invertible neural network. We deeply analyze the properties
of traditional ISP and design specific modules that can not
only well approximate the camera ISP but also reconstruct
almost identical RAW data with the camera RAW data.

6287

