Cloud2Curve: Generation and Vectorization of Parametric Sketches
Ayan Das1,2

Yongxin Yang1,2

Timothy Hospedales1,3

Tao Xiang1,2

Yi-Zhe Song1,2

1

2

SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence
3
University of Edinburgh, United Kingdom

{a.das, yongxin.yang, t.xiang, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk, t.hospedales@ed.ac.uk

1. Introduction
The analysis of free-hand sketches using deep learning
[40] has flourished over the past few years, with sketches
now being well analysed from classification [43, 42] and
retrieval [27, 12, 4] perspectives. Sketches for digital analysis have always been acquired in two primary modalities
- raster (pixel grids) and vector (line segments). Raster
sketches have mostly been the modality of choice for sketch
recognition and retrieval [43, 27]. However, generative
sketch models began to advance rapidly [16] after focusing on vector representations and generating sketches as
sequences [7, 37] of waypoints/line segments, similarly to
how humans sketch. As a happy byproduct, this paradigm
leads to clean and blur-free image generation as opposed
to direct raster-graphic generations [30]. Recent works
have studied creativity in sketch generation [16], learning to
sketch raster photo input images [36], learning efficient hu-

Pen Sketch

Preprocessing

Point Cloud

Cloud2Curve

Generated Vector Sketches

Sampling

Analysis of human sketches in deep learning has advanced immensely through the use of waypoint-sequences
rather than raster-graphic representations. We further
aim to model sketches as a sequence of low-dimensional
parametric curves. To this end, we propose an inverse
graphics framework capable of approximating a raster or
waypoint based stroke encoded as a point-cloud with a
variable-degree Bézier curve. Building on this module,
we present Cloud2Curve, a generative model for scalable
high-resolution vector sketches that can be trained end-toend using point-cloud data alone. As a consequence, our
model is also capable of deterministic vectorization which
can map novel raster or waypoint based sketches to their
corresponding high-resolution scalable Bézier equivalent.
We evaluate the generation and vectorization capabilities
of our model on Quick, Draw! and K-MNIST datasets.

Sampling

Abstract

Figure 1. Cloud2Curve capability teaser. Top: Our trained model
can vectorize a pen-on-paper sketch using scalable parametric
curves. Bottom: Cloud2Curve can be trained on raster datasets
such as KMNIST, where existing generative models cannot.

man sketching strategies [3], exploiting sketch generation
for photo representation learning [39], and the interaction
between sketch generation and language [18].
We present Cloud2Curve, a framework that advances the
generative sketch modeling paradigm on two major axes: (i)
by generating parametric sketches, i.e., a compositions of
its constituent strokes as scalable parametric curves; and (ii)
providing the ability to sample such sketches given pointcloud data, which is trivial to obtain either from rastergraphic or waypoint sequences. Altogether, our framework
uniquely provides the ability to generate or deterministically vectorize scalable parametric sketches based on point
clouds, as illustrated in Figure 1 and explained below.
First, we note that although existing frameworks like
SketchRNN [16] and derivatives generate vector sketches,
they do so via generation of a dense sequence of short
straight line segments. Consequently, (i) the output sketches
are not spatially scalable as required, e.g., for digital art applications, (ii) they struggle to generate long sketches due to
the use of recurrent generators [28], and (iii) the generative
process suffers from low interpretability compared to human sketching, where the human mental model relies more
on composing sketches with smooth strokes. While there

7088

