Neural Cellular Automata Manifold
Alejandro Hernandez Ruiz1
Armand Vilalta2
Francesc Moreno-Noguer1
1
Institut de Robòtica i Informàtica Industrial, CSIC-UPC, Spain
2
Barcelona Supercomputing Center, Spain

Abstract
Very recently, the Neural Cellular Automata (NCA) has
been proposed to simulate the morphogenesis process with
deep networks. NCA learns to grow an image starting from
a fixed single pixel. In this work, we show that the neural
network (NN) architecture of the NCA can be encapsulated
in a larger NN. This allows us to propose a new model
that encodes a manifold of NCA, each of them capable of
generating a distinct image. Therefore, we are effectively
learning an embedding space of CA, which shows generalization capabilities. We accomplish this by introducing
dynamic convolutions inside an Auto-Encoder architecture,
for the first time used to join two different sources of information, the encoding and cell’s environment information. In
biological terms, our approach would play the role of the
transcription factors, modulating the mapping of genes into
specific proteins that drive cellular differentiation, which
occurs right before the morphogenesis. We thoroughly evaluate our approach in a dataset of synthetic emojis and also in
real images of CIFAR-10. Our model introduces a generalpurpose network, which can be used in a broad range of
problems beyond image generation.

1. Introduction
Reproduction of multi-cellular organisms entails generating entire bodies from a single cell. Complex organisms
also require to create different types of somatic cells and
spatially arrange them to form the different tissues while
ensuring temporal stability. These three aspects, cellular differentiation, morphogenesis and cell-growth control are the
pillars of developmental biology. Computational methods
are a key ingredient of the developmental biology study, up
to the point that the term “morphogene” itself was coined by
Turing [26] decades before its empirical demonstration.
In this context, we model these fundamental processes using novel dynamic neural network architectures
in combination with neural cellular automata (NCA) [20].
We evaluate the proposed approach on the synthetic

[CGTA…]

[TGCA…]
Figure 1. A manifold of Neural Cellular Automata. Our model
encodes a manifold of programs in a DNA-like encoding. The
encodings are transformed into NCAs parameters, whose behavior
is able to reconstruct (or “grow”) a desired target image from a
pixel seed.

NotoColorEmoji [7] and real CIFAR-10 [17] image
datasets. In both cases our model is able to “grow” the
images with a low error (see Fig. 2).
Most complex organisms have their DNA protected inside
a nucleus. DNA expression outside the nucleus is carried out
by the cellular machinery and regulated via Transcription
Factors (TF). Many TF are involved in defining an organism’s spatial arrangement. Most of them are Morphogenes,
soluble molecules that can diffuse and carry signals via concentration gradients. This biological model inspired our
network architecture at the macro-scale (see Fig. 3). In our
network, we create a vector encoding where common information for all cells is stored, as in DNA. The expression
of such encoding by the “cellular machinery” is modulated
by a Parameter Predictor (PP), with a similar role to that of
TF. The “cellular machinery” (NCAM’s Dynamic Convolutions) receives two sources of information: one from its
DNA-encoding through the Parameter Predictor and another
from the gradients of Morphogenes in its surrounding envi-

10020

