Causal Attention for Vision-Language Tasks
Xu Yang1 , Hanwang Zhang1 , Guojun Qi2 , Jianfei Cai3
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore,
2
Futurewei Technologies
3
Faculty of Information Technology, Monash University, Australia,
s170018@e.ntu.edu.sg, hanwangzhang@ntu.edu.sg, guojunq@gmail.com, Jianfei.Cai@monash.edu

Abstract

a

man

is

Q

We present a novel attention mechanism: Causal Attention (CATT), to remove the ever-elusive confounding effect
in existing attention-based vision-language models. This effect causes harmful bias that misleads the attention module to focus on the spurious correlations in training data,
damaging the model generalization. As the confounder is
unobserved in general, we use the front-door adjustment
to realize the causal intervention, which does not require
any knowledge on the confounder. Specifically, CATT is
implemented as a combination of 1) In-Sample Attention
(IS-ATT) and 2) Cross-Sample Attention (CS-ATT), where
the latter forcibly brings other samples into every IS-ATT,
mimicking the causal intervention. CATT abides by the QK-V convention and hence can replace any attention module such as top-down attention and self-attention in Transformers. CATT improves various popular attention-based
vision-language models by considerable margins. In particular, we show that CATT has great potential in large-scale
pre-training, e.g., it can promote the lighter LXMERT [57],
which uses fewer data and less computational power, comparable to the heavier UNITER [14]. Code is published in
https://github.com/yangxuntu/lxmertcatt.

1. Introduction
Stemming from the strong cognitive evidences in selective signal processing [59, 50], the attention mechanism has
arguably become the most indispensable module in vision
and language models [66, 5, 3, 16, 11, 36]. Although its
idiosyncratic formulation varies from task to task, its nature
can be summarized as the following common Q-K-V notation: given a query q, the attention mechanism associates
q to each feature value vi by using the normalized attentive weight αi ∝ qT ki , where ki is the key function of the
value;P
thus, the resultant selective feature value — attention
— is i αi vi . In a modern view, the attention can be un-

K

Q
Top-Down

SelfATT

K

V

X

ATT

riding

V

Z

Y

Causal Graph of Attention

Figure 1. Top: an example of image captioner with a self-attention
and a top-down attention modules. Bottom: the corresponding
causal graph. The reason why the prediction is “riding” but not
“driving” is explained in Figure 3.

derstood as a feature transformer that encodes input query
q by using the given values V = {vi } [60].
Taking image captioning as an example in Figure 1, if
q and V are both encoded from the input X, e.g., the
RoI features of an image, we call it self-attention; if q is
changed to the sentence context, we call it top-down attention. Intuitively, self-attention is usually viewed as a nonlocal [65] (or graph [7]) convolution network that enriches
each local value with global relationship features; top downattention is used to enrich the context with the cross-domain
relationship features [3]. Both of them can be combined
and stacked into deep networks, serving as powerful multimodal encoder-decoder transformer networks [32, 12].
As a bridge connecting the input feature X and the output label Y , the quality of attention — how reasonable
the attentive weight α is — plays a crucial role for the
overall performance. However, due to the fact that the attention weights are unsupervised, e.g., there is no wordregion grounding for the top-down attention or relationship
dependency annotation for the self-attention, the weights
will be inevitably misled by the dataset bias. For example, as shown in Figure 1, since there are many images
captioned with “person riding horse” in the training data,
self-attention learns to infer “riding” by building the dependency between “person” and “horse”. Then, given a test

9847

