StyleMix: Separating Content and Style for Enhanced Data Augmentation
Minui Hong*
Jinwoo Choi*
Gunhee Kim
Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea
{alsdml123, jinwoo71, gunhee}@snu.ac.kr
https://github.com/alsdml/StyleMix

Abstract
In spite of the great success of deep neural networks for
many challenging classification tasks, the learned networks
are vulnerable to overfitting and adversarial attacks. Recently, mixup based augmentation methods have been actively studied as one practical remedy for these drawbacks.
However, these approaches do not distinguish between the
content and style features of the image, but mix or cut-andpaste the images. We propose StyleMix and StyleCutMix as
the first mixup method that separately manipulates the content and style information of input image pairs. By carefully mixing up the content and style of images, we can create more abundant and robust samples, which eventually
enhance the generalization of model training. We also develop an automatic scheme to decide the degree of style mixing according to the pair’s class distance, to prevent messy
mixed images from too differently styled pairs. Our experiments on CIFAR-10, CIFAR-100 and ImageNet datasets
show that StyleMix achieves better or comparable performance to state of the art mixup methods and learns more
robust classifiers to adversarial attacks.

1. Introduction
Although deep neural networks have achieved remarkable achievements in many classification tasks [18, 15,
31, 10], the learned networks are vulnerable to overfitting and adversarial attacks. As one of the most promising approaches to alleviate these issues, the data augmentation and regularization methods have been actively studied [30, 4, 29, 27, 1, 16]. As the earliest work, Mixup [30]
augments a new sample by mixing two samples via interpolation of both images and labels. Instead of using the entire
object regions, CutMix [29] cuts and pastes patches from
one image onto the other image along with the ground truth
labels being mixed proportionally to the area of patches.
Manifold Mixup [27] regularizes to prevent the network
* Equal contribution

from overfitting on the intermediate representations that interpolate hidden states. These approaches certainly improve
classification performance and robustness over input noise
and attacks, but they do not distinguish between the content
and style of the images for generating new mixup samples.
Content generally refers to the shape and form of an image,
while the style primarily includes texture and color [5]. If
convolutional neural networks are trained with no distinction between content and style, they tend to be biased to focus on a small faction of information to learn categories [6]
(e.g. an elephant is identified using only gray skin texture
no matter how the foreground looks like).
In this work, we argue that carefully mixing up the content and style of two input images can benefit creating more
abundant and robust samples, which eventually enhance the
generalization of model training. The style transfer methods [5, 14, 26, 19] have shown great progress recently and
proved that deep networks encode not only the content but
also the style information of images and offer the possibility to alter the distribution of low-level visual features in
the image while preserving the semantic content. Thus, by
separately considering the content and style of each input
image, we have two levels of options to augment training
data such as generating content-preserved images with diverse styles, varying foreground objects in the same styled
images, or both. Thus, classifiers are fully learned to recognize both content and style features to enhance the classification performance and robustness over noise and attacks.
We propose StyleMix as a new mixup method for data
augmentation that can generate various training samples
through convex combinations of content and style characteristics (Figure 1). We then extend to StyleCutMix that allows sub-image level manipulation based on the cut-andpaste idea of CutMix [29]. Finally, we develop a scheme
to automatically decide the degree of style mixing according to the class distance between a given pair of images.
With classification experiments on CIFAR-10 [17], CIFAR100 [17] and ImageNet datasets [3], each of our proposals nontrivially improves the classification performance and
eventually attains comparative performance to state-of-the-

14862

