Hyperdimensional computing as a framework for systematic aggregation of
image descriptors
Peer Neubert and Stefan Schubert
Chemnitz University of Technology
firstname.lastname@etit.tu-chemnitz.de

Abstract
Image and video descriptors are an omnipresent tool
in computer vision and its application fields like mobile
robotics. Many hand-crafted and in particular learned image descriptors are numerical vectors with a potentially
(very) large number of dimensions. Practical considerations like memory consumption or time for comparisons call
for the creation of compact representations. In this paper,
we use hyperdimensional computing (HDC) as an approach
to systematically combine information from a set of vectors in a single vector of the same dimensionality. HDC
is a known technique to perform symbolic processing with
distributed representations in numerical vectors with thousands of dimensions. We present a HDC implementation
that is suitable for processing the output of existing and future (deep learning based) image descriptors. We discuss
how this can be used as a framework to process descriptors
together with additional knowledge by simple and fast vector operations. A concrete outcome is a novel HDC-based
approach to aggregate a set of local image descriptors together with their image positions in a single holistic descriptor. The comparison to available holistic descriptors
and aggregation methods on a series of standard mobile
robotics place recognition experiments shows a 20% improvement in average performance and > 2× better worstcase performance compared to runner-up.

1. Introduction
Image descriptors are very useful tools for recognition
tasks in computer vision. Many hand-crafted and in particular deep learning based descriptors are numerical vectors with a potentially large number of dimensions, e.g.
NetVLAD [1] uses 4,096-D vectors (after PCA), DELF [44]
uses 1,024-D vectors (before PCA). Approaches like BoW
[56], VLAD [23], or ASMK [60] aggregate the information
from multiple vectors in a single holistic vector representation to reduce memory consumption and computational

efforts during comparison. For example, deciding whether
two images show the same place based on a set of local
landmarks from each image can then be done by a single
distance measure between the two aggregated vectors. Although these techniques are able to combine large numbers
of descriptors in a compact vector, for certain tasks like
place recognition, it is beneficial to encode additional information in the final vector representation, e.g., information
about the image locations of aggregated vectors.
The central idea of this paper is to use binding and
bundling of vectors as a flexible framework to combine image descriptors and additional information. The underlying technique of binding and bundling vectors is taken from
a field known as hyperdimensional computing (HDC) or
vector symbolic architectures (VSA). This is an established
class of approaches to solve symbolic computational problems using mathematical operations on large numerical vectors with thousands of dimensions [25, 42]. The bundling
operator ⊕ superposes information of a variable number of
vectors in a single vector; we can think of it as some form
of averaging. The binding operator ⊗ can, for example, express role-filler or variable-value pairs as required in symbolic processing. An important property is that the output
of the operations are vectors from the same vector space.
This allows to chain HDC operations and enables versatile
encoding of structured data from a set of d-dimensional vectors in a single d-dimensional vector.
We will present a HDC implementation that allows the
processing of existing and future (deep learning based) image descriptors in Sec. 3. This section will also describe
how HDC can be used as a framework to aggregate holistic
or local image descriptors and to combine them with additional information. A concrete outcome is a novel approach
to create a holistic image descriptor from a set of local descriptors with image position information in Sec. 3.2.2. For
example, we can create a holistic descriptor from three local descriptors L1 , L2 , L3 with poses P1 , P2 , P2 as simple
as (L1 ⊗ P1 ) ⊕ (L2 ⊗ P2 ) ⊕ (L3 ⊗ P3 ). The poses serve
as “roles“ that are associated with landmarks as “fillers“.
When comparing two such holistic descriptors (e.g. based

16938

