Learning a Facial Expression Embedding Disentangled from Identity
Wei Zhang1∗, Xianpeng Ji1∗, Keyu Chen2∗, Yu Ding1∗, Changjie Fan1
1
Virtual Human Group, Netease Fuxi AI Lab
2
University of Science and Technology of China
{zhangwei05,jixianpeng,dingyu01,fanchangjie}@corp.neatease.com
cky95@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
The facial expression analysis requires a compact and
identity-ignored expression representation. In this paper,
we model the expression as the deviation from the identity by a subtraction operation, extracting a continuous and
identity-invariant expression embedding. We propose a Deviation Learning Network (DLN) with a pseudo-siamese
structure to extract the deviation feature vector. To reduce
the optimization difficulty caused by additional fully connection layers, DLN directly provides high-order polynomial to nonlinearly project the high-dimensional feature to
a low-dimensional manifold. Taking label noise into account, we add a crowd layer to DLN for robust embedding
extraction. Also, to achieve a more compact representation, we use hierarchical annotation for data augmentation. We evaluate our facial expression embedding on the
FEC validation set. The quantitative results prove that we
achieve the state-of-the-art, both in terms of fine-grained
and identity-invariant property. We further conduct extensive experiments to show that our expression embedding is
of high quality for expression recognition, image retrieval,
and face manipulation.

1. Introduction
Facial expression plays a vital role in human social communication. Humans are very skilled at perceiving expressions, which is non-trivial for computers. The development of human-computer interaction requires reasonable
facial expression representation. Studies on resolving this
problem have been conducted for decades in the expression
analysis area. The previous methods, such as Facial Action Coding System (FACS) [11] and categorical expression
model [7] [28], try to build discrete expression representation with semantic definitions. However, these methods
ignore the big variance within the emotional classes and
∗ Equal contribution. Yu Ding is the corresponding author.

𝐕𝑒𝑥𝑝1

𝐕𝑖𝑑

𝐕𝑒𝑥𝑝2

𝐕𝑒𝑥𝑝3

(a) Expression manifold

𝐕𝑒𝑥𝑝1

𝐕𝑒𝑥𝑝3

𝐕𝑖𝑑
𝐕𝑒𝑥𝑝2

(b) Deviation module

Figure 1: Description of expression manifold and our Deviation
model.

few of them can handle well the identity-entangled problem. Therefore, most of the existing expression representations are still lack of enough capacity for extracting finegrained and identity-invariant expression information from
given faces and somehow block the downstream tasks such
as expression recognition [28], image retrieval [36] and face
manipulation [39].
In this paper, we develop a novel expression embedding framework being capable of learning a continuous and
smooth space for expressions from face images. To represent the complicated and subtle expression, we follow the
idea [36] of using contrastive comparison to learn the expression distribution. The optimization goal is to map two
similar expressions within a triplet close to each other while
away from the third one. Besides, based on the perspective
that expressions should be lying on a manifold closing to
the identity [15] (See Fig. 1a), we model the facial expression as a deviation from the facial identity representation
like Fig. 1b. In this way, we disentangle the facial identity attribute from the source face in an explicit manner. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first work that tries to
resolve the expression embedding problem by intentionally
disentangling the face identity attribute.
Our expression embedding learning framework called
Deviation Learning Network (DLN) is composed of three
modules (See Fig. 2): a deviation module for extract-

6759

