Cross-View Regularization for Domain Adaptive Panoptic Segmentation
Jiaxing Huang, Dayan Guan, Aoran Xiao, Shijian Lu∗
School of Computer Science Engineering, Nanyang Technological University
{Jiaxing.Huang, Dayan.Guan, Aoran.Xiao, Shijian.Lu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract

1. Introduction
Panoptic segmentation unifies semantic segmentation
and instance segmentation which aims to assign a semantic class and an instance ID to each image pixel concurrently. With a large amount of annotated training images,
panoptic segmentation has recently made rapid progress under a supervised setup [32, 31, 39, 52, 41, 68, 37, 25, 38].
Unfortunately, collecting large-scale training images with
pixel-level annotations is prohibitively expensive and timeconsuming [10, 46]. One way to mitigate this constraint
is to leverage synthetic images [53] that can be automatically annotated by graphic software. However, synthetic
and natural images have clear domain gaps and panoptic
segmentation models trained using synthetic images usually
∗ Corresponding author.

CVRN (Ours)

Source

Source Only

Target

326

Target

Multi-Viewing

Cross-View Regularization

F
ITR
ISR

Stylized Target

Panoptic segmentation unifies semantic segmentation
and instance segmentation which has been attracting increasing attention in recent years. However, most existing
research was conducted under a supervised learning setup
whereas unsupervised domain adaptive panoptic segmentation which is critical in different tasks and applications is
largely neglected. We design a domain adaptive panoptic
segmentation network that exploits inter-style consistency
and inter-task regularization for optimal domain adaptive
panoptic segmentation. The inter-style consistency leverages semantic invariance across the same image of the different styles which ‘ fabricates’ certain self-supervisions
to guide the network to learn domain-invariant features.
The inter-task regularization exploits the complementary
nature of instance segmentation and semantic segmentation and uses it as a constraint for better feature alignment
across domains. Extensive experiments over multiple domain adaptive panoptic segmentation tasks (e.g. syntheticto-real and real-to-real) show that our proposed network
achieves superior segmentation performance as compared
with the state-of-the-art.

Input Images

F

ISR
ITR

Instance Segmentation

Semantic Segmentation

Figure 1. Our proposed cross-view regularization network
(CVRN) tackles domain adaptive panoptic segmentation by exploring an inter-task regularization (ITR) and an inter-style regularization (ISR). As shown in the bottom part, ITR exploits the
complementary nature of instance segmentation and semantic segmentation to regularize each other. ISR employs online image stylization to augments multiple views of the same image for regularization. Panoptic segmentations with and without our cross-view
regularization are shown in the top part (the black dash lines highlight two close-up views). Best viewed in color.

experience sharp performance drop while applied to natural
images, as shown in Figure 1.
One strategy that could better leverage synthetic images is domain adaptive panoptic segmentation that adopts
certain unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) techniques
for adaptation from synthetic images to natural images.
However, domain adaptive panoptic segmentation is largely
neglected though domain adaptive semantic segmentation
[76, 22, 59, 34, 24, 77, 67, 26, 70, 33] and domain adaptive
instance detection/segmentation [3, 65, 72, 21, 79, 69, 17]
have been investigated extensively. This could be due to a
misconception that domain adaptive panoptic segmentation

10133

