Mirror3D: Depth Refinement for Mirror Surfaces
Jiaqi Tan

Weijie Lin Angel X. Chang Manolis Savva
Simon Fraser University
https://3dlg-hcvc.github.io/mirror3d/

Input image + mirror mask

Raw depth

Original point cloud

Refined depth

Refined point cloud

Figure 1: We present the task of 3D mirror plane prediction and depth refinement. First, we annotate several popular RGBD
datasets (Matterport3D [6], ScanNet [7], NYUv2 [32]) with 3D mirror planes. Our benchmarks show that both existing
RGBD dataset ‘ground truth’ raw depth data, and state-of-the-art depth estimation and depth completion methods exhibit
dramatic errors on mirror surfaces. We propose an architecture for 3D mirror plane estimation that refines depth estimates
and produces more reliable reconstructions (compare left and right depth and point cloud pairs from NYUv2 [32] dataset).

Abstract
Despite recent progress in depth sensing and 3D reconstruction, mirror surfaces are a significant source of errors.
To address this problem, we create the Mirror3D dataset:
a 3D mirror plane dataset based on three RGBD datasets
(Matterpot3D, NYUv2 and ScanNet) containing 7,011 mirror instance masks and 3D planes. We then develop Mirror3DNet: a module that refines raw sensor depth or estimated depth to correct errors on mirror surfaces. Our key
idea is to estimate the 3D mirror plane based on RGB input
and surrounding depth context, and use this estimate to directly regress mirror surface depth. Our experiments show
that Mirror3DNet significantly mitigates errors from a variety of input depth data, including raw sensor depth and
depth estimation or completion methods.

1. Introduction
Recent years have seen much progress in 3D reconstruction methods. It is now possible to acquire 3D re-

constructions of interiors with high quality geometry and
texture. However, these reconstructions fail spectacularly
when used in environments with mirrors and glass, both of
which are prevalent in indoor spaces.
The fragility of many reconstruction methods is due to
a reliance on accurate active depth sensing. Commodity
sensors such as the Microsoft Kinect and Intel RealSense
employ active infrared or time of flight depth sensing which
requires strong signal return from sensed surfaces. Unfortunately, highly glossy and reflective surfaces such as mirrors cause either no signal return or highly unreliable depth
estimates. Though it may seem that reflectors are a ‘corner case’ with few affected pixels, the resulting errors are
catastrophic to reconstruction algorithms, leading to loss of
camera pose tracking and geometry artifacts (see Figure 1).
Recently, Whelan et al. [34] demonstrated that by detecting mirror planes it is possible to mitigate the above issues and achieve high-quality reconstructions in scenes with
many reflectors. However, their method relies on the use
of an AprilTag [27] attached to a custom camera rig. The
use of such custom hardware is not always feasible. In this

15990

