MOST: A Multi-Oriented Scene Text Detector with Localization Refinement
Minghang He1 * Minghui Liao1∗ Zhibo Yang2 Humen Zhong3
Jun Tang2 Wenqing Cheng1 Cong Yao2 Yongpan Wang2 Xiang Bai1†
Huazhong University of Science and Technology1
Alibaba Group2 Nanjing University3
{minghanghe,mhliao}@foxmail.com
xixing.tj@alibaba-inc.com

{yaocong2010,yangzhibo450}@gmail.com

yongpan@taobao.com

{xbai,chenwq}@hust.edu.cn

zhonghumen@smail.nju.edu.cn

Abstract
Over the past few years, the field of scene text detection has progressed rapidly that modern text detectors are
able to hunt text in various challenging scenarios. However, they might still fall short when handling text instances
of extreme aspect ratios and varying scales. To tackle such
difficulties, we propose in this paper a new algorithm for
scene text detection, which puts forward a set of strategies to significantly improve the quality of text localization. Specifically, a Text Feature Alignment Module (TFAM)
is proposed to dynamically adjust the receptive fields of
features based on initial raw detections; a Position-Aware
Non-Maximum Suppression (PA-NMS) module is devised to
selectively concentrate on reliable raw detections and exclude unreliable ones; besides, we propose an Instancewise IoU loss for balanced training to deal with text instances of different scales. An extensive ablation study
demonstrates the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed strategies. The resulting text detection system, which
integrates the proposed strategies with a leading scene text
detector EAST, achieves state-of-the-art or competitive performance on various standard benchmarks for text detection
while keeping a fast running speed.

1. Introduction
Recently, scene text reading has become an active research topic in the computer vision community, due to
the vital value in a wide range of applications, such as
video indexing, signboard reading [25], and instant translation, which requires automatic textual information extraction from natural images.
Driven by deep neural networks and massive data, techniques and systems for scene text reading have evolved
drastically over the past few years and numerous inspiring
* Equal Contribution
† Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Illustration of the superiority of the proposed MOST in
handling long text instances. (a) and (b) are from EAST [45]; (c)
and (d) are from MOST. (a) and (c) show raw detection boxes predicted at 3 different locations inside the text region. The sampling
point shares the same color with the corresponding detection box.
(b) and (d) are the final detection results.

ideas have been proposed [20]. However, on account of
real-world challenges such as diverse shapes, arbitrary orientations, various scales as well as complex illumination,
severe blur, and perspective distortion, there is still large
room for improvement of current text reading methods.
In particular, regarding scene text detection, the topic we
are concerned with in this work, obvious weaknesses of existing algorithms can be observed. For instance, EAST [45],
a representative one-stage scene text detector, has proven to
be poor at detecting text instances with extreme aspect ratios (see Fig. 1 (a) and (b)). There are two main reasons:
(1) The network has a limited receptive field and thus is incapable of making use of sufficient information needed to
precisely predict the spatial extent of long text instances;
(2) In the Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) procedure of
EAST, the detections are merged using their text/non-text
classification scores as weight, which neglects their differences in quality caused by the network’s limited receptive
field and leads to biased geometric estimation.
To address these issues, we propose a Multi-Oriented
Scene Text detector (MOST) with localization refinement.

8813

