PD-GAN: Probabilistic Diverse GAN for Image Inpainting
Hongyu Liu1
1
Huya Inc

Ziyu Wan2 Wei Huang3 Yibing Song4 Xintong Han1 * Jing Liao2
2
City University of Hong Kong 3 Hunan University 4 Tencent AI Lab

{liuhongyu1,hanxintong}@huya.com
yibingsong.cv@gmail.com

(a) Input

(b) PIC1 [58]

(c) PIC2

ziyuwan2-c@my.cityu.edu.hk
jingliao@cityu.edu.hk

(d) PIC3

(e) Ours1

(f) Ours2

(g) Ours3

Figure 1. Visual comparison of diverse inpainting results. Our method generates more diverse and visually realistic results than PIC [58].

Abstract
We propose PD-GAN, a probabilistic diverse GAN for
image inpainting. Given an input image with arbitrary hole
regions, PD-GAN produces multiple inpainting results with
diverse and visually realistic content. Our PD-GAN is built
upon a vanilla GAN which generates images based on random noise. During image generation, we modulate deep
features of input random noise from coarse-to-fine by injecting an initially restored image and the hole regions in
multiple scales. We argue that during hole filling, the pixels near the hole boundary should be more deterministic
(i.e., with higher probability trusting the context and initially restored image to create natural inpainting boundary), while those pixels lie in the center of the hole should
enjoy more degrees of freedom (i.e., more likely to depend
* X. Han is the corresponding author. The results and code are available
at https://github.com/KumapowerLIU/PD-GAN.

on the random noise for enhancing diversity). To this end,
we propose spatially probabilistic diversity normalization
(SPDNorm) inside the modulation to model the probability
of generating a pixel conditioned on the context information. SPDNorm dynamically balances the realism and diversity inside the hole region, making the generated content more diverse towards the hole center and resemble
neighboring image content more towards the hole boundary. Meanwhile, we propose a perceptual diversity loss to
further empower PD-GAN for diverse content generation.
Experiments on benchmark datasets including CelebA-HQ,
Places2 and Paris Street View indicate that PD-GAN is effective for diverse and visually realistic image restoration.

1. Introduction
There is a growing attention on developing advanced
image inpainting methods for content removal [34, 3] and

9371

