MR Image Super-Resolution with Squeeze and Excitation Reasoning Attention
Network
Yulun Zhang1 , Kai Li1 , Kunpeng Li1 , Yun Fu1,2
Department of ECE, Northeastern University, USA
2
Khoury College of Computer Science, Northeastern University, USA
1

yulun100@gmail.com, {kunpengli, kaili, yunfu}@ece.neu.edu

Abstract
High-quality high-resolution (HR) magnetic resonance
(MR) images afford more detailed information for reliable
diagnosis and quantitative image analyses. Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have shown promising ability for MR image super-resolution (SR) given low-resolution
(LR) MR images. The LR MR images usually share some visual characteristics: repeating patterns, relatively simpler
structures, and less informative background. Most previous
CNN-based SR methods treat the spatial pixels (including
the background) equally. They also fail to sense the entire
space of the input, which is critical for high-quality MR image SR. To address those problems, we propose squeeze and
excitation reasoning attention networks (SERAN) for accurate MR image SR. We propose to squeeze attention from
global spatial information of the input and obtain global
descriptors. Such global descriptors enhance the network’s
ability to focus on more informative regions and structures
in MR images. We further build relationship among those
global descriptors and propose primitive relationship reasoning attention. The global descriptors are further reﬁned
with learned attention. To fully make use of the aggregated
information, we adaptively recalibrate feature responses
with learned adaptive attention vectors. These attention
vectors select a subset of global descriptors to complement
each spatial location for accurate details and texture reconstruction. We propose squeeze and excitation attention with
residual scaling, which not only stabilizes the training but
also makes it flexible to other basic networks. Extensive experiments show the effectiveness of our proposed SERAN,
which clearly surpasses state-of-the-art methods on benchmarks quantitatively and visually.

1. Introduction
High-resolution (HR) magnetic resonance (MR) images
would provide more detailed structures and textures, which

RDN

Bicubic

IDN

Ours

Ground Truth

Figure 1. The visual comparison between the our method and recent image SR methods on a PD image with scaling factor ×4.

beneﬁt accurate diagnosis and quantitative image analyses [5]. However, in real-world cases, HR MR images
are obtained at the cost of longer scanning time, lower
signal-to-noise ratio, and smaller spatial converge [32]. Image super-resolution (SR) reconstructs HR outputs from the
given low-resolution (LR) ones. It is becoming a promising
technique to upscale the spatial resolution of MR images.
Recently, deep convolutional neural network (CNN) has
shown its powerful ability for high-quality image SR. Dong
et al. ﬁrstly introduced CNN for image SR in SRCNN [7,8],
which has only three convolutional layers. Kim et al. increased the network depth by utilizing residual learning in
VDSR [18]. Hui et al. proposed information distillation
network (IDN) [15]. Zhang et al. achieved better SR performance with RDN [48], which fully utilizes hierarchical
features. On the other hand, some MR images oriented SR
methods were also proposed. Chen et al. used 3D dense
network and adversarial learning for MR image SR [5].
However, those deep CNN based methods either neglect
the characteristics of MR images or suffer from intrinsic

13425

