Unsupervised Multi-Source Domain Adaptation for Person Re-Identification
Zechen Bai1 , Zhigang Wang1 , Jian Wang1 , Di Hu2,3∗ , Errui Ding1∗
1
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc., China,
2
Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, China,
3
Beijing Key Laboratory of Big Data Management and Analysis Methods
zechenbai.baidu@outlook.com, dihu@ruc.edu.cn,
{wangzhigang05,wangjian33,dingerrui}@baidu.com
Abstract
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) methods for
person re-identification (re-ID) aim at transferring re-ID
knowledge from labeled source data to unlabeled target
data. Although achieving great success, most of them only
use limited data from a single-source domain for model
pre-training, making the rich labeled data insufficiently exploited. To make full use of the valuable labeled data, we
introduce the multi-source concept into UDA person re-ID
field, where multiple source datasets are used during training. However, because of domain gaps, simply combining
different datasets only brings limited improvement. In this
paper, we try to address this problem from two perspectives,
i.e. domain-specific view and domain-fusion view. Two constructive modules are proposed, and they are compatible
with each other. First, a rectification domain-specific batch
normalization (RDSBN) module is explored to simultaneously reduce domain-specific characteristics and increase
the distinctiveness of person features. Second, a graph convolutional network (GCN) based multi-domain information
fusion (MDIF) module is developed, which minimizes domain distances by fusing features of different domains. The
proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art UDA person
re-ID methods by a large margin, and even achieves comparable performance to the supervised approaches without any post-processing techniques.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (re-ID) aims at retrieving images
of a specified person across different cameras. Recently,
supervised person re-ID methods [34, 37, 47] have made
impressive progress. However, when testing on unseen
datasets, they usually suffer from dramatic performance
degradation. Collecting and annotating enough training
∗ Co-Corresponding Auther.

data for a specified scenario is expected, but it is laborintensive and expensive. Therefore, unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) for person re-ID has attracted an increasing attention.
Numerous UDA person re-ID methods have been proposed. Among them, the pseudo-label-based branch [33,
41, 10] dominates the state-of-the-art methods. They usually consists of two steps: (1) obtaining a pre-trained model
by supervised training on the source domain; (2) training
on the target domain by pseudo-label prediction and finetune iteratively. Although pseudo-label-based methods are
proved effective, most of them only use limited data from
a single-source domain for model pre-training, making the
rich labeled data insufficiently exploited. This is undoubtedly a great waste of resources.
To make full use of the existing abundant labeled data,
we first introduce the multi-source concept into UDA person re-ID field, where multiple source datasets are used in
both model pre-training and fine-tuning stages. For the latter, the ground-truth labels of source domain and pseudo labels of target domain together provide supervisions. However, we find simply combining different datasets brings
limited improvement or even negative effect. This is because different datasets usually have different characteristics such as color, illumination, camera views, etc. This
problem is widely known as domain gaps.
In this paper, we try to address this problem from two
perspectives, i.e. domain-specific view and domain-fusion
view. As for the former, several successful UDA methods
[1, 45, 2] use specific network components to capture and
eliminate incompatible characteristics of different domains.
Nevertheless, most of these methods are originally designed
for a close-set problem, i.e. general classification which has
the following properties. (1) Multiple domains share all or
part of the label set. (2) Samples have relatively small intraclass distances and large inter-class distances. Due to these
two reasons, it is easy for these methods to correctly aggregate intra-class samples even they come from different do-

12914

