Single Image Reflection Removal with Absorption Effect
Qian Zheng1∗ Boxin Shi2,3,4 ∗ Jinnan Chen1 Xudong Jiang1 Ling-Yu Duan2,4 Alex C. Kot1
1

School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
NELVT, Department of Computer Science and Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China
3
Institute for Artificial Intelligence, Peking University, Beijing, China
4
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{zhengqian, exdjiang, eackot}@ntu.edu.sg, {shiboxin, lingyu}@pku.edu.cn, jinnan001@e.ntu.edu.sg
2

Abstract
In this paper, we consider the absorption effect for the
problem of single image reflection removal. We show that
the absorption effect can be numerically approximated by
the average of refractive amplitude coefficient map. We
then reformulate the image formation model and propose a
two-step solution that explicitly takes the absorption effect
into account. The first step estimates the absorption effect from a reflection-contaminated image, while the second
step recovers the transmission image by taking a reflectioncontaminated image and the estimated absorption effect as
the input. Experimental results on four public datasets show
that our two-step solution not only successfully removes
reflection artifact, but also faithfully restores the intensity
distortion caused by the absorption effect. Our ablation studies further demonstrate that our method achieves superior
performance on the recovery of overall intensity and has
good model generalization capacity. The code is available
at https://github.com/q-zh/absorption.

1. Introduction
When light interacts with a plate glass surface, it can be
partly absorbed, reflected, and transmitted. A widely used
formation model of a reflection-contaminated image I is
formulated as1
I = ΩT + ΦR,

(1)

where Ω and Φ represent refractive and reflective amplitude
coefficient maps, T and R represent transmission and reflection images. Recovering transmission image T from a
single reflection-contaminated image I is challenging due to
its ill-posedness [1]. As can be observed from Equation (1),
such ill-posedness is not only caused by unknown content
of T and R, but also by unknown content-free variables of
Ω and Φ. Most existing methods rely on image content for
single image reflection removal, i.e., explicit priors from
image gradients (e.g., [2]) and dictionaries (e.g., [3]), or
∗ Corresponding authors.
1 As there is no matrix multiplication in this paper, we redefine the matrix
multiplication as the element-wise multiplication for simplicity.

implicit priors from training data (e.g., [4]). The nature of
content-free variables is widely studied to solve the problem
of multi-images reflection removal (e.g., [5, 6]) while they
are seldom considered in the context of single image reflection removal. Besides, most existing solutions (e.g., single
image [7], multi-images [8]) are based on an ideal image
formation model that does not take the absorption effect (defined in Section 3) into account, i.e., assuming the glass to
be thin enough. A recent work solves for ΩT instead of T
as the absorption effect can significantly darken the transmission [9].2 Since the absorption effect is independent from
image content while varying with different colors, thicknesses, or orientations of glass in the real-world, considering
the absorption effect can help mitigate the ill-posedness of
single image reflection removal.
In this paper, we revisit the formation model of the
reflection-contaminated image by taking the absorption effect into account (Section 3). According to the results of
Monte Carlo simulation [10], we observe that the absorption effect can be numerically represented by the average
of refractive amplitude coefficient map, defined as avg(Ω)
(Section 5.1). As the content-free variable avg(Ω) fluctuates
in the simulation, we argue that an accurate estimation of
avg(Ω) can benefit in solving the problem of single image reflection removal. To this end, we propose a two-step solution
to first estimate avg(Ω) and then recover the transmission
image T through two neural networks. To obtain an accurate
estimation of avg(Ω) in the first step, we adopt a two-branch
training strategy by taking I and T as inputs. The core idea
is to reduce the influence from image content of transmission
and reflection while propagating discriminative features of
content-free variable avg(Ω) across the layers of our neural
network (Section 4.1). We also constrain the second step
with the Lipschitz condition [11] to increase the generalization capacity regarding diverse avg(Ω) (Section 4.2). Our
method achieves a superior performance advantage on public
datasets. In summary, our contributions are as follows,
• We propose the first formulation to consider the absorption effect in the context of reflection removal. We further show that the absorption effect can be numerically
2 Please find our experiments of fitting the absorption effect for real data
in the supplementary material.

113395

