NeRD: Neural 3D Reflection Symmetry Detector
Yichao Zhou
Univ. of California, Berkeley
zyc@berkeley.edu

Shichen Liu
Univ. of Southern California
liushich@usc.edu

Abstract
Recent advances have shown that symmetry, a structural
prior that most objects exhibit, can support a variety of
single-view 3D understanding tasks. However, detecting 3D
symmetry from an image remains a challenging task. Previous works either assume the symmetry is given or detect the
symmetry with a heuristic-based method. In this paper, we
present NeRD, a Neural 3D Reflection Symmetry Detector,
which combines the strength of learning-based recognition
and geometry-based reconstruction to accurately recover
the normal direction of objects’ mirror planes. Specifically,
we enumerate the symmetry planes with a coarse-to-fine
strategy and find the best ones by building 3D cost volumes
to examine the intra-image pixel correspondence from the
symmetry. Our experiments show that the symmetry planes
detected with our method are significantly more accurate
than the planes from direct CNN regression on both synthetic and real datasets. More importantly, we also demonstrate that the detected symmetry can be used to improve the
performance of downstream tasks such as pose estimation
and depth map regression by a wide margin over existing
methods. The code of this paper has been made public at
https://github.com/zhou13/nerd.

1. Introduction
Recovering the 3D orientation of objects in an image is
a fundamental problem in 3D vision, which plays important
roles in tasks such as robotics, autonomous driving, virtual
reality (VR), augmented reality (AR), and 3D scene understanding. Traditionally, such a problem is hard to solve. Researchers can to RGB-D input captured with time-of-flight
cameras or structured light [5, 27, 29]. Unfortunately, depth
cameras often have limited range and can be interfered with
by other light sources, and the requirement of owning a depth
camera is inconvenient for average users, which severely restricts its applications.
Recent advances in convolutional neural networks in object detection and instance segmentation have shown good

Yi Ma
Univ. of California, Berkeley
yima@eecs.berkeley.edu

Correct
symmetry normal
Correspondence
signal
Depth
Input image

Cost Volume

Incorrect
symmetry normal

No signal

Depth
Input image

Cost volume

Figure 1: Illustration of the symmetry detection process in NeRD.
For each pixel, we enumerate its depth and warp features along the
line according to the symmetry plane hypothesis. If the hypothesis
is correct, there should be matched features for most of the pixels.

potential in inferring object-level information from RGB images by leveraging supervised learning. Nowadays, singleview neural network-based methods are able to predict the
object pose under different settings. Some work explores
the instance-level 3D pose estimation problem [21, 28, 32]
in which the CAD models of the objects are known beforehand. However, these settings are rather limited because
in practice we do not have CAD models for many objects.
Therefore, other work tries to tackle the category-level 3D
pose estimation problem [4, 25, 39] without relying on the
exact CAD models of objects. Unlike the cases where either
depth information or CAD models are available, previous
single-view category-level 3D pose estimation methods can
hardly exploit the geometric constraints between the input
RGB image and the 3D shape and predict the pose solely by
interpolating the training data. Hence, such formulation is
ill-posed, which leads to inaccurate pose recovery [31].
To address this difficulty, we identify a structure that commonly exists in man-made objects, the reflection symmetry,
as a geometric connection between the object poses and the
115940

