Knowledge Evolution in Neural Networks
Ahmed Taha

Abhinav Shrivastava
University of Maryland, College Park

Larry Davis

Abstract

1. Introduction
Gene transfer is the transfer of genetic information from
a parent to its offspring. Genes encode genetic instructions
(knowledge) from ancestors to descendants. The ancestors
do not necessarily have better knowledge; yet, the evolution
of knowledge across generations promotes a better learning curve for the descendants. In this paper, we strive to
replicate this process for deep networks. We encapsulate
a deep network’s knowledge inside a subnetwork, dubbed
the fit-hypothesis H △ . Then, we pass the fit-hypothesis’s
knowledge from a parent network to its offspring (next deep
network generation). We repeat this process iteratively and
demonstrate a significant performance improvement in the
descendant networks as shown in Fig. 1.

70
Top-1

Deep learning relies on the availability of a large corpus of data (labeled or unlabeled). Thus, one challenging
unsettled question is: how to train a deep network on a relatively small dataset? To tackle this question, we propose an
evolution-inspired training approach to boost performance
on relatively small datasets. The knowledge evolution (KE)
approach splits a deep network into two hypotheses: the fithypothesis and the reset-hypothesis. We iteratively evolve
the knowledge inside the fit-hypothesis by perturbing the
reset-hypothesis for multiple generations. This approach
not only boosts performance, but also learns a slim network
with a smaller inference cost. KE integrates seamlessly with
both vanilla and residual convolutional networks. KE reduces both overfitting and the burden for data collection.
We evaluate KE on various network architectures and
loss functions. We evaluate KE using relatively small
datasets (e.g., CUB-200) and randomly initialized deep networks. KE achieves an absolute 21% improvement margin
on a state-of-the-art baseline. This performance improvement is accompanied by a relative 73% reduction in inference cost. KE achieves state-of-the-art results on classification and metric learning benchmarks. Code available at
http://bit.ly/3uLgwYb

FLW-KE
FLW-CE
CUB-KE
CUB-CE

60

0

20

40

60

80

100

Generation # (g)
Figure 1. Classification performance on Flower-102 (FLW) and
CUB-200 (CUB) datasets trained on a randomly initialized
ResNet18. The horizontal dashed-lines denote a SOTA crossentropy (CE) baseline [58]. The marked-curves show our approach (KE) performance across generations. The 100th generation KE-N100 achieves absolute 21% and 5% improvement margins over the Flower-102 and CUB-200 baselines, respectively.

The lottery ticket literature [8, 62, 34, 42, 10] regards
a dense network as a set of hypotheses (subnetworks).
Zhou et al. [62] propose a sampling-based approach, while
Ramanujan et al. [42] propose an optimization-based approach, to identify the best randomly-initialized hypothesis. This hypothesis may be called the lottery ticket, but it
is still limited by its random initialization. In this paper, we
pick a random hypothesis, with inferior performance, and
iteratively evolve its knowledge.
The main contribution of this paper is an evolutioninspired training approach. To evolve knowledge inside a
deep network, we split the network into two hypotheses
(subnetworks): the fit-hypothesis H △ and the reset hypothesis H ▽ as shown in Fig. 2. We evolve the knowledge inside
H △ by re-training the network for multiple generations.
For every new generation, we perturb the weights inside
H ▽ to encourage the H △ to learn an independent representation. This knowledge evolution approach boosts performance on relatively small datasets and promotes a better
learning curve for descendant networks. Our intuitions are
presented in Sec. 3.3 and empirically validated in Sec. 5.

12843

