Manifold Regularized Dynamic Network Pruning
Yehui Tang1,2 , Yunhe Wang2 ,* Yixing Xu2 , Yiping Deng3 , Chao Xu1 , Dacheng Tao4 , Chang Xu4
1
2

Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University.
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies. 3 Central Software Institution, Huawei Technologies.
4
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, University of Sydney.
yhtang@pku.edu.cn; yunhe.wang@huawei.com; c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Neural network pruning is an essential approach for
reducing the computational complexity of deep models so
that they can be well deployed on resource-limited devices.
Compared with conventional methods, the recently developed dynamic pruning methods determine redundant filters
variant to each input instance which achieves higher acceleration. Most of the existing methods discover effective subnetworks for each instance independently and do not utilize
the relationship between different inputs. To maximally excavate redundancy in the given network architecture, this
paper proposes a new paradigm that dynamically removes
redundant filters by embedding the manifold information of
all instances into the space of pruned networks (dubbed as
ManiDP). We first investigate the recognition complexity
and feature similarity between images in the training set.
Then, the manifold relationship between instances and the
pruned sub-networks will be aligned in the training procedure. The effectiveness of the proposed method is verified on several benchmarks, which shows better performance in terms of both accuracy and computational cost
compared to the state-of-the-art methods. For example, our
method can reduce 55.3% FLOPs of ResNet-34 with only
0.57% top-1 accuracy degradation on ImageNet. The code
will be available at https://github.com/huaweinoah/Pruning/tree/master/ManiDP.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have
achieved state-of-the-art performance on a large variety of
computer vision tasks, e.g., image classification [16, 49,
24, 60], objection detection [11, 45, 12], and video analysis [8, 13, 22]. Besides the model performance, recent researches pay more attention on the model efficiency, especially the computational complexity [57, 48, 6, 47]. Since
* Corresponding author.

there are considerable real-world applications required to
be deployed on resource constrained hardwares, e.g., mobile phones and wearable devices, techniques that effectively reduce the cost of modern deep networks are required [32, 14, 59, 61].
To this end, a number of model compression algorithms have been developed without affecting network performance. For instance, quantization [54, 15, 44, 58] uses
less bits to represent network weights and knowledge distillation [20, 55, 4, 41, 56] is to train a compact network
based on the knowledge of a teacher network. Low-rank approximation [36, 25, 30] tries to decompose the original filters to smaller ones while pruning method directly discards
the redundant neurons to get a sparser network. Among
them, channel pruning (or filter pruning) [19, 50, 37, 34]
is regarded as a kind of structured pruning method, which
directly discards redundant filters to obtain a compact network with lower computational cost. Since the pruned network can be well employed on mainstream hardwares to obtain considerable speed-up, channel pruning is widely used
in industrial products.
The conventional channel pruning methods obtain a
static network applied to all input samples, which do not
excavate redundancy maximally, as the diverse demands for
network parameters and capacity from different instances
are neglected. In fact, the importance of filters is highly
input-dependent. A few methods proposed recently prune
channels according to individual instances dynamically and
achieve better performance. For example, Gao et al. [10] introduce small auxiliary modules to predict the saliencies of
channels with given input data, and prune unimportant filters at run-time. Instance-wise sparsity is adopted in [33] to
induce different sub-networks for different samples. However, the existing methods prune channels for individual instances independently, which neglects the relationship between different instances. A sparsity constraint with same
intensity is usually used for different input instances, regardless of the diversity of instance complexity. Besides,
the similarity between instances is also valuable informa-

5018

