Multi-Modal Fusion Transformer for End-to-End Autonomous Driving
Aditya Prakash*1
Kashyap Chitta*1,2
Andreas Geiger1,2
1
2
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen
University of Tübingen
{firstname.lastname}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract

Situation

How should representations from complementary sensors be integrated for autonomous driving? Geometrybased sensor fusion has shown great promise for perception tasks such as object detection and motion forecasting.
However, for the actual driving task, the global context of
the 3D scene is key, e.g. a change in traffic light state can
affect the behavior of a vehicle geometrically distant from
that traffic light. Geometry alone may therefore be insufficient for effectively fusing representations in end-to-end
driving models. In this work, we demonstrate that imitation
learning policies based on existing sensor fusion methods
under-perform in the presence of a high density of dynamic
agents and complex scenarios, which require global contextual reasoning, such as handling traffic oncoming from
multiple directions at uncontrolled intersections. Therefore, we propose TransFuser, a novel Multi-Modal Fusion
Transformer, to integrate image and LiDAR representations
using attention. We experimentally validate the efficacy of
our approach in urban settings involving complex scenarios
using the CARLA urban driving simulator. Our approach
achieves state-of-the-art driving performance while reducing collisions by 76% compared to geometry-based fusion.

Trafﬁc

1. Introduction
Image-only [16, 8, 41, 3, 42, 64, 53] and LiDARonly [46, 23] methods have recently shown impressive results for end-to-end driving. However, these studies focus
primarily on settings with limited dynamic agents and assume near-ideal behavior from other agents in the scene.
With the introduction of adversarial scenarios in the recent CARLA [21] versions, e.g. vehicles running red lights,
uncontrolled 4-way intersections, or pedestrians emerging from occluded regions to cross the road at random
locations, image-only approaches perform unsatisfactory
(Tab. 1) since they lack the 3D information of the scene re* indicates equal contribution

Trafﬁc Lights

Ego-Vehicle
LiDAR View

Camera View

Trafﬁc Lights
Trafﬁc

Figure 1: Illustration. Consider an intersection with oncoming traffic from the left. To safely navigate the intersection, the ego-vehicle (green) must capture the global context of the scene involving the interaction between the traffic light (yellow) and the vehicles (red). However, the traffic
light state is not visible in the LiDAR point cloud and the
vehicles are not visible in the camera view. Our TransFuser
model integrates both modalities via global attention mechanisms to capture the 3D context and navigate safely.
quired in these scenarios. While LiDAR consists of 3D information, LiDAR measurements are typically very sparse
(in particular at distance), and additional sensors are required to capture information missing in LiDAR scans, e.g.
traffic light states.
While most existing methods for end-to-end driving focus on a single input modality, autonomous driving systems typically come equipped with both cameras and LiDAR sensors [21, 47, 25, 59, 17, 26, 48, 1, 62]. This
raises important questions: Can we integrate representations from these two modalities to exploit their complementary advantages for autonomous driving? To what extent should we process the different modalities independently and what kind of fusion mechanism should we employ for maximum performance gain? Prior works in the

7077

