Controllable Image Restoration for Under-Display Camera in Smartphones
Kinam Kwon*

Eunhee Kang*
Sangwon Lee
Su-Jin Lee
Hyong-Euk Lee
ByungIn Yoo
Jae-Joon Han
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), South Korea

Abstract

Under-display
camera
12:45

Under-display camera (UDC) technology is essential for
full-screen display in smartphones and is achieved by removing the concept of drilling holes on display. However,
this causes inevitable image degradation in the form of spatially variant blur and noise because of the opaque display
in front of the camera. To address spatially variant blur and
noise in UDC images, we propose a novel controllable image restoration algorithm utilizing pixel-wise UDC-specific
kernel representation and a noise estimator. The kernel
representation is derived from an elaborate optical model
that reflects the effect of both normal and oblique light incidence. Also, noise-adaptive learning is introduced to control noise levels, which can be utilized to provide optimal
results depending on the user preferences. The experiments
showed that the proposed method achieved superior quantitative performance as well as higher perceptual quality
on both a real-world dataset and a monitor-based aligned
dataset compared to conventional image restoration algorithms.

1. Introduction
Recently, an under-display camera (UDC) is in the spotlight as a new design form factor for smartphones. UDC
is mounted below the display, which enables a full-screen
display for better user experience without punch holes or
notches. However, inevitable image degradation is accompanied by UDC, and thus, to realize this attractive technology, the corresponding technical breakthrough against the
degraded camera imaging performance is required.
One of the major limitations of UDC system is low light
transmission of the display. Relatively low signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) and additional noise due to the display cause
severe image quality degradation especially in smartphone
cameras, whereas other cameras powered by large sensor
pixels and a large lens adequately compensate for the signal
reduction [36]. In addition, various forms of optical diffrac* These two authors contributed equally.

Restored images

Spaally variant blur kernels

Punch hole
camera
12:45

Contollable
noise-balancing level

Figure 1: Controllable image restoration algorithm to enhance the quality of UDC images degraded by spatially
variant blur and noise.
tion and interference are generated by the display pattern
which consists of transparent and opaque areas; therefore, a
complicated blurry image is captured by a particular diffraction blur kernel [10]. Furthermore, the color tone is distorted by the wavelength-dependent light transmittance of
the display, which is applied to each color filter array.
Meanwhile, image sensor data are normally reconstructed into standard RGB images by an image signal processor (ISP) which consists of the sequential process of demosaicing, white balancing, color space transform, sharpening, etc. The ISP is implemented on-chip and tuned to a
specific sensor. Recently, several attempts have been made
to replace ISP with neural networks [13, 17, 22]. However,
their preliminary results under laboratory experimental settings may be incompatible with existing functions such as
scalability, scene-specific detail enhancement, multi-image
fusion, and high dynamic range.
Therefore, solving the UDC problem while maintaining
compatibility with the existing functions has become an important problem. A simple solution is to handle the degradation caused only by a UDC in the linear RGB sensor data,
while maintaining the conventional ISP. The linear RGB domain has the advantage of preserving the physical properties
of the UDC system because it does not go through nonlin-

2073

