Embedded Discriminative Attention Mechanism for Weakly Supervised
Semantic Segmentation
Tong Wu1 *, Junshi Huang2 *, Guangyu Gao1†, Xiaoming Wei2 , Xiaolin Wei2 , Xuan Luo2 , Chi Harold Liu1
1
2
Beijing Institute of Technology
Meituan
{3220190896, guangyugao, chiliu}@bit.edu.cn
{huangjunshi, weixiaoming, weixiaolin02, luoxuan03}@meituan.com

Abstract
Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS) with
image-level annotation uses class activation maps from
the classifier as pseudo-labels for semantic segmentation.
However, such activation maps usually highlight the local
discriminative regions rather than the whole object, which
deviates from the requirement of semantic segmentation. To
explore more comprehensive class-specific activation maps,
we propose an Embedded Discriminative Attention Mechanism (EDAM) by integrating the activation map generation
into the classification network directly for WSSS. Specifically, a Discriminative Activation (DA) layer is designed
to explicitly produce a series of normalized class-specific
masks, which are then used to generate class-specific pixellevel pseudo-labels demanded in segmentation. For learning the pseudo-labels, the masks are multiplied with the feature maps after the backbone to generate the discriminative
activation maps, each of which encodes the specific information of the corresponding category in the input images.
Given such class-specific activation maps, a Collaborative
Multi-Attention (CMA) module is proposed to extract the
collaborative information of each given category from images in a batch. In inference, we directly use the activation
masks from the DA layer as pseudo-labels for segmentation. Based on the generated pseudo-labels, we achieve the
mIoU of 70.60% on PASCAL VOC 2012 segmentation testset, which is the new state-of-the-art, to our best knowledge.
Code and pre-trained models are available online soon.

1. Introduction
Driven by Deep Neural Networks (DNNs), significant
progress [32, 6, 7] has been made in fully supervised seman* Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

This work was supported mainly by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61972036, in part
by grants under Grant 91746210, and in part by Beijing Science and Technology Project. (No. Z181100008918018).

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. (a) The heatmap from
CAM [52] tends to only highlight the local discriminative regions
instead of the whole object. (b) In our model, the DA layer extracts class-specific activation maps, called discriminative activation maps, of multi-images. For each category, the CMA module exploits the collaborative information based on the intra-image
and inter-image homogeneity of activation maps. Note that the
black, pink and grey lines indicate the information flow of background, person and car, respectively. Best viewed in color.

tic segmentation, for which however, it is time-consuming
and costly to attain pixel-level annotations. To deal with
this problem, researchers seek to leverage weaker supervision, such as bounding boxes [34], scribbles [29], points [3],
and even image-level labels [35], for semantic segmentation, namely, Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation (WSSS). In this paper, we mainly focus on the imagelevel labels based WSSS.
Previous WSSS methods [21, 45, 40, 4] with imagelevel labels often use a classification network to generate
the initial segmentation response, such as the Class Activation Map (CAM) [52], to highlight the corresponding foreground. However, the initial response from the classifier
usually focuses on the discriminative object regions, rather
than the whole object, which deviates from a desirable segmentation result. Some approaches improve quality of such
initial responses by region erasing [46, 18], region grow-

16765

