Image Restoration for Under-Display Camera
Yuqian Zhou1 , David Ren2 , Neil Emerton3 , Sehoon Lim3 , Timothy Large3
1
IFP, UIUC, 2 CIL, UC Berkeley, 3 Microsoft
f

Abstract
The new trend of full-screen devices encourages us to
position a camera behind a screen. Removing the bezel
and centralizing the camera under the screen brings larger
display-to-body ratio and enhances eye contact in video
chat, but also causes image degradation. In this paper, we
focus on a newly-defined Under-Display Camera (UDC),
as a novel real-world single image restoration problem.
First, we take a 4k Transparent OLED (T-OLED) and a
phone Pentile OLED (P-OLED) and analyze their optical
systems to understand the degradation. Second, we design
a Monitor-Camera Imaging System (MCIS) for easier real
pair data acquisition, and a model-based data synthesizing pipeline to generate Point Spread Function (PSF) and
UDC data only from display pattern and camera measurements. Finally, we resolve the complicated degradation using deconvolution-based pipeline and learning-based methods. Our model demonstrates a real-time high-quality
restoration. The presented methods and results reveal the
promising research values and directions of UDC.

1. Introduction
Under-display Camera (UDC) is a new imaging system
that mounts display screen on top of a traditional digital
camera lens, as shown in Figure 1. Such a system has
mainly two advantages. First, it brings a new product trend
of full-screen devices [11] with larger screen-to-body ratio,
which can provide better user perceptive and intelligent experience [12]. Without seeing the bezel and extra buttons,
users can easily access more functions by directly touching
the screen. Second, it provides better human computer interaction. By putting the camera in the center of the display,
it enhances teleconferencing experiences with perfect gaze
tracking, and it is increasingly relevant for larger display
devices such as laptops and TVs.
Unlike pressure or fingerprint sensors that can be easily integrated into a display, it is relatively difficult to retain full functionality of an imaging sensor after mounting
it behind a display. The imaging quality of a camera will
be severely degraded due to lower light transmission rate

m
n

Display Lens
g(m,n) p(m,n)

u
v

Sensor
I(u,v)

Figure 1: The newly proposed imaging system named
Under-Display Camera (UDC). We mount display screen on
top of a traditional digital camera lens. The design brings
new trend of full-screen devices.
and diffraction effects. As a result, images captured will
be noisy and blurry. Therefore, while bringing better user
experience and interaction, UDC may sacrifice the quality
of photography, face processing [35] and other downstream
vision tasks. Restoring and enhancing the images captured
by UDC system will be desired.
Traditional image restoration approaches form the task
as an inverse problem or an optimization problem like
Maximum-a-Posterior (MAP). For the UDC problem, for
practical purposes, the proposed image restoration algorithm and system are expected to work in real-time. Therefore, deconvolutional-based methods like Wiener Filter [14]
should be preferred. Deconvolution is the inverse process of
convolution and recovers the original signal from the pointspread-function (PSF)-convolved image. The fidelity of the
deconvolution process is dependent on the space-invariance
of the PSF over the image field of-view (FOV) and on
a low condition number for the inverse of the PSF [19].
For strongly non-delta-function-like PSFs such as those encountered when imaging through a display, the value of condition number can be large. For such PSFs an additional
denoising step may be essential.
Another option is the emerging discriminative learningbased image restoration model. Data-driven discriminative learning-based image restoration models usually outperform traditional methods in specific tasks like image denoising [3, 26, 42, 43, 47, 48], de-bluring [21, 28],de-raining
[39, 40], de-hazing [13, 33], super-resolution [22, 37], and

9179

