3DIoUMatch: Leveraging IoU Prediction
for Semi-Supervised 3D Object Detection
He Wang1*
1

Yezhen Cong2* Or Litany3 Yue Gao2
Stanford University 2 Tsinghua University

Abstract
3D object detection is an important yet demanding task
that heavily relies on difficult to obtain 3D annotations.
To reduce the required amount of supervision, we propose
3DIoUMatch, a novel semi-supervised method for 3D object detection applicable to both indoor and outdoor scenes.
We leverage a teacher-student mutual learning framework
to propagate information from the labeled to the unlabeled
train set in the form of pseudo-labels. However, due to the
high task complexity, we observe that the pseudo-labels suffer from significant noise and are thus not directly usable.
To that end, we introduce a confidence-based filtering mechanism, inspired by FixMatch. We set confidence thresholds
based upon the predicted objectness and class probability to
filter low-quality pseudo-labels. While effective, we observe
that these two measures do not sufficiently capture localization quality. We therefore propose to use the estimated 3D
IoU as a localization metric and set category-aware selfadjusted thresholds to filter poorly localized proposals. We
adopt VoteNet as our backbone detector on indoor datasets
while we use PV-RCNN on the autonomous driving dataset,
KITTI. Our method consistently improves state-of-the-art
methods on both ScanNet and SUN-RGBD benchmarks by
significant margins under all label ratios (including fully labeled setting). For example, when training using only 10%
labeled data on ScanNet, 3DIoUMatch achieves 7.7 absolute improvement on mAP@0.25 and 8.5 absolute improvement on mAP@0.5 upon the prior art. On KITTI, we are
the first to demonstrate semi-supervised 3D object detection
and our method surpasses a fully supervised baseline from
1.8% to 7.6% under different label ratio and categories.

1. Introduction
Object detection is a key task in 3D scene understanding. It provides a concise representation of raw sensor
measurements in the form of semantically meaningful 3D
bounding boxes. This low-dimensional representation can
*: equal contribution
Project page: http://THU17cyz.github.io/3DIoUMatch

Leonidas J. Guibas1
NVIDIA

3

already serve numerous applications in autonomous driving
and AR/VR, as well as in robot navigation and manipulation. As a result, in recent years there has been a surge of
interest in developing improved object detection pipelines
and indeed current state-of-the-art methods show impressive performance. Yet, much of their success is attributed to
the availability of large datasets of 3D scenes that are carefully annotated. While rapid advances in sensor technology
facilitate the collection of 3D scenes at scale, annotating
them remains the main bottleneck. This calls for detection
methods that can leverage both labeled and unlabeled data
at train time.
In this work, we aim to address this requirement by
proposing a novel semi-supervised 3D object detection
method which we dub 3DIoUMatch. As a generally applicable method, 3DIoUMatch can be applied to both indoor
scene datasets, i.e. ScanNet[4] and SUN-RGBD[28], and
outdoor datasets, i.e. KITTI[7]. We adopt popular pointbased object detectors, VoteNet [18] and PV-RCNN [24],
as our backbone object detection networks for the indoor
and outdoor scenes, correspondingly. To provide supervision to the unlabeled scenes, we leverage a teacher-student
mutual learning framework [29] and use the bounding box
predictions from the teacher network as pseudo-labels to supervise the student network on unlabeled data. However,
unlike most pseudo-label techniques that were designed for
classification, in the highly complex (joint regression and
classification) task of object detection, we observe that the
pseudo-labels suffer from significant noise, and using them
directly is suboptimal.
Inspired by FixMatch [26], the state-of-the-art semisupervised learning (SSL) method for 2D image classification that proposed confidence-based filtering to improve pseudo-label quality, we adopt a pseudo-label filtering mechanism for 3D object detection by setting thresholds on predicted class probabilities (and objectness scores
for VoteNet), so as to filter out teacher proposals with potentially erroneous semantic labels or ones not belong to
foreground. While effective, these criteria alone are not sufficient to capture localization quality, and the pseudo-labels
may still have large errors in the bounding box parameters.

14615

