Rectification-based Knowledge Retention for Continual Learning
Pravendra Singh1,∗ ,
Pratik Mazumder2,∗ ,
Piyush Rai2 ,
Vinay P. Namboodiri2,3
1
Independent Researcher, India 2 IIT Kanpur, India 3 University of Bath, United Kingdom
pravendra1988@gmail.com, pratikm@cse.iitk.ac.in, piyush@cse.iitk.ac.in, vpn22@bath.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep learning models suffer from catastrophic forgetting when trained in an incremental learning setting. In
this work, we propose a novel approach to address the
task incremental learning problem, which involves training
a model on new tasks that arrive in an incremental manner. The task incremental learning problem becomes even
more challenging when the test set contains classes that are
not part of the train set, i.e., a task incremental generalized zero-shot learning problem. Our approach can be used
in both the zero-shot and non zero-shot task incremental
learning settings. Our proposed method uses weight rectifications and affine transformations in order to adapt the
model to different tasks that arrive sequentially. Specifically, we adapt the network weights to work for new tasks by
“rectifying” the weights learned from the previous task. We
learn these weight rectifications using very few parameters.
We additionally learn affine transformations on the outputs
generated by the network in order to better adapt them for
the new task. We perform experiments on several datasets in
both zero-shot and non zero-shot task incremental learning
settings and empirically show that our approach achieves
state-of-the-art results. Specifically, our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art non zero-shot task incremental
learning method by over 5% on the CIFAR-100 dataset. Our
approach also significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art
task incremental generalized zero-shot learning method by
absolute margins of 6.91% and 6.33% for the AWA1 and
CUB datasets, respectively. We validate our approach using various ablation studies.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models are used to solve many realworld problems, and they have even surpassed humanlevel performance in many tasks. However, deep learning models generally require all the training data to be
available at the beginning of the training. If this is not
the case, deep learning models suffer from catastrophic
∗ The first two authors contributed equally.

forgetting [17], and their performance on the previously
seen classes or tasks starts degrading. In contrast, human
beings can continually learn new classes of data without
losing the previously gained knowledge. To avoid catastrophic forgetting, deep learning models should perform
lifelong/continual/incremental learning [5, 18]. Deep learning models also require all the classes to be present in the
train set. When the test set contains classes not seen during
training, the performance of these models degrades significantly [27, 39]. This is known as the zero-shot learning
problem. The incremental learning problem becomes even
more challenging when coupled with the zero-shot learning
problem. In this paper, we solve for the task incremental
learning problem in the zero-shot and non zero-shot setting.
The task incremental learning problem involves training
the model on one task at a time, where each task has a set of
non-overlapping classes. When a new task becomes available to the network for training, the previous task data is
no longer accessible. Training on only the new task data
causes the network to forget all the previous task knowledge. Therefore, the model has to prevent the forgetting of
older tasks when training on new tasks. The task incremental generalized zero-shot learning problem involves training
the model on one task at a time, where each task has a set of
unseen classes not seen during training, which is the same
as the zero-shot learning setting. The objective of the model
is to successfully identify the seen and unseen classes of all
the trained tasks.
We propose a novel approach called Rectification-based
Knowledge Retention (RKR) for the task incremental learning problem in the zero-shot and non zero-shot setting. Our
approach (RKR) learns weight rectifications to adapt the
network weights for a new task. After learning these weight
rectifications, we can quickly adapt the network to work for
images from that task by simply applying these weight rectifications to the network weights. We utilize an efficient
technique for learning these weight rectifications to limit
the model size. We also learn affine transformations (scaling factors) for all the intermediate outputs of the network
that allow better adaptation of the network to the respective
task.

15282

