Home Action Genome: Cooperative Compositional Action Understanding
Nishant Rai1 , Haofeng Chen1 , Jingwei Ji1 , Rishi Desai1 , Kazuki Kozuka2 , Shun Ishizaka2 ,
Ehsan Adeli1 , Juan Carlos Niebles1
1
Stanford University 2 Panasonic Corporation
http://www.homeactiongenome.org

Abstract
Existing research on action recognition treats activities
as monolithic events occurring in videos. Recently, the benefits of formulating actions as a combination of atomicactions have shown promise in improving action understanding with the emergence of datasets containing such
annotations, allowing us to learn representations capturing
this information. However, there remains a lack of studies
that extend action composition and leverage multiple viewpoints and multiple modalities of data for representation
learning. To promote research in this direction, we introduce Home Action Genome (HOMAGE): a multi-view action dataset with multiple modalities and view-points supplemented with hierarchical activity and atomic action labels together with dense scene composition labels. Leveraging rich multi-modal and multi-view settings, we propose
Cooperative Compositional Action Understanding (CCAU),
a cooperative learning framework for hierarchical action
recognition that is aware of compositional action elements.
CCAU shows consistent performance improvements across
all modalities. Furthermore, we demonstrate the utility of
co-learning compositions in few-shot action recognition by
achieving 28.6% mAP with just a single sample.

1. Introduction
Action understanding in videos is a critical task with various use-cases and real-world applications, from robotics
[1, 2] and human-computer interaction [3] to healthcare
[4, 5] and elderly behavior monitoring [6, 7]. Despite the
recent success of deep learning methods for image classification, complex and holistic action or event understanding
remains an elusive task.
There are several challenges associated with the task of
action understanding. The inherent variability in executing
complex activities poses one of the most critical difficulties in building action understating models. To understand
these challenges, it is essential to understand what actions
are composed of. As opposed to bounding boxes in the object detection task, actions are composed of various parts

Audio

faudio

caudio
Activity

do laundry
(single-label)

Third
Person
View

fthird

cthird
Atomic
Action

Ego
View

fego

cego

Cooperative
Learning

holding a basket
holding detergent

(multi-label)

Compositional
Outputs

Figure 1: Given an activity instance (e.g., ‘do laundry’) and corresponding multiple views, we compute features using modalityspecific deep encoders (f modules). Different modalities may
capture different semantic information regarding the action. Cooperatively training all modalities together allows us to see improved performance. We utilize training using both video-level
and atomic action labels to allow both the videos and atomic actions to benefit from the compositional interactions between the
two. As discussed in the results, we see significantly improved
performance when using the above components together.

spanned in space and time. For instance, the action of “laundry” involves multiple entities, e.g., humans, objects, and
their relationships, and is composed of a number of atomic
actions. Such partonomy of actions [8, 9, 10] both in space
and time defines a hierarchical structure. Furthermore, to
capture the variability in executing complex activities, understanding each part (e.g., body limbs, objects, or atomic
actions) becomes crucial. Since actions happen in the 3D
world, a holistic understanding of the world requires capturing the subtle movements or parts using multiple modalities
(e.g., RGB and audio) and from multiple viewpoints.
Each of these challenges has previously been separately
investigated using different datasets and advanced methods. For instance, numerous datasets were put together
for generic action recognition and spatio-temporal localization in YouTube or broadcasting third-person videos, such
as Kinetics [11], Charades [12], ActivityNet [13], UCF101
[14]. Other datasets such as EPIC Kitchens [15] were used
for ego-centric action recognition. Action Genome [10]
focused on using scene information in action recognition,

11184

