Person Re-identification using Heterogeneous Local Graph Attention Networks
Zhong Zhang1 , Haijia Zhang1 , Shuang Liu1∗
1
Tianjin Key Laboratory of Wireless Mobile Communications and Power Transmission,
Tianjin Normal University, China
{zhong.zhang8848, haijia27zhang, shuangliu.tjnu}@gmai1.com

Abstract
Recently, some methods have focused on learning local
relation among parts of pedestrian images for person reidentification (Re-ID), as it offers powerful representation
capabilities. However, they only provide the intra-local relation among parts within single pedestrian image and ignore the inter-local relation among parts from different images, which results in incomplete local relation information.
In this paper, we propose a novel deep graph model named
Heterogeneous Local Graph Attention Networks (HLGAT)
to model the inter-local relation and the intra-local relation in the completed local graph, simultaneously. Specifically, we first construct the completed local graph using
local features, and we resort to the attention mechanism
to aggregate the local features in the learning process of
inter-local relation and intra-local relation so as to emphasize the importance of different local features. As for the
inter-local relation, we propose the attention regularization
loss to constrain the attention weights based on the identities of local features in order to describe the inter-local
relation accurately. As for the intra-local relation, we propose to inject the contextual information into the attention
weights to consider structure information. Extensive experiments on Market-1501, CUHK03, DukeMTMC-reID and
MSMT17 demonstrate that the proposed HLGAT outperforms the state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (Re-ID) [5, 22, 43, 51] aims to
match the given person of interest in different scenarios. It
is a challenging task due to various complex factors, such
as illumination, body poses and viewpoints.
Learning discriminative and robust features is the main
issue for person Re-ID. With the prosperity of Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), researchers learn deep features to improve the performance of person Re-ID. Some
∗ Corresponding author.

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The existing methods focus on learning the intralocal relation among parts within single pedestrian image. (b) The
proposed HLGAT constructs the completed local graph to model
the inter-local relation and the intra-local relation, simultaneously.
The solid line indicates the inter-local edge, and the dotted line
denotes the intra-local edge.

methods [2, 4, 7, 53] design various deep models to extract global features from entire pedestrian images. In order to mine local information from different body parts,
some part-based methods [13, 27, 34, 42] are proposed to
extract local features. Among them, direct partition strategy [1, 6, 21, 36, 44] is usually adopted to split feature
maps or pedestrian images into several horizontal grids.
To locate accurate and meaningful body parts, some researchers [10,16,29,31,48] resort to human pose estimation
or human paring techniques to process pedestrian images.
Recently, local relation information is exploited in several studies [12, 14, 26], where they compute relation maps
based on the local similarity among feature maps, or aggregate local features to learn relation information from different body parts. However, they only focus on the intralocal relation among parts within single pedestrian image as
shown in Fig. 1(a), and ignore the inter-local relation among
parts from different pedestrian images. This results in a lack
of local relation information from these parts and weakens
the representation capabilities of local features. Hence, it
is important to take the inter-local relation into consideration, and properly integrate with the intra-local relation for
person Re-ID.
In this paper, we propose a novel deep graph model

12136

