Generating Diverse Structure for Image Inpainting With Hierarchical VQ-VAE
Jialun Peng1
Dong Liu1 *
Songcen Xu2
Houqiang Li1
1
University of Science and Technology of China 2 Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
pjl@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {dongeliu, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn, xusongcen@huawei.com

Abstract
Given an incomplete image without additional constraint, image inpainting natively allows for multiple solutions as long as they appear plausible. Recently, multiplesolution inpainting methods have been proposed and shown
the potential of generating diverse results. However, these
methods have difficulty in ensuring the quality of each solution, e.g. they produce distorted structure and/or blurry
texture. We propose a two-stage model for diverse inpainting, where the first stage generates multiple coarse results
each of which has a different structure, and the second stage
refines each coarse result separately by augmenting texture.
The proposed model is inspired by the hierarchical vector
quantized variational auto-encoder (VQ-VAE), whose hierarchical architecture disentangles structural and textural
information. In addition, the vector quantization in VQVAE enables autoregressive modeling of the discrete distribution over the structural information. Sampling from the
distribution can easily generate diverse and high-quality
structures, making up the first stage of our model. In
the second stage, we propose a structural attention module inside the texture generation network, where the module utilizes the structural information to capture distant
correlations. We further reuse the VQ-VAE to calculate
two feature losses, which help improve structure coherence
and texture realism, respectively. Experimental results on
CelebA-HQ, Places2, and ImageNet datasets show that our
method not only enhances the diversity of the inpainting
solutions but also improves the visual quality of the generated multiple images. Code and models are available
at: https://github.com/USTC- JialunPeng/
Diverse-Structure-Inpainting.

1. Introduction
Image inpainting refers to the task of filling in the missing region of an incomplete image so as to produce a complete and visually plausible image. Inpainting benefits a se* This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China
under Grants 62036005 and 62022075. (Corresponding author: Dong
Liu.)

Figure 1. (Top) Input incomplete image, where the missing region
is depicted in gray. (Middle) Visualization of the generated diverse
structures. (Bottom) Output images of our method.

ries of applications including object removal, photo restoration, and transmission error concealment. As an ill-posed
problem, inpainting raises a great challenge especially when
the missing region is large and contains complex content.
As such, inpainting has attracted much research attention.
Recently, a series of deep learning-based methods are
proposed for inpainting [10, 19]. They usually employ
encoder-decoder architectures and train the networks with
the combinations of reconstruction and adversarial losses.
To enhance the visual quality of the results, a number of
studies [23, 26, 32, 34, 36] adopt the contextual attention
mechanisms to use the available content for generating the
missing content. Also, several studies [13, 33, 35] propose
modified convolutions in replacement of normal convolutions to reduce the artifacts.
The aforementioned methods all learn a deterministic
mapping from an incomplete image to a complete im-

10775

