Few-Shot Human Motion Transfer by
Personalized Geometry and Texture Modeling

1

Zhichao Huang1 , Xintong Han2 , Jia Xu2 , Tong Zhang1
2
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
Huya Inc

zhuangbx@connect.ust.hk, {hanxintong, xujia}@huya.com, tongzhang@ust.hk

Abstract

Human motion transfer [7, 9, 12, 17, 22, 27, 34, 44, 45]
generates videos of one person that takes the same motion
as the person in a target video, which has huge potential
applications in virtual characters, movie making, etc. The
rapid growth of generative networks [11] and image translation frameworks [15, 40] enables generating photo-realistic
images for human motion transfer. Basically, one would extract the pose sequence of the target video and take the pose
as the input to generate the video for a new person.

Mask

Render

Source Person

UV Coordinate

Target Pose

Texture Generator

…

1. Introduction

…

We present a new method for few-shot human motion
transfer that achieves realistic human image generation
with only a small number of appearance inputs. Despite recent advances in single person motion transfer, prior methods often require a large number of training images and
take long training time. One promising direction is to perform few-shot human motion transfer, which only needs a
few of source images for appearance transfer. However, it is
particularly challenging to obtain satisfactory transfer results. In this paper, we address this issue by rendering a
human texture map to a surface geometry (represented as a
UV map), which is personalized to the source person. Our
geometry generator combines the shape information from
source images, and the pose information from 2D keypoints
to synthesize the personalized UV map. A texture generator then generates the texture map conditioned on the texture of source images to fill out invisible parts. Furthermore, we may fine-tune the texture map on the manifold of
the texture generator from a few source images at the test
time, which improves the quality of the texture map without over-fitting or artifacts. Extensive experiments show
the proposed method outperforms state-of-the-art methods
both qualitatively and quantitatively. Our code is available at https://github.com/HuangZhiChao95/
FewShotMotionTransfer.

Geometry Generator

Complete
Texture Map
Source Textures

Figure 1. Method overview. Our method contains three key components: a geometry generator for generation of a personalized
UV map, a texture generator to fill out incomplete texture, and
a neural renderer rendering the human image. Detailed network
structures are illustrated in Figure 2.

The appearance of the new person can be provided in two
ways. One type of models aim to train an individual model
for a specific person. To obtain such a model, one needs
to collect a large number of images for the new person and
trains a network to translate the pose to the image of the
person [7, 39]. Then the appearance information is stored
in the weights of the network and the image of new pose can
be directly generated by taking the new pose as input. However, such methods need a large amount of training data and
training time to obtain a model for the new person, which
hinders the applications of these approaches.
For the other type, the information of appearance is pro-

2297

