Progressive Semantic-Aware Style Transformation for Blind Face Restoration
Chaofeng Chen1, 3∗ Xiaoming Li2, 3, 5 Lingbo Yang4, 3
Lei Zhang3, 5 Kwan-Yee K. Wong 1
1

Department of Computer Science, The University of Hong Kong
3

DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
5

4

2

Xianhui Lin3

Faculty of Computing, Harbin Institute of Technology

Institute of Digital Media, Peking University

Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
https://github.com/chaofengc/PSFRGAN

LQ

PULSE [24]

HiFaceGAN [36]

DFDNet [20]

Ours

Figure 1: Result comparison with state-of-the-art methods. (Please zoom in to see the details)

Abstract
Face restoration is important in face image processing,
and has been widely studied in recent years. However, previous works often fail to generate plausible high quality
(HQ) results for real-world low quality (LQ) face images.
In this paper, we propose a new progressive semantic-aware
style transformation framework, named PSFR-GAN, for
face restoration. Specifically, instead of using an encoderdecoder framework as previous methods, we formulate the
restoration of LQ face images as a multi-scale progressive
restoration procedure through semantic-aware style transformation. Given a pair of LQ face image and its corresponding parsing map, we first generate a multi-scale pyramid of the inputs, and then progressively modulate different
scale features from coarse-to-fine in a semantic-aware style
transfer way. Compared with previous networks, the proposed PSFR-GAN makes full use of the semantic (parsing
maps) and pixel (LQ images) space information from different scales of input pairs. In addition, we further introduce a
semantic aware style loss which calculates the feature style
loss for each semantic region individually to improve the
details of face textures. Finally, we pretrain a face parsing network which can generate decent parsing maps from
∗ This work was done when he was an intern at Alibaba.

real-world LQ face images. Experiment results show that
our model trained with synthetic data can not only produce
more realistic high-resolution results for synthetic LQ inputs but also generalize better to natural LQ face images
compared with state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Blind face restoration refers to recovering the HQ images
from the LQ inputs which suffer from unknown degradation
such as low resolution, noise, blur and lossy compression.
It has drawn more and more interest due to its wide applications. However, most current restoration methods still focus
on a specific type of restoration, especially super resolution,
and few of them can generalize well to real LQ images.
Unlike general image restoration, face restoration can
exploit strong prior knowledge of the face to recover details
of the face components even when the images are severely
degraded. Therefore, many recent works about face super resolution incorporate face prior knowledge to improve
the performance, such as parsing maps [4], face landmarks
[1, 5, 37] and identity prior [42]. Most of these works are
based on an encoder-decoder like structure, which follow
the practice of general image restoration and aim to learn
a direct black-box mapping from LQ to HQ images. Al-

11896

