Keep your Eyes on the Lane: Real-time Attention-guided Lane Detection
Lucas Tabelini1 , Rodrigo Berriel1 , Thiago M. Paixão2 ,
Claudine Badue1 , Alberto F. De Souza1 , Thiago Oliveira-Santos1
1
Universidade Federal do Espı́rito Santo (UFES) 2 Instituto Federal do Espı́rito Santo (IFES)
tabelini@lcad.inf.ufes.br

Abstract
Modern lane detection methods have achieved remarkable performances in complex real-world scenarios, but
many have issues maintaining real-time efficiency, which is
important for autonomous vehicles. In this work, we propose LaneATT: an anchor-based deep lane detection model,
which, akin to other generic deep object detectors, uses the
anchors for the feature pooling step. Since lanes follow a
regular pattern and are highly correlated, we hypothesize
that in some cases global information may be crucial to
infer their positions, especially in conditions such as occlusion, missing lane markers, and others. Thus, this work
proposes a novel anchor-based attention mechanism that
aggregates global information. The model was evaluated extensively on three of the most widely used datasets in the literature. The results show that our method outperforms the current state-of-the-art methods showing both higher efficacy
and efficiency. Moreover, an ablation study is performed
along with a discussion on efficiency trade-off options that
are useful in practice. Code and models are available at
https://github.com/lucastabelini/LaneATT.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has been essential for recent advances in
numerous areas, especially in autonomous driving [2]. Many
of the deep learning applications in self-driving cars are
in their perception systems. To be safe around humans,
autonomous vehicles should perceive their surroundings,
including the position of other vehicles and themselves. In
the end, the more predictable a car’s movement is, the safer
it will be for its passengers and pedestrians. Thus, it is
important for autonomous vehicles to know each lane’s exact
position, which is the goal of lane detection systems.
Lane detection models have to overcome various challenges. In a real-world scenario, models should be robust to
several adverse conditions, such as extreme light and weather.
Moreover, lane markings can be occluded by other objects
(e.g., cars), which is extremely common for self-driving cars.
Some approaches, such as polynomial regression models,

may also suffer from a data imbalance problem caused by
the long-tail effect since cases with sharper curves are less
common. Besides, the model not only has to be robust but
also efficient. In several applications, lane detection must
perform in real-time, or faster to save processing power for
other systems, a requirement that many models struggle to
cope with.
There are numerous works in the literature that tackle this
problem. Before the advent of deep learning, several methods used more traditional computer vision techniques, such
as Hough lines [4, 1]. More recently, focus has shifted to
deep learning approaches with the advance of convolutional
neural networks (CNNs) [17, 11, 18]. In this context, the lane
detection problem is usually formulated as a segmentation
task, where, given an input image, the output is a segmentation map with per-pixel predictions [17]. Although recent
advances in deep learning have enabled the use of segmentation networks in real-time [22], various models struggle to to
achieve real-time performance. Consequently, the number of
backbone options for segmentation-based methods is rather
limited. Hence, some recent works have proposed solutions
in other directions [13, 23]. Apart from that, many other
issues are common in works on lane detection, such as the
need for a post-processing step (usually a heuristic), long
training times, and a lack of publicly available source code,
which hinders comparisons and reproducibility.
In this work, we present a method for real-time lane
detection that is both faster and more accurate than most
state-of-the-art methods. We propose an anchor-based singlestage lane detection model called LaneATT. It uses a novel
anchor-based feature pooling method that enables the use
of a lightweight backbone CNN while maintaining high
accuracy, contrary to an existing method [13]. A novel
anchor-based attention mechanism to aggregate global information is also proposed. Extensive experimental results are
shown on three benchmarks (TuSimple [24], CULane [17]
and LLAMAS [3]), along with a comparison with state-ofthe-art methods, a discussion on efficiency trade-offs, and an
ablation study of our design choices. In summary, our main
contributions are:

294

