Beyond Max-Margin: Class Margin Equilibrium for Few-shot Object Detection
Bohao Li1 *
Boyu Yang1 *
Chang Liu1
Feng Liu1
Rongrong Ji2,3,4
Qixiang Ye1,4†
PriSDL, EECE, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100049, China.1
MAC, Department of Artificial Intelligence, School of Informatics, Xiamen University, 361005, China.2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Xiamen University, 361005, China.3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China.4
{libohao20, yangboyu18, liuchang615, liufeng20}@mails.ucas.ac.cn

rrji@xmu.edu.cn

qxye@ucas.ac.cn

Max-Margin

Abstract
Few-shot object detection has made substantial progress
by representing novel class objects using the feature representation learned upon a set of base class objects. However,
an implicit contradiction between novel class classification
and representation is unfortunately ignored. On the one
hand, to achieve accurate novel class classification, the distributions of either two base classes must be far away from
each other (max-margin). On the other hand, to precisely
represent novel classes, the distributions of base classes
should be close to each other to reduce the intra-class distance of novel classes (min-margin). In this paper, we propose a class margin equilibrium (CME) approach, with the
aim to optimize both feature space partition and novel class
reconstruction in a systematic way. CME first converts the
few-shot detection problem to the few-shot classification
problem by using a fully connected layer to decouple localization features. CME then reserves adequate margin space
for novel classes by introducing simple-yet-effective class
margin loss during feature learning. Finally, CME pursues margin equilibrium by disturbing the features of novel
class instances in an adversarial min-max fashion. Experiments on Pascal VOC and MS-COCO datasets show that
CME significantly improves upon two baseline detectors
(up to 3 ∼ 5% in average), achieving state-of-the-art performance. Code is available at https://github.com/BohaoLee/CME.

1. Introduction
In the past few years, we witnessed the great progress
of visual object detection [16, 17, 3, 18]. This is attributed
to the availability of large-scale datasets with precise anno* Equal Contribution.
† Corresponding Author.

Base Class 1

Min-Margin
Base Class 2

Base Class 1

Base Class 2

Novel Class 1

Novel Class 1

Feature Space

Feature Space

Class Distributions

Class Distributions

(a)

(b)

Figure 1. The contradiction of representation and classification in
few-shot object detection. (a) To separate the classes with each
other, either two base classes requires to be far away from each
other (max-margin), which aggregates the intra-class distance of
novel classes. (b) To precisely represent novel classes, the distributions of base classes should be close to those of novel classes
(min-margin), which improves the difficulty of classification.

tations and convolutional neural networks (CNNs) capable
of absorbing the annotation information. However, annotating a large amount of objects is expensive and laborious [22, 23, 33, 34]. It is also not consistent with cognitive
learning, which can build a precise model using few-shot
supervisions [20].
Few-shot detection, which simulates the way that human
learns, has attracted increasing attention. Given base classes
of sufficient training data and novel classes of few supervisions, few-shot detection trains a model to simultaneously
detect objects from both base and novel classes. To this
end, a majority of works divided the training procedure to
two stages: base class training (representation learning) and
novel class reconstruction (meta training). In representation learning, the sufficient training data of base classes are
used to train a network and constructs a representative feature space. In meta training, the network is finetuned so
that the novel class objects can be represented within the
feature space. Among the earliest work, Kang et al. [7] pro17363

