Metadata Normalization
Mandy Lu, Qingyu Zhao, Jiequan Zhang, Kilian M. Pohl, Li Fei-Fei, Juan Carlos Niebles, Ehsan Adeli
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
{mlu,eadeli}@stanford.edu

Abstract

Metadata Normalization (MDN)

1. Introduction
Recent advances in fields such as computer vision, natural language processing, and medical imaging have been
propelled by tremendous progress in deep learning [7].
These deep neural models owe their success to their large
number of trainable parameters, which encode rich information from the data. However, since the learning process can be extremely unstable, much of the work is spent
on carefully selecting a model through hyperparameter tuning, an integral part of approaches such as [31, 39]. To aid
with model development, normalization techniques such as
Batch Normalization (BN) [31] and Group Normalization
(GN) [61] make the training process more robust and less
sensitive to covariate or distribution shift.
BN and GN perform feature normalization by standardizing them solely using batch or group statistics (i.e., mean
and standard deviation). Although they have pushed the

Layer L+1

…

Layer L

f

Batch Normalization (BN) and its variants have delivered tremendous success in combating the covariate shift induced by the training step of deep learning methods. While
these techniques normalize the feature distribution by standardizing with batch statistics, they do not correct the influence on features from extraneous variables or multiple
distributions. Such extra variables, referred to as metadata here, may create bias or confounding effects (e.g.,
race when classifying gender from face images). We introduce the Metadata Normalization (MDN) layer, a new
batch-level operation which can be used end-to-end within
the training framework, to correct the influence of metadata on the feature distribution. MDN adopts a regression analysis technique traditionally used for preprocessing
to remove (regress out) the metadata effects on model features during training. We utilize a metric based on distance
correlation to quantify the distribution bias from the metadata and demonstrate that our method successfully removes
metadata effects on four diverse settings: one synthetic, one
2D image, one video, and one 3D medical image dataset.

𝑟 = f - x𝜷

…

x𝜷

f

r

Figure 1. The proposed Metadata Normalization operation. MDN
layer takes the learned features from the previous layer (f ), analyzes the effects of the metadata on them, residualizes such effects,
and outputs the distribution corrected features (r).

state-of-the-art forward, they do not handle extraneous dependencies in the data other than the input and output label variables. In many applications, confounders [57, 69]
or protected variables [46] (sometimes referred to as bias
variables [2]) may inject bias into the learning process and
skew the distribution of the learned features. For instance,
(i) when training a gender classification model from face
images, an individual’s race (quantified by skin shade) has
a crucial influence on prediction performance as shown in
[11]; (ii) in video understanding, action recognition models
are often driven by the scene [15, 30] instead of learning
the harder movement-related action cues; (iii) for medical
studies, patient demographic information or data acquisition site location (due to device and scanner differences)
are variables that easily confound studies and present a troublesome challenge for the generalization of these studies to
other datasets or everyday clinical usages [10, 68].
This additional information about training samples is often freely available in datasets (e.g., in medical datasets as
patient data) or can be extracted using off-the-shelf models (such as in [11, 15]). We refer to them as metadata,
namely “data that provides information about other data”
[59], an umbrella term for additional variables that provide
information about training data but are not directly used
as model input. The extraneous dependencies between the
training data and metadata directly affect the distributions
of the learned features; however, typical normalization op-

10917

