PointFlow: Flowing Semantics Through Points for Aerial Image Segmentation
Xiangtai Li1∗, Hao He2,3∗ , Xia Li4 , Duo Li5 , Guangliang Cheng6 ,8
Jianping Shi6 ,7 Lubin Weng2 , Yunhai Tong1 Zhouchen Lin1
1

Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), Peking University
2
NLPR, Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences 4 ETH Zurich 5 HKUST
6
SenseTime Research 7 Qing Yuan Research Institute, SJTU 8 Shanghai AI Laboratory

Abstract

1. Introduction
High spatial resolution (HSR) remote sensing images
contain various geospatial objects, including airplanes,
ships, vehicles, buildings, etc. Understanding these objects from HSR remote sensing imagery has great practical
∗ The first two authors contribute equally. Email: lxtpku@pku.edu.cn.
Corresponding to: Yunhai Tong, Guangliang Cheng

Aerial Image

Ground Truth Mask

.

.

.

.

Semantics
Propagation

.

. . . .

.

.

.

.

.

. . . .

.

Aerial Image Segmentation is a particular semantic segmentation problem and has several challenging characteristics that general semantic segmentation does not have.
There are two critical issues: The one is an extremely
foreground-background imbalanced distribution, and the
other is multiple small objects along with the complex background. Such problems make the recent dense affinity context modeling perform poorly even compared with baselines due to over-introduced background context. To handle
these problems, we propose a point-wise affinity propagation module based on the Feature Pyramid Network (FPN)
framework, named PointFlow. Rather than dense affinity learning, a sparse affinity map is generated upon selected points between the adjacent features, which reduces
the noise introduced by the background while keeping efficiency. In particular, we design a dual point matcher
to select points from the salient area and object boundaries, respectively. Experimental results on three different aerial segmentation datasets suggest that the proposed
method is more effective and efficient than state-of-the-art
general semantic segmentation methods. Especially, our
methods achieve the best speed and accuracy trade-off on
three aerial benchmarks. Further experiments on three
general semantic segmentation datasets prove the generality of our method. Code and models are made available
(https://github.com/lxtGH/PFSegNets).

(a) FPN-like structure (b) Dense affinity propagation (c) Our Point-based propagation

Figure 1: Illustration of an aerial image segmentation example
and our proposed module. The first row presents the input image
and ground truth with complex backgrounds and small objects.
The second row indicates the schematic diagram on dense affinity
propagation and our proposed point-based propagation module.

value for urban monitoring and management. Aerial Image
segmentation is an important task in remote sensing understanding that can provide semantic and localization information cues for interest targets. It is a specific semantic
segmentation task that aims to assign a semantic category
to each image pixel.
However, besides the large scale variation problems in
most semantic segmentation datasets [12, 69, 39, 6], aerial
images have their own challenging problems including high
background complexity [68], background and foreground
imbalance [49], tiny foreground objects in high resolution
images. As shown in the first row of Fig.1, the red boxes
show the tiny objects in the scene while the yellow box
and blue box show the complex background context, including houses and trees, receptively. Current general semantic

4217

