Learning from the Master: Distilling Cross-modal Advanced Knowledge
for Lip Reading
Sucheng Ren1 , Yong Du2,1∗, Jianming Lv1 , Guoqiang Han1 , Shengfeng He1†
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology
2
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Ocean University of China
Abstract
Knowledge

Lip reading aims to predict the spoken sentences from
silent lip videos. Due to the fact that such a vision task
usually performs worse than its counterpart speech recognition, one potential scheme is to distill knowledge from a
teacher pretrained by audio signals. However, the latent
domain gap between the cross-modal data could lead to
a learning ambiguity and thus limits the performance of
lip reading. In this paper, we propose a novel collaborative framework for lip reading, and two aspects of issues
are considered: 1) the teacher should understand bi-modal
knowledge to possibly bridge the inherent cross-modal gap;
2) the teacher should adjust teaching contents adaptively
with the evolution of the student. To these ends, we introduce a trainable “master” network which ingests both
audio signals and silent lip videos instead of a pretrained
teacher. The master produces logits from three modalities
of features: audio modality, video modality, and their combination. To further provide an interactive strategy to fuse
these knowledge organically, we regularize the master with
the task-specific feedback from the student, in which the
requirement of the student is implicitly embedded. Meanwhile, we involve a couple of “tutor” networks into our
system as guidance for emphasizing the fruitful knowledge
flexibly. In addition, we incorporate a curriculum learning
design to ensure a better convergence. Extensive experiments demonstrate that the proposed network outperforms
the state-of-the-art methods on several benchmarks, including in both word-level and sentence-level scenarios.

1. Introduction
Lip reading, which is also referred to as visual speech
recognition, aims at predicting words or sentences being
spoken from muted lip videos. This vision task enables to
switch speech to text without relying on hearing, and therefore, it could apply to many practical scenarios, such as dubbling for silent films, creating a voice for aphonia patients,
and serving for security systems. To tackle this problem,
early researches usually adopt HMM with designed hand∗ The first two authors contribute equally.
† Corresponding author (hesfe@scut.edu.cn).

Pretrained Knowledge
Teacher

Audio
Tutor

Master
Feedback

Student

Student

Audio Video

Audio Video

Label

Label

(a) Traditional KD

Audio Video

Video
Tutor

(b) Ours

Figure 1: (a) Traditional knowledge distillation from pretrained audio teacher to a video student. (b) Our method
distills advanced knowledge from the master that trained not
only with both audio and video data, but also the feedback
from the student, leading to a more compatible knowledge
transfer. Furthermore, the introduced audio and video tutors
provide additional cues to the student for further bringing
the cross-modal gap.
crafted features [6, 10, 19], whereas recent works exploit
deep neural networks [18, 29, 23] for lip reading.
Notwithstanding the tremendous success of deep learning and large benchmark construction [8, 1, 2], the admitted
most critical challenge is the inherent limitation of visual information, which severely impedes a good performance of
lip reading models. For example, different characters “p”
and “b” share a similar lip shape so that they are hard to be
distinguished in video clips. In contrast, such an uncertainty
can be uniquely identified by audio information, and audio
based speech recognition would not be affected by ambiguities caused by the intrinsic limitation of visual information.
Specifically, the counterpart of lip reading task, i.e., speech
recognition, could achieve a much more accurate translation of speech to text. The performance gap can even reach
40% [1] on the metric of word error rate (WER).
Based on this fact, one potential solution is to transfer knowledge from audio data to video data via knowledge distillation (KD) [15] (Fig. 1a). Several previous approaches [29, 31] attempt to build KD-based models, which
consist of a teacher network pretrained by audio signals
and a student network utilized for lip reading. The audio
information is introduced in this way and supposed to be

13325

