Out-of-Distribution Detection Using Union of 1-Dimensional Subspaces
Alireza Zaeemzadeh
University of Central Florida

Niccolò Bisagno
University of Trento

Zeno Sambugaro
University of Trento

zaeemzadeh@eecs.ucf.edu

niccolo.bisagno@unitn.it

zeno.sambugaro@unitn.it

Nicola Conci
University of Trento

Nazanin Rahnavard
University of Central Florida

Mubarak Shah
University of Central Florida

nicola.conci@unitn.it

nazanin@eecs.ucf.edu

shah@crcv.ucf.edu

Abstract
The goal of out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is to handle the situations where the test samples are drawn from a
different distribution than the training data. In this paper,
we argue that OOD samples can be detected more easily if
the training data is embedded into a low-dimensional space,
such that the embedded training samples lie on a union of
1-dimensional subspaces. We show that such embedding of
the in-distribution (ID) samples provides us with two main
advantages. First, due to compact representation in the feature space, OOD samples are less likely to occupy the same
region as the known classes. Second, the first singular vector
of ID samples belonging to a 1-dimensional subspace can
be used as their robust representative. Motivated by these
observations, we train a deep neural network such that the
ID samples are embedded onto a union of 1-dimensional
subspaces. At the test time, employing sampling techniques
used for approximate Bayesian inference in deep learning,
input samples are detected as OOD if they occupy the region corresponding to the ID samples with probability 0.
Spectral components of the ID samples are used as robust
representative of this region. Our method does not have any
hyperparameter to be tuned using extra information and it
can be applied on different modalities with minimal change.
The effectiveness of the proposed method is demonstrated on
different benchmark datasets, both in the image and video
classification domains.

1. Introduction
Many classification methods are designed and deployed
under the assumption that training data contains samples
from all the possible classes that the classifier will encounter
during testing. Of course, such assumption does not hold in
many applications; as it may not be possible to cover every
potential input class in the training set. Thus, it is desir-

able to detect out-of-distribution (OOD) samples; the input
instances that do not belong to any of the training classes.
In general, OOD detection techniques try to either use the
class membership probabilities as a measure of uncertainty
[12, 21, 36, 39, 14], or define a measure of similarity between the input samples and the training dataset in a feature
space [2, 40, 20, 28]. As discussed in [20], the features
extracted from a conventional softmax classifier follow a
class-conditional Gaussian distribution. However, general
class-conditional Gaussian embeddings are not particularly
appropriate for outlier detection, as they are not easily distinguishable in the feature space.
In this work, we claim that we can improve the OOD
detection performance by constraining the representation of
in-distribution (ID) samples in the feature space. Particularly,
if we embed the training samples such that the feature vectors belonging to each known class lie on a 1-dimensional
subspace, OOD samples can be detected more robustly
with higher probability, compared to a class-conditional
non-degenerate Gaussian embeddings. Such a union of 1dimensional subspaces representation provides us with two
main advantages. First, due to compact representation in
the feature space, OOD samples are less likely to occupy
the same region as the known classes. In other words, a
random vector in a high-dimensional space lies on a specific
1-dimensional line with probability 0. Second, we show
that the first singular vector of a 1-dimensional subspace
is a robust representative of its samples. We exploit these
two desirable features and reject samples as OOD, if they
occupy the region corresponding to the training samples
with probability 0. This region is identified by the set of the
first singular vectors of the training classes. To estimate the
probability, we use Monte Carlo sampling techniques used
in Bayesian deep learning such as [25, 8].
Our work is primarily motivated by the rich literature of
spectral methods in signal processing and machine learning.
Spectral techniques have been proven to be very effective

9452

