Quality-Agnostic Image Recognition via Invertible Decoder
Insoo Kim1

Seungju Han1 Ji-won Baek1 Seong-Jin Park1 Jae-Joon Han1 * Jinwoo Shin2 *
1
Samsung Advanced Institute of Technology (SAIT), South Korea
2
Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), South Korea
Stage I

Abstract
Despite the remarkable performance of deep models on
image recognition tasks, they are known to be susceptible to common corruptions such as blur, noise, and lowresolution. Data augmentation is a conventional way to
build a robust model by considering these common corruptions during the training. However, a naive data augmentation scheme may result in a non-specialized model for particular corruptions, as the model tends to learn the averaged distribution among corruptions. To mitigate the issue,
we propose a new paradigm of training deep image recognition networks that produce clean-like features from any
quality image via an invertible neural architecture. The proposed method consists of two stages. In the first stage, we
train an invertible network with only clean images under the
recognition objective. In the second stage, its inversion, i.e.,
the invertible decoder, is attached to a new recognition network and we train this encoder-decoder network using both
clean and corrupted images by considering recognition and
reconstruction objectives. Our two-stage scheme allows the
network to produce clean-like and robust features from any
quality images, by reconstructing their clean images via the
invertible decoder. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method on image classification and face recognition tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep learning models have shown remarkable performance for image recognition (or classification) tasks, even
surpassing human-level performance [30, 41, 42, 17, 23, 4,
48, 22]. They typically assume high-quality (HQ) or clean
images for their training/testing, while such an assumption
may not hold in practice, e.g., images of various qualities
can be encountered in their applications [9]. Moreover,
deep models are known to be vulnerable to image distortions such as noise, blur, JPEG, contrast, weather, and lowresolution. On the other hand, the human visual system robustly extracts semantic information from such images due
to its generalization ability [14].
* Corresponding authors

Invertible
Classifier
(𝒇𝒇𝝍𝝍 )

Stage II

GAP & FC layer

Inverse & Transfer
Frozen
Classifier
(𝒇𝒇𝜽𝜽 )

Decoder
(𝒇𝒇𝝍𝝍−𝟏𝟏)

GAP & FC layer

Figure 1. Quality-agnostic learning scheme based on classifierdecoder structure. We train an invertible classifier using a classification objective at the first stage. We use it as an invertible
decoder of the second stage by its inversion and freezing the parameters. A new classifier is trained with this frozen decoder using
HQ and LQ images at the second stage. As a result, the decoder
evokes HQ features from both HQ and LQ input images.

In practice, data augmentation is a conventional and principled way to build models robust against various domains
or corruptions of data.1 For example, one can synthesize
LQ images by using degradation procedures, such as blur,
noise, and low-resolution, and then train a model using both
HQ and LQ images. One can also train a model using HQ
images, and then fine-tune it using both HQ and LQ images. However, training (or fine-tuning) with such diverse
characteristics of data may generate the averaged distribution among corruptions [47], such that it results in an underfitted (or poor) model for a particular type of data, e.g., HQ
images [14] or LQ images [44, 51, 10]. Indeed, learning a
better single neural network handling such various types is
a challenge to overcome.
To process various types of corruptions better, several
quality-aware deep models have been studied [11, 2, 50].
They introduce an additional network module per quality
type in order to handle multiple corruption types, and show
1 In this paper, we primarily assume that types of corruption or LQ images in test data are known at training time. Hence, our work is orthogonal
to prior works building robust models without the assumption [20, 38, 19].

12257

