NeuralFusion: Online Depth Fusion in Latent Space
Silvan Weder1

Johannes L. Schönberger2
Marc Pollefeys1,2
1
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
2
Microsoft Mixed Reality and AI Zurich Lab

Martin R. Oswald1

Abstract
We present a novel online depth map fusion approach
that learns depth map aggregation in a latent feature space.
While previous fusion methods use an explicit scene representation like signed distance functions (SDFs), we propose
a learned feature representation for the fusion. The key idea
is a separation between the scene representation used for
the fusion and the output scene representation, via an additional translator network. Our neural network architecture
consists of two main parts: a depth and feature fusion subnetwork, which is followed by a translator sub-network to
produce the final surface representation (e.g. TSDF) for
visualization or other tasks. Our approach is an online
process, handles high noise levels, and is particularly able
to deal with gross outliers common for photometric stereobased depth maps. Experiments on real and synthetic data
demonstrate improved results compared to the state of the
art, especially in challenging scenarios with large amounts
of noise and outliers. The source code will be made available
at https://github.com/weders/NeuralFusion.

1. Introduction
Reconstructing the geometry of a scene is a central component of many applications in 3D computer vision. Awareness of the surrounding geometry enables robots to navigate,
augmented and mixed reality devices to accurately project
the information into the user’s field of view, and serves as
the basis for many 3D scene understanding tasks.
In this paper, we consider online surface reconstruction
by fusing a stream of depth maps with known camera calibration. The fundamental challenge in this task is that depth
maps are typically noisy, incomplete, and contain outliers.
Depth map fusion is a key component in many 3D reconstruction methods, like KinectFusion [40], VoxelHashing [42],
InfiniTAM [23], and many others. The vast majority of methods builds upon the concept of averaging truncated signed
distance functions (TSDFs), as proposed in the pioneering
work by Curless and Levoy [9]. This approach is so popular
due to its simple, highly parallelizable, and real-time capable

TSDF Fusion [9]

RoutedFusion [62]

Ours

Figure 1. Results of our end-to-end depth fusion on real-world
MVS data [29]. Our method learns to separate outliers and true
geometry without the need of filtering heuristics.

way of fusing noisy depth maps into a surface. However,
it has difficulties with handling outliers and thin geometry,
which can be mainly attributed to the local integration of
depth values in the TSDF volume.
To tackle this fundamental limitation, existing methods
use various heuristics to filter outliers in decoupled pre- or
post-processing steps. Such filtering techniques entail the
usual trade-off in terms of balancing accuracy against completeness. Especially in an online fusion system, striking
this balance is extremely challenging in the pre-filtering
stage, because it is difficult to distinguish between a first surface measurement and an outlier. Consequently, to achieve
complete surface reconstructions, one must use conservative
pre-filtering, which in turn requires careful post-filtering of
outliers by non-local reasoning on the TSDF volume or the
final mesh. This motivates our key idea to use different scene
representations for the fusion and final method output, while
all prior works perform depth fusion and filtering directly in
the output representation. In contrast, we perform the fusion
step in a latent scene representation, implicitly learned to
encode features like confidence information or local scene
information. A final translation step simultaneously filters
and decodes this learned scene representation into the final
output relevant to downstream applications.

3162

