Combining Semantic Guidance and Deep Reinforcement Learning For
Generating Human Level Paintings
Jaskirat Singh
Australian National University

Liang Zheng
Australian National University

jaskirat.singh@anu.edu.au

liang.zheng@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Generation of stroke-based non-photorealistic imagery,
is an important problem in the computer vision community. As an endeavor in this direction, substantial recent
research efforts have been focused on teaching machines
“how to paint”, in a manner similar to a human painter.
However, the applicability of previous methods has been
limited to datasets with little variation in position, scale
and saliency of the foreground object. As a consequence,
we find that these methods struggle to cover the granularity and diversity possessed by real world images. To this
end, we propose a Semantic Guidance pipeline with 1) a
bi-level painting procedure for learning the distinction between foreground and background brush strokes at training time. 2) We also introduce invariance to the position
and scale of the foreground object through a neural alignment model, which combines object localization and spatial transformer networks in an end to end manner, to zoom
into a particular semantic instance. 3) The distinguishing
features of the in-focus object are then amplified by maximizing a novel guided backpropagation based focus reward. The proposed agent does not require any supervision on human stroke-data and successfully handles variations in foreground object attributes, thus, producing much
higher quality canvases for the CUB-200 Birds [29] and
Stanford Cars-196 [17] datasets. Finally, we demonstrate
the further efficacy of our method on complex datasets with
multiple foreground object instances by evaluating an extension of our method on the challenging Virtual-KITTI [2]
dataset. Source code and models are available at https:
//github.com/1jsingh/semantic-guidance.

1. Introduction
Paintings form a key medium through which humans express their visual conception, creativity and thoughts. Being
able to paint constitutes a vital skill in the human learning
process and requires long-term planning to efficiently con-

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Semantic Guidance. We propose a semantic guidance
pipeline for the “learning to paint” problem. The reinforcement
learning agent incorporates (b) object localization and semantic
segmentation maps for the target image (a), to achieve enhanced
foreground saliency (refer Fig. 3) in the final canvas (d). We also
introduce expert guidance to amplify the focus on small but distinguishing features of the foreground objects (e.g. bird’s eye), by
proposing (c) a guided backpropagation based focus reward.

vey the picture within a limited number of brush strokes.
Thus, the successful impartation of this challenging skill to
machines, would not only have huge applications in computer graphics, but would also form a key component in the
development of a general artificial intelligence system.
Recently, a lot of research [6, 11, 15, 22, 31, 34] is being
targeted on teaching machines “how to paint”, in a manner
similar to a human painter. A popular solution to this problem is to use reinforcement learning and model the painting
episode as a Markov Decision Process (MDP). Given a tar-

16387

