GAN Prior Embedded Network for Blind Face Restoration in the Wild
Tao Yang1 , Peiran Ren1 , Xuansong Xie1 , and Lei Zhang1,2∗
1
DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
2
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
yangtao9009@gmail.com, peiran r@sohu.com, xingtong.xxs@taobao.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Blind face restoration (BFR) from severely degraded face
images in the wild is a very challenging problem. Due to
the high illness of the problem and the complex unknown
degradation, directly training a deep neural network (DNN)
usually cannot lead to acceptable results. Existing generative adversarial network (GAN) based methods can produce
better results but tend to generate over-smoothed restorations. In this work, we propose a new method by first learning a GAN for high-quality face image generation and embedding it into a U-shaped DNN as a prior decoder, then
fine-tuning the GAN prior embedded DNN with a set of
synthesized low-quality face images. The GAN blocks are
designed to ensure that the latent code and noise input to
the GAN can be respectively generated from the deep and
shallow features of the DNN, controlling the global face
structure, local face details and background of the reconstructed image. The proposed GAN prior embedded network (GPEN) is easy-to-implement, and it can generate
visually photo-realistic results. Our experiments demonstrated that the proposed GPEN achieves significantly superior results to state-of-the-art BFR methods both quantitatively and qualitatively, especially for the restoration of
severely degraded face images in the wild. The source code
and models can be found at https://github.com/
yangxy/GPEN .

1. Introduction
Face images are among the most popular types of images in our daily life, while face images are often degraded
due to the many factors such as low resolution, blur, noise,
compression, etc., or the combination of them. Face image
restoration has been attracting significant attentions, aiming
at reproducing a clear and realistic face image from the degraded input. Traditional face image restoration methods
∗ This work is partially supported by the Hong Kong RGC RIF grant
(R5001-18).

[50, 3, 2, 36] usually solve an inverse problem based on the
degradation model and handcrafted priors, which demonstrate limited performance in practice. Recently, deep neural networks (DNNs) have shown superior results in a variety of computer vision tasks [24, 48, 13, 25, 30], and many
DNN based face restoration methods [49, 29, 16] have also
been developed and they have demonstrated much better
performance than traditional ones.
Though much progress has been made for face restoration, blind face restoration (BFR) remains a challenging
research problem because of the unknown and complex
degradation of low quality (LQ) face images in the wild.
In order to recover a high-quality (HQ) face image with
photo-realistic textures from an LQ face image, a number of
BFR methods have been proposed by resorting to the spatial
transformer networks [49], exemplar images [29, 28, 9], 3D
facial priors [16], and facial component dictionaries [27].
Yang et al. [47] proposed a collaborative suppression and
replenishment (CSR) approach to progressively replenish
facial details. These methods exhibit impressive results on
artificially degraded faces; however, they fail to tackle realworld LQ face images. The conditional generative adversarial network (cGAN) based methods such as Pix2Pix [18]
and Pix2PixHD [43] learn a direct mapping from input image to output image. These methods achieve more realistic
results but tend to over-smooth the images (see Figures 5
and 7), which is commonly blamed to the high illness of
real-world BFR tasks.
With the rapid advancement of GAN techniques [21, 22],
recently some methods have been proposed to reconstruct
faces from extremely low resolution inputs [12, 34, 38].
Richardson et al. [38] employed an encoder network to
generate a series of style vectors before feeding them into a
pre-trained generator, achieving a generic image-to-image
translation framework. However, such methods can only
work on non-blind image super-resolution problems. Furthermore, they kept the pre-trained GAN unchanged in
training for the consistency and convenience of face manipulations. This however leads to unstable quality of restored faces when dealing with real-world LQ face images

672

