Mutual CRF-GNN for Few-shot Learning
Shixiang Tang1†

Dapeng Chen2
Lei Bai1
Kaijian Liu2
Yixiao Ge3
Wanli Ouyang1
1
The University of Sydney, SenseTime Computer Vision Group, Australia
2
3
Sensetime Group Limited, Hong Kong
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong
{stan3903, lei.bai, wanli.ouyang}@sydney.edu.au
liukaijian@sensetime.com

dapengchenxjtu@yahoo.com yxge@link.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Graph-neural-networks (GNN) is a rising trend for fewshot learning. A critical component in GNN is the affinity.
Typically, affinity in GNN is mainly computed in the feature
space, e.g., pairwise features, and does not take fully advantage of semantic labels associated to these features. In this
paper, we propose a novel Mutual CRF-GNN (MCGN). In
this MCGN, the labels and features of support data are used
by the CRF for inferring GNN affinities in a principled and
probabilistic way. Specifically, we construct a Conditional
Random Field (CRF) conditioned on labels and features of
support data to infer a affinity in the label space. Such
affinity is fed to the GNN as the node-wise affinity. GNN
and CRF mutually contributes to each other in MCGN. For
GNN, CRF provides valuable affinity information. For CRF,
GNN provides better features for inferring affinity. Experimental results show that our approach outperforms stateof-the-arts on datasets miniImageNet, tieredImageNet, and
CIFAR-FS on both 5-way 1-shot and 5-way 5-shot settings.

1. Introduction
Few-shot learning attempts to classify unlabelled data
(i.e., query samples) when only a few labelled data (i.e.,
support samples) are available. Instead of relying on regularization to compensate for the data scarcity, researchers
have explored ways to learn a distribution of similar tasks
(also called “meta-learning”). Meta-learning method introduces the concept of episodic, which means that one round
of model training contains only few samples (e.g., 1 or 5)
for each class. By episodic training, meta-learning methods
aim to train a meta-learner that can quickly propagate labels
from support samples to query samples.
Recently, Graph Neural Network (GNN) [60, 31] becomes a rising method to transfer the knowledge from the
† This work was done when Shixiang Tang was an intern at SenseTime.

(a)

(b)

CRF

Label
Prediction

GNN

Class A: feature

label

Binary compatibility:

variable

Class B: feature

Unary compatibility:

label

variable

GNN affinity:

Figure 1. Illustration of Mutual CRF-GNN (MCGN). Green and
purple indicate different classes. Unary compatibility contains label information and binary compatibility contains feature information from GNN. (a): The marginal distribution for pairwise variables can be used to predict the affinity for GNN. (b): the marginal
distribution of single variable is used for label prediction.

support samples to the query samples. In particular, Garcia
and Bruna [15] first modelled the few-shot learning problem as a supervised graph message passing task by defining
each sample in the support set and query set as a node in
GNN.
Affinity, which measures the similarity between two
samples/nodes, is a key component in GNN. Therefore, lots
of approaches are proposed to have better affinity representation. EGNN [26] proposes to utilize labels for GNN affinity initialization and propagate the edge labels for explicitly
modeling the intra-cluster similarity and inter-cluster dissimilarity. DPGN [53] propose to incorporates distribution
propagation with GCN and combines both distribution-level
relations with instance-level relations.
In this regard, we leverage CRF [48], which is a powerful probabilistic graphical model, to manipulate dependencies between variables, to collaborate with GNN. We
model the labels as random variables in CRF. In our ap-

2329

