Robust Instance Segmentation through
Reasoning about Multi-Object Occlusion
Xiaoding Yuan1
1

Adam Kortylewski2

Yihong Sun2

Alan Yuille2

Tongji University, 2 Johns Hopkins University

Abstract
Analyzing complex scenes with Deep Neural Networks is
a challenging task, particularly when images contain multiple objects that partially occlude each other. Existing approaches to image analysis mostly process objects independently and do not take into account the relative occlusion of nearby objects. In this paper, we propose a deep
network for multi-object instance segmentation that is robust to occlusion and can be trained from bounding box
supervision only. Our work builds on Compositional Networks, which learn a generative model of neural feature activations to locate occluders and to classify objects based
on their non-occluded parts. We extend their generative
model to include multiple objects and introduce a framework for efficient inference in challenging occlusion scenarios. In particular, we obtain feed-forward predictions
of the object classes and their instance and occluder segmentations. We introduce an Occlusion Reasoning Module
(ORM) that locates erroneous segmentations and estimates
the occlusion order to correct them. The improved segmentation masks are, in turn, integrated into the network
in a top-down manner to improve the image classification.
Our experiments on the KITTI INStance dataset (KINS) and
a synthetic occlusion dataset demonstrate the effectiveness
and robustness of our model at multi-object instance segmentation under occlusion. Code is publically available at
https://github.com/XD7479/Multi-Object-Occlusion.

1. Introduction
Scenes in images most often depict multiple objects that
partially occlude each other. Recent studies [38, 18] showed
that deep networks are less robust at recognizing partially
occluded objects compared to Humans. The main difficulties are raised by the combinatorial variability of the object
ordering and positioning, as well as the fact that scenes can
contain known and unknown object classes.
One approach to address the problem of occlusion in

Figure 1: Our proposed model corrects erroneous instance
segmentations through multi-object reasoning. Left: Two
input images that are processed independently. The segmentation results identify visible object parts in blue, invisible parts in red, and context in green. Note how in the
top image, the model cannot identify the occlusion. Center:
By enforcing consistency between segmentations of nearby
objects, our model can identify conflicting segmentations
(white area). Right: Reasoning about the occlusion order
resolves the erroneous predictions.

deep networks is data augmentation [36, 5, 34, 1]. While
this increases the robustness of deep networks, the classification performance on partially occluded objects still remains substantially worse compared to non-occluded objects. Recent work introduced compositional deep networks
(CompositionalNets) and showed that these are more robust to partial occlusion compared to data augmentation approaches [16, 17, 30]. CompositionalNets are deep neural
network architectures in which the fully connected classification head is replaced with a differentiable compositional
model. The structure of the compositional model enables
CompositionalNets to decompose images into objects and
context, as well as to further decompose objects into their
individual parts. The generative nature of the compositional model enables it to segment objects and occluders

11141

