MP3: A Unified Model to Map, Perceive, Predict and Plan
Sergio Casas*,1,2 , Abbas Sadat ∗,1 , Raquel Urtasun1,2
Uber ATG1 , University of Toronto2
{sergio, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu, abbas.sadat@gmail.com
Abstract
High-definition maps (HD maps) are a key component of
most modern self-driving systems due to their valuable semantic and geometric information. Unfortunately, building
HD maps has proven hard to scale due to their cost as well
as the requirements they impose in the localization system
that has to work everywhere with centimeter-level accuracy.
Being able to drive without an HD map would be very beneficial to scale self-driving solutions as well as to increase the
failure tolerance of existing ones (e.g., if localization fails or
the map is not up-to-date). Towards this goal, we propose
MP3, an end-to-end approach to mapless1 driving where
the input is raw sensor data and a high-level command (e.g.,
turn left at the intersection). MP3 predicts intermediate
representations in the form of an online map and the current
and future state of dynamic agents, and exploits them in a
novel neural motion planner to make interpretable decisions
taking into account uncertainty. We show that our approach
is significantly safer, more comfortable, and can follow commands better than the baselines in challenging long-term
closed-loop simulations, as well as when compared to an
expert driver in a large-scale real-world dataset.

1. Introduction
Most modern self-driving stacks require up-to-date highdefinition (HD) maps that contain rich semantic information
necessary for driving such as the topology and location of
the lanes, crosswalks, traffic lights, intersections as well as
the traffic rules for each lane (e.g., unprotected left, right turn
on red, maximum speed). These maps are a great source of
knowledge that simplify the perception and motion forecasting tasks, as the online inference process has to mainly focus
on dynamic objects (e.g., vehicles, pedestrians, cyclists).
Furthermore, the use of HD maps significantly increases the
safety of motion planning as knowing the lane topology and
geometry eases the generation of potential trajectories for
* Denotes equal contribution
1 We note that by mapless we mean without HD maps. A coarse road

network like the ones available in off-the-shelf services such as Google
Maps or OpenStreetMap is assumed available for routing towards the goal.

Driving with an HD map

Mapless driving

“Turn Right”

Figure 1: Left: a localization error makes the SDV follow
a wrong route when using an HD map, driving into traffic.
Right: mapless driving can interpret the scene from sensors
and achieve a safe plan that follows a high-level command.
the ego-vehicle that adhere to the traffic rules. In addition,
progressing towards a specific goal is much simpler when
the desired route is defined as a sequence of lanes to traverse.
Unfortunately, building HD maps has proven hard to
scale due to the complexity and cost of generating the maps
and maintaining them. Furthermore, the heavy reliance on
HD maps introduces very demanding requirements for the
localization system, which needs to work at all times with
centimeter-level accuracy or else unsafe situations like Fig. 1
(left) might arise. This motivates the development of mapless
technology, which can serve as the fail-safe in the case of
localization failures or outdated maps, and potentially unlock
self-driving at scale at a much lower cost.
Self-driving without HD maps is a very challenging task.
Perception can no longer rely on the prior that is more likely
to find vehicles on the road and pedestrians on the sidewalk.
Motion forecasting of dynamic objects becomes even more
challenging without having access to the lanes that vehicles
typically follow or the location of crosswalks for pedestrians.
Most importantly, the search space to plan a safe maneuver
for the SDV goes from narrow envelopes around the lane center lines [1, 45, 46, 50] to the full set of dynamically feasible
trajectories as depicted in Fig. 1 (right). Moreover, without
a well-defined route as a series of lanes to follow, the goal
that the SDV is trying to reach needs to be abstracted into
high-level behaviors such as going straight at an intersection, turning left or turning right [11], which require taking

14403

