Over-the-Air Adversarial Flickering Attacks against Video Recognition
Networks
Roi Pony1 *, Itay Naeh2 *, Shie Mannor1,3
1

Department of Electrical Engineering, Technion Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel
2

Rafael - Advanced Defense Systems Ltd., Israel
3

Nvidia Research

roipony@gmail.com, itay@naeh.us, shie@technion.ac.il

Abstract
Deep neural networks for video classification, just like
image classification networks, may be subjected to adversarial manipulation. The main difference between image
classifiers and video classifiers is that the latter usually
use temporal information contained within the video. In
this work we present a manipulation scheme for fooling
video classifiers by introducing a flickering temporal perturbation that in some cases may be unnoticeable by human observers and is implementable in the real world. After demonstrating the manipulation of action classification
of single videos, we generalize the procedure to make universal adversarial perturbation, achieving high fooling ratio. In addition, we generalize the universal perturbation
and produce a temporal-invariant perturbation, which can
be applied to the video without synchronizing the perturbation to the input. The attack was implemented on several target models and the transferability of the attack was
demonstrated. These properties allow us to bridge the gap
between simulated environment and real-world application,
as will be demonstrated in this paper for the first time for
an over-the-air flickering attack.

1. Introduction
In recent years, Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) have
shown phenomenal performance in a wide range of tasks,
such as image classification [12], object detection [18], semantic segmentation [22] etc. Despite their success, DNNs
have been found vulnerable to adversarial attacks. Many
works [27, 5, 17] have shown that a small (sometimes imperceptible) perturbation added to an image, can make a
given DNNs prediction false. These findings have raised
* Equal contribution

action
recognition

δ
X

X̂

prediction
”skydiving”

”juggling balls”

(a) Diagram of a Flickering Adversarial Attack in a simulated environment (digital).

action
recognition

δ
X

X̂

prediction
”skydiving”

”juggling balls”

(b) Diagram of an Over-the-Air Flickering Adversarial Attack in
the real-world (physical).

Figure 1: Top figure shows the attack diagram in the digital
domain performed by adding a uniform RGB perturbation
to the attacked video. Bottom figure shows the modeling of
the digitally-developed attack into the real-world by transmitting the perturbation in the scene using a smart RGB led
bulb.

many concerns, particularly for critical systems such as face
recognition systems [25], surveillance cameras [24], autonomous vehicles, and medical applications [16]. In recent
years most of the attention was given to the study of adversarial patterns in images and less in video action recognition. Only in the past two years works on adversarial video
attacks were published [33, 8, 34, 10], even though DNNs
have been applied to video-based tasks for several years,
in particular video action recognition [2, 32, 4]. In video
action recognition networks temporal information is of the
essence in categorizing actions, in addition to per-frame im-

515

