Passive Inter-Photon Imaging
Atul Ingle a ∗ , Trevor Seets a , Mauro Buttafava b , Shantanu Gupta a ,
Alberto Tosi b , Mohit Gupta a † , Andreas Velten a †
a

University of Wisconsin-Madison

Abstract
Digital camera pixels measure image intensities by converting incident light energy into an analog electrical current, and then digitizing it into a fixed-width binary representation. This direct measurement method, while conceptually simple, suffers from limited dynamic range and poor
performance under extreme illumination — electronic noise
dominates under low illumination, and pixel full-well capacity results in saturation under bright illumination. We
propose a novel intensity cue based on measuring interphoton timing, defined as the time delay between detection of successive photons. Based on the statistics of interphoton times measured by a time-resolved single-photon
sensor, we develop theory and algorithms for a scene
brightness estimator which works over extreme dynamic
range; we experimentally demonstrate imaging scenes with
a dynamic range of over ten million to one. The proposed
techniques, aided by the emergence of single-photon sensors such as single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs) with
picosecond timing resolution, will have implications for a
wide range of imaging applications: robotics, consumer
photography, astronomy, microscopy and biomedical imaging.

1. Measuring Light from Darkness
Digital camera technology has witnessed a remarkable
revolution in terms of size, cost and image quality over
the past few years. Throughout this progress, however,
one fundamental characteristic of a camera sensor has not
changed: the way a camera pixel measures brightness. Conventional image sensor pixels manufactured with complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) and chargecoupled device (CCD) technology can be thought of as
light buckets (Fig. 1(a)), which measure scene brightness
in two steps: first, they collect hundreds or thousands of
photons and convert the energy into an analog electrical
signal (e.g. current or voltage), and then they digitize this
† Equal contribution.
This research was supported in part by DARPA HR0011-16-C-0025, DoE
NNSA DE-NA0003921 [1], NSF GRFP DGE-1747503, NSF CAREER
1846884 and 1943149, and Wisconsin Alumni Research Foundation.
∗ Email: ingle@uwalumni.com

b

Politecnico di Milano

analog quantity using high-resolution analog-to-digital converters. Conceptually, there are two main drawbacks of this
image formation strategy. First, at extremely low brightness
levels, noise in the pixel electronics dominates resulting in
poor signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR). Second, since each pixel
bucket has a fixed maximum capacity, bright regions in the
scene cause the pixels to saturate and subsequent incident
photons do not get recorded.
In this paper, we explore a different approach for measuring image intensities. Instead of estimating intensities
directly from the number of photons incident on a pixel, we
propose a novel intensity cue based on inter-photon timing,
defined as the time delay between detection of successive
photons. Intuitively, as the brightness increases, the time-ofdarkness between consecutive photon detections decreases.
By modeling the statistics of photon arrivals, we derive a
theoretical expressions that relates the average inter-photon
delay and the incident flux. The key observation is that
because photon arrivals are stochastic, the average interphoton time decreases asymptotically as the incident flux
increases. Using this novel temporal intensity cue, we design algorithms to estimate brightness from as few as one
photon timestamp per pixel to extremely high brightness,
beyond the saturation limit of conventional sensors.
How to Measure Inter-Photon Timing? The inter-photon
timing intensity cue and the resulting brightness estimators
can achieve extremely high dynamic range. A natural question to ask then is: How does one measure the inter-photon
timing? Conventional CMOS sensor pixels do not have the
ability to measure time delays between individual photons
at the timing granularity needed for estimating intensities
with high precision. Fortunately, there is an emerging class
of sensors called single-photon avalanche diodes (SPADs)
[11, 7], that can not only detect individual photons, but also
precisely time-tag each captured photon with picosecond
resolution.
Emergence of Single-Photon Sensors: SPADs are naturally suited for imaging in low illumination conditions, and
thus, are fast becoming the sensors of choice for applications that require extreme sensitivity to photons together
with fine-grained temporal information: single-photon 3D
time-of-flight imaging [52, 34, 46, 45, 33], transient imaging [50, 49], non-line-of-sight imaging [35, 19], and flu-

8585

