Co-Attention for Conditioned Image Matching
Olivia Wiles
VGG, Dept. of Eng. Science
University of Oxford

Sébastien Ehrhardt
VGG, Dept. of Eng. Science
University of Oxford

Andrew Zisserman
VGG, Dept. of Eng. Science
University of Oxford

ow@robots.ox.ac.uk

hyenal@robots.ox.ac.uk

az@robots.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
We propose a new approach to determine correspondences between image pairs in the wild under large changes
in illumination, viewpoint, context, and material. While
other approaches find correspondences between pairs of
images by treating the images independently, we instead
condition on both images to implicitly take account of the
differences between them. To achieve this, we introduce (i) a
spatial attention mechanism (a co-attention module, CoAM)
for conditioning the learned features on both images, and
(ii) a distinctiveness score used to choose the best matches
at test time. CoAM can be added to standard architectures
and trained using self-supervision or supervised data, and
achieves a significant performance improvement under hard
conditions, e.g. large viewpoint changes. We demonstrate
that models using CoAM achieve state of the art or competitive results on a wide range of tasks: local matching, camera
localization, 3D reconstruction, and image stylization.

1. Introduction
Determining correspondence between two images of the
same scene or object is a fundamental challenge of computer
vision, important for many applications ranging from optical
flow and image manipulation, to 3D reconstruction and camera localization. This task is challenging due to scene-shift:
two images of the same scene can differ dramatically due
to variations in illumination (e.g. day to night), viewpoint,
texture, and season (e.g. snow in winter versus flowering
trees in spring).
Methods that solve the correspondence task typically follow a detect-and-describe approach: first they detect distinctive regions [5, 15, 30, 34, 49] and then describe these
regions using descriptors [5, 6, 21, 26, 30, 49] with varying
degrees of invariance to scale, illumination, rotation, and
affine transformations. These descriptors are then matched
between images by comparing descriptors exhaustively, often using additional geometric constraints [16]. Recent approaches have sought to learn either or both of these components [3, 8, 9, 10, 13, 27, 39, 46, 47, 54, 59, 60, 73, 74].

These methods typically only find matches at textured locations, and do not find matches over smooth regions of an
object. Additionally, finding these repeatable detections with
invariance to scene-shift is challenging [2, 51, 56].
If prior knowledge is assumed, in terms of limited camera or temporal change (as in optical flow computation in
videos), then a dense-to-dense approach can be used for pairs
that have limited scene shift. In this case, methods typically
obtain a dense feature map which is compared from one
image to another by restricting the correspondence search to
a small support region in the other image (based on the prior
knowledge). Spatial and smoothness constraints can additionally be imposed to improve results [8, 11, 29, 53, 66, 71].
We focus on the cases where there is potentially significant scene shift (and no prior knowledge is available), and
introduce a new approach for obtaining correspondences between a pair of images. Previous methods learn descriptors
for each image without knowledge of the other image. Thus,
their descriptors must be invariant to changes – e.g. to scale
and illumination changes. However, as descriptors become
increasingly invariant, they become increasingly ambiguous
to match (e.g. a constant descriptor is invariant to everything
but also confused for everything). We forsake this invariance
and instead condition the descriptors on both images. This allows the descriptors to be modified based on the differences
between the images (e.g. a change in global illumination).
Traditionally, this was infeasible, but we can learn such a
model efficiently using neural networks.
To achieve this we introduce a network (CD-UNet), which
consists of two important components. First, a new spatial
Co-Attention Module (CoAM) that can be ‘plugged into’ a
UNet, or similar architectures developed for single image descriptors, in order to generate descriptors conditioned on the
pair of images. Second, we introduce a Distinctiveness score
in order to select the best matches from these descriptors.
We further investigate the utility of the CoAM under both
supervised and self-supervised training. In the latter case,
we augment the recent self-supervised approach of learning
camera pose of [70] by using CoAMs in a plug-and-play
fashion. We evaluate these trained models on a variety of
115920

