SMURF: Self-Teaching Multi-Frame
Unsupervised RAFT with Full-Image Warping
Austin Stone∗1

Daniel Maurer∗2
Alper Ayvaci2
1
Robotics at Google

{austinstone, anelia, rjon}@google.com

Anelia Angelova1
Rico Jonschkowski1
2
Waymo
{maurerd, ayvaci}@waymo.com

https://github.com/google-research/google-research/tree/master/smurf

Abstract
We present SMURF, a method for unsupervised learning
of optical flow that improves state of the art on all benchmarks by 36% to 40% (over the prior best method UFlow)
and even outperforms several supervised approaches such
as PWC-Net and FlowNet2. Our method integrates architecture improvements from supervised optical flow, i.e.
the RAFT model, with new ideas for unsupervised learning
that include a sequence-aware self-supervision loss, a technique for handling out-of-frame motion, and an approach
for learning effectively from multi-frame video data while
still only requiring two frames for inference.

1. Introduction
Optical flow describes a dense pixel-wise correspondence between two images, specifying for each pixel in the
first image, where that pixel is in the second image. The
resulting vector field of relative pixel locations represents
apparent motion or “flow” between the two images. Estimating this flow field is a fundamental problem in computer vision and any advances in flow estimation benefit
many downstream tasks such as visual odometry, multiview depth estimation, and video object tracking.
Classical methods formulate optical flow estimation as
an optimization problem [2, 8]. They infer, for a given image pair, a flow field that maximizes smoothness and the
similarity of matched pixels. Recent supervised learning
approaches instead train deep neural networks to estimate
optical flow from examples of ground-truth annotated image pairs [9, 28, 29, 37]. Since obtaining ground truth flow
is extremely difficult for real images, supervised learning
is generally limited to synthetic data [5, 20]. While these
methods have produced excellent results in the training domain, generalization is challenging when the gap between
the target domain ant the synthetic training data is too wide.
∗ Authors contributed equally.

Unsupervised learning is a promising direction to address this issue as it allows training optical flow models
from unlabeled videos of any domain. The unsupervised
approach works by combining ideas from classical methods and supervised-learning – training the same neural networks as in supervised approaches but optimizing them with
objectives such as smoothness and photometric similarity
from classical methods. Unlike those classical methods, unsupervised approaches perform optimization not per image
pair but jointly for the entire training set.
Since unsupervised optical flow takes inspiration from
classical and supervised learning methods, we can make
substantial progress by properly combining novel ideas with
insights from these two directions. In this paper, we do exactly that and make the following three contributions:
1. We integrate the current best supervised model,
RAFT [29] with unsupervised learning and perform key
changes to the loss functions and data augmentation to
properly regularize this model for unsupervised learning.
2. We perform unsupervised learning on image crops while
using the full image to compute unsupervised losses.
This technique, which we refer to as full-image warping, improves flow quality near image boundaries.
3. We leverage a classical method for multi-frame flow
refinement [19] to generate better labels for selfsupervision from multi-frame input. This technique improves performance especially in occluded regions without requiring more than two frames for inference.
Our method Self-Teaching Multi-frame Unsupervised
RAFT with Full-Image Warping (SMURF) combines these
three contributions and improves the state of the art (SOTA)
in unsupervised optical flow in all major benchmarks, i.e. it
reduces errors by 40 / 36 / 39 % in the Sintel Clean / Sintel
Final / KITTI 2015 benchmarks relative to the prior SOTA
set by UFlow [12]. These improvements also reduce the
gap to supervised approaches, as SMURF is the first unsupervised optical flow method that outperforms supervised
FlowNet2 [9] and PWC-Net [28] on all benchmarks.

3887

