Modular Interactive Video Object Segmentation:
Interaction-to-Mask, Propagation and Difference-Aware Fusion
Ho Kei Cheng
UIUC/HKUST

Yu-Wing Tai
Kuaishou Technology

Chi-Keung Tang
HKUST

hokeikc2@illinois.edu

yuwing@gmail.com

cktang@cs.ust.hk

Interaction-to-Mask

Abstract

Clicks

Propagation

1. Introduction
Video object segmentation (VOS) aims to produce highquality segmentation of a target object instance across an
input video sequence, which has wide applications in video
understanding and editing. Existing VOS methods can be
categorized by the types of user input: semi-supervised
methods require pixel-wise annotation of the first frame,
while interactive VOS approaches take user interactions
(e.g., scribbles or clicks) as input where users can iteratively
refine the results until satisfaction.
This paper focuses on interactive VOS (iVOS) which
finds more applications in video editing, because typical
user interactions such as scribbles or clicks (a few seconds
per frame) are much easier than specifying full annotation
Source code, pretrained models and dataset are available at: https:
//hkchengrex.github.io/MiVOS. This research is supported in
part by Kuaishou Technology and the Research Grant Council of the Hong
Kong SAR under grant no. 16201420.

Round 1

Difference-Aware Fusion

Copy

Corrective
scribbles

Round 2

We present Modular interactive VOS (MiVOS) framework which decouples interaction-to-mask and mask propagation, allowing for higher generalizability and better performance. Trained separately, the interaction module converts user interactions to an object mask, which is then
temporally propagated by our propagation module using
a novel top-k filtering strategy in reading the space-time
memory. To effectively take the user’s intent into account,
a novel difference-aware module is proposed to learn how
to properly fuse the masks before and after each interaction, which are aligned with the target frames by employing the space-time memory. We evaluate our method both
qualitatively and quantitatively with different forms of user
interactions (e.g., scribbles, clicks) on DAVIS to show that
our method outperforms current state-of-the-art algorithms
while requiring fewer frame interactions, with the additional advantage in generalizing to different types of user
interactions. We contribute a large-scale synthetic VOS
dataset with pixel-accurate segmentation of 4.8M frames to
accompany our source codes to facilitate future research.

Figure 1. User annotates one of the frames (e.g., with clicks at the
top-left frame) and MiVOS bidirectionally propagates the masks
to the entire video sequence. Our difference-aware fusion module guides the segmentation network to correct the masks across
frames based on user’s intended correction on another frame (e.g.,
with scribbles on the bottom-right frame).

(∼79 seconds per instance), with the iterative or successive
refinement scheme allowing the user more control over result accuracy versus interaction budget trade-off [1].
Conceptually, iVOS can be considered as the combination of two tasks: interaction understanding (e.g., mask generation from interactions [2, 3, 4, 5]) and temporal propagation (e.g., semi-supervised VOS methods [6, 7, 8]). Current
methods usually perform the two tasks jointly, using interconnected encoders [9, 10, 11] or memory-augmented interaction features [12, 13, 14]. The strong coupling limits
the form of user interaction (e.g., scribbles only) and makes
training difficult. Attempts to decouple the two tasks fail
to reach state-of-the-art accuracy [15, 16] as user’s intent
cannot be adequately taken into account in the propagation
process.
One advantage of unified methods over decoupled methods is that the former can efficiently pick up small corrective interactions across many frames, which is suited to the
DAVIS evaluation robot [1]. However, we believe that human users tend to interactively correct a single frame to
high accuracy before checking other frames, as the visual
examination itself takes time and human labor while free
for an evaluation robot. Our method requires less interacted
frames by letting the user focus on a single frame multiple
times while attaining the same or even better accuracy. Our
method is efficient as single-frame interaction can be done
almost instantly [4], with the more time-consuming propagation performed only sparsely.

5559

