Simple Copy-Paste is a Strong Data Augmentation Method
for Instance Segmentation

† 1,3

Rui Qian
1

Golnaz Ghiasi∗ 1
Tsung-Yi Lin1

Yin Cui∗ 1 Aravind Srinivas∗ † 1,2
Ekin D. Cubuk1 Quoc V. Le1 Barret Zoph1

Google Research, Brain Team

2

UC Berkeley

Abstract

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation [22, 10] is an important task in
computer vision with many real world applications. Instance segmentation models based on state-of-the-art convolutional networks [11, 57, 67] are often data-hungry.
At the same time, annotating large datasets for instance
segmentation [40, 21] is usually expensive and timeconsuming. For example, 22 worker hours were spent per
∗ Equal contribution. Correspondence to: golnazg@google.com.
† Work done during an internship at Google Research.
1 Code and checkpoints for our models are available at https :
//github.com/tensorflow/tpu/tree/master/models/
official/detection/projects/copy_paste

Cornell University

50
45
40

COCO Box AP

Building instance segmentation models that are dataefficient and can handle rare object categories is an
important challenge in computer vision. Leveraging data
augmentations is a promising direction towards addressing
this challenge. Here, we perform a systematic study of
the Copy-Paste augmentation (e.g., [13, 12]) for instance
segmentation where we randomly paste objects onto an
image. Prior studies on Copy-Paste relied on modeling the
surrounding visual context for pasting the objects. However, we find that the simple mechanism of pasting objects
randomly is good enough and can provide solid gains on
top of strong baselines. Furthermore, we show Copy-Paste
is additive with semi-supervised methods that leverage
extra data through pseudo labeling (e.g. self-training).
On COCO instance segmentation, we achieve 49.1 mask
AP and 57.3 box AP, an improvement of +0.6 mask AP
and +1.5 box AP over the previous state-of-the-art. We
further demonstrate that Copy-Paste can lead to significant
improvements on the LVIS benchmark. Our baseline model
outperforms the LVIS 2020 Challenge winning entry by
+3.6 mask AP on rare categories. 1

3

35
30

Standard Aug.
Strong Aug.
Strong Aug. + Copy-Paste

25
20

0.1

0.25

0.5

0.75

Fraction of COCO Dataset

1.0

Figure 1. Data-efficiency on the COCO benchmark: Combining
the Copy-Paste augmentation along with Strong Aug. (large scale
jittering) allows us to train models that are up to 2× more dataefficient than Standard Aug. (standard scale jittering). The augmentations are highly effective and provide gains of +10 AP in
the low data regime (10% of data) while still being effective in the
high data regime with a gain of +5 AP. Results are for Mask RCNN EfficientNet-B7 FPN trained on an image size of 640×640.

1000 instance masks for COCO [40]. It is therefore imperative to develop new methods to improve the data-efficiency
of state-of-the-art instance segmentation models.
Here, we focus on data augmentation [50] as a simple
way to significantly improve the data-efficiency of instance
segmentation models. Although many augmentation methods such as scale jittering and random resizing have been
widely used [26, 25, 20], they are more general-purpose
in nature and have not been designed specifically for instance segmentation. An augmentation procedure that is
more object-aware, both in terms of category and shape,
is likely to be useful for instance segmentation. The CopyPaste augmentation [13, 12, 15] is well suited for this need.
By pasting diverse objects of various scales to new background images, Copy-Paste has the potential to create challenging and novel training data for free.

2918

