Pixel-wise Anomaly Detection in Complex Driving Scenes
Giancarlo Di Biase∗
ETH Zurich

Hermann Blum∗
ETH Zurich

Roland Siegwart
ETH Zurich

Cesar Cadena
ETH Zurich

giandbt@gmail.com

hermann.blum@ethz.ch

rsiegwart@ethz.ch

cesarc@ethz.ch

Figure 1. Anomaly scenarios overview. There are three possible outcomes when a segmentation network encounters an
anomalous instance. First, anomaly instances are properly segmented and classified as one of the training classes (i.e bird
is confused as a person) (top). Second, anomaly instances are over-segmented with multiple classes (i.e dog is detected
as a combination of person, vegetation, and terrain classes) (middle). And third, anomaly instances are blended with the
background, not detected (i.e boxes blend with the street segmentation) (bottom). Our proposed method produces robust
predictions for all scenarios, while previous approaches fail to handle at least one of them.

Abstract
The inability of state-of-the-art semantic segmentation
methods to detect anomaly instances hinders them from being deployed in safety-critical and complex applications,
such as autonomous driving. Recent approaches have
focused on either leveraging segmentation uncertainty to
identify anomalous areas or re-synthesizing the image from
the semantic label map to find dissimilarities with the input image. In this work, we demonstrate that these two
methodologies contain complementary information and can
be combined to produce robust predictions for anomaly
segmentation. We present a pixel-wise anomaly detection
framework that uses uncertainty maps to improve over existing re-synthesis methods in finding dissimilarities between
the input and generated images. Our approach works as
a general framework around already trained segmentation
networks, which ensures anomaly detection without compromising segmentation accuracy, while significantly out-

performing all similar methods. Top-2 performance across
a range of different anomaly datasets shows the robustness
of our approach to handling different anomaly instances.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have shown significant improvements in the field of computer vision. Neural
networks have become the de-facto methodology for classification, object detection, and semantic segmentation due
to their high accuracy in comparison to previous methods
[35, 34, 41]. However, while the predictions of these networks are highly accurate, they usually fail when encountering anomalous inputs (i.e. instances outside the training
distribution of the network).
* Equal Contribution
This work was partially supported by the Hilti Group and the National
Center of Competence in Research (NCCR) Robotics through the SwissNational Science Foundation.

16918

