Semi-supervised Domain Adaptation based on Dual-level Domain Mixing for
Semantic Segmentation
Shuaijun Chen1† , Xu Jia2†‡, Jianzhong He1,3 , Yongjie Shi1,4 , Jianzhuang Liu1
1
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies. 2 Dalian University of Technology.
3
Data Storage and Intelligent Vision Technical Research Dept, Huawei Cloud.
4
Key Lab of Machine Perception, Peking University
{chenshuaijun,jianzhong.he,shiyongjie2,liu.jianzhuang}@huawei.com,xjia@dlut.edu.cn

Abstract
Data-driven based approaches, in spite of great success
in many tasks, have poor generalization when applied to
unseen image domains, and require expensive cost of annotation especially for dense pixel prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation. Recently, both unsupervised domain
adaptation (UDA) from large amounts of synthetic data and
semi-supervised learning (SSL) with small set of labeled
data have been studied to alleviate this issue. However,
there is still a large gap on performance compared to their
supervised counterparts. We focus on a more practical setting of semi-supervised domain adaptation (SSDA) where
both a small set of labeled target data and large amounts
of labeled source data are available. To address the task
of SSDA, a novel framework based on dual-level domain
mixing is proposed. The proposed framework consists of
three stages. First, two kinds of data mixing methods are
proposed to reduce domain gap in both region-level and
sample-level respectively. We can obtain two complementary domain-mixed teachers based on dual-level mixed data
from holistic and partial views respectively. Then, a student model is learned by distilling knowledge from these
two teachers. Finally, pseudo labels of unlabeled data are
generated in a self-training manner for another few rounds
of teachers training. Extensive experimental results have
demonstrated the effectiveness of our proposed framework
on synthetic-to-real semantic segmentation benchmarks.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation with the goal of assigning
semantic-level labels to every pixel in an image is one
of the fundamental topics in computer vision due to its
widely critical real-world applications, such as autonomous
driving [11] and robotic navigation [28, 39]. Over the
† Equal contribution

past few years, deep convolutional neural networks(CNNs)
have achieved dramatic improvements in semantic segmentation [1, 25, 17, 26, 2, 48]. The success of CNN-based
methods benefits from large volume of manually labeled
data [24, 8], and the assumption of independent and identical data distribution between training and testing samples.
However, performance drops significantly when the model
trained on training set (source domain) is directly applied to
unseen test scenarios (target domain). In addition, densely
annotating pixel-wise labels of many samples in target domain is time-consuming and uneconomical.
To reduce the heavy demand for pixel-wise annotation,
one way is to employ large amounts of easy-to-get simulation data which can be collected from game engines such
as GTA5 [33] and SYNTHIA [34]. In addition, unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) strategy, which aims at
transferring knowledge from a synthetic label-rich source
domain to a real-world label-scarce target domain, is required to bridge domain gap between synthetic and realworld domains. Impressive results have been achieved
by UDA methods that extract domain-invariant representations via entropy minimization [31, 43], generative modelling [16, 12] and adversarial learning [42, 41]. However, domain shift cannot be completely eliminated by these
methods due to weak supervision on target examples. There
is still a big gap in performance compared with supervised
methods. Another way in addressing the issue of heavy annotation is to annotate only a small set of images from target
domain and make full use of plenty of unlabeled data with
semi-supervised learning (SSL) techniques [10, 30, 9, 29].
Due to the shortage of labeled data in SSL setting, the obtained model has the risk of overfitting to the small amount
of labeled data. How to effectively utilize available unlabeled and limited labeled data from different domains is the
key in improving model’s accuracy and generalization for
pixel-wise prediction tasks.

‡ Part of this work was done while he was in Noah’s Ark Lab

Hence, a more practical task of semi-supervised domain

11018

