Variational Prototype Learning for Deep Face Recognition

1

Huawei

Jiankang Deng * 1,2,3
Jia Guo * 3
Jing Yang4
Alexandros Lattas1,2
Stefanos Zafeiriou1,2
2
3
4
Imperial College
InsightFace
University of Nottingham
{j.deng16, a.lattas, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk
guojia@gmail.com, jing.yang2@nottingham.ac.uk

Abstract
Deep face recognition has achieved remarkable improvements due to the introduction of margin-based softmax loss, in which the prototype stored in the last linear
layer represents the center of each class. In these methods,
training samples are enforced to be close to positive prototypes and far apart from negative prototypes by a clear
margin. However, we argue that prototype learning only
employs sample-to-prototype comparisons without considering sample-to-sample comparisons during training and
the low loss value gives us an illusion of perfect feature
embedding, impeding the further exploration of SGD. To
this end, we propose Variational Prototype Learning (VPL),
which represents every class as a distribution instead of a
point in the latent space. By identifying the slow feature
drift phenomenon, we directly inject memorized features
into prototypes to approximate variational prototype sampling. The proposed VPL can simulate sample-to-sample
comparisons within the classification framework, encouraging the SGD solver to be more exploratory, while boosting performance. Moreover, VPL is conceptually simple,
easy to implement, computationally efficient and memory
saving. We present extensive experimental results on popular benchmarks, which demonstrate the superiority of the
proposed VPL method over the state-of-the-art competitors.

1. Introduction
Recent state-of-the-art face recognition methods [35, 28,
45, 8, 41, 19] mainly focus on employing margin penalty
to enhance the discriminative feature embedding. The pioneering work [35] uses the Triplet loss to enforce faces
from the same class to be closer than faces from different
classes, by a clear margin in the Euclidean space. However,
* Equal contributions.
InsightFace is a nonprofit Github project for 2D and 3D face analysis.

(a) Prototype Learning

(b) Variational Prototype Learning

Figure 1: Difference between the Prototype Learning (PL) and
the proposed Variational Prototype Learning (VPL). The prototype
learning (e.g. softmax loss) employs sample-to-prototype comparisons and represents every class as a point in the latent space. By
contrast, the proposed VPL represents every class as a distribution in order to simulate sample-to-sample comparison within the
classification framework.

the sample-to-sample comparisons in the Triplet loss are
constrained to the local mini-batch, and therefore sophisticated mining strategies are required to choose an informative mini-batch [34, 35] and select representative triplets
within the mini-batch [52, 33, 40]. On large-scale datasets
[31, 13], there is a combinatorial explosion in the number of triplets, which results in an immensely complicated
mining step. To this end, margin-based softmax methods [28, 5, 45, 43, 8, 41, 19] introduce a margin penalty
into the prototype learning and conduct global comparisons
between training samples and class-wise prototypes. The
sample-to-prototype comparison is more efficient and stable
than the sample-to-sample comparison, as (a) the prototype
number is much smaller than the sample number, and (b)
both the class-wise prototype and the embedding network
are optimized in every iteration during training. In that manner, the prototypes try to memorize positive features and
forget negative features, while the embedding features try
to get close to positive prototypes and keep far apart from
negative prototypes.

11906

