The Multi-Temporal Urban Development SpaceNet Dataset
Adam Van Etten1 , Daniel Hogan1 , Jesus Martinez Manso2 ,
Jacob Shermeyer3 , Nicholas Weir4,† , Ryan Lewis4,†
1

3

In-Q-Tel CosmiQ Works, [avanetten, dhogan]@iqt.org; 2 Planet, jesus@planet.com;
Capella Space, jake.shermeyer@capellaspace.com; 4 Amazon, [weirnich, rstlewis]@amazon.com

Abstract
Satellite imagery analytics have numerous human development and disaster response applications, particularly
when time series methods are involved. For example, quantifying population statistics is fundamental to 67 of the 231
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals Indicators,
but the World Bank estimates that over 100 countries currently lack effective Civil Registration systems. To help address this deficit and develop novel computer vision methods for time series data, we present the Multi-Temporal
Urban Development SpaceNet (MUDS, also known as
SpaceNet 7) dataset. This open source dataset consists of
medium resolution (4.0m) satellite imagery mosaics, which
includes ≈ 24 images (one per month) covering > 100
unique geographies, and comprises > 40, 000 km2 of imagery and exhaustive polygon labels of building footprints
therein, totaling over 11M individual annotations. Each
building is assigned a unique identifier (i.e. address), which
permits tracking of individual objects over time. Label fidelity exceeds image resolution; this “omniscient labeling”
is a unique feature of the dataset, and enables surprisingly precise algorithmic models to be crafted. We demonstrate methods to track building footprint construction (or
demolition) over time, thereby directly assessing urbanization. Performance is measured with the newly developed SpaceNet Change and Object Tracking (SCOT) metric, which quantifies both object tracking as well as change
detection. We demonstrate that despite the moderate resolution of the data, we are able to track individual building
identifiers over time.

1. Introduction
Time series analysis of satellite imagery poses an interesting computer vision challenge, with many human development applications. We aim to advance this field through
the release of a large dataset aimed at enabling new methods

in this domain. Beyond its relevance for disaster response,
disease preparedness, and environmental monitoring, time
series analysis of satellite imagery poses unique technical
challenges often unaddressed by existing methods.
The MUDS dataset (also known as SpaceNet 7) consists
of imagery and precise building footprint labels over dynamic areas for two dozen months, with each building assigned a unique identifier (see Section 3 for further details).
In the algorithmic portion of this paper (Section 5), we focus on tracking building footprints to monitor construction
and demolition in satellite imagery time series. We aim to
identify all of the buildings in each image of the time series
and assign identifiers to track the buildings over time.
Timely, high-fidelity foundational maps are critical to a
great many domains. For example, high-resolution maps
help identify communities at risk for natural and humanderived disasters. Furthermore, identifying new building
construction in satellite imagery is an important factor in
establishing population estimates in many areas (e.g. [8]).
Population estimates are also essential for assessing burden
on infrastructure, from roads[4] to medical facilities [28].
The inclusion of individual building identifiers is a
unique feature of the MUDS dataset, and enables potential
improvements upon existing course population estimates.
Without unique identifiers building tracking is not possible;
this means that over a given area one can only determine
how many new buildings exist. By tracking unique building identifiers one can determine which buildings changed
(whose properties such as precise location, area, etc. can
be correlated with features such as road access, distance to
hospitals, etc.), thus providing a much more granular view
into population growth.
Several unusual features of satellite imagery (e.g. small
object size, high object density, dramatic image-to-image
difference compared to frame-to-frame variation in video
object tracking, different color band wavelengths and
counts, limited texture information, drastic changes in shadows, and repeating patterns) are relevant to other tasks and
† This work was completed prior to Nicholas Weir, Ryan Lewis joining Amazon.

16398

