Improving Sign Language Translation with Monolingual Data
by Sign Back-Translation
Hao Zhou1
1

Wengang Zhou1,2,∗ Weizhen Qi1

Junfu Pu1

Houqiang Li1,2,∗

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center

zhouh156@mail.ustc.edu.cn, zhwg@ustc.edu.cn, {weizhen,pjh}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, lihq@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Despite existing pioneering works on sign language
translation (SLT), there is a non-trivial obstacle, i.e., the
limited quantity of parallel sign-text data. To tackle this
parallel data bottleneck, we propose a sign back-translation
(SignBT) approach, which incorporates massive spoken
language texts into SLT training. With a text-to-gloss translation model, we first back-translate the monolingual text to
its gloss sequence. Then, the paired sign sequence is generated by splicing pieces from an estimated gloss-to-sign
bank at the feature level. Finally, the synthetic parallel data
serves as a strong supplement for the end-to-end training of
the encoder-decoder SLT framework.
To promote the SLT research, we further contribute CSLDaily, a large-scale continuous SLT dataset. It provides
both spoken language translations and gloss-level annotations. The topic revolves around people’s daily lives (e.g.,
travel, shopping, medical care), the most likely SLT application scenario. Extensive experimental results and analysis
of SLT methods are reported on CSL-Daily. With the proposed sign back-translation method, we obtain a substantial
improvement over previous state-of-the-art SLT methods.

1. Introduction
Sign language serves as the primary communication
method among the deaf community. However, in a society where the spoken language is primarily used, the deaf
people face issues of social isolation and communication
barrier in daily lives [4]. Due to the significant social impact and the cross-modality challenge, sign language understanding has been attracting more and more research attention [1, 4, 10, 17, 22, 26, 37, 48]. In this paper, we concentrate on sign language translation (SLT), which aims to automatically generate the spoken language translation from a
∗ Corresponding authors: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li

http://home.ustc.edu.cn/˜zhouh156/dataset/csl-daily

Sign Language Parallel Data

Feature
Gloss

Text

什么(what)

时间(time)

飞机 (plane) 迟到 (late)

不 (no)

飞机什么时候出发？不要迟到。
(What time will the plane leave? Don’t be late.)
Spoken Language Text
SLT
SignBT

Figure 1. Pipelines of sign language translation (SLT) and sign
back-translation (SignBT). Our SignBT approach establishes an
inverse path of SLT and uses it to enrich text-feature pairs from
external monolingual data for SLT training.

continuous sign video.
Considering the different grammar rules and vocabularies of sign language and spoken language, SLT is typically
treated as a sequence-to-sequence learning problem. Existing SLT systems typically rely on the encoder-decoder
architectures [10, 11, 25]. Despite the success of encoderdecoder networks in neural machine translation (NMT), the
translation quality in SLT is limited, which is partially attributed to the huge gap in the training data size. While
the News Translation task [3] provides over 77M EnglishGerman data, the only suitable SLT dataset PHOENIX2014T [10] has less than 9K Sign-German data. To alleviate
it, there are two possible solutions, i.e., collecting millions
of parallel pairs or introducing monolingual data. The high
charge of sign video collection and annotation makes the
former a luxury. In contrast, making good use of accessible
monolingual texts is a promising direction for SLT.
In this work, we propose to generate synthetic parallel
data with monolingual texts for SLT training. Our method
is inspired by the success of text-to-text back-translation in
NMT [36]. They train an inverse model with available pairs
and use it to back-translate the monolingual data. However, when it goes to SLT, the key challenge becomes how to
bridge the huge domain gap between text and vision signals.
A straightforward idea is to generate the sign video from a

1316

