Extreme Low-Light Environment-Driven Image Denoising over Permanently
Shadowed Lunar Regions with a Physical Noise Model
Ben Moseley
University of Oxford
Oxford, UK

Valentin Bickel
ETH Zurich/ MPS Goettingen
Zurich/ Goettingen, CH/ GER

bmoseley@robots.ox.ac.uk

Ignacio G. López-Francos
NASA Ames Research Center
Moffett Field, CA, USA

Abstract
Recently, learning-based approaches have achieved impressive results in the field of low-light image denoising.
Some state of the art approaches employ a rich physical
model to generate realistic training data. However, the performance of these approaches ultimately depends on the realism of the physical model, and many works only concentrate on everyday photography. In this work we present a
denoising approach for extremely low-light images of permanently shadowed regions (PSRs) on the lunar surface,
taken by the Narrow Angle Camera on board the Lunar
Reconnaissance Orbiter satellite. Our approach extends
existing learning-based approaches by combining a physical noise model of the camera with real noise samples and
training image scene selection based on 3D ray tracing to
generate realistic training data. We also condition our denoising model on the camera’s environmental metadata at
the time of image capture (such as the camera’s temperature and age), showing that this improves performance. Our
quantitative and qualitative results show that our method
strongly outperforms the existing calibration routine for the
camera and other baselines. Our results could significantly
impact lunar science and exploration, for example by aiding
the identification of surface water-ice and reducing uncertainty in rover and human traverse planning into PSRs.

1. Introduction
Low-light image denoising is an important field of computer vision. Low-light environments occur in many different applications, such as night-time photography, astronomy and microscopy [4, 7, 50], and the images captured

Loveneesh Rana
University of Luxembourg
Luxembourg, LUX

usually have very poor quality. Fundamentally, this is due
to the very limited number of photons arriving at the camera, meaning that noise sources such as photon noise and
sensor-related noise strongly dominate [7, 22].
Direct approaches for removing these noise sources include increasing the exposure time or by using burst photography and aligning and combining the images during
post-processing. However, these approaches have significant downsides; for example longer exposure times can
cause blurring and burst photography can still be sensitive
to dynamic scenes [18, 20]. Instead, image denoising can be
applied, for which there exists a rich literature [3, 13, 11].
An emerging approach is to use learning-based denoising methods on short exposure images [4, 46, 48]. Whilst
promising, a disadvantage is that large amounts of labelled
training data are often required to prevent overfitting, which
can be expensive to collect, or unavailable [4, 50, 1]. Some
recent methods alleviate this problem by using physical
models to generate synthetic training data [46], but ultimately the generalisation performance depends on the realism of the physical model.
Furthermore, many recent works focus on denoising
low-light images of everyday scenes [4, 20, 46, 35]. In
this work we present a denoising approach for a specialised
set of extremely low-light images; namely those of the Permanently Shadowed Regions (PSRs) on the lunar surface,
taken by the Narrow Angle Camera (NAC) on board the
Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter (LRO) satellite [6, 38]. Improving the quality of these images could have significant
scientific impact, for example by enabling the detection of
science targets and obstacles in PSRs, reducing the uncertainty in rover and human traverse planning and aiding the
identification of surface-exposed water-ice [26].

6317

