LiDAR R-CNN: An Efficient and Universal 3D Object Detector
Zhichao Li* Feng Wang* Naiyan Wang
TuSimple
{leeisabug, feng.wff, winsty}@gmail.com

Abstract
LiDAR-based 3D detection in point cloud is essential in
the perception system of autonomous driving. In this paper, we present LiDAR R-CNN, a second stage detector that
can generally improve any existing 3D detector. To fulfill the real-time and high precision requirement in practice,
we resort to point-based approach other than the popular
voxel-based approach. However, we find an overlooked issue in previous work: Naively applying point-based methods like PointNet could make the learned features ignore
the size of proposals. To this end, we analyze this problem
in detail and propose several methods to remedy it, which
bring significant performance improvement. Comprehensive experimental results on real-world datasets like Waymo Open Dataset (WOD) and KITTI dataset with various
popular detectors demonstrate the universality and superiority of our LiDAR R-CNN. In particular, based on one
variant of PointPillars, our method could achieve new stateof-the-art results with minor cost. Codes will be released at
https://github.com/tusimple/LiDAR_RCNN .

1. Introduction
For autonomous vehicles and robots, estimating the
7 Degrees-of-Freedom (location, dimension, and orientation) state of the surrounding objects in complicated realworld environments is a vital task. Recently, LiDAR-based
3D object detection has been received increasing attention [29, 25, 23] due to its ability of direct 3D measurement. However, compared with the well developed 2D image
detection, LiDAR-based 3D detection still suffers from the
intrinsic difficulties of point sparsity and large search space
in 3D space.
Given that point clouds from LiDAR are irregular, most
3D detection methods transform such data into regular 3D
voxel grids [33, 52, 44, 12] or collections of projected 2D
view [11, 3, 46, 17, 45, 16, 18]. While these methods can

easily take advantage of the ordered data representation by
using regular 2D or 3D convolution for feature extraction
conveniently, the quantization error in the construction of
voxel or multi-view features limits their performance. On
the contrary, point-based methods [28, 30, 41, 26, 48] can
learn features from the raw point cloud, but usually, they
need complicated and inefficient operations [28] to aggregate local information. Consequently, these point-based
methods are mostly fused with other representations other
than individually used for 3D object detection.
In this paper, we are more interested in another setting
like R-CNN [9]: We already have a set of proposals in
3D space and seek to refine them. Therefore, we name
our method LiDAR R-CNN. When confronting this usage,
PointNet becomes our first choice since the network only
needs to process the points from a single object in a small
region. Compared with the DNN features with rich semantic information, the original point cloud contains the most
accurate location information. Intuitively, applying PointNet [27] on the raw point cloud for detection is straightforward. However, we find that the results of such a naive
implementation are unsatisfactory. Through careful analysis, we find an intriguing size ambiguity problem: Different
from voxel-based methods that equally divide the space into
fixed size, PointNet only aggregates the features from points
while ignoring the spacing in 3D space. Nevertheless, the
spacing encodes essential information, such as the scale of
the object. To remedy this issue, we propose a series of
solutions and prove their effectiveness through detailed experiments. Comprehensive evaluation results on the Waymo
Open Dataset(WOD) [34] prove that our proposed LiDAR
R-CNN can improve the performance of various off-theshelf detectors significantly and consistently. With a welltuned PointPillars model, we even outperform the state-ofthe-art models.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
• We propose an R-CNN style second-stage detector for
3D object detection based on PointNet. Our method is
plug-and-play to any existing 3D detector, and needs
no re-training to the base detectors.

*The first two authors contribute equally to this work.

7546

