Face Forensics in the Wild
Tianfei Zhou1 , Wenguan Wang1 * , Zhiyuan Liang2 , Jianbing Shen3,2
1

ETH Zurich

2

Beijing Institute of Technology

3

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

https://github.com/tfzhou/FFIW

Abstract
On existing public benchmarks, face forgery detection
techniques have achieved great success. However, when
used in multi-person videos, which often contain many people active in the scene with only a small subset having been
manipulated, their performance remains far from being satisfactory. To take face forgery detection to a new level,
we construct a novel large-scale dataset, called FFIW10K,
which comprises 10,000 high-quality forgery videos, with
an average of three human faces in each frame. The
manipulation procedure is fully automatic, controlled by
a domain-adversarial quality assessment network, making
our dataset highly scalable with low human cost. In addition, we propose a novel algorithm to tackle the task
of multi-person face forgery detection. Supervised by
only video-level label, the algorithm explores multiple instance learning and learns to automatically attend to tampered faces. Our algorithm outperforms representative approaches for both forgery classification and localization on
FFIW10K, and also shows high generalization ability on existing benchmarks. We hope that our dataset and study will
help the community to explore this new field in more depth.

1. Introduction
The rise of synthetic audiovisual media is forcing us towards a critical and unsettling realization: our belief that
video and audio recordings are reliable representations of
reality is no longer tenable. In particular, since emerging
in 2017, the deepfake phenomenon has grown rapidly, requiring face forensics to recognize potentially manipulated
facial regions in images and videos. Accurate face forgery
detection1 would have an immediate and far-reaching impact in alleviating the malicious intents of deepfakes, such
as, face recognition attacks [42] and fake news [36, 4].
To help with this, several benchmarks have been established. The pioneering large-scale dataset, i.e., FaceForensics++ [63], has greatly contributed to spurring interest and
* Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang.
1 In this work, “forgery” refers to altering imagery by swapping faces.

Figure 1: Representative examples from FFIW10K , showing
multi-person video frames with only a few faces being forged.
Can you recognize the manipulated ones?2

progress in the area of face forgery detection. However,
as algorithms evolve, there have been signs of performance
saturation on this dataset [62]. More recent datasets (e.g.,
DeeperForensics-1.0 [37], DFDC [22], Celeb-DF[50]) thus
employ more advanced synthesis techniques to produce
highly realistic tampered faces. Even so, all previous
datasets are subject to a significant limitation: they have a
strong selection bias [69] to favor trimmed videos, each of
which involves only one person. Thus, they provide insufficient representation of true visual world, which makes them
inappropriate and unreliable to evaluate face forgery detection models in real-world, multi-person circumstances.
To take the research of face forensics into a new level, we
introduce a new large-scale dataset, called FFIW10K, promoting empirical study of face forgery detection in multiperson scenarios. In FFIW10K, each video involves multiple
individuals but only some, not all, faces are manipulated
(see Fig. 1). This raises a significant challenge to current
techniques: even for the fake videos, real faces are still in
the majority. In particular, FFIW10K features 10,000 highfidelity manipulated videos, with 12 seconds long on average, resulting in 33 hours of video in total. In comparison
with existing datasets, FFIW10K has several distinguished
features: i) Real-world complexity. The number of identities
in each frame ranges from one to fifteen, with three on average, yielding a better representation of real visual scenes.
ii) High fidelity with low human cost. The synthesis quality is controlled by a quality assessment network (Q-Net),
which provides an effortless way to measure the realism of
2 Answer: The middle person in the left image and the rightmost of the
back row in the right image are fake.

5778

