Exploiting Edge-Oriented Reasoning for 3D Point-based Scene Graph Analysis
Chaoyi Zhang
University of Sydney

Jianhui Yu
University of Sydney

Yang Song
University of New South Wales

chaoyi.zhang@sydney.edu.au

jianhui.yu@sydney.edu.au

yang.song1@unsw.edu.au

Weidong Cai
University of Sydney
tom.cai@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Scene understanding is a critical problem in computer
vision. In this paper, we propose a 3D point-based scene
graph generation (SGGpoint ) framework to effectively
bridge perception and reasoning to achieve scene understanding via three sequential stages, namely scene graph
construction, reasoning, and inference. Within the reasoning stage, an EDGE-oriented Graph Convolutional Network (EdgeGCN) is created to exploit multi-dimensional
edge features for explicit relationship modeling, together
with the exploration of two associated twinning interaction mechanisms between nodes and edges for the independent evolution of scene graph representations. Overall,
our integrated SGGpoint framework is established to seek
and infer scene structures of interest from both real-world
and synthetic 3D point-based scenes. Our experimental
results show promising edge-oriented reasoning effects on
scene graph generation studies. We also demonstrate our
method advantage on several traditional graph representation learning benchmark datasets, including the node-wise
classification on citation networks and whole-graph recognition problems for molecular analysis.

1. Introduction
Scene understanding is intrinsically close to the essence
of computer vision. It simulates human visual system in
recognizing the miscellaneous clues concealed in the complex visual world, succeeded by understanding what we perceive in the visual scenes surrounding us [8]. This process
could be integrated and assisted with an efficient use of semantic scene graph (SG), which has its popularity welldemonstrated within the computer graphics community, via
depicting the objects and their inner structural relationships
Our project page: https://SGGpoint .github.io

7
door
8
hanger

3
wall
4
wall

10
wardrobe

5
bathtub

1
floor

14
mirror

15
chandelier

9
wardrobe

11
rug

13
shelving

12
sink

2
wall

Support

6
toilet

Surround
Next-to

Figure 1. 3D Point-based Scene Graph Generation (SGGpoint )
takes as inputs real-world or synthetic 3D scenes S (left) and
class-agnostic instance mask M (middle) to inference a scene
graph G (right). M and G above are aligned to the same spatial
layout, sharing a unified instance color encoding.

(scene layouts) as its nodes and edges, respectively.
Unlike most of the successful works proposed for 2D
SG studies [49, 46, 24, 15], this paper focuses on 3D pointbased semantic SG analysis – an emerging 3D visual recognition task that has not been well-explored yet. Such methods could provide great aid for arising cross-domain vision tasks including 2D-3D scene retrieval [38], 3D visual
grounding [4, 3], and scene captioning [5], which would
subsequently benefit real-life applications such as creative
interior decoration designs, self-driving autonomous vehicles, or other AI-enriched indoor/outdoor industries.
Within the rising progression of 3D point-based semantic SG analysis, the research interests have gradually
shifted from object-centric point cloud learning tasks, such
as 3D object detection [32, 48, 33], instance segmenta-

9705

