Body Meshes as Points
Jianfeng Zhang1

Dongdong Yu2
1

Jun Hao Liew1
2

National University of Singapore

{zhangjianfeng,liewjunhao}@u.nus.edu

ByteDance AI Lab

Xuecheng Nie3
3

Jiashi Feng1

Yitu Technology

yudongdong@bytedance.com

elefjia@nus.edu.sg

Abstract
We consider the challenging multi-person 3D body mesh
estimation task in this work. Existing methods are mostly
two-stage based—one stage for person localization and
the other stage for individual body mesh estimation, leading to redundant pipelines with high computation cost and
degraded performance for complex scenes (e.g., occluded
person instances). In this work, we present a singlestage model, Body Meshes as Points (BMP), to simplify the
pipeline and lift both efficiency and performance. In particular, BMP adopts a new method that represents multiple
person instances as points in the spatial-depth space where
each point is associated with one body mesh. Hinging on
such representations, BMP can directly predict body meshes
for multiple persons in a single stage by concurrently localizing person instance points and estimating the corresponding body meshes. To better reason about depth ordering
of all the persons within the same scene, BMP designs a
simple yet effective inter-instance ordinal depth loss to obtain depth-coherent body mesh estimation. BMP also introduces a novel keypoint-aware augmentation to enhance
model robustness to occluded person instances. Comprehensive experiments on benchmarks Panoptic, MuPoTS3D and 3DPW clearly demonstrate the state-of-the-art efficiency of BMP for multi-person body mesh estimation, together with outstanding accuracy. Code can be found at:
https://github.com/jfzhang95/BMP.

1. Introduction
3D human body mesh recovery aims to reconstruct the
3D full-body mesh of the person instance from images
or videos. As a fundamental yet challenging task, it has
been widely applied for action recognition [63], virtual tryon [41], motion retargeting [35], etc. With the recent notable progress in single-person based full-body mesh recovery [24, 27, 3, 25], a more realistic and challenging setting has attracted increasing attention, i.e. to estimate body
meshes for multiple persons from a single image.
Existing methods for multi-person mesh recovery are

Figure 1. Our single-stage solution. The proposed model represents each person instance as the center point of its body. Instance
localization and body mesh recovery are then directly predicted
from the center point features, enabling simultaneous reconstruction of multiple persons in a single stage. Best viewed in color.

mainly two-stage solutions, including top-down [20] and
bottom-up [69] approaches. The former first localizes person instances via a person detector, based on which it then
recovers the 3D meshes individually; the bottom-up approach estimates person keypoints at first, and then jointly
reconstructs multiple 3D human bodies in the image via
constrained optimization [69]. Though with notable accuracy, the above paradigms are inefficient with computational redundancy. For instance, the former one estimates
body mesh for each person separately, and consequently the
total computation cost linearly grows with the number of
persons in the image, while the latter requires grouping the
keypoints into corresponding persons and inferring the body
meshes iteratively, leading to high computational cost.
Targeted at a more efficient and compact pipeline, we
consider exploring a single-stage solution. Despite the recent popularity and promising performance of single-stage
methods on 2D keypoints estimation [43] and object detection tasks [75, 59], a single-stage pipeline for multi-person
mesh recovery is barely explored as it remains unclear how
to effectively integrate both person localization and mesh
recovery steps within a single stage. In this work, we propose a new instance representation for multi-person body
mesh recovery that represents multiple person instances as
points in the spatial-depth space where each point is associated with one body mesh. Such an representation allows
effective parallelism of person localization and body mesh
recovery. Based on it, we develop a new model architecture that exploits shareable features for both localization
and mesh recovery and thus achieve a single-stage solution.
In particular, the model has two parallel branches, one

546

