Differentiable Multi-Granularity Human Representation Learning for
Instance-Aware Human Semantic Parsing
Tianfei Zhou1 , Wenguan Wang1 * , Si Liu2 , Yi Yang3 , Luc Van Gool1
1

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich

2

Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University

3

University of Technology Sydney

https://github.com/tfzhou/MG-HumanParsing

Abstract
To address the challenging task of instance-aware human part parsing, a new bottom-up regime is proposed to
learn category-level human semantic segmentation as well
as multi-person pose estimation in a joint and end-to-end
manner. It is a compact, efficient and powerful framework
that exploits structural information over different human
granularities and eases the difficulty of person partitioning. Specifically, a dense-to-sparse projection field, which
allows explicitly associating dense human semantics with
sparse keypoints, is learnt and progressively improved over
the network feature pyramid for robustness. Then, the difficult pixel grouping problem is cast as an easier, multiperson joint assembling task. By formulating joint association as maximum-weight bipartite matching, a differentiable
solution is developed to exploit projected gradient descent
and Dykstra’s cyclic projection algorithm. This makes our
method end-to-end trainable and allows back-propagating
the grouping error to directly supervise multi-granularity
human representation learning. This is distinguished from
current bottom-up human parsers or pose estimators which
require sophisticated post-processing or heuristic greedy
algorithms. Experiments on three instance-aware human
parsing datasets show that our model outperforms other
bottom-up alternatives with much more efficient inference.

1. Introduction
Instance-aware human parsing, i.e., partitioning humans
into semantic parts (e.g., torso, head) and associating each
part with the corresponding human instance, has only
started to be tackled in the literature (dating back to [31]).
This article addresses this task through a new regime,
which learns to jointly estimate human poses (i.e., a sparse,
skeleton-based human representation) and segment human
parts (i.e., a pixel-wise, fine-grained human representation)
in an end-to-end trainable, bottom-up fashion.
* Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang.

Figure 1: Overview of our new bottom-up regime for instanceaware human semantic parsing. By learning 1) categorylevel human semantic parsing, 2) body-to-joint projection, and 3)
bottom-up keypoint detection and association in a joint and end-toend manner, our model tackles the task in a differentiable, multigranularity human representation learning framework.

In the field of human parsing, the idea of leveraging human pose as structural knowledge to facilitate human understanding has been exploited for years [56]. However,
previous efforts only focus on the instance-agnostic setting [54, 53, 15, 37, 64, 48]. Further, most of them directly
utilize human joints (pre-detected from off-the-shelf pose
estimators) as extra inputs [56, 54], or simply generate keypoint estimations as a by-product [15, 64]. In sharp contrast,
by learning to associate semantic person pixels with their
closest person instance joints, our model seamlessly injects
bottom-up pose estimation into instance-aware human semantic learning and inference. Thus, our human parser can
make use of the complementary cues from sparse human
joints and dense part semantics, and push further the envelope of human understanding in unconstrained environments. This represents an early effort to formulate instanceaware human parsing and multi-person pose estimation in a
bottom-up, differentiable, and multi-granularity human representation learning framework (see Fig. 1).

1622

