Sparse R-CNN: End-to-End Object Detection with Learnable Proposals
Peize Sun1∗ , Rufeng Zhang2∗ , Yi Jiang3∗ , Tao Kong3 , Chenfeng Xu4 , Wei Zhan4 ,
Masayoshi Tomizuka4 , Lei Li3 , Zehuan Yuan3 , Changhu Wang3 , Ping Luo1
1

3

The University of Hong Kong 2 Tongji University
ByteDance AI Lab 4 University of California, Berkeley
k anchor
boxes
W

…

N predicted
proposals

…

H

k anchor
boxes

N learned
proposals

…

W
…

(a) Dense: RetinaNet

class
box

class
box

class
box

H

(c) Sparse: Sparse R-CNN

(b) Dense-to-Sparse: Faster R-CNN

Figure 1 – Comparisons of different object detection pipelines. (a) In dense detectors, HW k object candidates enumerate on all image
grids, e.g. RetinaNet [23]. (b) In dense-to-sparse detectors, they select a small set of N candidates from dense HW k object candidates,
and then extract image features within corresponding regions by pooling operation, e.g. Faster R-CNN [30]. (c) Our proposed Sparse
R-CNN, directly provides a small set of N learned object proposals. Here N ≪ HW k.

50

Abstract

* Equal contribution.

45
500 epochs

40
COCO AP

We present Sparse R-CNN, a purely sparse method for
object detection in images. Existing works on object detection heavily rely on dense object candidates, such as
k anchor boxes pre-defined on all grids of image feature
map of size H × W . In our method, however, a fixed
sparse set of learned object proposals, total length of N ,
are provided to object recognition head to perform classification and location. By eliminating HW k (up to hundreds
of thousands) hand-designed object candidates to N (e.g.
100) learnable proposals, Sparse R-CNN completely avoids
all efforts related to object candidates design and many-toone label assignment. More importantly, final predictions
are directly output without non-maximum suppression postprocedure. Sparse R-CNN demonstrates accuracy, run-time
and training convergence performance on par with the wellestablished detector baselines on the challenging COCO
dataset, e.g., achieving 45.0 AP in standard 3× training schedule and running at 22 fps using ResNet-50 FPN
model. We hope our work could inspire re-thinking the convention of dense prior in object detectors. The code is available at: https://github.com/PeizeSun/SparseR-CNN .

35
30
25
20

3x schedule

15
0

20

40

60
80
100
Training Epochs

RetinaNet
Faster R-CNN
DETR
Sparse R-CNN
120

140

Figure 2 – Convergence curves of RetinaNet, Faster R-CNN,
DETR and Sparse R-CNN on COCO val2017 [24]. Sparse
R-CNN achieves competitive performance in terms of training
efficiency and detection quality.

1. Introduction
Object detection aims at localizing a set of objects and
recognizing their categories in an image. Dense prior has
always been cornerstone to success in detectors. In classic
computer vision, the sliding-window paradigm, in which a
classifier is applied on a dense image grid, is leading de-

14454

