Landmark Regularization: Ranking Guided Super-Net Training in Neural
Architecture Search
Kaicheng Yu∗
CVLab, EPFL

René Ranftl
Intelligent Systems Lab, Intel

Mathieu Salzmann
CVLab, EPFL

kaicheng.yu.yt@gmail.com

rene.ranftl@intel.com

mathieu.salzmann@epfl.ch

Abstract

Super-net

Sample

Update

Poor correlation

e

∗ This work was partially done during an internship at Intel, and supported in part by the Swiss National Science Foundation.

NAS
algorithm

e

pl

Modern algorithms for neural architecture search (NAS)
can now find architectures that outperform the humandesigned ones for many computer vision tasks [21, 42, 7,
34]. A driving factor behind this progress was the introduction of parameter sharing [27], which reduces the search
time from thousands of GPU hours to just a few and has thus
become the backbone of most state-of-the-art NAS frameworks [3, 49, 5, 23]. At the heart of all these methods is a
shared network, a.k.a. super-net, that encompasses all architectures within the search space.
To train the super-net, NAS algorithms essentially sample individual architectures from the super-net and train
them for one or a few steps. The sampling can be
done explicitly, with strategies such as reinforcement learning [27, 6], evolutionary algorithms [15, 39], or random
sampling [52, 18], or implicitly, by relying on a differentiable parameterization of the architecture space [19, 22, 5,

luat

m

1. Introduction

Eva

Stand-alone
Rank

Sa

Weight sharing has become a de facto standard in neural architecture search because it enables the search to be
done on commodity hardware. However, recent works have
empirically shown a ranking disorder between the performance of stand-alone architectures and that of the corresponding shared-weight networks. This violates the main
assumption of weight-sharing NAS algorithms, thus limiting their effectiveness. We tackle this issue by proposing
a regularization term that aims to maximize the correlation between the performance rankings of the shared-weight
network and that of the standalone architectures using a
small set of landmark architectures. We incorporate our
regularization term into three different NAS algorithms and
show that it consistently improves performance across algorithms, search-spaces, and tasks.

Super-net
Rank

Search space

Regularize
>
Landmark architectures
Stand-alone Rank

>

Super-net
NAS
algorithm

Evaluate

te

da

Up

Better correlation

Figure 1: Traditional super-net training leads to poor correlation
between relative stand-alone performance and super-net performance (top). We sample landmark architectures and use their relative performance to guide training towards an improved ranking
and show that this improves the search performance (bottom).

42, 53]. Whether explicit or implicit, the underlying assumption of these methods is that the relative performance
of the individual architectures in the super-net is highly correlated with the performance of the same architectures when
they are trained in a stand-alone fashion. If this were the
case, one could then safely choose the best individual architecture from the super-net after the search and use it
for evaluation. However, this assumption was disproved
in [52, 54], who showed a correlation close to zero between the two rankings on complex search spaces [47, 22].
The major reason behind this is fairly intuitive: To be optimal, different individual architectures should have different
parameter values, which they cannot because the parameters are shared. Super-net training will thus not produce
the same results as stand-alone training. More importantly,
there is no guarantee that even the relative ranking of the
architectures will be maintained. While for simple, linear
search spaces the ranking can be improved by using a carefully crafted sampling strategy [8, 9], addressing the ranking disorder for more realistic, complex search spaces remains an open problem [50].
In this paper, we propose to explicitly encourage archi-

13723

