3D Object Detection with Pointformer
Xuran Pan1 * Zhuofan Xia1 * Shiji Song1 Li Erran Li2† Gao Huang1‡
1
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology (BNRist),
2
Alexa AI, Amazon / Columbia University
{pxr18, xzf20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, erranlli@gmail.com,
{shijis, gaohuang}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Image of the scene

Abstract
Feature learning for 3D object detection from point
clouds is very challenging due to the irregularity of 3D point
cloud data. In this paper, we propose Pointformer, a Transformer backbone designed for 3D point clouds to learn features effectively. Specifically, a Local Transformer module
is employed to model interactions among points in a local
region, which learns context-dependent region features at
an object level. A Global Transformer is designed to learn
context-aware representations at the scene level. To further capture the dependencies among multi-scale representations, we propose Local-Global Transformer to integrate
local features with global features from higher resolution.
In addition, we introduce an efficient coordinate refinement
module to shift down-sampled points closer to object centroids, which improves object proposal generation. We use
Pointformer as the backbone for state-of-the-art object detection models and demonstrate significant improvements
over original models on both indoor and outdoor datasets.

1. Introduction
3D object detection in point clouds is essential for many
real-world applications such as autonomous driving [10]
and augmented reality [18]. Compared to images, 3D point
clouds can provide detailed geometry and capture 3D structure of the scene. On the other hand, point clouds are irregular, which can not be processed by powerful deep learning models, such as convolutional neural networks directly.
This poses a big challenge for effective feature learning.
The common feature processing methods in 3D detection can be roughly categorized into three types, based on
the form of point cloud representations. Voxel-based ap* Equal contribution.
† Work done prior to Amazon.
‡ Corresponding author.

Top-50 attention

Ground truth

Top-100 attention

Top-200 attention

Figure 1. Attention maps directly from Pointformer block,
darker blue indicates stronger attention. For the key point
(star), Pointformer first focuses on the local region of the same
object (the back of the chair), then spreads the attention to other
regions (the legs), finally attends to points from other objects globally (other chairs), leveraging both local and global dependencies.

proaches [28, 12, 42] gridify the irregular point clouds into
regular voxels and are followed by sparse 3D convolutions
to learn high dimensional features. Though effective, voxelbased approaches face the dilemma between efficiency and
accuracy. Specifically, using smaller voxels gains more precision, but suffers from higher computational cost. Conversely, using larger voxels misses potential local details in
the crowded voxels.
Alternatively, point-based approaches [25], inspired by
the success of PointNet [21] and its variants, consume raw
points directly to learn 3D representations, which mitigates
the drawback of converting point clouds to some regular
structures. Leveraging learning techniques for point sets,
point-based approaches avoid voxelization-induced information loss and take advantage of the sparsity in point
clouds by only computing on valid data points. Nevertheless, due to the irregularity of point cloud data, point-based
learning operations have to be permutation-invariant and
adaptive to the input size. To achieve this, it learns simple symmetric functions (e.g. using point-wise feedforward
networks with pooling functions) which highly restricts its
representation power.

7463

