Saliency-Guided Image Translation
Lai Jiang1,2 , Mai Xu1 *, Xiaofei Wang1 , Leonid Sigal2
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
Department of Computer Science, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC Canada
1

{jianglai.china, MaiXu, xfwang}@buaa.edu.cn, lsigal@cs.ubc.ca

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a novel task for saliencyguided image translation, with the goal of image-to-image
translation conditioned on the user specified saliency map.
To address this problem, we develop a novel Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-based model, called SalG-GAN.
Given the original image and target saliency map, SalGGAN can generate a translated image that satisfies the target saliency map. In SalG-GAN, a disentangled representation framework is proposed to encourage the model to
learn diverse translations for the same target saliency condition. A saliency-based attention module is introduced as
a special attention mechanism for facilitating the developed
structures of saliency-guided generator, saliency cue encoder and saliency-guided global and local discriminators.
Furthermore, we build a synthetic dataset and a real-world
dataset with labeled visual attention for training and evaluating our SalG-GAN. The experimental results over both
datasets verify the effectiveness of our model for saliencyguided image translation.

1. Introduction
Conditional image generation has gained signiﬁcant attention in recent years, especially in light of the progress
in Generative Adversarial Network (GAN)-based, and, to a
lesser extent, Variational Auto Encoder (VAE)-based generative methods. Impressive results have been achieved in
generating high-quality images from different (conditioning) information such as text [6, 11], sketches [13], layouts [38], facial attributes [5, 34] and scene graphs [18].
Image-to-image translation [13, 20, 33, 40] has been a particularly successful sub-class of these methods. Imageto-image translation focuses on producing images that are
structurally similar to the original inputs but deviate in
stylistic [20] or texture detail [33]. This allows models such
as CycleGAN [40] and alternatives to produce images of
zebras from horses, or Picasso painting renditions from everyday photographs. More recent models [1] also provide
* Corresponding author.

ability to modify the image more structurally by, for example, adding speciﬁc objects. This of course requires a user
to select and place an object in a desired location. None
of these methods, however, allow for the ability to model
more abstract translations or image modiﬁcations that alter
the way in which the original image is perceived.
Consider someone taking a photo of a person outdoors.
In addition to the person, the image may contain other background or foreground objects (e.g., cars, motorcycle) that
distract attention of the viewer. How can this be mitigated
in “post-production”? Many techniques and strategies can
be employed. For example, distracting objects may simply be removed, using image inpainting techniques [36] on
the object regions. Alternatively, good bokeh (good quality blur) could be computationally applied to all pixels but
those belonging to the main subject, effectively modeling
shallow depth of ﬁeld which is a common technique in professional photography. Note that a bad bokeh (a distracting
blur) may actually have an adverse effect toward the desired
goal. Further, a color pallet of either distracting objects or
the subject itself maybe altered to make the subject more
distinctive. These are just some of the multitude of ways
that an image maybe altered to achieve a desired effect. Lets
consider what all of these strategies have in common, in effect they are trying to modify the saliency distribution of the
input image, by modifying image itself, to achieve a certain
visual effect. We posit that ability to manipulate an image
to achieve a desired saliency distribution is a core task for a
variety of high-level applications including image retargeting [26], object enhancement [27], distractor removal [7]
and intelligent advertisement [31]. To this end we propose
a novel task of saliency-guided image translation and corresponding benchmark datasets.
The goal of saliency-guided image translation is to perform image-to-image translation conditioned on the (user
speciﬁed) target image saliency map. Some examples
of saliency-guided image translation are shown in Figure 1. Despite long history of saliency in computer vision [14], few approaches exist that carry ability to perform saliency-driven image adjustments; most focus on

16509

