On Robustness and Transferability of Convolutional Neural Networks
Josip Djolonga∗ Jessica Yung* Michael Tschannen* Rob Romijnders Lucas Beyer
Alexander Kolesnikov Joan Puigcerver Matthias Minderer Alexander D’Amour
Dan Moldovan Sylvain Gelly Neil Houlsby Xiaohua Zhai Mario Lucic
Google Research, Brain Team

Abstract

Pre-training
design choices

Modern deep convolutional networks (CNNs) are often
criticized for not generalizing under distributional shifts.
However, several recent breakthroughs in transfer learning
suggest that these networks can cope with severe distribution
shifts and successfully adapt to new tasks from a few training
examples. In this work we study the interplay between outof-distribution and transfer performance of modern image
classification CNNs for the first time and investigate the
impact of the pre-training data size, the model scale, and the
data preprocessing pipeline. We find that increasing both
the training set and model sizes significantly improve the
distributional shift robustness. Furthermore, we show that,
perhaps surprisingly, simple changes in the preprocessing
such as modifying the image resolution can significantly
mitigate robustness issues in some cases. Finally, we outline
the shortcomings of existing robustness evaluation datasets
and introduce a synthetic dataset SI-S CORE we use for a
systematic analysis across factors of variation common in
visual data such as object size and position.

Training strategy

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional networks have attained impressive
results across a plethora of visual classification benchmarks
[36, 60] where the training and testing distributions match.
In the real world, however, the conditions in which the models are deployed can often differ significantly from the conditions in which the model was trained. It is thus imperative
to understand the impact dataset shifts [50] have on the performance of these models. This problem has gained a lot
of traction and several systematic investigations have shown
unexpectedly high sensitivity of image classifiers to various
dimensions, including photometric perturbations [27], natural perturbations obtained from video data [54], as well as
model-specific adversarial perturbations [23].
The problem of dataset shift, or out-of-distribution (OOD)
generalization, is closely related to a learning paradigm
∗ Shared first authorship.
Please send e-mail correspondence to
{josipd,lucic}@google.com.

Performance

Training dataset size
Model arch. and size
Testing pre-processing

[36]

In-distribution
[62, 63]

Transfer

[60]
Out-of-distribution

Figure 1: We explore the fundamental interplay between in-distribution
performance, out-of-distribution (OOD) performance, and transfer learning
performance (red arrows in the graph on the right), with respect to the major
design choices listed on the left. The relationship between in-distribution
and OOD performance is highly under-explored along these axes, whereas
that between OOD and transfer performance has not been studied before to
the best of our knowledge.

known as transfer learning [56, §13]. In transfer learning
we are interested in constructing models that can improve
their performance on some target task by leveraging data
from different related problems. In contrast, under dataset
shift one assumes that there are two environments, namely
training and testing [56], with the constraint that the model
cannot be adapted using data from the target environment.
As a consequence, the two environments typically have to
be more similar and their differences more structured than
in the transfer setting (c.f. Section 2).
In the context of transfer learning, detailed scaling laws
characterizing the interplay between the in-distribution and
transfer performance as a function of pre-training data set
size, model size, architectural choices such as normalization, and transfer strategy have been established recently
[37, 72, 36]. Model and dataset scale were identified as
key factors for transfer performance. The similarities between transfer learning and OOD generalization suggests
that these axes are also relevant for OOD generalization and
raises the question of what the corresponding scaling laws
are. While some axes have been partially explored by prior
work [27, 70], the big picture is largely unknown. Even more
importantly, is in-distribution performance enough to characterize OOD performance, or can transfer performance give
a more fine-grained characterization of OOD performance

16458

