Exploring Simple Siamese Representation Learning
Xinlei Chen

Kaiming He

Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

similarity

Abstract
Siamese networks have become a common structure in
various recent models for unsupervised visual representation learning. These models maximize the similarity between two augmentations of one image, subject to certain
conditions for avoiding collapsing solutions. In this paper,
we report surprising empirical results that simple Siamese
networks can learn meaningful representations even using
none of the following: (i) negative sample pairs, (ii) large
batches, (iii) momentum encoders. Our experiments show
that collapsing solutions do exist for the loss and structure,
but a stop-gradient operation plays an essential role in preventing collapsing. We provide a hypothesis on the implication of stop-gradient, and further show proof-of-concept
experiments verifying it. Our “SimSiam” method achieves
competitive results on ImageNet and downstream tasks. We
hope this simple baseline will motivate people to rethink the
roles of Siamese architectures for unsupervised representation learning. Code is made available.1

1. Introduction
Recently there has been steady progress in un-/selfsupervised representation learning, with encouraging results on multiple visual tasks (e.g., [2, 17, 8, 15, 7]). Despite
various original motivations, these methods generally involve certain forms of Siamese networks [4]. Siamese networks are weight-sharing neural networks applied on two or
more inputs. They are natural tools for comparing (including but not limited to “contrasting”) entities. Recent methods define the inputs as two augmentations of one image,
and maximize the similarity subject to different conditions.
An undesired trivial solution to Siamese networks is
all outputs “collapsing” to a constant. There have been
several general strategies for preventing Siamese networks
from collapsing. Contrastive learning [16], e.g., instantiated
in SimCLR [8], repulses different images (negative pairs)
while attracting the same image’s two views (positive pairs).
The negative pairs preclude constant outputs from the solution space. Clustering [5] is another way of avoiding constant output, and SwAV [7] incorporates online clustering
1 https://github.com/facebookresearch/simsiam

predictor h

encoder f

x1

stop-grad

encoder f

x2

image x
Figure 1. SimSiam architecture. Two augmented views of one
image are processed by the same encoder network f (a backbone
plus a projection MLP). Then a prediction MLP h is applied on one
side, and a stop-gradient operation is applied on the other side. The
model maximizes the similarity between both sides. It uses neither
negative pairs nor a momentum encoder.

into Siamese networks. Beyond contrastive learning and
clustering, BYOL [15] relies only on positive pairs but it
does not collapse in case a momentum encoder is used.
In this paper, we report that simple Siamese networks
can work surprisingly well with none of the above strategies
for preventing collapsing. Our model directly maximizes
the similarity of one image’s two views, using neither negative pairs nor a momentum encoder. It works with typical
batch sizes and does not rely on large-batch training. We
illustrate this “SimSiam” method in Figure 1.
Thanks to the conceptual simplicity, SimSiam can serve
as a hub that relates several existing methods. In a nutshell, our method can be thought of as “BYOL without the
momentum encoder”. Unlike BYOL but like SimCLR and
SwAV, our method directly shares the weights between the
two branches, so it can also be thought of as “SimCLR
without negative pairs”, and “SwAV without online clustering”. Interestingly, SimSiam is related to each method by
removing one of its core components. Even so, SimSiam
does not cause collapsing and can perform competitively.
We empirically show that collapsing solutions do exist,
but a stop-gradient operation (Figure 1) is critical to prevent such solutions. The importance of stop-gradient suggests that there should be a different underlying optimization problem that is being solved. We hypothesize that there
are implicitly two sets of variables, and SimSiam behaves
like alternating between optimizing each set. We provide

15750

