Lips Don’t Lie: A Generalisable and Robust Approach to Face Forgery Detection
Alexandros Haliassos1,†
1

Konstantinos Vougioukas1

Stavros Petridis1
2

Imperial College London

Maja Pantic1,2

Facebook London

{alexandros.haliassos14,k.vougioukas,stavros.petridis04,m.pantic}@imperial.ac.uk

Abstract
Although current deep learning-based face forgery detectors achieve impressive performance in constrained scenarios, they are vulnerable to samples created by unseen
manipulation methods. Some recent works show improvements in generalisation but rely on cues that are easily corrupted by common post-processing operations such as compression. In this paper, we propose LipForensics, a detection approach capable of both generalising to novel manipulations and withstanding various distortions. LipForensics
targets high-level semantic irregularities in mouth movements, which are common in many generated videos. It consists in first pretraining a spatio-temporal network to perform visual speech recognition (lipreading), thus learning
rich internal representations related to natural mouth motion. A temporal network is subsequently finetuned on fixed
mouth embeddings of real and forged data in order to detect
fake videos based on mouth movements without overfitting
to low-level, manipulation-specific artefacts. Extensive experiments show that this simple approach significantly surpasses the state-of-the-art in terms of generalisation to unseen manipulations and robustness to perturbations, as well
as shed light on the factors responsible for its performance.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep generative models, especially
Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [24], have enabled the use of off-the-shelf models that can produce ultrarealistic fake videos with little human effort or expertise.
Face manipulation methods in particular have raised considerable concerns due to their ability to alter a person’s identity [38, 30, 34], expression [52, 51, 44], or lip movements
[50, 57, 56] to match the face in a given target video. The
misuse of such technology can spread political propaganda,
defame individuals, or damage trust in journalism.
With the aid of recent releases of large-scale face forgery
† Corresponding author.

Train-time

Test-time

Stage 1: Which words are spoken?

Unseen forgery types

…

…

Stage 2: Are these real or fake?

…

Corrupted videos

…

Figure 1. Illustration of our training and testing objectives.
By leveraging semantically high-level, spatio-temporal representations learned via the task of lipreading, our face forgery detector
can handle both novel manipulations and common corruptions at
test-time.

datasets [46, 38, 30, 16], it is possible to train deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) to detect fake videos
[3, 25, 64, 4, 14, 45, 42, 36]. Despite excellent accuracy
on samples that are independent and identically distributed
to the training distribution, it is known that dramatic drops
in performance may be experienced when this stringent criterion is not met [35, 8, 43]. For example, detectors often
significantly underperform on novel forgery types. This understandably sparks concerns, as a deployed detector is unlikely to be exposed only to forgeries seen during training.
Moreover, they are often sensitive to common perturbations
such as compression and are, as a result, vulnerable to the
image processing pipelines on social networks.
Recent attempts to boost generalisation to novel forgeries include simple data augmentations [59], a two-branch
network that amplifies multi-band frequencies [41], an
autoencoder-like structure to serve as an anomaly detector [13, 17, 43], and patch-based classification to model
local patterns [8]. However, these methods still substantially overfit to seen manipulations. A particularly effective
method is Face X-ray [35], which proposes to predict the
blending boundary between the background image and the
inserted, altered face. Although it attains impressive gen-

5039

