RSG: A Simple but Effective Module for Learning Imbalanced Datasets
Jianfeng Wang1 , Thomas Lukasiewicz1 , Xiaolin Hu2 , Jianfei Cai3 , Zhenghua Xu4 *
University of Oxford1 Tsinghua University2 Monash University3 Hebei University of Technology4
{jianfeng.wang, thomas.lukasiewicz}@cs.ox.ac.uk, xlhu@tsinghua.edu.cn, jianfei.cai@monash.edu
zhenghua.xu@hebut.edu.cn

Abstract

Sample in the
frequent class

Imbalanced datasets widely exist in practice and are
a great challenge for training deep neural models with a
good generalization on infrequent classes. In this work, we
propose a new rare-class sample generator (RSG) to solve
this problem. RSG aims to generate some new samples
for rare classes during training, and it has in particular
the following advantages: (1) it is convenient to use and
highly versatile, because it can be easily integrated into
any kind of convolutional neural network, and it works well
when combined with different loss functions, and (2) it is
only used during the training phase, and therefore, no additional burden is imposed on deep neural networks during
the testing phase. In extensive experimental evaluations, we
verify the effectiveness of RSG. Furthermore, by leveraging
RSG, we obtain competitive results on Imbalanced CIFAR
and new state-of-the-art results on Places-LT, ImageNetLT, and iNaturalist 2018. The source code is available at
https://github.com/Jianf-Wang/RSG.

Sample in
the rare class

1. Introduction
Computer vision research has made great progress in the
past few years, driven by the development of deep convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [20, 27, 11, 15, 35, 33,
32, 5, 12, 28] as well as large-scale datasets of high quality [7, 22]. However, these large-scale datasets are usually
well-designed, and the number of instances in each class
is balanced artificially, which is inconsistent with the data
distributions in real-world scenaries. It is common that the
images of some categories are difficult to be collected, resulting in a dataset with an imbalanced data distribution. In
general, imbalanced datasets can be classified into two categories in terms of data distributions: long-tailed imbalanced
distributions [6] and step imbalanced distributions [2], which
will both be the focus of this work.
Generating new samples for rare classes during training
is a good solution [8, 36, 38], which is regarded as a data
* Corresponding author.

w1
w2

New generated
sample for the
rare class

RSG
Conv

w1
w2
New generated
feature maps of
samples

Conv
Feature maps

Figure 1: RSG in a simple CNN. The part in the dotted box is
only used during training. RSG learns to generate new rare-class
samples, which are used to reshape the decision boundary and
enlarge the feature space of rare classes.

augmentation method. However, these methods have different drawbacks, which limit their performance. Firstly,
some frameworks [8, 38] were not trained in an end-to-end
manner, so that the gradients cannot be backpropagated from
the top to the bottom of CNNs. But it is well known that
deep models can usually benefit from end-to-end training.
Secondly, some methods [8, 38] utilized variation information, such as different poses or lighting, among samples from
the same frequent class to generate new rare-class samples.
However, these methods did not introduce any mechanism to
ensure that the variation information obtained from frequent
classes is class-irrelevant. As a result, if the variation information (which still contains the class-relevant information)
is directly combined with real rare-class samples to generate
new rare-class ones for training the classifier and reshaping
decision boundaries, the performance will be hurt due to
the aliasing of different class-relevant information. Finally,
Wang et al. [36] use noise vectors to encode the variation
information mentioned above. But using such noise vectors
for generation can possibly generate unstable or low-quality
samples, since noise vectors are too random to reflect the
true variations among real images.1
1 Note that [38] has proposed to avoid sampling random vectors due to

their randomness, and [8] also has conducted experiments and verified that
using random vectors to generate new samples for training classifiers can
degrade the performance.

3784

