High-Resolution Photorealistic Image Translation in Real-Time:
A Laplacian Pyramid Translation Network

1

Jie Liang1,2∗, Hui Zeng1,2∗ and Lei Zhang1,2†
The HongKong Polytechnic University, 2 DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
{csjliang, cshzeng, cslzhang}@comp.polyu.edu.hk
Abstract

Existing image-to-image translation (I2IT) methods are
either constrained to low-resolution images or long inference time due to their heavy computational burden on the
convolution of high-resolution feature maps. In this paper, we focus on speeding-up the high-resolution photorealistic I2IT tasks based on closed-form Laplacian pyramid
decomposition and reconstruction. Speciﬁcally, we reveal
that the attribute transformations, such as illumination and
color manipulation, relate more to the low-frequency component, while the content details can be adaptively reﬁned
on high-frequency components. We consequently propose
a Laplacian Pyramid Translation Network (LPTN) to simultaneously perform these two tasks, where we design a
lightweight network for translating the low-frequency component with reduced resolution and a progressive masking
strategy to efﬁciently reﬁne the high-frequency ones. Our
model avoids most of the heavy computation consumed by
processing high-resolution feature maps and faithfully preserves the image details. Extensive experimental results on
various tasks demonstrate that the proposed method can
translate 4K images in real-time using one normal GPU
while achieving comparable transformation performance
against existing methods. Datasets and codes are available:
https://github.com/csjliang/LPTN.

1. Introduction
Image-to-image translation (I2IT, [11, 26, 31]), which
aims to translate images from a source domain to a target
one, has gained signiﬁcant attention. Recently, photorealistic I2IT has been attracting increasing interest in various practical tasks, e.g., transferring images among different daytimes or seasons [11] or retouching the illumination
and color of images to improve their aesthetic quality [4].
∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author. This work is supported by the Hong Kong RGC
RIF grant (R5001-18).

(a) Original Images, MSE=7853.9

(b) High Frequencies, Level=1, MSE=97.5

(c) High Frequencies, Level=2, MSE=107.7

(d) Low Frequencies, Level=3, MSE=6969.4

Figure 1. (a) Images of a scene captured at different daytimes and
(b∼d) the Laplacian pyramids (ﬁgures in (c∼d) are resized for
better visualization). As shown by the MSE and the Histograms,
the differences between the day and night images are dominated
in the low-frequency components (d).

Different from the general I2IT problem, the key challenge
of the practical photorealistic I2IT task is to keep efﬁciency
and avoid content distortions when handling high-resolution
images.
To achieve faithful translations, most traditional methods [16, 29, 33] employ an encoding-decoding paradigm
which maps the input image into a low-dimensional latent
space, followed by reconstructing the output from a translated latent code. However, these methods are naturally lim19392

