Minimally Invasive Surgery for Sparse Neural Networks in Contrastive Manner
Chong Yu1,2
1
2
NVIDIA
Fudan University
chongy@nvidia.com

Abstract
With the development of deep learning, neural networks
tend to be deeper and larger to achieve good performance.
Trained models are more compute-intensive and memoryintensive, which lead to the big challenges on memory bandwidth, storage, latency, and throughput. In this paper, we
propose the neural network compression method named
minimally invasive surgery. Different from traditional model compression and knowledge distillation methods, the proposed method refers to the minimally invasive surgery principle. It learns the principal features from a pair of dense
and compressed models in a contrastive manner. It also optimizes the neural networks to meet the specific hardware
acceleration requirements. Through qualitative, quantitative, and ablation experiments, the proposed method shows
a compelling performance, acceleration, and generalization in various tasks.

1. Introduction
Deep learning technologies promote performance in various applications like computer vision, natural language
processing, autonomous driving, recommendation system,
etc. The promising performance is achieved by deeper and
larger neural networks. For example, the classical architectures in convolutional neural networks like VGG-19 [41],
ResNeXt-101 [49], SENet-154 [17] has 143.67, 83.46, and
115.09 million parameters, respectively. Google’s neural machine translation model [48] has about 210 million
parameters. The popular language understanding model
BERT [8] has about 340 million parameters. The deep
learning recommendation model (DLRM) [29] has about
540 million parameters.
Neural networks with a huge amount of parameters have
some shortcomings [56]. First of all, the large neural network is very compute-intensive. In the network evaluation process, inference costs a lot of time even the network is running on dedicated acceleration hardware like GPU [31] [32] or TPU [40]. We can enlarge the batch size to
help improve the throughput of large neural networks. But

the latency is still a problem. In fact, whenever we interact with phones or computers, we are very sensitive to the
latency of the interaction. We don’t like to wait for an application to launch or for the web-page to load search results.
Moreover, we are especially sensitive in realtime interactions such as speech recognition and autonomous driving
systems. Secondly, the large neural network is memoryintensive on mobile devices as well as in the server environment. Storage and loading the large neural network to
compute inference results consume a large amount of energy. Due to the limitations on application sizes, download
time and launch speed, transfer and storage of large models
is especially a challenge in the mobile environment.
Compressing the large neural network to a smaller version can bring benefits to more efficient computation, memory, and energy consumptions. But at the meanwhile,
how to keep the accuracy of the original neural network
during compression needs to be investigated. A common method of neural model compression is network pruning [12]: setting the weights with small magnitude values
of a pre-trained network to zero and fine-tuning the remaining weights to try to recover accuracy. For the aggressive
network pruning tasks, knowledge distillation [15] is often
used as the auxiliary method to improve the accuracy of the
pruned network. A complementary method of neural model compression is quantization. Changing fundamental data
types adds the ability to accelerate the arithmetic operations,
both in training [28] and inference processes [20].
In this work, we explore a neural network compression
method based on the knowledge extracted from a pair of
dense and compressed models. We named this method as
Minimally Invasive Surgery(MIS) because it is inspired by
the principle and process of the real minimally invasive
surgery. We apply the MIS technique to several networks
and tasks to show generality in supervised and unsupervised
learning. Our main contributions include:
• We prove that MIS has better performance than knowledge distillation and network compression methods.
• We provide the theoretical demonstration of MIS from
information entropy and Bayes perspectives.
• We show that MIS technique can apply to various net-

3589

