Zero-Shot Instance Segmentation
Ye Zheng1,2
Jiahong Wu3
Yongqiang Qin3
Faen Zhang3
Li Cui1
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences1
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences2
AInnovation Technology Co., Ltd3
{zhengye@ict.ac.cn,wujiahong@ainnovation.com,qinyongqiang@ainnovation.com
zhangfaen@ainnovation.com,lcui@ict.ac.cn}

Abstract
Deep learning has significantly improved the precision
of instance segmentation with abundant labeled data. However, in many areas like medical and manufacturing, collecting sufficient data is extremely hard and labeling this
data requires high professional skills. We follow this motivation and propose a new task set named zero-shot instance segmentation (ZSI). In the training phase of ZSI, the
model is trained with seen data, while in the testing phase,
it is used to segment all seen and unseen instances. We
first formulate the ZSI task and propose a method to tackle
the challenge, which consists of Zero-shot Detector, Semantic Mask Head, Background Aware RPN and Synchronized
Background Strategy. We present a new benchmark for
zero-shot instance segmentation based on the MS-COCO
dataset. The extensive empirical results in this benchmark
show that our method not only surpasses the state-of-the-art
results in zero-shot object detection task but also achieves
promising performance on ZSI. Our approach will serve as
a solid baseline and facilitate future research in zero-shot
instance segmentation. Code available at ZSI.

1. Introduction
In recent years, deep learning based instance segmentation methods [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6] have made great progress.
These supervised learning paradigm methods strongly rely
on large-scale labeled data. However, for many real-world
applications, e.g., the medical and manufacturing, collecting and labeling data are very time consuming and need
professional annotators, which results in that we always do
not have labeled data for unseen classes in these tasks. Besides, for open-set [7, 8] instance segmentation tasks, we
can not label all categories, so there are many unlabeled unseen classes that need to be segmented. Without abundant
labeled data, modern instance segmentation approaches are
not competent to train a deep neural network to segment
unseen instances. In recent years, many zero-shot learning

unseen class
fork

knife

seen class
knife

seen

fork

seen
train

model

test

unseen
Labeled training data
of seen categories

Unlabeled test data
of seen and unseen categories

Figure 1. In zero-shot instance segmentation, we can only use the
labeled data of seen categories for training but predict the instance
segmentation results for both seen and unseen categories. In our
method, we use the seen classes data, e.g., “knife” to establish
the mapping relationship between visual and semantic concepts
during training and then transfer it to segment unseen instances,
e.g.,“fork” in inference.

methods have been proposed. The latest achievements of
zero-shot learning focus on the problem of zero-shot classification [7, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19]. Limited
by the existing benchmarks [20, 21, 22], the zero-shot classification approaches focus on reasoning a single dominant
unseen object in input image, which makes it unsuitable for
real scenes. In the real world, several unseen objects belonging to different classes may appear at the same time.
Therefore, zero-shot object detection (ZSD) [23, 24] and
zero-shot semantic segmentation (ZSS) [25] have been pro-

2593

