3D AffordanceNet: A Benchmark for Visual Object Affordance Understanding
Shengheng Deng1,* , Xun Xu2,* , Chaozheng Wu1 , Ke Chen1,4 and Kui Jia1,3,4,†
1
South China University of Technology, 2 I2R, A-STAR
3
Pazhou Laboratory, 4 Peng Cheng Laboratory

Abstract
The ability to understand the ways to interact with objects from visual cues, a.k.a. visual affordance, is essential
to vision-guided robotic research. This involves categorizing, segmenting and reasoning of visual affordance. Relevant studies in 2D and 2.5D image domains have been made
previously, however, a truly functional understanding of object affordance requires learning and prediction in the 3D
physical domain, which is still absent in the community. In
this work, we present a 3D AffordanceNet dataset, a benchmark of 23k shapes from 23 semantic object categories, annotated with 18 visual affordance categories. Based on this
dataset, we provide three benchmarking tasks for evaluating visual affordance understanding, including full-shape,
partial-view and rotation-invariant affordance estimations.
Three state-of-the-art point cloud deep learning networks
are evaluated on all tasks. In addition we also investigate a
semi-supervised learning setup to explore the possibility to
benefit from unlabeled data. Comprehensive results on our
contributed dataset show the promise of visual affordance
understanding as a valuable yet challenging benchmark.

1. Introduction
The concept of affordance was first defined as what the
environment offers the animal, introduced by [6]. Affordance understanding is concerned with the interactions between human and environment. For instance, human can sit
on the chair, grasp a cup or lift a bag. Being able to understand the affordance of objects is crucial for robots to operate in dynamic and complex environments [8]. Many applications are supported by affordance understanding including, anticipating and predicting future actions[12, 10, 13],
recognizing agent’s activities[21, 4, 26], providing valid
functionality of the objects[7], understanding social scene
situations[2] and understanding the hidden values of the
* indicates equal contribution.
† Correspondence to Kui Jia <kuijia@scut.edu.cn>.

Pour

Wrap-Grasp

Contain

Grasp

Cut

Stab

Grasp

Contain

Lift

Figure 1. The 3D AffordanceNet dataset. The mesh was first annotated with affordance keypoints. Then we densely sample points
and obtain the ground truth data via label propagation.

objects[33]. Tasks including affordance categorization, reasoning, semantic labeling, activity recognition, etc. are defined as specific instantiations of affordance understanding
[8]. Among all these we find semantic labeling [22, 33] is
of the most importance because the ability to localize the
position of possible affordance is highly desired by robotic
research. We refer semantic labeling as affordance estimation throughout this paper.
The most important and proper modality for affordance
understanding is through visual sensors [8]. Visual affordance understanding has been extensively studied recently
with computer vision techniques. Many algorithms are
built upon deep neural networks [19, 3, 23] thus require
large labeled affordance dataset for benchmarking. Relevant datasets are developed for these purposes with data collected from 2D (RGB) sensors [32, 24, 22] or 2.5D (RGBD)
sensors [18, 19, 23]. Nevertheless, we believe that the affordance understanding requires learning in the 3D domain
which conveys the geometric properties. For example, the
affordance of grasp is highly correlated with vertical structure with small perimeter and sittable is correlated with flat
surface. Unfortunately, such detailed geometry is not captured by the existing 2D datasets while the 2.5 ones [19, 23]
are often captured with small depth variation and do not
carry enough geometric information.

1778

