Exploring and Distilling Posterior and Prior Knowledge for
Radiology Report Generation
Fenglin Liu1 , Xian Wu2 *, Shen Ge2 , Wei Fan2 , Yuexian Zou1,3 *
1
ADSPLAB, School of ECE, Peking University
2
Tencent Medical AI Lab, Beijing, China 3 Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
{fenglinliu98, zouyx}@pku.edu.cn, {kevinxwu, shenge, Davidwfan}@tencent.com

Ground Truth:

Abstract

Lungs are clear. No pleural effusions or pneumothoraces. Heart and
mediastinum of normal size and contour. 1scoliosis.

HRNN:

Automatically generating radiology reports can improve
current clinical practice in diagnostic radiology. On one
hand, it can relieve radiologists from the heavy burden of
report writing; On the other hand, it can remind radiologists of abnormalities and avoid the misdiagnosis and
missed diagnosis. Yet, this task remains a challenging
job for data-driven neural networks, due to the serious
visual and textual data biases. To this end, we propose
a Posterior-and-Prior Knowledge Exploring-and-Distilling
approach (PPKED) to imitate the working patterns of radiologists, who will first examine the abnormal regions and
assign the disease topic tags to the abnormal regions, and
then rely on the years of prior medical knowledge and prior
working experience accumulations to write reports. Thus,
the PPKED includes three modules: Posterior Knowledge
Explorer (PoKE), Prior Knowledge Explorer (PrKE) and
Multi-domain Knowledge Distiller (MKD). In detail, PoKE
explores the posterior knowledge, which provides explicit
abnormal visual regions to alleviate visual data bias; PrKE
explores the prior knowledge from the prior medical knowledge graph (medical knowledge) and prior radiology reports (working experience) to alleviate textual data bias.
The explored knowledge is distilled by the MKD to generate the final reports. Evaluated on MIMIC-CXR and IUXray datasets, our method is able to outperform previous
state-of-the-art models on these two datasets.

1. Introduction
Medical images like radiology and pathology images are
widely-used in disease diagnosis and treatment [7]. Given
a radiology image, radiologists first examine both the normal and abnormal regions and then use the learned medical
knowledge and accumulated working experience to write a
coherent report to note down the findings [32, 10]. Given
* Corresponding authors.

Heart size is normal. There is a moderate right sided pneumothorax with tip in
the right atrium. There is a moderate right sided pneumothorax with large
pleural effusion. No pneumothorax masses. No pneumothorax masses. No
acute bony abnormalities.

Ours:
1There is a scoliosis. No acute cardiopulmonary abnormality. There is no
pleural effusion. No evidence of pneumothorax. The lungs are clear. There is
no focal airspace consolidation.

Ground Truth:
1The heart size is enlarged. 2The aorta is tortuous. The pulmonary

vasculature appears normal. Lungs are otherwise clear bilaterally. No pleural
effusions or pneumothorax. No bony abnormalities.

HRNN:
1Cardiomegaly with pulmonary vascular congestion and interstitial edema.
There is a moderate right sided pneumothorax with large pleural effusion. No
bony abnormalities. There is no pneumothorax. There is no pneumothorax.

Ours:
1Heart size is enlarged. 2Tortuosity of the aorta. No pleural effusion. There is

no focal airspace consolidation. There is no pneumothorax. No bony
abnormalities.

Figure 1. Two examples of ground truth reports and reports generated by HRNN [19] and our method. The Red colored text indicates the abnormalities in reports. The Blue colored text stands
for the similar sentences used to describe the normalities in ground
truth reports. There are notable data bias and the HRNN fails to depict some rare but important abnormalities and generates some error sentences (Underlined text) and repeated sentences (Italic text).

the large volume of radiology images, writing reports become a heavy burden for radiologists. Furthermore, for less
experienced radiologists, some abnormalities in radiology
images may be ignored and consequently not included in the
reports [4]. To relieve radiologists from such heavy workload and remind inexperienced radiologists of abnormalities, automatically generating radiology reports becomes a
critical task in clinical practice.
In recent years, automatic radiology report generation
has attracted extensive research interests [47, 22, 41, 14, 6].
Most existing methods, like [15, 43, 46] follow the standard image captioning approaches and employ the encoderdecoder framework, e.g., CNN-HRNN [15, 23]. In the encoding stage, the image features are extracted by CNN from
the entire image; In the decoding stage, the whole report
is generated by HRNN. However, directly applying image
captioning approaches to radiology images has the follow-

13753

