Skeleton Merger: an Unsupervised Aligned Keypoint Detector
Ruoxi Shi, Zhengrong Xue, Yang You, Cewu Lu*
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
eliphat, xuezhengrong, qq456cvb, lucewu@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Detecting aligned 3D keypoints is essential under many
scenarios such as object tracking, shape retrieval and
robotics. However, it is generally hard to prepare a highquality dataset for all types of objects due to the ambiguity
of keypoint itself. Meanwhile, current unsupervised detectors are unable to generate aligned keypoints with good coverage. In this paper, we propose an unsupervised aligned
keypoint detector, Skeleton Merger, which utilizes skeletons
to reconstruct objects. It is based on an Autoencoder architecture. The encoder proposes keypoints and predicts activation strengths of edges between keypoints. The decoder
performs uniform sampling on the skeleton and refines it
into small point clouds with pointwise offsets. Then the activation strengths are applied and the sub-clouds are merged.
Composite Chamfer Distance (CCD) is proposed as a distance between the input point cloud and the reconstruction
composed of sub-clouds masked by activation strengths. We
demonstrate that Skeleton Merger is capable of detecting
semantically-rich salient keypoints with good alignment,
and shows comparable performance to supervised methods
on the KeypointNet dataset. It is also shown that the detector is robust to noise and subsampling. Our code is available at https://github.com/eliphatfs/SkeletonMerger.

1. Introduction
Being able to fully understand an object is arguably the
ultimate goal of computer vision. For 3D point clouds, detecting semantic keypoints is currently the most promising
and widely adopted approach. [25, 21] Keypoints are crucial to the success of many vision applications such as object tracking, shape registration and in robotics [15, 24, 3,
5]. In many actual cases where objects from the same category are compared, we desire keypoints to be not only accurately located but also aligned within a certain category for
* Cewu Lu is corresponding author. He is the member of Qing Yuan
Research Institute and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China. He is also the member of Shanghai
Qizhi Research Institute, China.

Figure 1. Examples of detected aligned keypoints and the corresponding skeletons from our detector. Skeleton is shown in
purple lines. Objects are from ModelNet40 [27] and ShapeNetCoreV2 [4] datasets.

performing high-level vision tasks such as 3D object recognition and reconstruction. [29]
However, to decide whether a point contains semantics
requires high-level intelligence, as ‘semantics’ itself is ambiguously defined. Different people would present different
understandings of semantic points. Therefore, very limited
human annotated quality data are available so far [31]. Consequently, supervised methods can only deal with very limited range of objects covered in the datasets despite their
success on many other tasks.
Most unsupervised methods, either traditional handcrafted ones [19, 33] or deep learning-based [12], take advantage of geometric properties to detect keypoints. While
stable, these keypoints are often not rich in semantics, and
the coverage of keypoints on the input point cloud is generally low, especially under a small number of points, which
limits their performance in downstream tasks. Moreover,
the keypoints detected are neither ordered nor aligned. A
very recent approach [8] can learn aligned 3D keypoints
by decomposing keypoint coordinates into a low-rank nonrigid shape representation. However, in categories like the
airplane where objects do not necessarily share highly similar geometric shapes, its performance dramatically declines.
In view of the challenges above, we propose Skeleton

43

