Denoise and Contrast for Category Agnostic Shape Completion
Antonio Alliegro1
Diego Valsesia1
Giulia Fracastoro1
Enrico Magli1
Tatiana Tommasi1,2
1

Politecnico di Torino, Italy

2

Italian Institute of Technology

{name.surname}@polito.it

Abstract
In this paper, we present a deep learning model that exploits the power of self-supervision to perform 3D point
cloud completion, estimating the missing part and a context
region around it. Local and global information are encoded
in a combined embedding. A denoising pretext task provides
the network with the needed local cues, decoupled from
the high-level semantics and naturally shared over multiple classes. On the other hand, contrastive learning maximizes the agreement between variants of the same shape
with different missing portions, thus producing a representation which captures the global appearance of the shape.
The combined embedding inherits category-agnostic properties from the chosen pretext tasks. Differently from existing approaches, this allows to better generalize the completion properties to new categories unseen at training time.
Moreover, while decoding the obtained joint representation, we better blend the reconstructed missing part with
the partial shape by paying attention to its known surrounding region and reconstructing this frame as auxiliary objective. Our extensive experiments and detailed ablation on the
ShapeNet dataset show the effectiveness of each part of the
method with new state of the art results. Our quantitative
and qualitative analysis confirms how our approach is able
to work on novel categories without relying neither on classification and shape symmetry priors, nor on adversarial
training procedures.

1. Introduction
Cameras that scan and render objects in 3D are becoming
more and more available as standard feature in many smartphones, drones, robots and cars. Most of these 3D sensing
technologies are low-cost stereo cameras as well as depth
and laser scanners that output point clouds which are often
incomplete due to occlusions, transparency, light reflections
or limitations in resolution and viewing angle. The missing

Figure 1. Our DeCo encodes local and global information from the
training data via denoising and contrastive learning. The learned
embedding is finally decoded to estimate the missing part of the
input shape and a frame, i.e. a context region around the hole.
Thanks to the class-agnostic nature of the self-supervised pretext
tasks, our model is effective for point-cloud completion on novel
object categories.

regions corrupt the object shape preventing its direct use in
tasks like robotic manipulation [28], scene understanding
[10], autonomous driving [2] and augmented reality [17].
To overcome those issues, point cloud completion aims at
estimating the complete geometry of the missing regions
from partial observations.
There have been several efforts to tackle the completion
problem including volumetric representations and related
distance fields or mesh models. The most recent literature
focuses on the efficient solution of directly inferring new
points: a widely used pipeline consists in encoding the partial input into a latent representation which is then decoded
to produce the whole shape. However, this strategy leads to
an overly difficult setting, where the method attempts at reconstructing the entire point cloud rather than simply filling
the missing part. As a consequence, the learned model captures the global geometry more than local properties of each
sample, resulting in reconstructions that resemble a generic
average object rather than the specific input instance. Naı̈ve
design choices of the encoder also contribute to this effect by squashing all the structural information of the point
cloud into a single latent global feature with a significant
information loss on the details of local regions.
Among the techniques proposed to improve local and

4629

