Unveiling the Potential of Structure Preserving for
Weakly Supervised Object Localization
Xingjia Pan1,3∗ Yingguo Gao1∗ Zhiwen Lin1 * Fan Tang2† Weiming Dong3,4,5
Haolei Yuan1 Feiyue Huang1 Changsheng Xu3,4,5
1
Youtu Lab, Tencent 2 Jilin University 3 NLPR, Institute of Automation, CAS
4
School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS 5 CASIA-LLVision Joint Lab
{noahpan, yingguogao, xavierzwlin,harryyuan,garyhuang}@tencent.com
tangfan@jlu.edu.cn, {weiming.dong, changsheng.xu}@ia.ac.cn

Abstract
Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) remains
an open problem given the deficiency of finding object
extent information using a classification network. Although
prior works struggled to localize objects through various
spatial regularization strategies, we argue that how to extract
object structural information from the trained classification
network is neglected. In this paper, we propose a two-stage
approach, termed structure-preserving activation (SPA), toward fully leveraging the structure information incorporated
in convolutional features for WSOL. First, a restricted activation module (RAM) is designed to alleviate the structuremissing issue caused by the classification network on the basis of the observation that the unbounded classification map
and global average pooling layer drive the network to focus
only on object parts. Second, we designed a post-process
approach, termed self-correlation map generating (SCG)
module to obtain structure-preserving localization maps
on the basis of the activation maps acquired from the first
stage. Specifically, we utilize the high-order self-correlation
(HSC) to extract the inherent structural information retained
in the learned model and then aggregate HSC of multiple
points for precise object localization. Extensive experiments
on two publicly available benchmarks including CUB-2002011 and ILSVRC show that the proposed SPA achieves
substantial and consistent performance gains compared with
baseline approaches. Code and models are available at
github.com/Panxjia/SPA CVPR2021.

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) requires
the image-level annotations indicating the presence or
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

Figure 1. Self-correlation maps corresponding to the image
positions masked by red crosses. The 2nd and 3rd rows are the
first- and second-order self-correlation maps, respectively.

absence of a class of objects in images to learn localization
models [17, 18, 19, 35, 29, 28]. In recent years, WSOL has
attracted increasing attention because it can leverage rich
Web images with tags to learn object-level models.
As a work for WSOL, Class Activation Mapping
(CAM) [43] uses the intermediate classifier activation to
discover discriminative image regions for target object
localization [4]. Afterward, divergent activation methods [23,
35, 37] design multiple parallel branches or introduce
attention modules to drive networks learning complete
object extent. Adversarial erasing methods [5, 15, 33, 39]
pursue learning full object extent in a hide-and-seek fashion.
Existing methods [15, 33, 39] largely depend on CAM and
spatial regularization to localize objects, e.g., expanding
activated regions to full object extent; however, preserving
the structure of object is unfortunately neglected.
Through experiments, we observed that the head structure
of the classification network causes the CAM missing object
structure information contained in convolutional features.
Specifically, the network driven by sole classification loss
tends to activate a small proportion of features with largest
discriminative capability while depressing the majority of
111642

