Soteria: Provable Defense against Privacy Leakage in Federated Learning from
Representation Perspective
Jingwei Sun, Ang Li, Binghui Wang, Huanrui Yang, Hai Li, Yiran Chen
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Duke University
{jingwei.sun, ang.li630, binghui.wang, huanrui.yang, hai.li, yiran.chen}@duke.edu

Abstract
Federated learning (FL) is a popular distributed learning framework that can reduce privacy risks by not explicitly sharing private data. However, recent works have
demonstrated that sharing model updates makes FL vulnerable to inference attack. In this work, we show our key observation that the data representation leakage from gradients is the essential cause of privacy leakage in FL. We also
provide an analysis of this observation to explain how the
data presentation is leaked. Based on this observation, we
propose a defense called Soteria against model inversion
attack in FL. The key idea of our defense is learning to perturb data representation such that the quality of the reconstructed data is severely degraded, while FL performance
is maintained. In addition, we derive a certified robustness
guarantee to FL and a convergence guarantee to FedAvg,
after applying our defense. To evaluate our defense, we
conduct experiments on MNIST and CIFAR10 for defending against the DLG attack and GS attack. Without sacrificing accuracy, the results demonstrate that our proposed
defense can increase the mean squared error between the
reconstructed data and the raw data by as much as 160×
for both DLG attack and GS attack, compared with baseline defense methods. Therefore, the privacy of the FL system is significantly improved. Our code can be found at
https://github.com/jeremy313/Soteria.

1. Introduction
Federated learning (FL) [16] is a popular distributed
learning approach that enables a number of devices to train
a shared model in a federated fashion without transferring
their local data. A central server coordinates the FL process, where each participating device communicates only
the model parameters on the central server while keeping
local data private. Thus, FL becomes a natural choice for
developing mobile deep learning applications, such as nextword prediction [10], emoji prediction [22], etc.
Privacy preservation is the major motivation for propos-

ing FL. However, recent works demonstrated that sharing model updates or gradients also makes FL vulnerable to inference attack, e.g., property inference attack [18]
and model inversion attack [5, 28, 7, 26]. Here property inference attack infers sensitive properties of training
data using the model updates, and model inversion attack
reconstructs training data using model gradients. However, the essential causes of such privacy leakages have
not been thoroughly investigated or explained. Some defense strategies have been presented to prevent the privacy
leakage and can be categorized into three types: differential privacy [21, 24, 9, 17, 8], secure multi-party computation [4, 19, 3, 18], and data compression [28]. But these
defensive approaches incur either significant computational
overheads or unignorable accuracy loss. The reason is that
existing defenses are not specifically designed for the privacy leakage from the communicated local updates. The
privacy issues seriously hinder the development and deployment of FL. There is an urgent necessity to unveil the essential cause of privacy leakage such that we can develop
effective defenses to tackle the privacy issue of FL.
In this work, we assume that the server in FL is malicious
and it aims to reconstruct the private training data from devices. Our key observation is: the class-wise data representations of each device’s data are embedded in shared
local model updates, and such data representations can
be inferred to perform model inversion attacks. Therefore, the information can be severely leaked through the
model updates. In particular, we provide an analysis to
reveal how the data representations, e.g., in the fully connected (FC) layer, are embedded in the model updates. We
then propose an algorithm to infer class-wise data representation to perform model inversion attacks. Our empirical
study demonstrates that the correlation between the inferred
data representations using our algorithm and the real data
representations is as high as 0.99 during local training, and
thus proves that the representations leakage is the essential
cause behind existing attacks. Note that the data is often
non-IID (identically and independently distributed) across
the devices in FL. We also show that the non-IID character-

9311

