MetaHTR: Towards Writer-Adaptive Handwritten Text Recognition
Ayan Kumar Bhunia1

Shuvozit Ghose∗ Amandeep Kumar∗ Pinaki Nath Chowdhury1,2
Aneeshan Sain1,2 Yi-Zhe Song1,2
1
SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, United Kingdom.
2
iFlyTek-Surrey Joint Research Centre on Artificial Intelligence.
{a.bhunia, p.chowdhury, a.sain, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk.
{shuvozit.ghose, kumar.amandeep015}@gmail.com.

Support
Set

GRU
Decoder
GRU
Decoder

Evaluation
Set

Attention
Module
2 layer
Bi-LSTM

∗ Interned with SketchX

2 layer
Bi-LSTM

Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) has been a longstanding research problem in computer vision [6, 35, 47,
29]. As a fundamental means of communication, handwritten text can appear in a variety of forms such as memos,
whiteboards, handwritten notes, stylus-input, postal automation, reading aid for visually handicapped, etc [49]. In
general, the target of automatic HTR is to transcribe hand-

Inner Loop Gradient Update

Backbone
CNN

1. Introduction

Backbone
CNN

Handwritten Text Recognition (HTR) remains a challenging problem to date, largely due to the varying writing
styles that exist amongst us. Prior works however generally
operate with the assumption that there is a limited number
of styles, most of which have already been captured by existing datasets. In this paper, we take a completely different
perspective – we work on the assumption that there is always a new style that is drastically different, and that we
will only have very limited data during testing to perform
adaptation. This creates a commercially viable solution –
being exposed to the new style, the model has the best shot
at adaptation, and the few-sample nature makes it practical to implement. We achieve this via a novel meta-learning
framework which exploits additional new-writer data via a
support set, and outputs a writer-adapted model via single gradient step update, all during inference (see Figure
1). We discover and leverage on the important insight that
there exists few key characters per writer that exhibit relatively larger style discrepancies. For that, we additionally propose to meta-learn instance specific weights for a
character-wise cross-entropy loss, which is specifically designed to work with the sequential nature of text data. Our
writer-adaptive MetaHTR framework can be easily implemented on the top of most state-of-the-art HTR models. Experiments show an average performance gain of 5-7% can
be obtained by observing very few new style data (≤ 16).

Attention
Module

Writer Adapted Model

(a)

Compute

Abstract

Writer-A
Writer-B
Writer-C
Writer-D
Writer-E
Writer-F

(b)

Figure 1. (a) During inference, our MetaHTR framework exploits
additional handwritten images of a specific writer through support
set, and gives rise to a writer adapted model via single gradient
step update. (b) Varying styles across different writers (IAM).

written text to its digital content [40] so that the textual content can be made freely accessible.
Handwriting recognition is inherently difficult due to its
free flowing nature and complex shapes assumed by characters and their combinations [6]. Torn pages, and warped
or touching lines also make HTR more challenging. Most
importantly however, handwritten texts are diverse across
individual handwritten styles where each style can be very
unique [13, 23] – while some might prefer an idiosyncratic
style of writing certain characters like ‘G’ and ‘Z’, others
may choose a cursive style with uneven line-spacing.
Modern deep learning based HTR models [28, 40, 26]
mostly tackle these challenges by resourcing to a large
amount of training data. The hope is that most style variations would have already been captured because of the data
volume. Albeit with limited success, it had become apparent that these models tend to over-fit to styles already
captured, but generalising poorly to those unseen. This
is largely owning to the uniquely different styles amongst
writers – there is always a new style that is unobserved, and
is drastically different to the already captured (see Figure
1). The practical implication of this is, e.g., my iPad does

15830

