Scale-Localized Abstract Reasoning
Yaniv Benny1
1

Niv Pekar1

Lior Wolf1,2

The School of Computer Science, Tel Aviv University
2
Facebook AI Research (FAIR)

Abstract
We consider the abstract relational reasoning task,
which is commonly used as an intelligence test. Since
some patterns have spatial rationales, while others are only
semantic, we propose a multi-scale architecture that processes each query in multiple resolutions. We show that indeed different rules are solved by different resolutions and
a combined multi-scale approach outperforms the existing
state of the art in this task on all benchmarks by 5-54%.
The success of our method is shown to arise from multiple
novelties. First, it searches for relational patterns in multiple resolutions, which allows it to readily detect visual relations, such as location, in higher resolution, while allowing the lower resolution module to focus on semantic relations, such as shape type. Second, we optimize the reasoning network of each resolution proportionally to its performance, hereby we motivate each resolution to specialize on
the rules for which it performs better than the others and ignore cases that are already solved by the other resolutions.
Third, we propose a new way to pool information along the
rows and the columns of the illustration-grid of the query.
Our work also analyses the existing benchmarks, demonstrating that the RAVEN dataset selects the negative examples in a way that is easily exploited. We, therefore, propose
a modified version of the RAVEN dataset, named RAVENFAIR. Our code and pretrained models are available at
https://github.com/yanivbenny/MRNet.

1. Introduction
Raven’s Progressive Matrices (RPM) is a widely-used
intelligence test [13, 3], which does not require prior knowledge in language, reading, or arithmetics. While IQ measurements are often criticized [21, 4], RPM is highly correlated with other intelligence-based properties [17] and has
a high statistical reliability [12, 11]. Its wide acceptance
by the psychological community led to an interest in the AI
community. Unfortunately, as pointed out by [20, 25, 8],

applying machine learning models to it can sometimes result in shallow heuristics that have little to do with actual
intelligence. Therefore, it is necessary to study the pitfalls
of RPMs and the protocols to eliminate these exploits.
In Sec. 2.1, we present an analysis of the most popular machine learning RPM benchmarks, PGM [15] and
RAVEN [26], from the perspective of biases and exploits. It
is shown that RAVEN is built in a way that enables the selection of the correct answer with a high success rate without observing the question itself. To mitigate this bias, we
construct, in Sec. 3, a fair variant of the RAVEN benchmark. To further mitigate the identified issues, we propose
a new evaluation protocol, in which every choice out of the
multiple-choice answers is evaluated independently. This
new evaluation protocol leads to a marked deterioration in
the performance of the existing methods and calls for the
development of more accurate ones that also allows for a
better understating of abstract pattern recognition. In Sec. 4,
we propose a novel neural architecture, which, as shown in
Sec. 5, outperforms the existing methods by a sizable margin. The performance gap is also high when applying the
network to rules that were unseen during training. Furthermore, the structure of the new method allows us to separate
the rules into families that are based on the scale in which
reasoning occurs.
The success of the new method stems mostly from
two components: (i) a multi-scale representation, which is
shown to lead to a specialization in different aspects of the
RPM challenge across the levels, and (ii) a new form of information pooling along the rows and columns of the challenge’s 3 × 3 matrix.
To summarize, the contributions of this work are as follows: (i) An abstract multi-scale design for relational reasoning. (ii) A novel reasoning network that is applied on
each scale to detect relational patterns between the rows and
between the columns of the query grid. (iii) An improved
loss function that balances between the single positive example and the numerous negative examples. (iv) A multihead attentive loss function that prioritizes the different resolutions to specialize in solving different rules. (v) A new
112557

