Dual Attention Guided Gaze Target Detection in the Wild
Yi Fang1∗ , Jiapeng Tang1∗ , Wang Shen1 , Wei Shen2† , Xiao Gu1 , Li Song1† , Guangtao Zhai1†
1
Institute of Image Communication and Network Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
2
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
{yifang, tangjp, shenwang, wei.shen, gugu97, song li, zhaiguangtao}@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Gaze target detection aims to infer where each person in
a scene is looking. Existing works focus on 2D gaze and
2D saliency, but fail to exploit 3D contexts. In this work, we
propose a three-stage method to simulate the human gaze
inference behavior in 3D space. In the first stage, we introduce a coarse-to-fine strategy to robustly estimate a 3D gaze
orientation from the head. The predicted gaze is decomposed into a planar gaze on the image plane and a depthchannel gaze. In the second stage, we develop a Dual Attention Module (DAM), which takes the planar gaze to produce
the filed of view and masks interfering objects regulated by
depth information according to the depth-channel gaze. In
the third stage, we use the generated dual attention as guidance to perform two sub-tasks: (1) identifying whether the
gaze target is inside or out of the image; (2) locating the
target if inside. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our
approach performs favorably against state-of-the-art methods on GazeFollow and VideoAttentionTarget datasets.

1. Introduction
Gaze cues indicate what a person is interested in, and
thus function as an important means to evaluate intentions
and predict human behaviors in various social contexts [12].
For these reasons, gaze analysis has widely been used in
neurophysiology studies [36, 10], relevant saliency prediction [8, 34], and social awareness tracking [7, 29, 30]. However, most existing works need particular equipment (e.g.,
eye tracker [13], VR/AR device, or costly RGB-D cameras [42]) or specialized settings (e.g., human-robot interaction [31, 40], or constrained subject locations [32, 1]). In
contrast, we are concerned with gaze target detection from a
more readily available source in daily life, i.e., a single image in the wild. As depicted in Figure 1 (a), given a scene
and the head location for each person (bounding box), we
∗ Equal contribution. † Corresponding anthor.

aim to predict where they are looking, including identifying
out-of-frame targets and locating inside-frame targets (dot).
Existing methods [37, 28, 5, 6, 46] typically reason about
salient objects in the scene conditioned on an estimated gaze
orientation. While significant advances have been made,
there are still three critical problems to be considered. (1)
Most prior works explore the gaze direction in 2D representations and barely encode the depth-channel gaze. They fail
to capture whether the marked person is looking forward,
backward, or sideward (see Figure 1 (b)). An intuitive solution proposed by Chong et al. [5] simply incorporates the
3D gaze as an additional feature channel but does not reasonably combine with scene contexts. Thus, we need an
explicit 3D gaze representation coupling with a more effective way to exploit it. (2) Previous methods search for
salient objects mainly from 2D visual cues. It is hard for
them to capture exact spatial information for lack of scene
depth understanding. For instance, two or more candidate
objects at different depths may exist along the subject’s gaze
direction (see Figure 1 (c)). Thus, we need to model the
person-relative depth of surroundings for 3D scene understanding. (3) Existing approaches directly learn a mapping
function from head features to gaze direction. They are hard
to cope with the fixation inconsistency between the eyes and
the head (see Figure 1 (d), e.g., facing forward but looking downward). Thus, we need to learn the dependency between eyes and the head for a more accurate prediction.
Based on the above observations, we propose a threestage scheme to simulate the human gaze inference behavior in 3D space. When one infers the gaze target of another
person, he/she first predicts a gaze orientation and then estimates the target by analyzing the 3D geometry of the scene
along the gaze direction. Similarly, in the first stage, we
learn to estimate a 3D gaze direction from the head image.
The predicted gaze is decomposed into a planar gaze on
the 2D image plane and a depth-channel gaze. Then we
propose the Dual Attention Module (DAM) to model the
person’s depth-aware perspective in the scene as the second stage. Specifically, we aggregate two parallel attention components. One is a field of view (FOV) generator

11390

