BiCnet-TKS: Learning Efficient Spatial-Temporal Representation for Video
Person Re-Identification
Ruibing Hou1,2 , Hong Chang1,2 , Bingpeng Ma2 , Rui Huang3 , Shiguang Shan1,2,4
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing, 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
3
Shenzhen Institute of Artificial Intelligence and Robotics for Society,
The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, Guangdong, 518172, China
4
CAS Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, Shanghai, 200031, China
1

ruibing.hou@vipl.ict.ac.cn, bpma@ucas.ac.cn, ruihuang@cuhk.edu.cn, {changhong, sgshan}@ict.ac.cn

Down-sampling

Abstract
In this paper, we present an efficient spatial-temporal
representation for video person re-identification (reID).
Firstly, we propose a Bilateral Complementary Network
(BiCnet) for spatial complementarity modeling. Specifically, BiCnet contains two branches. Detail Branch processes frames at original resolution to preserve the detailed
visual clues, and Context Branch with a down-sampling
strategy is employed to capture long-range contexts. On
each branch, BiCnet appends multiple parallel and diverse
attention modules to discover divergent body parts for consecutive frames, so as to obtain an integral characteristic of
target identity. Furthermore, a Temporal Kernel Selection
(TKS) block is designed to capture short-term as well as
long-term temporal relations by an adaptive mode. TKS can
be inserted into BiCnet at any depth to construct BiCnetTKS for spatial-temporal modeling. Experimental results
on multiple benchmarks show that BiCnet-TKS outperforms
state-of-the-arts with about 50% less computations. The
source code is available at https://github.com/
blue-blue272/BiCnet-TKS.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (reID) [34, 50, 11] aims at retrieving a particular person across multiple non-overlapped
cameras. Recently, with the emergence of large video
benchmarks [50, 20] and the growth of computational resource, video person reID has been attracting a lot of attention. The video data contain richer spatial and temporal
clues, which can be utilized to reduce visual ambiguities for
more robust reID.
Despite the significant progress in video reID, most ex-

Detail Branch

(a) Input sequence pairs and
activation maps of existing method

Context Branch

(b) Input sequence pairs and
activation maps of our method

Figure 1: An example of class activation maps [53] of a pair of
input video sequences of existing method [50] and our method.

isting methods do not take full advantage of the rich spatialtemporal clues in videos. For spatial clues, most methods [28, 26, 12] conduct the same operation on each frame
at same input resolution, resulting in highly redundant spatial features for consecutive frames. The redundant features easily focus on the same most representative local region [14], which may be indistinguishable for the two persons with seemingly similar local body parts. For example,
as shown in Fig. 1 (a), the green T-shirt of the sequence pair
attracts the most attention, but is difficult to distinguish the
two pedestrians. Therefore, it is desirable to automatically
capture the diverse spatial clues across consecutive frames
to form a full characteristic of each identify.
For temporal clues, most existing methods only model

2014

