PQA: Perceptual Question Answering
Yonggang Qi1 * Kai Zhang1∗ Aneeshan Sain2 Yi-Zhe Song2
1
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, CN 2 SketchX, CVSSP, University of Surrey, UK
{qiyg, forer}@bupt.edu.cn

{a.sain, y.song}@surrey.ac.uk

Abstract
Perceptual organization remains one of the very few established theories on the human visual system. It underpinned many pre-deep seminal works on segmentation and
detection, yet research has seen a rapid decline since the
preferential shift to learning deep models. Of the limited
attempts, most aimed at interpreting complex visual scenes
using perceptual organizational rules. This has however
been proven to be sub-optimal, since models were unable to
effectively capture the visual complexity in real-world imagery. In this paper, we rejuvenate the study of perceptual
organization, by advocating two positional changes: (i) we
examine purposefully generated synthetic data, instead of
complex real imagery, and (ii) we ask machines to synthesize novel perceptually-valid patterns, instead of explaining
existing data. Our overall answer lies with the introduction of a novel visual challenge – the challenge of perceptual question answering (PQA). Upon observing example
perceptual question-answer pairs, the goal for PQA is to
solve similar questions by generating answers entirely from
scratch (see Figure 1). Our first contribution is therefore
the first dataset of perceptual question-answer pairs, each
generated specifically for a particular Gestalt principle. We
then borrow insights from human psychology to design an
agent that casts perceptual organization as a self-attention
problem, where a proposed grid-to-grid mapping network
directly generates answer patterns from scratch. Experiments show our agent to outperform a selection of naive
and strong baselines. A human study however indicates
that ours uses astronomically more data to learn when compared to an average human, necessitating future research
(with or without our dataset).

1. Introduction
The ultimate goal for computer vision, as one might argue, lies with imitating the human visual system. Machine
vision systems in their infancy were largely inspired by
* Equal contribution

Q&A

Observation

Challenge

Figure 1. Perceptual Question and Answer (PQA). Given an exemplar PQA pair (Left), a new question (right) is required to be
addressed, i.e. generate answer-grid from scratch.

theories on visual perception. Perceptual organization in
particular played an important part, leading to the state-ofthe-art performances on image segmentation [6, 12], contour detection [1, 22] or shape parsing [19, 14] for example. Research efforts have diminished thereafter with the
introduction of deep learning, where the need for modeling human visual systems are no longer deemed necessary, as performances on certain vision tasks have already
reached/exceeded human level [13, 20, 7].
Perceptual organization theory essentially boils down to
a finite set of rules (called Gestalt) that collectively guide
the reasoning of our visual system [33, 30, 31]. Cognitive
scientists have been mostly interested in computationally
modeling these rules [38, 4], and reason using them in a
collective manner [32, 5]. These models are however very
limited in their power to represent the complex underlying
mechanism of perceptual organization. Computer vision research took the opposite route, where the focus had been on
using the very limited knowledge of perceptual organization to explain complex imagery [24]. Yet, performances
reported are largely sub-optimal and only applicable to a
few niche topics such as contour grouping [37, 28, 17]. It is
however interesting and encouraging to notice very recent
works on unsupervised 3D reconstruction achieved impressive results by exploring just the rule of symmetry [34].
In this paper, we set out to rejuvenate the research on
perceptual organization. Unique to previous attempts that
use simple Gestalt rules to explain complicated image data,
we (i) approach the problem via purposefully generated synthetic data specific to each Gestalt principle, and (ii) ask an
112056

