GDR-Net: Geometry-Guided Direct Regression Network for
Monocular 6D Object Pose Estimation

1

Gu Wang1,2 , Fabian Manhardt2 , Federico Tombari2,3 , Xiangyang Ji1
Tsinghua University, BNRist 2 Technical University of Munich 3 Google
wangg16@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn,
fabian.manhardt@tum.de,
tombari@in.tum.de,

xyji@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Estimating the 6D pose, i.e. the 3D rotation and 3D
translation, of objects with respect to the camera is a fundamental problem in computer vision. It has wide applicability to many real-world tasks such as robotic manipulation [10, 66, 53], augmented reality [35, 50] and autonomous driving [32, 58]. Most traditional methods rely on
depth data for this task [13, 36, 14, 63, 54], while monocular methods lagged considerably behind [10, 12]. Nonetheless, with the advent of deep learning and especially the rise
of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs), accuracy and
robustness of monocular 6D object pose estimation have
been consistently improving, even at times surpassing methods relying on depth data [22, 42, 18].
Different strategies for predicting 6D pose from monoc-

CNN
A

RGB

2D-3D Corr.
3D Model
A

6D pose estimation from a single RGB image is a fundamental task in computer vision. The current top-performing
deep learning-based methods rely on an indirect strategy,
i.e., first establishing 2D-3D correspondences between the
coordinates in the image plane and object coordinate system, and then applying a variant of the PnP/RANSAC algorithm. However, this two-stage pipeline is not end-toend trainable, thus is hard to be employed for many tasks
requiring differentiable poses. On the other hand, methods based on direct regression are currently inferior to
geometry-based methods. In this work, we perform an indepth investigation on both direct and indirect methods, and
propose a simple yet effective Geometry-guided Direct Regression Network (GDR-Net) to learn the 6D pose in an
end-to-end manner from dense correspondence-based intermediate geometric representations. Extensive experiments
show that our approach remarkably outperforms state-ofthe-art methods on LM, LM-O and YCB-V datasets. Code
is available at https://git.io/GDR-Net.

6D Pose

Patch-P𝑛P

Surface Regions

Figure 1: Illustration of GDR-Net. We directly regress the
6D object pose from a single RGB using a CNN and the
learnable Patch-PnP by leveraging the guidance of intermediate geometric features including 2D-3D dense correspondences and surface region attention.

ular data have been proposed. For instance, learning of
an embedding space for pose [49] or direct regression of
the 3D rotation and translation [31]. While these methods generally perform well, they usually lack in accuracy
when compared with approaches that instead rely on establishing 2D-3D correspondences prior to estimating the 6D
pose [28, 15].
Differently, this latter class of methods usually involves
solving the 6D pose through a variant of the PnP/RANSAC
algorithm. While such a paradigm provides good estimates,
it also suffers from several drawbacks. First, these methods
are usually trained with a surrogate objective for correspondence regression, which does not necessarily reflect the actual 6D pose error after optimization. In practice, two sets
of correspondences can have the same average error while
describing completely different poses. Second, these approaches are not differentiable with respect to the estimated
6D pose, which limits learning. For instance, these meth-

16611

