OTCE: A Transferability Metric for Cross-Domain Cross-Task Representations
Yang Tan, Yang LiB , Shao-Lun Huang
Tsinghua-Berkeley Shenzhen Institute, Tsinghua University
tany19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {yangli, shaolun.huang}@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn

Transfer learning is a useful learning paradigm to improve the performance on target tasks with the help of
related source tasks (or source models), especially when
only few labeled target data are available for supervision [30, 37]. A Transferability metric can quantitatively
reveal how easy it is to transfer knowledge learned from
a source task to the target task [13, 4, 36, 24]. It indeed
provides a road map for conducting transfer learning in
B Corresponding author. This research is funded by Natural Science
Foundation of China 62001266.

11
11
2 2 33
22 3

uc

n
m ai
Do

Cross-Task Transfer

s-D

1. Introduction

Source task

e
tiv

ion
Adaptat

s
Cro

Transfer learning across heterogeneous data distributions (a.k.a. domains) and distinct tasks is a more general and challenging problem than conventional transfer
learning, where either domains or tasks are assumed to be
the same. While neural network based feature transfer is
widely used in transfer learning applications, finding the
optimal transfer strategy still requires time-consuming experiments and domain knowledge. We propose a transferability metric called Optimal Transport based Conditional
Entropy (OTCE), to analytically predict the transfer performance for supervised classification tasks in such crossdomain and cross-task feature transfer settings. Our OTCE
score characterizes transferability as a combination of domain difference and task difference, and explicitly evaluates them from data in a unified framework. Specifically,
we use optimal transport to estimate domain difference and
the optimal coupling between source and target distributions, which is then used to derive the conditional entropy of
the target task (task difference). Experiments on the largest
cross-domain dataset DomainNet and Office31 demonstrate
that OTCE shows an average of 21% gain in the correlation
with the ground truth transfer accuracy compared to stateof-the-art methods. We also investigate two applications of
the OTCE score including source model selection and multisource feature fusion.

1

Target task

Domain-1
Domain-2

Tr
an
sd

1

Abstract

om
a

in
C

ros
s

-Tas
k Tran
sfer

11
11
22 33
22 3
22
2

444
4
5 5 66
55 6 6
44
22
2 44
5 5 66
55 6 6

Figure 1. Illustration of three different transfer learning scenarios, i.e., transductive domain adaptation [27], cross-task transfer [5, 24] and the cross-domain cross-task transfer we investigating. We take the digital number classification as an example,
where the cross-domain cross-task transfer setting suffers both domain difference and task difference.

practice, e.g., selecting highly transferable tasks for joint
training [41], or understanding task relationships for source
model selection [5, 1, 38, 24].
While theoretical results in transfer learning such as
[6, 8, 9, 21] suggest that task relationship can be modeled by
certain divergence between the source and target data generating distributions, they are difficult to estimate in practice
when target training data is limited. Previous transferability
metrics [41, 40, 1] empirically calculate the task relationships indicated by training loss or validation accuracy, thus
they need to retrain the source model involving expensive
computation. Recent analytical metrics [5, 38, 24] are limited by strict assumptions on data. NCE [38] assumes that
source and target tasks share the same input instances; Hscore [5] assumes that source and target data are distributed
in the same domain. Although LEEP [28] does not make
any assumptions on source and target data except for having the same input size, it does not work sufficiently well
under the cross-domain setting.
In this paper, we investigate the transferability estimation
problem for classification tasks under the more challenging

15779

