Polka Lines:
Learning Structured Illumination and Reconstruction for Active Stereo
Seung-Hwan Baek

Felix Heide

Princeton University
Abstract
Active stereo cameras that recover depth from structured
light captures have become a cornerstone sensor modality for 3D scene reconstruction and understanding tasks
across application domains. Active stereo cameras project
a pseudo-random dot pattern on object surfaces to extract
disparity independently of object texture. Such hand-crafted
patterns are designed in isolation from the scene statistics, ambient illumination conditions, and the reconstruction method. In this work, we propose a method to jointly
learn structured illumination and reconstruction, parameterized by a diffractive optical element and a neural network, in an end-to-end fashion. To this end, we introduce a
differentiable image formation model for active stereo, relying on both wave and geometric optics, and a trinocular reconstruction network. The jointly optimized pattern, which
we dub “Polka Lines,” together with the reconstruction network, makes accurate active-stereo depth estimates across
imaging conditions. We validate the proposed method in
simulation and using with an experimental prototype, and
we demonstrate several variants of the Polka Lines patterns
specialized to the illumination conditions.

1. Introduction
Active depth cameras have become essential for threedimensional scene reconstruction and scene understanding,
with established and emerging applications across disciplines, including robotics, autonomous drones, navigation,
driver monitoring, human-computer interaction, virtual and
mixed reality, and remote conferencing. When combined
with RGB cameras, depth-sensing methods have made it
possible to recover high-fidelity scene reconstructions [23].
Such RGB-D cameras also allowed researchers to collect
large-scale RGB-D data sets that propelled work on fundamental computer vision problems, including scene understanding [44, 21] and action recognition [36]. However,
while depth cameras under controlled conditions with low
ambient light and little object motion are becoming reliable [1, 42], depth imaging in strong ambient light, at long
ranges, and for fine detail and highly dynamic scenes remains an open challenge.
A large body of work has explored active depth sens-

ing approaches to tackle this challenge [18, 27, 4, 41],
with structure light and time-of-flight cameras being the
most successful methods. Pulsed time-of-flight sensors emit
pulses of light into the scene and measure the travel time
of the returned photons directly by employing sensitive silicon avalanche photo-diodes [51] or single-photon avalanche
diodes [5]. Although these detectors are sensitive to a single
photon, their low fill factor restricts existing LiDAR sensors
to point-by-point scanning with individual diodes, which
prohibits the acquisition of dense depth maps. Correlation
time-of-flight sensors [18, 25, 27] overcome this challenge
by indirectly estimating round-trip time from the phase of
temporally modulated illumination. Although these cameras provide accurate depth for indoor scenes, they suffer from strong ambient illumination and multi-path interference [45, 29], are limited to VGA resolution, and they
require multiple captures, which makes dynamic scenes a
challenge. Active stereo [55, 1, 2] has emerged as the only
low-cost depth sensing modality that has the potential to
overcome these limitations of existing methods for roomsized scenes. Active stereo cameras equip a stereo camera
pair with an illumination module that projects a fixed pattern onto a scene so that, independently of surface texture,
stereo correspondence can be reliably estimated. As such,
active stereo methods allow for single-shot depth estimates
at high resolutions using low-cost diffractive laser dot modules [1] and conventional CMOS sensor deployed in massmarket products including Intel RealSense cameras [1] and
the Google Pixel 4 Phones [2]. However, although active
stereo has become a rapidly emerging depth-sensing technology, existing approaches struggle with extreme ambient
illumination and complex scenes, prohibiting reliable depth
estimates in uncontrolled in-the-wild scenarios.
These limitations are direct consequences of the pipeline
design of existing active stereo systems, which handengineer the illumination patterns and the reconstruction algorithms in isolation. Typically, the illumination pattern is
designed in a first step using a diffractive optical element
(DOE) placed in front of a laser diode. Existing dot patterns resulting from known diffractive gratings, such as the
Dammann grating [10], are employed with the assumption
that generating uniform textures ensures robust disparity estimation for the average scene. Given a fixed illumination

5757

