Seeing Out of tHe bOx:
End-to-End Pre-training for Vision-Language Representation Learning
Zhicheng Huang1,2 ,* Zhaoyang Zeng3 ,* Yupan Huang3 ,* Bei Liu4 , Dongmei Fu1,2 , Jianlong Fu4
1
School of Automation and Electrical Engineering, University of Science and Technology Beijing
2
Beijing Engineering Research Center of Industrial Spectrum Imaging
3
Sun Yat-sen University, 4 Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
We study joint learning of Convolutional Neural Network
(CNN) and Transformer for vision-language pre-training
(VLPT) which aims to learn cross-modal alignments from
millions of image-text pairs. State-of-the-art approaches
extract salient image regions and align regions with words
step-by-step. As region-based visual features usually represent parts of an image, it is challenging for existing visionlanguage models to fully understand the semantics from
paired natural languages. In this paper, we propose SOHO
to “Seeing Out of tHe bOx” that takes a whole image as
input, and learns vision-language representation in an endto-end manner. SOHO does not require bounding box annotations which enables inference 10 times faster than regionbased approaches. In particular, SOHO learns to extract
comprehensive yet compact image features through a visual
dictionary (VD) that facilitates cross-modal understanding.
VD is designed to represent consistent visual abstractions
of similar semantics. It is updated on-the-ﬂy and utilized
in our proposed pre-training task Masked Visual Modeling
(MVM). We conduct experiments on four well-established
vision-language tasks by following standard VLPT settings.
In particular, SOHO achieves absolute gains of 2.0% R@1
score on MSCOCO text retrieval 5k test split, 1.5% accuracy on NLVR2 test-P split, 6.7% accuracy on SNLI-VE test
split, respectively.

1. Introduction
With the success of Transformer and self-supervised
learning, we have recently witnessed a boosting number
of research works on cross-modal learning, especially on
vision-language pre-training (VLPT) [7, 22, 23, 27, 34, 37,
48]. VLPT models learn better cross-modal representation with large-scale easy-accessible image-text pairs. They
have established state-of-the-art results in many vision* Equal Contribution. This work was performed when Zhicheng Huang,
Zhaoyang Zeng and Yupan Huang were visiting Microsoft Research Asia
as research interns.

​

boat
man

woman

Task I: TR
Baseline: A couple sit in a
boat on the sea.
×
Ours: A couple sit on the √
shore next to a boat on the sea.
Task II: VQA
Q: What are the people doing?
Baseline: Boating.
×
Ours: Chatting.
√

Figure 1: Comparisons of SOHO and region-based methods by top-1 image-to-text retrieval (TR) and visual question answering (VQA) results. Baselines lack global context and fail to understand the image. SOHO discovers visual clues out of region boxes and infers correct human activities. [Best viewed in color.]
language tasks, such as visual question answering (VQA)
[3], image-text retrieval [25], natural language for visual
reasoning (NLVR) [35], etc.
Visual representation plays an important role in VLPT
models. The recent success of VLPT models has been accompanied by the usage of region-based image features,
which are extracted by object detectors pre-trained on the
Visual Genome dataset [2]. However, there are three challenges to directly utilize region-based image features for
vision-language understanding. Firstly, regions focus on
objects inside bounding boxes while neglecting the contextual information out of the boxes, which is important for
relation understanding and reasoning. For example in Figure 1, we can easily detect “man”, “woman” and “boat” in
the image. However, without the contextual information out
of these boxes, a model will misunderstand the relation as
“people boating” and result in an incorrect answer for either text retrieval or VQA. Secondly, visual understanding
of images will be limited to the pre-deﬁned categories for
regions. Thirdly, most region-based image features are extracted by a detection model, which will suffer from low
quality, noise, and over-sampling [2] and rely on large-scale
boxes annotation data. Although some works try to train
detection model[38, 46] with weakly-supervised, the performance is far below the requirements. Recently, some

12976

