Intra-Inter Camera Similarity for Unsupervised Person Re-Identification
Shiyu Xuan
Shiliang Zhang
Department of Computer Science, School of EECS, Peking University
Beijing 100871, China
shiyu xuan@stu.pku.edu.cn, slzhang.jdl@pku.edu.cn

Abstract
Most of unsupervised person Re-Identification (Re-ID)
works produce pseudo-labels by measuring the feature
similarity without considering the distribution discrepancy
among cameras, leading to degraded accuracy in label
computation across cameras. This paper targets to address this challenge by studying a novel intra-inter camera similarity for pseudo-label generation. We decompose
the sample similarity computation into two stage, i.e., the
intra-camera and inter-camera computations, respectively.
The intra-camera computation directly leverages the CNN
features for similarity computation within each camera.
Pseudo-labels generated on different cameras train the reid model in a multi-branch network. The second stage considers the classification scores of each sample on different
cameras as a new feature vector. This new feature effectively alleviates the distribution discrepancy among cameras and generates more reliable pseudo-labels. We hence
train our re-id model in two stages with intra-camera and
inter-camera pseudo-labels, respectively. This simple intrainter camera similarity produces surprisingly good performance on multiple datasets, e.g., achieves rank-1 accuracy
of 89.5% on the Market1501 dataset, outperforming the recent unsupervised works by 9+%, and is comparable with
the latest transfer learning works that leverage extra annotations.

1. Introduction
Person Re-Identification (ReID) aims to match a given
query person in an image gallery collected from nonoverlapping camera networks [41, 23]. Thanks to the powerful deep Convolutional Neural Network (CNN), great progresses have been made in fully-supervised person ReID
[38, 25, 19, 18, 30]. To relieve the requirement of expensive
person ID annotation, increasing efforts are being made on
The code is available at https://github.com/SY- Xuan/
IICS.

Figure 1. t-SNE visualization [20] of features from a subset of
DukeMTMC-ReID. Different colors indicate samples from different cameras. Baseline features in (a) suffer from feature distribution discrepancies among cameras. Features learned by our
method are visualized in (b), where features from different cameras have similar distribution.

unsupervised person ReID [36, 49, 12, 33, 32, 6], i.e., training with labeled source data and unlabeled target data, or
fully relying on unlabeled target data for training.
Existing unsupervised person ReID works can be
grouped into three categories: a) using domain adaptation to align distributions of features between source and
target domains [32, 15, 29], b) applying Generative Adversarial Network (GAN) to perform image style transfer, meanwhile maintaining the identity annotations on
source domains [49, 31, 45, 3], and c) generating pseudolabels on target domains for training via assigning similar images with similar labels via clustering, KNN search,
etc. [16, 5, 35, 6, 28]. The first two categories define unsupervised person ReID as a transfer learning task, which
leverages the labeled data on source domains. Generating
pseudo-labels makes it possible to train ReID models with
fully unsupervised setting, thus shows better flexibility.
Most of pseudo-labels prediction algorithms share a similar intuition, i.e., first computing sample similarities, then
assigning similar samples identified by clustering or KNN
with similar labels. During this procedure, the computed
sample similarity largely decides the ReID accuracy. To
generate high quality pseudo-labels, samples of the same
identity are expected share larger similarities than with
those from different identities. However, the setting of unsupervised person ReID makes it difficult to learn reliable

11926

