A Multi-Task Network for Joint Specular Highlight Detection and Removal

1. Introduction
Specular highlight, as a common physical phenomenon
in the real world, often presents as bright spot on shiny material surfaces when illuminated. Highlight detection and
removal have long been fundamental problems in computer
vision. The reason is twofold. First, detecting where the
highlight is allows us to infer the light direction, scene geometry [19] and camera location. Second, removing the
effect from highlight can help improve the performance of
many vision tasks, such as object detection [14], intrinsic
image decomposition [2], and tracking [9]. Note that, for
simplicity, we refer highlight to specular highlight in this
paper, except stated definitely.
Early works detect highlight by treating the brightest
∗ Corresponding author.

Highlight-free

Highlight

Highlight mask

Shi et al.

Guo et al.

Yang et al.

Ours

Zhang et al.

Li et al.

Fu et al.

Ours

Highlight-free

Input

Highlight

Highlight removal

Highlight mask

Specular highlight detection and removal are fundamental and challenging tasks. Although recent methods have
achieved promising results on the two tasks by training on
synthetic training data in a supervised manner, they are typically solely designed for highlight detection or removal,
and their performance usually deteriorates significantly on
real-world images. In this paper, we present a novel network that aims to detect and remove highlights from natural images. To remove the domain gap between synthetic
training samples and real test images, and support the investigation of learning-based approaches, we first introduce
a dataset with about 16K real images, each of which has the
corresponding ground truths of highlight detection and removal. Using the presented dataset, we develop a multi-task
network for joint highlight detection and removal, based
on a new specular highlight image formation model. Experiments on the benchmark datasets and our new dataset
show that our approach clearly outperforms state-of-the-art
methods for both highlight detection and removal.

Highlight detection

Abstract

A quadruples
in our dataset

Gang Fu1 , Qing Zhang2 , Lei Zhu3 , Ping Li4 , and Chunxia Xiao1,∗
1
School of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
3
Department of Applied Mathematics and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, UK
4
Department of Computing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, China

Figure 1. Visual comparison of highlight detection and removal
on an example image from our dataset. We compare our method
with the state-of-the-art removal methods including Shi et al. [28],
Guo et al. [10], and Yang et al. [37], and with the state-of-the-art
detection methods including Zhang et al. [41], Li et al. [18], and
Fu et al. [6].

pixels in an image as highlights [41, 18], which has low
accuracy since it may mistake pixels with high intensities
as highlight. As for highlight removal, traditional methods are often based on optimization [13, 20, 7], clustering
[29] and filtering [37, 38] etc, and may fail to handle largescale highlight removal due to lack of image semantics.
More recent methods on highlight detection and removal
are mostly deep learning-based. Although learning-based
highlight detection and removal methods have achieved remarkable progress [28, 39, 6], they basically have two limitations. First, these methods are typically trained on synthetic data or a very small number of real data, so that may

7752

