Deep Compositional Metric Learning
Wenzhao Zheng, Chengkun Wang, Jiwen Lu∗, Jie Zhou
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
{zhengwz18, wck20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {lujiwen, jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract

1. Introduction
Learning a discriminative and generalizable metric to
compute the distances between images is a long-standing
problem in computer vision, which serves as the foundation to a variety of tasks such as face clustering [18, 60, 66],
person re-identification [6, 7, 72] and image retrival [47, 49,
70]. The objective of metric learning is to compress samples from the same class and maintain a margin between
different classes in the learned metric space [9, 19, 61].
∗ Corresponding author
1 Code: https://github.com/wzzheng/DCML

De-pose
De-color
Minus

Color
Minus

Pose

DCML Ensemble
De-pose
De-color

De-pose

De-color

Generalization

In this paper, we propose a deep compositional metric learning (DCML) framework for effective and generalizable similarity measurement between images. Conventional deep metric learning methods minimize a discriminative loss to enlarge interclass distances while suppressing intraclass variations, which might lead to inferior generalization performance since samples even from the same
class may present diverse characteristics. This motivates
the adoption of the ensemble technique to learn a number of
sub-embeddings using different and diverse subtasks. However, most subtasks impose weaker or contradictory constraints, which essentially sacrifices the discrimination ability of each sub-embedding to improve the generalization
ability of their combination. To achieve a better generalization ability without compromising, we propose to separate the sub-embeddings from direct supervisions from the
subtasks and apply the losses on different composites of the
sub-embeddings. We employ a set of learnable compositors
to combine the sub-embeddings and use a self-reinforced
loss to train the compositors, which serve as relays to distribute the diverse training signals to avoid destroying the
discrimination ability. Experimental results on the CUB200-2011, Cars196, and Stanford Online Products datasets
demonstrate the superior performance of our framework. 1

Existing Ensembles

Compositors

Discriminativeness

Figure 1. Motivation of the proposed DCML framework. “De-”
stands for “remove” where embeddings usually discard intra-class
variations such as pose and color for discriminativeness, while existing ensemble-based deep metric learning methods learn a set of
sub-embeddings by directly performing different subtasks on them
to capture diverse data characteristics including intraclass variations such as colors and poses. They generally compromise on the
discriminativeness of the metric to improve the generalization ability. Differently, we only require a set of adaptive composites of the
sub-embeddings to perform well on subtasks and simultaneously
impose a discriminative constraint on the concatenation of the subembeddings. Our framework can improve the generalization of the
learned metric without sacrificing the discriminativeness.

Recently, deep metric learning (DML) methods achieve
outstanding performance by exploiting the powerful representation ability of deep convolutional neural networks
(CNNs) [22, 29, 46, 52] to transform an image to the corresponding embedding, where the distance metric is defined
as the Euclidean distance between embeddings.
Losses in deep metric learning are generally highly
discriminative, which encourage small intraclass variations and large interclass margins in order to make the
learned metric robust to differentiate samples from differ-

9320

