Cuboids Revisited: Learning Robust 3D Shape Fitting to Single RGB Images
Florian Kluger1 , Hanno Ackermann1 , Eric Brachmann2 , Michael Ying Yang3 , Bodo Rosenhahn1
1

Leibniz University Hannover, 2 Niantic, 3 University of Twente

Abstract
Humans perceive and construct the surrounding world
as an arrangement of simple parametric models. In particular, man-made environments commonly consist of volumetric primitives such as cuboids or cylinders. Inferring these
primitives is an important step to attain high-level, abstract
scene descriptions. Previous approaches directly estimate
shape parameters from a 2D or 3D input, and are only able
to reproduce simple objects, yet unable to accurately parse
more complex 3D scenes. In contrast, we propose a robust
estimator for primitive fitting, which can meaningfully abstract real-world environments using cuboids. A RANSAC
estimator guided by a neural network fits these primitives
to 3D features, such as a depth map. We condition the network on previously detected parts of the scene, thus parsing
it one-by-one. To obtain 3D features from a single RGB image, we additionally optimise a feature extraction CNN in
an end-to-end manner. However, naively minimising pointto-primitive distances leads to large or spurious cuboids
occluding parts of the scene behind. We thus propose an
occlusion-aware distance metric correctly handling opaque
scenes. The proposed algorithm does not require labourintensive labels, such as cuboid annotations, for training.
Results on the challenging NYU Depth v2 dataset demonstrate that the proposed algorithm successfully abstracts
cluttered real-world 3D scene layouts.

1. Introduction
Humans tend to create using simple geometric forms.
For instance, a house is made from bricks and squared
timber, and a book is a cuboidal assembly of rectangles.
Consequently, it appears that humans also visually abstract
environments by decomposing them into arrangements of
cuboids, cylinders, ellipsoids and other simple volumetric
primitives [5]. Such an abstraction of the 3D world is also
very useful for machines with visual perception. Scene representation based on geometric shape primitives has been
an active topic since the very beginning of Computer Vision. In 1963, Blocks World [50] from Larry Roberts was
one of the earliest approaches for qualitative 3D shape recovery from 2D images using generic shape primitives. In

(a) Input images

(b) Recovered superquadrics [45]

(c) Recovered cuboids (ours)

Figure 1: Primitive-based Scene Abstractions: We parse
images of real-world scenes (a) in order to generate abstractions of their 3D structure using cuboids (c). Our method is
capable of capturing scene structure more accurately than
previous work [45] based on superquadrics (b).
recent years, with rapid advances in the field of deep learning, high-quality 3D reconstruction from single images has
become feasible. Most approaches recover 3D information such as depth [13] and meshes [56] from RGB images. Fewer works consider more parsimonious 3D shape
descriptions such as cuboids [54] or superquadrics [45, 44].
These 3D shape parsers work well for isolated objects, but
do not generalise to complex real-world scenes (cf. Fig. 1).
Robust model fitting algorithms such as RANSAC [14]
and its many derivatives [2, 9, 47] have been used to fit

13070

