Dense Contrastive Learning for Self-Supervised Visual Pre-Training

1

Rufeng Zhang2 ,

The University of Adelaide, Australia

Chunhua Shen1 ,*
2

Tongji University, China

Abstract

60
59

DenseCL

1. Introduction
Pre-training has become a well-established paradigm
in many computer vision tasks. In a typical pre-training
paradigm, models are first pre-trained on large-scale
datasets and then fine-tuned on target tasks with less training data. Specifically, the supervised ImageNet pre-training
has been dominant for years, where the models are pretrained to solve image classification and transferred to
downstream tasks. However, there is a gap between im-

58

3

74

Ours
MoCo-v2
Sup. IN

72
70

Ours
MoCo-v2
Sup. IN

68

57

66

56
55

64

54

62

53

Lei Li3

ByteDance AI Lab

AP (%)

To date, most existing self-supervised learning methods
are designed and optimized for image classification. These
pre-trained models can be sub-optimal for dense prediction
tasks due to the discrepancy between image-level prediction and pixel-level prediction. To fill this gap, we aim to
design an effective, dense self-supervised learning method
that directly works at the level of pixels (or local features)
by taking into account the correspondence between local
features. We present dense contrastive learning (DenseCL),
which implements self-supervised learning by optimizing a
pairwise contrastive (dis)similarity loss at the pixel level
between two views of input images.
Compared to the baseline method MoCo-v2, our method
introduces negligible computation overhead (only <1%
slower), but demonstrates consistently superior performance when transferring to downstream dense prediction
tasks including object detection, semantic segmentation and
instance segmentation; and outperforms the state-of-the-art
methods by a large margin. Specifically, over the strong
MoCo-v2 baseline, our method achieves significant improvements of 2.0% AP on PASCAL VOC object detection,
1.1% AP on COCO object detection, 0.9% AP on COCO instance segmentation, 3.0% mIoU on PASCAL VOC semantic segmentation and 1.8% mIoU on Cityscapes semantic
segmentation.
Code and models are available at: https://git.io/

* Corresponding author.

Tao Kong3 ,

mIoU (%)

Xinlong Wang1 ,

COCO

ImageNet

(a) Object Detection

60

COCO

ImageNet

(b) Semantic Segmentation

Figure 1 – Comparisons of pre-trained models by fine-tuning
on object detection and semantic segmentation datasets. ‘Sup.
IN’ denotes the supervised pre-training on ImageNet. ‘COCO’
and ‘ImageNet’ indicate the pre-training models trained on
COCO and ImageNet respectively. (a): The object detection results of a Faster R-CNN detector fine-tuned on VOC
trainval07+12 for 24k iterations and evaluated on VOC
test2007; (b): The semantic segmentation results of an FCN
model fine-tuned on VOC train aug2012 for 20k iterations
and evaluated on val2012. The results are averaged over 5
independent trials.

age classification pre-training and target dense prediction
tasks, such as object detection [9, 25] and semantic segmentation [5]. The former focuses on assigning a category to an
input image, while the latter needs to perform dense classification or regression over the whole image. For example,
semantic segmentation aims to assign a category for each
pixel, and object detection aims to predict the categories
and bounding boxes for all object instances of interest. A
straightforward solution would be to pre-train on dense prediction tasks directly. However, these tasks’ annotation is
notoriously time-consuming compared to the image-level
labeling, making it hard to collect data at a massive scale
to pre-train a universal feature representation.
Recently, unsupervised visual pre-training has attracted
much research attention, which aims to learn a proper visual representation from a large set of unlabeled images. A
few methods [17, 2, 3, 14] show the effectiveness in downstream tasks, which achieve comparable or better results
compared to supervised ImageNet pre-training. However,
the gap between image classification pre-training and target

3024

