Incremental Few-Shot Instance Segmentation
Dan Andrei Ganea
Utrecht University

Bas Boom
Cyclomedia Technology

Ronald Poppe
Utrecht University

dan.andrei.ganea@gmail.com

bboom@cyclomedia.com

r.w.poppe@uu.nl

Abstract

Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) have led to stateof-the-art results for image classiﬁcation [16, 32], object detection [28] and instance segmentation [11]. In general, performance increases with network depth and training set size.
While we can usually rely on large annotated databases for
more general classes, adding a class for which we have little training data available is challenging. For example, we
typically have a modest number of labeled training images
when adding new classes for state-speciﬁc street furniture
for self-driving cars, or types of weapons for automated detection in social media videos. Especially for instance segmentation, obtaining pixel-level annotations is costly.
Few-shot learning addresses the problem of learning
with limited available data. Typically, one assumes the existence of a set of base classes, for which there exist numerous training samples, and a disjoint set of novel classes,
1 Code available at: https://github.com/danganea/iMTFA

K shots

1. Introduction

K shots

Few-shot instance segmentation methods are promising
when labeled training data for novel classes is scarce. However, current approaches do not facilitate flexible addition of
novel classes. They also require that examples of each class
are provided at train and test time, which is memory intensive. In this paper, we address these limitations by presenting the ﬁrst incremental approach to few-shot instance segmentation: iMTFA. We learn discriminative embeddings for
object instances that are merged into class representatives.
Storing embedding vectors rather than images effectively
solves the memory overhead problem. We match these class
embeddings at the RoI-level using cosine similarity. This
allows us to add new classes without the need for further
training or access to previous training data. In a series of
experiments, we consistently outperform the current stateof-the-art. Moreover, the reduced memory requirements allow us to evaluate, for the ﬁrst time, few-shot instance segmentation performance on all classes in COCO jointly1 .

Training: compute novel class representatives
Instance
Feature
Extractor

Cosine-similarity classifier

Instance
Feature
Extractor
Weights
Novel
Base

RoI Align

Testing: inference

RoI
Feature
Extractor

Class-agnostic
Mask head

Class-agnostic
Box regressor

Figure 1. Incremental few-shot instance segmentation. For all
K instances of each novel class, we produce vector embeddings
using an Instance Feature Extractor. The average of these embeddings is stored as a per-class weight vector inside a cosinesimilarity classiﬁer. At test time (green), we compare the cosine
distance embeddings of object proposal to the per-class weights.

for which training data is scarce (K examples). The goal
is to train a system to correctly classify N classes: only the
novel classes, or both novel and base classes jointly.
Compared to few-shot image classiﬁcation, few-shot object detection (FSOD) and few-shot instance segmentation
(FSIS) have received signiﬁcantly less attention. While the
few solutions that have been introduced show great promise,
there is room for improvement in terms of practicality and
accuracy. Often, long training procedures with both novel
and base class samples are required [13, 36, 39]. This is
unpractical when we ﬂexibly want to add novel classes to a
trained network. In incremental few-shot learning, the addition of novel classes is independent from previous data,
so computation time is reduced.
In this paper, we introduce the ﬁrst incremental few-shot
instance segmentation method: iMTFA (Figure 1). We employ a two-stage training and ﬁne-tuning approach based on
Mask R-CNN [11]. The ﬁrst stage trains the Mask R-CNN
network. In the second stage, the fully-connected layers

1185

