Layout-Guided Novel View Synthesis from a Single Indoor Panorama
Jiale Xu1

Jia Zheng2 Yanyu Xu3 Rui Tang2 Shenghua Gao1,4∗
1
ShanghaiTech University 2 KooLab, Manycore
3
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR
4
Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging
{xujl1, gaoshh}@shanghaitech.edu.cn

{jiajia, ati}@qunhemail.com

xu yanyu@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg

Abstract
Existing view synthesis methods mainly focus on the perspective images and have shown promising results. However, due to the limited field-of-view of the pinhole camera, the performance quickly degrades when large camera movements are adopted. In this paper, we make the
first attempt to generate novel views from a single indoor
panorama and take the large camera translations into consideration. To tackle this challenging problem, we first use
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) to extract the deep
features and estimate the depth map from the source-view
image. Then, we leverage the room layout prior, a strong
structural constraint of the indoor scene, to guide the generation of target views. More concretely, we estimate the
room layout in the source view and transform it into the
target viewpoint as guidance. Meanwhile, we also constrain the room layout of the generated target-view images
to enforce geometric consistency. To validate the effectiveness of our method, we further build a large-scale photorealistic dataset containing both small and large camera
translations. The experimental results on our challenging dataset demonstrate that our method achieves stateof-the-art performance. The project page is at https:
//github.com/bluestyle97/PNVS.

1. Introduction
With the popularity of 360◦ cameras, panoramas have
been widely used in many emerging domains such as Virtual Reality (VR). In a typical VR application, the device displays a 360◦ virtual scene, which can respond to
6 degree-of-freedom (DoF) head motion and give the user
an immersive feeling. However, owing to the tedious image collection process, the panoramas are usually captured
at a limited set of locations in practice, which restricts the
∗ Corresponding author.

source view

target view
target camera

source camera

𝒕

Figure 1. Panoramic novel view synthesis. Our goal is to generate a target-view panorama from the source-view panorama with
camera translation t. The green, red, and blue lines represent
the ceiling-wall boundaries, wall-wall boundaries, and floor-wall
boundaries of the room layout, respectively.

DoF of scene viewing. With the expectation of providing
a free-viewpoint scene visualization experience, we make
the first attempt to address the problem of panoramic novel
view synthesis from a single panorama.
In this paper, we constrain the panoramic view synthesis
problem in the indoor scenario on account of its commonness in typical applications. Previous work [30, 36, 39] has
shown promising results on novel view synthesis from a single perspective image. However, the performance quickly
degrades when larger camera rotations and translations are
adopted. Due to the limited field-of-view (FoV) of a pinhole
camera, it is arduous to extrapolate the large unseen areas
caused by violent camera motion. In contrast, a panorama
inherently supports the rotational viewpoint change. Thus,
we only need to consider camera translations. Furthermore,
360◦ FoV provides omnidirectional information, making it
possible to consider larger camera translations. By synthe-

16438

