IMODAL: creating learnable user-defined deformation models
Leander Lacroix
INSERM U1299, Université Paris-Saclay

Benjamin Charlier
IMAG, Univ. Montpellier, France

leander.lacroix@protonmail.com

benjamin.charlier@umontpellier.fr

Alain Trouvé
Centre Borelli, ENS Paris-Saclay

Barbara Gris
LJLL, Sorbonne Université, CNRS

alain.trouve@ens-paris-saclay.fr

gris@ljll.math.upmc.fr

Abstract
A natural way to model the evolution of an object
(growth of a leaf for instance) is to estimate a plausible
deforming path between two observations. This interpolation process can generate deceiving results when the set
of considered deformations is not relevant to the observed
data. To overcome this issue, the framework of deformation modules allows to incorporate in the model structured
deformation patterns coming from prior knowledge on the
data. The goal of this article is twofold. First defining new
deformation modules incorporating structures coming from
the elastic properties of the objects. Second, presenting the
IMODAL library allowing to perform registration through
structured deformations. This library is modular: adapted
priors can be easily defined by the user, several priors can
be combined into a global one and various types of data can
be considered such as curves, meshes or images. It can be
downloaded at https://github.com/imodal.

1. Introduction
The last decade have witnessed important progress in
shape analysis fuelled by the increasing availability of data
sets produced by a wide range of imaging devices. However, biological and medical shape analysis stand at a particular place where a range of constraints are limiting the
size of available databases and usually further down-scaled
to few tens when filtered under specific conditions. Visual
inspection by experts is still playing an important role in
nowadays analysis especially when dealing with shape evolution. This is for different reasons: difficulty to separate the
target objects from background, difficulty to define population models when dealing with geometrical object (crosssectional aspect) and to aggregate them into longitudinal
profiles [11]. The computational anatomy and large deformation setting [12, 24, 3, 20, 18, 17] have helped a lot to

build principle ways to generate digital atlases from data
sets, perform registrations, compute deformation paths using paths of diffeomorphisms transporting wide range a geometrical features. However, the ubiquity of the all-purpose
approaches is often limited in two ways: first the reliance of
weakly structured deformation models preventing the introduction of high level prior knowledge (as deformation properties and constraints attached to the objects) in the analysis
and second, their inability to provide the user with an automatic separation of the different non-linear superposition of
biologically relevant dynamic components.
The paper is devoted to the exposition of a mathematical and computational framework IMODAL built upon the
modular approach pioneered in [14] and answering the two
previous limitations. We present in Figure 2 two results of
registration between the initial and final states of a basipetal
leaf growth (i.e. growth from the base) extracted from Figure 1a. We used unstructured deformations (LDDMM) [4]
and modular ones computed with IMODAL with the prior
knowledge that the deformation should be basipetal. The
basipetal growth is well recovered by IMODAL (see Section 3.1 for more detail) while unstructured deformations
fail modelling this growth.

2. Modelling evolution through constrained deformations
2.1. Large deformations
We recall here the notion of large deformations as defined in [2]. Let d, ℓ ≥ 1 be two integers and C0ℓ (Rd ) be the
space of vector fields of class C ℓ of Rd whose derivatives
k ≤ ℓ tend to zero at infinity. For v ∈PC0ℓ (Rd ), kvkℓ,∞
denotes the supremum norm: kvkℓ,∞ = |β|≤ℓ kDβ vk∞ .
Proposition 1 Let v. in L1 ([0, 1], C0ℓ (Rd )), i.e. a timeR1
dependent vector field such that 0 kvt kℓ,∞ dt < ∞. Then
there exists a unique absolutely continuous solution ϕv. ,

12905

