3D Shape Generation with Grid-based Implicit Functions
Moritz Ibing
Isaak Lim
Leif Kobbelt
Visual Computing Institute, RWTH Aachen University

Abstract
Previous approaches to generate shapes in a 3D setting
train a GAN on the latent space of an autoencoder (AE).
Even though this produces convincing results, it has two
major shortcomings. As the GAN is limited to reproduce the
dataset the AE was trained on, we cannot reuse a trained
AE for novel data. Furthermore, it is difficult to add spatial supervision into the generation process, as the AE only
gives us a global representation. To remedy these issues,
we propose to train the GAN on grids (i.e. each cell covers a part of a shape). In this representation each cell is
equipped with a latent vector provided by an AE. This localized representation enables more expressiveness (since the
cell-based latent vectors can be combined in novel ways)
as well as spatial control of the generation process (e.g. via
bounding boxes). Our method outperforms the current state
of the art on all established evaluation measures, proposed
for quantitatively evaluating the generative capabilities of
GANs. We show limitations of these measures and propose
the adaptation of a robust criterion from statistical analysis
as an alternative.

1. Introduction
Training stable 3D GANs can be challenging and often
better results are obtained by splitting the generation process into two parts. First an autoencoder (AE) is trained to
obtain a compressed latent representation, then a GAN is
trained to model the density of this global latent space. This
simplifies the task, as the AE typically generates reasonable
output for a wide range of latent vectors. Training the AE
can be seen as imposing a bias on the generation process to
produce shapes similar to those seen during its training.
This procedure has obtained convincing results both for
the generation of point clouds [1] and implicit functions
[5]. However, using the latent space of an AE as intermediate shape representation has some severe drawbacks.
Small variations of shapes are usually of local nature. As
the latent representation used in prior work is of inherently
global nature, such changes cannot be modeled easily. This
makes it difficult to add any localized modifications or con-

straints into the generation process. Tasks such as conditional generation based on semantic information (e.g. segmentation/part labels) become hard to train. Another problem is that the AE limits the space of shapes that can be
generated. Indeed every AE, which does not represent the
entire space of possible shapes in its latent space, limits the
expressiveness of the GAN through the bias it imposes. E.g.
if we train a GAN to create tables in such a manner, this is
unlikely to work with the latent space of an AE trained for
chairs.
A more natural choice of representation is to view a
shape as a composition of many different local parts. This
allows the network to choose parts that occur in different
objects and arrange them to create new shapes. Recently,
Jiang et al. [13] learned local latent representations by subdividing the object space into a grid to reconstruct scenes
from point clouds with high fidelity. This can be seen as
only imposing a localized bias on the shape generation process. Learning to capture the geometry within a single grid
cell is much simpler than learning to represent the whole
shape. Thus the reconstruction quality of the AE is much
improved.
We argue that this representation has several further advantages. Training a generative model on this localized latent space enables more variety in the generated shapes, as
latent vectors belonging to different shapes or even different
object classes can be mixed, giving the generator more degrees of freedom. Its expressiveness is thus not limited by
the AEs ability to generalize. In fact we do not even need
to train an AE for each specific class. An AE trained on
cells of e.g. tables can still be used to generate chairs, as on
part level both classes share similarities. Furthermore, we
can use convolutional architectures and thus build on existing research in image generation. Although this argument
applies to voxel based models as well [34], those are limited by the grid resolution that can fit into memory. As we
can represent complex surfaces per grid cell, we can model
realistic shapes while still keeping the grid resolution low.
Lastly, the spatial decomposition of the latent space allows
us to perform conditional generation based on spatial information, such as bounding boxes or semantic labels.
When it comes to evaluating GANs there is no univer-

13559

