A 3D GAN for Improved Large-pose Facial Recognition
Richard T. Marriott1,2
1

Sami Romdhani2

Ecole Centrale de Lyon, France

2

Liming Chen1

IDEMIA, France

richard.marriott@idemia.com

Abstract
Facial recognition using deep convolutional neural networks relies on the availability of large datasets of face images. Many examples of identities are needed, and for each
identity, a large variety of images are needed in order for
the network to learn robustness to intra-class variation. In
practice, such datasets are difficult to obtain, particularly
those containing adequate variation of pose. Generative
Adversarial Networks (GANs) provide a potential solution
to this problem due to their ability to generate realistic, synthetic images. However, recent studies have shown that current methods of disentangling pose from identity are inadequate. In this work we incorporate a 3D morphable model
into the generator of a GAN in order to learn a nonlinear
texture model from in-the-wild images. This allows generation of new, synthetic identities, and manipulation of pose,
illumination and expression without compromising the identity. Our synthesised data is used to augment training of
facial recognition networks with performance evaluated on
the challenging CFP and CPLFW datasets.

1. Introduction
State-of-the-art facial recognition (FR) algorithms are
trained using millions of images. With the internet as a resource, face-images are relatively easy to come by. However, the distribution of semantics throughout these images
is usually highly unbalanced. For example, the majority of
available photographs are frontal portraits of smiling subjects, with images containing large poses being relatively
scarce. Robustness to pose is currently considered to be
one of the largest challenges for FR. Some researchers have
attempted to avoid the problem by first frontalising probe
images [17, 34, 45], whilst others have attempted to learn
additional robustness to pose by synthetically augmenting
training datasets [7, 8, 30, 43]. We advocate this second approach since it does not require additional resources during
inference.
Synthetic augmentation of poses in training data has typically been achieved by fitting some 3D face model to in-

Figure 1. Instances of the FLAME 3D morphable model rendered
at various poses with nonlinear textures (and background) learned
by our 3D GAN from the MultiPIE dataset. (The model instances
correspond to the Neutral expression column of Figure 4.)

put images, extracting textures, and then re-projecting those
textures at modified poses [7, 43]. With recent advances
in the development of Generative Adversarial Networks
(GANs), however, a viable alternative has emerged. GANs
have been shown to be capable of generating realistic images of new identities and so restricting data-augmentation
to existing identities is not necessary. In order to generate fully synthetic training data, however, disentanglement
of identity from other characteristics, such as pose, is necessary. Recent studies have shown that 2D GAN methods
struggle to achieve this disentanglement [29]. In this work
we incorporate a 3D morphable model (3DMM) [26] into a
GAN so that images of new, synthetic identities can be generated, and the pose modified without identity being compromised. Our contributions are:
1. Introduction of a method of learning a nonlinear texture model from in-the-wild images that can be used to
generate images of synthetic identities with fully disentangled pose. No specially captured scans of facial
texture are required.
2. Demonstration of improvements to large-pose facial
recognition by augmenting datasets with synthetic, 3D
GAN images, and a state-of-art accuracy for CPLFW.

13445

