Enriching ImageNet with Human Similarity Judgments and Psychological
Embeddings
Brett D. Roads & Bradley C. Love
Department of Experimental Psychology
University College London
London, United Kingdom
{b.roads,b.love}@ucl.ac.uk

Abstract

Advances in supervised learning approaches to object
recognition flourished in part because of the availability
of high-quality datasets and associated benchmarks. However, these benchmarks—such as ILSVRC—are relatively
task-specific, focusing predominately on predicting class
labels. We introduce a publicly-available dataset that embodies the task-general capabilities of human perception
and reasoning. The Human Similarity Judgments extension to ImageNet (ImageNet-HSJ) is composed of a large
set of human similarity judgments that supplements the existing ILSVRC validation set. The new dataset supports a
range of task and performance metrics, including evaluation of unsupervised algorithms. We demonstrate two methods of assessment: using the similarity judgments directly
and using a psychological embedding trained on the similarity judgments. This embedding space contains an order
of magnitude more points (i.e., images) than previous efforts based on human judgments. We were able to scale to
the full 50,000 image ILSVRC validation set through a selective sampling process that used variational Bayesian inference and model ensembles to sample aspects of the embedding space that were most uncertain. To demonstrate
the utility of ImageNet-HSJ, we used the similarity ratings
and the embedding space to evaluate how well several popular models conform to human similarity judgments. One
finding is that the more complex models that perform better
on task-specific benchmarks do not better conform to human semantic judgments. In addition to the human similarity judgments, pre-trained psychological embeddings and
code for inferring variational embeddings are made publicly available. ImageNet-HSJ supports the appraisal of internal representations and the development of more humanlike models.

1. Introduction
One interesting question is how models’ internal representations compare to human-perceived similarities. While
people make such judgments with little effort, humanperceived similarity flexibly adapts to different contexts, reflecting a rich understanding of the world [32, 23]. For
example, people may perceive a beer bottle as similar to
cigarettes because both are age-restricted, while perceiving
a beer bottle as similar to a soda because both are beverages.
Humans may perceive two objects as similar for many reasons, including the two objects playing related roles within
encompassing systems, sharing perceptual properties, or
simply interacting with one another [23]. Human-perceived
similarity has been leveraged in applications such as image retrieval [11, 15] and human-in-the-loop categorization
[42, 62, 65], but has been under-utilized in the general development of computer vision algorithms. The lack of research is partly due to the absence of an appropriate dataset
and the technical challenges associated with collecting such
a dataset. This work introduces the Human Similarity Judgments extension to ImageNet (ImageNet-HSJ), designed to
include maximally informative similarity judgments for the
widely-used ILSVRC dataset [10, 45].
As algorithm development shifts from learning taskspecific representations towards task-general representations, the evaluation metrics used to assess models may
also benefit from an equivalent shift. While task-specific
metrics—such as classification accuracy—will always be
relevant, complementary task-general evaluation metrics
seem increasingly necessary. One strategy for creating a
task-general metric is to assess how well model-perceived
similarity aligns with human-perceived similarity. Comparing human and model similarity allows researchers to focus on the internal representations that precede task-specific
output. Internal representation metrics create a level playing
field when comparing across diverse training paradigms;
such as supervised, unsupervised, and self-supervised ap-

3547

