MonoRec: Semi-Supervised Dense Reconstruction in Dynamic Environments
from a Single Moving Camera
Felix Wimbauer1,⋆

Nan Yang1,2,⋆ Lukas von Stumberg1 Niclas Zeller1,2
1
Technical University of Munich, 2 Artisense

Daniel Cremers1,2

{wimbauer, yangn, stumberg, zellern, cremers}@in.tum.de

Abstract
In this paper, we propose MonoRec, a semi-supervised
monocular dense reconstruction architecture that predicts
depth maps from a single moving camera in dynamic environments. MonoRec is based on a multi-view stereo setting which encodes the information of multiple consecutive
images in a cost volume. To deal with dynamic objects in
the scene, we introduce a MaskModule that predicts moving object masks by leveraging the photometric inconsistencies encoded in the cost volumes. Unlike other multi-view
stereo methods, MonoRec is able to reconstruct both static
and moving objects by leveraging the predicted masks. Furthermore, we present a novel multi-stage training scheme
with a semi-supervised loss formulation that does not require LiDAR depth values. We carefully evaluate MonoRec
on the KITTI dataset and show that it achieves state-of-theart performance compared to both multi-view and singleview methods. With the model trained on KITTI, we furthermore demonstrate that MonoRec is able to generalize well
to both the Oxford RobotCar dataset and the more challenging TUM-Mono dataset recorded by a handheld camera. Code and related materials are available at https:
//vision.in.tum.de/research/monorec.

1. Introduction

Figure 1: MonoRec can deliver high-quality dense reconstruction from a single moving camera. The figure shows
an example of a large-scale outdoor point cloud reconstruction (KITTI Odometry sequence 07) by simply accumulating predicted depth maps. Please refer to our project page
for the video of the entire reconstruction of the sequence.

1.1. Real-world Scene Capture from Video
Obtaining a 3D understanding of the entire static and dynamic environment can be seen as one of the key-challenges
in robotics, AR/VR, and autonomous driving. State of today, this is achieved based on the fusion of multiple sensor sources (incl. cameras, LiDARs, RADARs and IMUs).
This guarantees dense coverage of the vehicle’s surroundings and accurate ego-motion estimation. However, driven
by the high cost as well as the challenge to maintain crosscalibration of such a complex sensor suite, there is an in⋆ Indicates equal contribution.

creasing demand of reducing the total number of sensors.
Over the past years, researchers have therefore put a lot of
effort into solving the problem of perception with only a single monocular camera. Considering recent achievements in
monocular visual odometry (VO) [8, 58, 51], with respect to
ego-motion estimation, this was certainly successful. Nevertheless, reliable dense 3D mapping of the static environment and moving objects is still an open research topic.
To tackle the problem of dense 3D reconstruction based
on a single moving camera, there are basically two paral-

6112

