Unsupervised Learning of Depth and Depth-of-Field Effect from Natural Images
with Aperture Rendering Generative Adversarial Networks
Takuhiro Kaneko
NTT Communication Science Laboratories, NTT Corporation
Single-DoF images only

Deep DoF Shallow DoF

Depth

Deep DoF Shallow DoF

Depth

Deep DoF Shallow DoF

Depth

(a) Training data
(b) Generated data
Figure 1. Unsupervised learning of depth and depth-of-field (DoF) effect from unlabeled natural images. (a) In training, we adopt
only a collection of single-DoF images without any additional supervision (e.g., ground-truth depth, pairs of deep and shallow DoF images,
and pretrained model). (b) Once trained, our model can synthesize tuples of deep and shallow DoF images and depths from random noise.
The generated data are beneficial in learning a shallow DoF renderer, which also requires no external supervision. The project page is
available at http://www.kecl.ntt.co.jp/people/kaneko.takuhiro/projects/ar-gan/.

Abstract
Understanding the 3D world from 2D projected natural
images is a fundamental challenge in computer vision and
graphics. Recently, an unsupervised learning approach has
garnered considerable attention owing to its advantages in
data collection. However, to mitigate training limitations,
typical methods need to impose assumptions for viewpoint
distribution (e.g., a dataset containing various viewpoint
images) or object shape (e.g., symmetric objects). These assumptions often restrict applications; for instance, the application to non-rigid objects or images captured from similar viewpoints (e.g., flower or bird images) remains a challenge. To complement these approaches, we propose aperture rendering generative adversarial networks (AR-GANs),
which equip aperture rendering on top of GANs, and adopt
focus cues to learn the depth and depth-of-field (DoF) effect of unlabeled natural images. To address the ambiguities triggered by unsupervised setting (i.e., ambiguities between smooth texture and out-of-focus blurs, and between
foreground and background blurs), we develop DoF mixture
learning, which enables the generator to learn real image
distribution while generating diverse DoF images. In addition, we devise a center focus prior to guiding the learning
direction. In the experiments, we demonstrate the effectiveness of AR-GANs in various datasets, such as flower, bird,
and face images, demonstrate their portability by incorporating them into other 3D representation learning GANs,
and validate their applicability in shallow DoF rendering.

1. Introduction
Natural images are 2D projections of a 3D world. Addressing the inverse problem, i.e., understanding the 3D
world from natural images, is a fundamental challenge in
computer vision and graphics. Owing to its diverse applications in various fields, such as in robotics, content creation,
and photo editing, this challenge has been actively studied.
A direct solution to challenge is learning a 3D predictor in a supervised manner using 2D and 3D data pairs
or multiview image sets. However, obtaining such data
is often impractical or time-consuming. To eliminate this
process, several studies have attempted to learn 3D representations from single-view images (i.e., with only a
single view per training instance). However, owing to
the ill-posed nature, several studies required auxiliary information, such as 2D keypoints [49, 23] or 2D silhouettes [17, 6, 32, 13], to align object positions or extract a
target object from the background. Other studies required
predefined category-specific shape models (e.g., 3DMM [3]
and SMPL [36]) [22, 56, 11, 43, 44] to obtain clues for reconstruction. Although they have exhibited promising results, collecting auxiliary information still requires a laborious annotation process, and a shape model requires additional preparation costs and restricts applicable objects.
To eliminate these disadvantages, fully unsupervised
learning methods that enable 3D representation learning
from single-view images without additional supervision and
shape models have been devised. Although this is a se-

15679

