Spatial-Phase Shallow Learning: Rethinking Face Forgery Detection
in Frequency Domain
Honggu Liu1∗
Xiaodan Li2
Wenbo Zhou1†
Yuefeng Chen2
2
2
1†
Yuan He
Hui Xue
Weiming Zhang
Nenghai Yu1
1
CAS Key Laboratory of Electromagnetic Space Information,
University of Science and Technology of China
2
Alibaba Group
lhg9754@mail.ustc.edu.cn,

{welbeckz, zhangwm, ynh}@ustc.edu.cn

{fiona.lxd, yuefeng.chenyf, heyuan.hy, hui.xueh}@alibaba-inc.com

60

The remarkable success in face forgery techniques has
received considerable attention in computer vision due to
security concerns. We observe that up-sampling is a necessary step of most face forgery techniques, and cumulative up-sampling will result in obvious changes in the frequency domain, especially in the phase spectrum. According to the property of natural images, the phase spectrum
preserves abundant frequency components that provide extra information and complement the loss of the amplitude
spectrum. To this end, we present a novel Spatial-Phase
Shallow Learning (SPSL) method, which combines spatial image and phase spectrum to capture the up-sampling
artifacts of face forgery to improve the transferability, for
face forgery detection. And we also theoretically analyze
the validity of utilizing the phase spectrum. Moreover, we
notice that local texture information is more crucial than
high-level semantic information for the face forgery detection task. So we reduce the receptive fields by shallowing
the network to suppress high-level features and focus on the
local region. Extensive experiments show that SPSL can
achieve the state-of-the-art performance on cross-datasets
evaluation as well as multi-class classification and obtain
comparable results on single dataset evaluation.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the tremendous success of generative
techniques, such as Variational Autoencoders (VAE) [35]
and Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [16], face
∗ Work done during the internship of Honggu Liu at Alibaba Group.
† Corresponding Author.

Phase Spectrum
Amplitude Spectrum

Average value of pixel difference

Abstract

50
40
30
20
10
0

0

1

2

3

Times of up-sampling

4

5

Figure 1: The variation analysis in the frequency domain. The curve shows the average value of pixel difference (mean and variance) of the phase spectrum between
1000 origin and up-sampling samples increase dramatically
with the increase of the number of up-sampling.
forgery has become an emerging hot research topic in very
recent years. The face forgery techniques are able to synthesize realistic faces that are indistinguishable for human
eyes. However, these forgery techniques are likely to be
abused for malicious purposes, causing serious security and
ethical issues (e.g. celebrity pornography and political persecution). Therefore, it is of paramount importance to develop more general and practical methods for face forgery
detection.
To alleviate the risks brought by malicious usage of face
forgery, various methods [51, 26, 1, 49, 2, 39, 38, 13, 23,
36, 29, 8, 24] have been proposed. Most of these methods detect face forgery in a supervised fashion with prior
knowledge of face manipulation methods [1, 6, 24]. Under this setting, these approaches achieve excellent performance on some public datasets [49, 21, 38, 27, 46]. How-

772

