Dual-GAN: Joint BVP and Noise Modeling for Remote Physiological
Measurement
Hao Lu1,2 , Hu Han1,3, *, S. Kevin Zhou4,1
Key Laboratory of Intelligent Information Processing of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS),
Institute of Computing Technology, CAS, Beijing 100190, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
3
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen, China
4
Medical Imaging, Robotics, and Analytic Computing Laboratory and Engineering (MIRACLE),
School of Biomedical Engineering & Suzhou Institute for Advance Research,
University of Science and Technology of China, Suzhou 215123, China
1

hao.lu@miracle.ict.ac.cn, hanhu@ict.ac.cn, s.kevin.zhou@gmail.com

Abstract
Remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) based physiological measurement has great application values in health
monitoring, emotion analysis, etc. Existing methods mainly
focus on how to enhance or extract the very weak blood
volume pulse (BVP) signals from face videos, but seldom
explicitly model the noises that dominate face video content. Thus, they may suffer from poor generalization ability in unseen scenarios. This paper proposes a novel adversarial learning approach for rPPG based physiological
measurement by using Dual Generative Adversarial Networks (Dual-GAN) to model the BVP predictor and noise
distribution jointly. The BVP-GAN aims to learn a noiseresistant mapping from input to ground-truth BVP, and the
Noise-GAN aims to learn the noise distribution. The two
GANs can promote each other’s capability, leading to improved feature disentanglement between BVP and noises.
Besides, a plug-and-play block named ROI alignment and
fusion (ROI-AF) block is proposed to alleviate the inconsistencies between different ROIs and exploit informative features from a wider receptive field in terms of ROIs. In comparison to state-of-the-art methods, our approach achieves
better performance in heart rate, heart rate variability, and
respiration frequency estimation from face videos.

1. Introduction
Physiological signals such as heart rate (HR), respiration frequency (RF), and heart rate variability (HRV) are
important indicators of human health status. Tradition* Corresponding author.

ally, these physiological signals are measured using electrocardiography (ECG) and photoplethysmography (PPG);
both are skin-contact based approach, which is intrusive and
may cause may cause discomfort for human. Recently, nocontact physiological measurement approaches based on remote photoplethysmography (rPPG) have attracted increasing attention, and most of the approaches use face videos
recorded by commodity cameras to perform rPPG based
physiological measurement [18, 19, 25]. The principle behind rPPG based physiological measurement is that the optical absorption by skin changes periodically along with the
periodic blood volume change due to heartbeat. Thus, if we
can capture the periodic skin color changes, we can obtain
the heart rate. However, such skin color changes are very
weak and can be easily affected by various noises such as
illumination and head movement.
Early approaches for rPPG based physiological measurement usually use PCA or ICA to decompose the raw temporal signal [1, 20, 28] or perform color space transformations like CHROM [8] and POS [37] to extract the BVP signals. These hand-crafted algorithms usually make certain
assumptions about the background noises, e.g., the motion
has the same influence to the intensity variations of different color channels, based on which the CHROM method
can remove the motion influence by computing the ratio between three channels [8]. However, since the human face
is not an ideal Lambertian object, such assumptions do not
always hold for every facial region. As a result, while the
hand-crafted methods may not require training and have relatively good generalization ability, there is still big room to
improve the physiological measurement accuracy. In addition, hand-crafted methods may not effectively leverage big
training dataset to learn informative features even when a

12404

