ReAgent: Point Cloud Registration using Imitation and Reinforcement Learning
Dominik Bauer, Timothy Patten and Markus Vincze
TU Wien
Vienna, Austria
{bauer,patten,vincze}@acin.tuwien.ac.at

Abstract
Point cloud registration is a common step in many 3D
computer vision tasks such as object pose estimation, where
a 3D model is aligned to an observation. Classical registration methods generalize well to novel domains but fail
when given a noisy observation or a bad initialization.
Learning-based methods, in contrast, are more robust but
lack in generalization capacity. We propose to consider iterative point cloud registration as a reinforcement learning task and, to this end, present a novel registration agent
(ReAgent). We employ imitation learning to initialize its
discrete registration policy based on a steady expert policy. Integration with policy optimization, based on our proposed alignment reward, further improves the agent’s registration performance. We compare our approach to classical and learning-based registration methods on both ModelNet40 (synthetic) and ScanObjectNN (real data) and show
that our ReAgent achieves state-of-the-art accuracy. The
lightweight architecture of the agent, moreover, enables reduced inference time as compared to related approaches.
Code is available at github.com/dornik/reagent.

1. Introduction
Depending on the application domain, point cloud registration methods need to fulfill a range of properties. For
example, AR applications and robotics applications require
real-time inference speed and robustness to unexpected observations. In such real-world deployment, generalization
to categories that were not seen during training is required.
Further, registration approaches also need to generalize to
different tasks, such as object pose estimation or scan alignment. Finally, an interaction with or scrutiny by a human
might be required. For this, the method’s steps need to
be interpretable. These properties are often competing and
thus difficult to achieve using a single approach.
As diverse as the required properties are the approaches
that are proposed to solve point cloud registration. Distinctive features of proposed methods are global [28, 30]

Figure 1: Iterative registration using ReAgent. The source
point cloud (cyan) is aligned to the target point cloud (gray),
starting from an initial source (magenta). ReAgent follows
policy π by taking action ai = arg maxa π(a|Oi ) given the
current observation Oi , improving registration step-by-step.

or local optimality [3], as well as one-shot [24] or iterative
computation [1]. Global considerations allow for greater
robustness to initial conditions than local methods, albeit at
the cost of significantly increased computation time. While
iterative methods may achieve higher accuracy than oneshot approaches through repeated registration, they may diverge over multiple steps. Furthermore, learning-based approaches are proposed in related work [24, 1, 25, 5], which
are shown to be more robust to initialization and noise than
classical approaches. However, these methods are not robust to domain change, e.g., when transferred to novel tasks.
In an effort to bridge this performance gap between
methods, we design a novel registration approach that unifies accuracy, robustness to noise and initialization with inference speed. While reinforcement learning methods for
RGB-based object pose refinement are proposed [22, 4], to
the best of our knowledge, we are the first to consider 3D
point cloud registration as a reinforcement learning problem. Our approach is based on a combination of Imitation
Learning (IL) and Reinforcement Learning (RL); imitating
an expert to learn an accurate initial policy, reinforcing a
symmetry-invariant reward to further improve the policy.

14586

