Learning Semantic Person Image Generation by Region-Adaptive Normalization
Zhengyao Lv1 , Xiaoming Li1 , Xin Li2 , Fu Li2 , Tianwei Lin2 , Dongliang He2 , Wangmeng Zuo1,3(
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2
Department of Computer Vision Technology (VIS), Baidu Inc.
3
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China

)

cszy98@gmail.com {csxmli, wmzuo}@hit.edu.cn

Abstract
Human pose transfer has received great attention due
to its wide applications, yet is still a challenging task that
is not well solved. Recent works have achieved great success to transfer the person image from the source to the
target pose. However, most of them cannot well capture
the semantic appearance, resulting in inconsistent and less
realistic textures on the reconstructed results. To address
this issue, we propose a new two-stage framework to handle the pose and appearance translation. In the first stage,
we predict the target semantic parsing maps to eliminate
the difficulties of pose transfer and further benefit the latter translation of per-region appearance style. In the second one, with the predicted target semantic maps, we suggest a new person image generation method by incorporating the region-adaptive normalization, in which it takes
the per-region styles to guide the target appearance generation. Extensive experiments show that our proposed
SPGNet can generate more semantic, consistent, and photorealistic results and perform favorably against the state of
the art methods in terms of quantitative and qualitative
evaluation. The source code and model are available at
https://github.com/cszy98/SPGNet.git.

1. Introduction
Given an image of a specific person under a certain perspective or pose, the human pose transfer task aims to generate images of the person with the same appearance and
meanwhile under the given target pose, which more importantly, are expected to be as photo-realistic as possible. The
task has a wide range of applications, such as generating
videos with pose sequences [2, 8, 12, 19, 40], data augmentation for person re-identification task [28, 47] and multi-view
display for virtual try-on [14, 41, 42].
Basically, human pose transfer is a non-rigid deformation
of the 3D human. Only using one 2D source image and target
pose to generate another view of the human body is still a

challenging task due to the following difficulties: (i) spatial
rearrangement of the appearance features, (ii) the inference
of the self-occlusion region, (iii) the photo-realistic results.
All these make the task valuable and remain an active topic
in the community of computer vision.
On the one hand, along with the rapid development of
deep learning, cGAN [24] based human pose transfer methods [22, 27, 36] have achieved significant progress. However,
this task is an unaligned image to image translation due to
the inconsistent poses between the source and target images.
Directly taking the concatenation of the source appearance
and target pose into a general encoder-decoder framework
cannot fully exploit the correspondence between the source
and target appearance, thus resulting in less realistic results.
On the other hand, to facilitate the spatial rearrangement
of the source appearance, deformation [18, 19, 29, 31] and
disentanglement [5, 23] based methods have been suggested.
Albeit the appearance alignment problem can be addressed,
the generated distortion and blurry appearance caused by the
warped and disentangled features are inevitable, giving rise
to visually unpleasing results. The recent progressive generation [35, 47] also achieved plausible performance, but the
final results usually lose semantic details. Though improvements have been obtained, the semantic generation remains
uninvestigated reasonably in the human pose transfer task.
In this paper, we present a two-stage framework to address the above issues. In the first stage, we predict the
target semantic parsing maps. Compared with these directly
generating the target image, the prediction of target parsing
maps is much easier, because we do not need to consider the
texture translation and this will make the network focus on
only one single task, i.e., pose transfer without considering
the effect of appearance that may bring the burden to the
learning of the network. With the given pose and source
parsing map, we suggest a SPATN model to generate the
target semantic maps in a progressive manner. We observe
that the target semantic maps can bring the following benefits: (i) it can not only provide the pose information, but

10806

