Reformulating HOI Detection as Adaptive Set Prediction
Mingfei Chen1,3 * Yue Liao2 * Si Liu2† Zhiyuan Chen3 Fei Wang3 Chen Qian3
1
Huazhong University of Science and Technology
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University 3 SenseTime Research

Abstract

Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection aims to identify HOI triplets <human, verb, object> from a given image, it is an important step toward the high-level semantic
understanding [8, 26, 46, 18, 17, 19, 6, 7, 44]. Conventional HOI methods can be divided into two-stage methods [38, 3, 10, 25, 24, 14, 9, 35] and one-stage methods [20, 27]. Most two-stage methods detect instances (humans and objects), and match the detected humans and objects one by one to form pair-wise proposals in the first
stage. Next, in the second stage, such methods infer the
interactions based on the features of cropped human-object
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author (liusi@buaa.edu.cn)

Aggregated Features
Interaction
Query Set

Ground-truth
Interaction
Prediction Set
drive

…

1. Introduction

(a) Union boxes: verb "direct" in yellow, "drive" (b) Interaction midpoints: verb "direct" in yellow,
in purple, matched anchor in red.
"drive" in purple, matched point in red.

…

Determining which image regions to concentrate is critical for Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection. Conventional HOI detectors focus on either detected human and
object pairs or pre-defined interaction locations, which limits learning of the effective features. In this paper, we reformulate HOI detection as an adaptive set prediction problem, with this novel formulation, we propose an Adaptive
Set-based one-stage framework (AS-Net) with parallel instance and interaction branches. To attain this, we map a
trainable interaction query set to an interaction prediction
set with transformer. Each query adaptively aggregates the
interaction-relevant features from global contexts through
multi-head co-attention. Besides, the training process is
supervised adaptively by matching each ground-truth with
the interaction prediction. Furthermore, we design an effective instance-aware attention module to introduce instructive features from the instance branch into the interaction branch. Our method outperforms previous stateof-the-art methods without any extra human pose and language features on three challenging HOI detection datasets.
Especially, we achieve over 31% relative improvement on
a large scale HICO-DET dataset. Code is available at
https://github.com/yoyomimi/AS-Net.

direct

Adaptive Feature Aggregation
Adaptive Set-based Ground-truth Matching
(c) Our adaptive set prediction method: verb "drive" in purple, "direct" in yellow. Interaction vectors
point from human centers to object centers. The features aggregated by queries are visualized at left.

Figure 1. Both the anchor-based (a) and point-based (b) one-stage
methods infer two different interactions “drive” and “direct” are at
similar location and concentrate on the similar features. Our set
prediction method (c) maps an interaction query set to an interaction prediction set by an interaction decoder. Then, interaction
predictions are adaptively matched with ground-truth. To attain
this, we first train a set of learnable embeddings as an interaction
query set. Next, each interaction query adaptively aggregates the
interaction-relevant features by co-attention. Finally, we match
each ground-truth with prediction for adaptive supervision. This
mechanism empowers our method to accurately predict two interactions for “drive” and “direct”. Best viewed in color.

pair-wise proposals. Two-stage methods have made great
progress in HOI detection, however, their efficiency and effectiveness are limited by their serial architectures. With the
development of one-stage object detectors, one-stage HOI
detectors [20, 27] have raised a new fashion. Existing onestage HOI detectors formulate HOI detection as a parallel
detection problem, which detects the HOI triplets from an
image directly. One-stage methods have delivered great improvements in both efficiency and effectiveness.
Determining which regions to concentrate on is critical and challenging for HOI detectors. To obtain essential features for interaction prediction, conventional two-

9004

