Connecting What to Say With Where to Look
by Modeling Human Attention Traces
Zihang Meng1 , Licheng Yu2 , Ning Zhang2 , Tamara Berg2 ,
Babak Damavandi2 , Vikas Singh1 , and Amy Bearman2
1

University of Wisconsin Madison

2

Facebook AI

zmeng29@wisc.edu, vsingh@biostat.wisc.edu
{lichengyu,ningzhang,tlberg,babakd,abearman}@fb.com

Abstract
We introduce a unified framework to jointly model images, text, and human attention traces. Our work is built
on top of the recent Localized Narratives annotation framework [31], where each word of a given caption is paired
with a mouse trace segment. We propose two novel tasks:
(1) predict a trace given an image and caption (i.e., visual
grounding), and (2) predict a caption and a trace given
only an image. Learning the grounding of each word is
challenging, due to noise in the human-provided traces and
the presence of words that cannot be meaningfully visually
grounded. We present a novel model architecture that is
jointly trained on dual tasks (controlled trace generation
and controlled caption generation). To evaluate the quality
of the generated traces, we propose a local bipartite matching (LBM) distance metric which allows the comparison
of two traces of different lengths. Extensive experiments
show our model is robust to the imperfect training data
and outperforms the baselines by a clear margin. Moreover, we demonstrate that our model pre-trained on the proposed tasks can be also beneficial to the downstream task of
COCO’s guided image captioning. Our code1 and project
page2 are publicly available.

1. Introduction
The development of powerful models and algorithms
within computer vision and natural language processing
proceeded along distinct trajectories with only occasional
overlap until recently. However, ideas from these two fields
are gradually converging, with a focus on building multimodal models, particularly for aligning visual and language
stimuli [25, 35, 34, 10]. The goal of these models is to
1 Code: github.com/facebookresearch/connect-caption-and-trace
2 Project page: http://pages.cs.wisc.edu/∼zihangm/connect caption trace

Figure 1: The three vision-and-language tasks, as illustrated
on a single example from the Localized Narratives dataset.
The first and third depicted tasks are novel.

mimic humans’ extraordinary abilities to compress information and translate it across modalities. Several joint or
combined visual recognition and natural language understanding tasks have emerged as natural tests of these visionand-language models’ capabilities. Image captioning asks
a model to identify and localize the key scene elements in
an image and describe them in natural language form. Visual grounding, and specifically phrase localization, asks a
model to solve the reverse problem: given a natural language query, identify the target object(s) of the query in
the image. Controlled image captioning, first introduced
in [12], combines the two tasks. Here, an external user is
asked to specify which parts of the image they want described and in what order (e.g., by providing an ordered sequence of bounding boxes). The output captions are therefore explicitly grounded in the image. One application of
this line of work is automatically generating localized descriptions of images for visually impaired users on social

12679

