Learning Decision Trees Recurrently Through Communication
Stephan Alaniz1,2 Diego Marcos3 Bernt Schiele2 Zeynep Akata1,2,4
1
University of Tübingen 2 MPI for Informatics 3 Wageningen University 4 MPI for Intelligent Systems

Abstract
Is it furry?

Integrated interpretability without sacrificing the prediction accuracy of decision making algorithms has the potential of greatly improving their value to the user. Instead of
assigning a label to an image directly, we propose to learn
iterative binary sub-decisions, inducing sparsity and transparency in the decision making process. The key aspect of
our model is its ability to build a decision tree whose structure is encoded into the memory representation of a Recurrent Neural Network jointly learned by two models communicating through message passing. In addition, our model
assigns a semantic meaning to each decision in the form
of binary attributes, providing concise, semantic and relevant rationalizations to the user. On three benchmark image
classification datasets, including the large-scale ImageNet,
our model generates human interpretable binary decision
sequences explaining the predictions of the network while
maintaining state-of-the-art accuracy.

1. Introduction
The decision mechanism of deep Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) is often hidden from the user, hindering their employment in critical applications such as healthcare, where a thorough understanding of this mechanism
may be required. The aim for analyzing the decision mechanism, i.e. introspection, is to reveal the internal process
of the decision maker to a machine learning practitioner or
user [48]. However, models offering explanations through
introspection may result in a performance loss [18, 45].
Incorporating recent advances in multi-agent communication [15], we formulate the decision process as an iterative decision tree and embed its structure into the memory
representation of a Recurrent Neural Network (RNN). Our
model uses message-passing [20] with discrete symbols
from a vocabulary. A tunable parameter controls whether
to learn this vocabulary from scratch or to map it to humanunderstandable attributes assigning a meaning to every decision to improve its interpretability. Further, encoding the
decision tree into the memory of an RNN retains the flexibility and performance of CNNs while being scalable. In-

N

Y

Yes
Does it have
whiskers?

N

Y

No
It’s a dog!

Figure 1: Our Recurrent Decision Tree (RDT) (left) asks
questions, Attribute-based Learner (AbL) (right) answers
with a yes/no s.t. the accuracy improves after each step.

stead of requiring an exponential number of tree nodes with
increasing depth, our model learns orders of magnitude
fewer nodes with a constant number of model parameters
for an arbitrary tree depth. After training, our neural model
can be converted exactly into a standard decision tree, being
computationally efficient at test time.
Our framework (see Figure 1) exposes a decision path in
the form of an explainable decision chain by breaking down
the decision process into multiple binary decisions. Our recurrent decision-tree (RDT) (blue) does not see the image,
and has to infer the image class, e.g. dog, by recurrently
asking binary questions, e.g. does it have whiskers? Our
attribute-based learner (AbL) (red) answers these questions
with yes/no by looking at the image, allowing the RDT to
update the class probabilities and the memory representation of the previous questions and answers. This is repeated
until the RDT reaches a final decision and the decision tree
becomes easily understandable as it associates the binary
answers with semantic attributes, e.g. has whiskers.
Our contributions are: 1) We propose a recurrent decision tree model (RDTC) with hard node splits and overcome current limitations of decision trees in terms of depth
scalability and flexibility; 2) We predict attributes in an
end-to-end manner allowing human-interpretable explanations; 3) We showcase on three datasets that our model
generates explainable decision trees more efficiently than
related methods while retaining the performance of nonexplainable CNNs. Our code is publicly available at:
https://github.com/ExplainableML/rdtc.

13518

