Learning to Track Instances without Video Annotations
Yang Fu1∗ , Sifei Liu2 , Umar Iqbal2 , Shalini De Mello2
Humphrey Shi1,3† , Jan Kautz2
1 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, 2 NVIDIA, 3 University of Oregon

Abstract

1. Introduction
In recent years, the vision community has rapidly improved the performance of instance segmentation at both the
image and video levels as a core technique in autonomous
driving. The pipeline for segmenting instances from videos
commonly includes: (i) segmentation on individual frame;
and (ii) linking of each instance across frames for an entire video sequence. Most existing approaches [5, 8, 23, 43]
employ fully-supervised learning that relies on dense annotations of instance segmentation masks and instance asso∗ This work was done while Yang Fu was a research intern at NVIDIA
† corresponding author
1 Project page: https://oasisyang.github.io/projects/
semi-track/index.html

…

…

…

…
…

Tracking segmentation masks of multiple instances has
been intensively studied, but still faces two fundamental
challenges: 1) the requirement of large-scale, frame-wise
annotation, and 2) the complexity of two-stage approaches.
To resolve these challenges, we introduce a novel semisupervised framework by learning instance tracking networks with only a labeled image dataset and unlabeled
video sequences. With an instance contrastive objective,
we learn an embedding to discriminate each instance from
the others. We show that even when only trained with images, the learned feature representation is robust to instance
appearance variations, and is thus able to track objects
steadily across frames. We further enhance the tracking
capability of the embedding by learning correspondence
from unlabeled videos in a self-supervised manner. In addition, we integrate this module into single-stage instance
segmentation and pose estimation frameworks, which significantly reduce the computational complexity of tracking
compared to two-stage networks. We conduct experiments
on the YouTube-VIS and PoseTrack datasets. Without any
video annotation efforts, our proposed method can achieve
comparable or even better performance than most fullysupervised methods1 .

Annotations in fully-supervised setting

large-scale videos

Annotations in our setting

…

Labeled Images

Unlabeled Videos

Figure 1. The annotations required for our proposed approach
vs. those for fully supervised approaches.

ciations across video frames (see Fig. 1 top). Since annotation of videos, especially in a per-frame manner requires
excessive labor, the fully-supervised learning setting, however, becomes the major bottleneck for frame-wise video
processing.
To reduce the dependence on labels, self-supervised
tracking approaches have been developed to learn pixellevel video correspondences from large-scale unlabeled
videos [17, 20, 39]. The learned correspondences can
be used to track any fine-grained attributes, e.g., segmentation masks, keypoints and textures, on a per-pixel basis. However, such self-supervised approaches aim to learn
semantically-independent representations, i.e., they do not
discriminate between object instances. Such approaches
can be used for tracking only when ground truth attributes
are annotated at keyframes, e.g., the 1st frame of any sequence [28]; or when additional pre-trained instance segmentation models are provided.
In this paper, we consider a novel semi-supervised setting: we learn to track instances only with a labeled image
dataset, and optionally, unlabeled video sequences. In other
words, in addition to learning image-level instance segmentation, we also learn to associate instances across frames
in a self-supervised manner. Our setting strikes a balance

8680

