Model-Aware Gesture-to-Gesture Translation
Hezhen Hu 1 , Weilun Wang 1 ,* Wengang Zhou 1,2 †, Weichao Zhao 1 , Houqiang Li 1,2†
1

CAS Key Laboratory of GIPAS, EEIS Department, University of Science and Technology of China (USTC)
2
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Hefei Comprehensive National Science Center
{alexhu, wwlustc, saruka}@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {zhwg, lihq}@ustc.edu.cn

Abstract
Hand gesture-to-gesture translation is a significant and
interesting problem, which serves as a key role in many applications, such as sign language production. This task involves fine-grained structure understanding of the mapping
between the source and target gestures. Current works follow a data-driven paradigm based on sparse 2D joint representation. However, given the insufficient representation
capability of 2D joints, this paradigm easily leads to blurry
generation results with incorrect structure. In this paper, we
propose a novel model-aware gesture-to-gesture translation
framework, which introduces hand prior with hand meshes
as the intermediate representation. To take full advantage
of the structured hand model, we first build a dense topology
map aligning the image plane with the encoded embedding
of the visible hand mesh. Then, a transformation flow is
calculated based on the correspondence of the source and
target topology map. During the generation stage, we inject
the topology information into generation streams by modulating the activations in a spatially-adaptive manner. Further, we incorporate the source local characteristic to enhance the translated gesture image according to the transformation flow. Extensive experiments on two benchmark
datasets have demonstrated that our method achieves new
state-of-the-art performance.

1. Introduction
Hand gesture-to-gesture translation aims to convert the
source gesture to the target one conditioned by the target
posture, while preserving identity information. This problem is of significant importance with broad applications
in sign language production, data augmentation, humancomputer interactions, etc. Hand exhibits highly articulated
joints and covers almost uniform appearance with fewer
local characteristics compared with rigid human bodies or
* Contribute equally with the first author.
† Corresponding author: Wengang Zhou and Houqiang Li.

Source
Image

Source
Condition

Target
Condition

Generated
Image

Prev.

Ours

Figure 1. Illustration of gesture-to-gesture translation. The first
and second row visualize the intermediate condition and generated
image of the previous method [34] and our method, respectively.
The samples are chosen from the STB dataset. Our method exhibits more accurate spatial structure and fine-grained details.

faces. As a result, it is characterized by more fine-grained
texture with self-occlusion and poses a new challenge on
learning the precise correspondence between the source and
the target for the task of gesture-to-gesture translation.
Previous methods [34, 19] encode the gesture state via
2D sparse joint representation. The source hand images are
translated according to the optical flow learned from the
source and target 2D joints. GestureGAN [34] attempts
to learn the mapping under two novel losses in a cycleconsistency manner. As shown in Fig. 1, we visualize the
intermediate representation and generated image by previous work and our method. It can be observed that the generated image by the comparison method contains incorrect
and blurry structure, while our method produces the image
with more fidelity in fine-grained details.
Previous methods follow a direct data-driven paradigm
and suffer unsatisfactory results due to limited representation capability and intrinsic ambiguity of 2D sparse hand
pose [34, 26]. To tackle this issue, we incorporate hand
prior and propose a model-aware gesture-to-gesture translation framework. Since hand gesture-to-gesture translation
needs fine-grained understanding of hand pose, shape and
texture, we attempt to depict the hand status more informatively. Specifically, we extract the hand representation in
a model-aware way. The hand model provides a compact
mapping from the latent pose and shape embedding to the
high-dimensional hand mesh representation. It is a fully-

16428

