Robust Reference-based Super-Resolution via C 2 -Matching
Yuming Jiang1 Kelvin C.K. Chan1 Xintao Wang2 Chen Change Loy1 Ziwei Liu1B
1
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University 2 Applied Research Center, Tencent PCG
{yuming002, chan0899, ccloy, ziwei.liu}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Reference-based Super-Resolution (Ref-SR) has recently
emerged as a promising paradigm to enhance a lowresolution (LR) input image by introducing an additional
high-resolution (HR) reference image. Existing Ref-SR
methods mostly rely on implicit correspondence matching
to borrow HR textures from reference images to compensate for the information loss in input images. However, performing local transfer is difficult because of two gaps between input and reference images: the transformation gap
(e.g. scale and rotation) and the resolution gap (e.g. HR and
LR). To tackle these challenges, we propose C 2 -Matching in
this work, which produces explicit robust matching crossing transformation and resolution. 1) For the transformation gap, we propose a contrastive correspondence network,
which learns transformation-robust correspondences using
augmented views of the input image. 2) For the resolution
gap, we adopt a teacher-student correlation distillation,
which distills knowledge from the easier HR-HR matching
to guide the more ambiguous LR-HR matching. 3) Finally,
we design a dynamic aggregation module to address the potential misalignment issue. In addition, to faithfully evaluate the performance of Ref-SR under a realistic setting, we
contribute the Webly-Referenced SR (WR-SR) dataset, mimicking the practical usage scenario. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that our proposed C 2 -Matching significantly
outperforms state of the arts by over 1dB on the standard
CUFED5 benchmark. Notably, it also shows great generalizability on WR-SR dataset as well as robustness across
large scale and rotation transformations 1 .

1. Introduction
Reference-based Super-Resolution (Ref-SR) [40, 39, 34,
26] has attracted substantial attention in recent years. Compared to Single-Image-Super-Resolution (SISR) [6, 13, 14,
17, 25, 4], where the only input is a single low-resolution
(LR) image, Ref-SR super-resolves the LR image with the
guidance of an additional high-resolution (HR) reference
1 Codes and datasets are available at https : / / github . com /
yumingj/C2-Matching.

xintao.wang@outlook.com

LR input image

SRNTT result

HR reference image

C2-Matching (ours) result

Figure 1. Cross transformation and Cross resolution matching
are performed in our C 2 -Matching. Our proposed C 2 -Matching
successfully transfers the HR details of the reference image by
finding more accurate correspondences. The correspondences
found by our method are marked in red and the correspondences
found by SRNTT [39] are marked in blue.

image. Textures of the HR reference image are transferred
to provide more fine details for the LR image.
The key step in texture transfer for Ref-SR is to find
correspondences between the input image and the reference image. Existing methods [39, 34, 32] perform correspondence matching implicitly. Their correspondences are
computed based on the content and appearance similarities,
which are then embedded into the main framework. However, it is a difficult task to accurately compute the correspondences under real-world variations due to two major
challenges: 1) the underlying transformation gap between
input images and reference images; 2) the resolution gap between input images and reference images. In Ref-SR, same
objects or similar texture patterns are often present in both
input images and reference images, but their appearances
vary due to scale and rotation transformations. In this case,
correspondences computed purely by appearance are inaccurate, leading to an unsatisfactory texture transfer. For the
resolution gap, due to the imbalance in the amount of information contained in an LR input image and an HR reference
image, the latter is often downsampled (to an LR image) to
match the former (in resolution). The downsampling operation inevitably results in information loss, hampering the
search for accurate correspondences, especially for the finetexture regions.

2103

