VirFace: Enhancing Face Recognition via Unlabeled Shallow Data
Wenyu Li1, *, Tianchu Guo*, Pengyu Li, Binghui Chen, Biao Wang, Wangmeng Zuo1( ) , Lei Zhang2
1
School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, China
2
Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, China
liwenyu27@gmail.com, antares tcguo@163.com, lipengyu007@gmail.com,
chenbinghui@bupt.edu.cn, wangbiao225@foxmail.com, wmzuo@hit.edu.cn, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recently, how to exploit unlabeled data for training face
recognition models has been attracting increasing attention. However, few works consider the unlabeled shallow
data1 in real-world scenarios. The existing semi-supervised
face recognition methods that focus on generating pseudo
labels or minimizing softmax classification probabilities of
the unlabeled data do not work very well on the unlabeled
shallow data. It is still a challenge on how to effectively utilize the unlabeled shallow face data to improve the performance of face recognition. In this paper, we propose a novel
face recognition method, named VirFace, to effectively exploit the unlabeled shallow data for face recognition. VirFace consists of VirClass and VirInstance. Specifically, VirClass enlarges the inter-class distance by injecting the unlabeled data as new identities, while VirInstance produces virtual instances sampled from the learned distribution of each
identity to further enlarge the inter-class distance. To the
best of our knowledge, we are the first to tackle the problem
of unlabeled shallow face data. Extensive experiments have
been conducted on both the small- and large-scale datasets,
e.g. LFW and IJB-C, etc, demonstrating the superiority of
the proposed method.

1. Introduction
Deep face recognition has benefit much from loss function [17, 30, 29, 6] and large-scale labeled datasets [28, 2,
10, 1]. Meanwhile, considering the fact that it is easy to
obtain large amount of unlabeled face data while annotating these unlabeled data is time-consuming, several works
[35, 34, 33, 36] has been proposed trying to enhance face
recognition performance via the unlabeled face data. However, in real-world scenarios, the unlabeled face data prefers
containing large amount of identities but only very few im* Equal contribution.
1 Shallow data means there are only few images per identity [8].

Figure 1. The dilemma of the existing semi-supervised face recognition methods on shallow data. (a) shows the clustering results
of shallow data. In this figure, the error clusters are marked with
red and purple circles. It is obvious that shallow data is hard to
be well clustered. (b) presents the optimal problem of UIR loss.
During training, the goal of optimizing these unlabeled data is to
move them towards the centroid point of the labeled data. This is
hard to optimize and may converge into a trivial solution.

ages per identity, namely shallow face data [8]. For better quantitative analysis, we define the shallow data as the
data with no more than 5 images per identity in this paper.
In such situation, we find that the existing semi-supervised
learning methods [35, 34, 33, 36] do not work well.
Specifically, the clustering based methods [34, 33, 36]
intend to assign the unlabeled data with pseudo-labels, and
then combining with the labeled data together to train a new
model. However, it is hard to cluster the shallow data as
shown in Figure 1(a). In this figure, the red circles denote
the error clusters that the samples from different identities
are clustered into a same category, while the purple circles
represent another kind of the clustering error that the samples from the same identity are clustered into different categories. Another work [35] proposed Unknown Identity Rejection(UIR) loss to make the unlabeled data be rejected by
all the identities. However, as shown in Figure 1(b), it is
easy to optimize the model to converge into a trivial solu-

14729

