Learning to Reconstruct High Speed and High Dynamic Range Videos
from Events

1

Yunhao Zou1
Yinqiang Zheng2
Tsuyoshi Takatani3
Ying Fu 1∗
2
3
Beijing Institute of Technology
The University of Tokyo
National Institute of Informatics

Abstract
Event cameras are novel sensors that capture the dynamics of a scene asynchronously. Such cameras record event
streams with much shorter response latency than images
captured by conventional cameras, and are also highly sensitive to intensity change, which is brought by the triggering
mechanism of events. On the basis of these two features,
previous works attempt to reconstruct high speed and high
dynamic range (HDR) videos from events. However, these
works either suffer from unrealistic artifacts, or cannot provide sufficiently high frame rate. In this paper, we present
a convolutional recurrent neural network which takes a
sequence of neighboring events to reconstruct high speed
HDR videos, and temporal consistency is well considered to
facilitate the training process. In addition, we setup a prototype optical system to collect a real-world dataset with
paired high speed HDR videos and event streams, which
will be made publicly accessible for future researches in
this field. Experimental results on both simulated and real
scenes verify that our method can generate high speed HDR
videos with high quality, and outperform the state-of-the-art
reconstruction methods.

1. Introduction
Compared with ordinary cameras that capture scene intensities at a fixed frame rate, event cameras work in a quite
different way of detecting pixel-wise intensity changes.
One unique feature of event camera is that an event is
triggered whenever the intensity change of a pixel reaches
certain contrast threshold, thus events are recorded asynchronously. Event cameras have quite a few advantages
over conventional frame-based ones, e.g., low latency, low
power, high temporal resolution, and high dynamic range
(HDR) [6]. Thanks to these features, event cameras are beneficial for different vision tasks including real-time object
tracking [24], high speed motion estimation [17], optical
flow estimation [7, 18], depth map prediction [42], egomo∗ Corresponding Author: fuying@bit.edu.cn

tion estimation [41], and on-board robotics [37].
Since event cameras record intensity changes without
any absolute intensity, they cannot be directly used for existing image-based vision algorithms. Very recently, researches have been conducted to reconstruct high speed
and HDR intensity images/videos [22, 32, 33] from events,
which open up new usage of event cameras. In spite of that,
the reconstructed high speed and HDR videos are still unsatisfactory in terms of visual quality. This motivates us to
explore a better way of video reconstruction from events.
One possible reason for the insufficiency of reconstruction quality might be the shortage of high-quality learning
data. For example, existing researches [22, 32, 33] unanimously try to simulate events by using a simulator, such as
ESIM [21]. However, high-speed HDR videos appropriate
for data simulation are extremely rare, and the movement of
a virtual event camera might not be realistic. Furthermore,
although substantial efforts [28] have been made to improve
the simulator, it still remains unknown how the simulated
events comply with real events recorded by event cameras,
especially when considering that complex factors like noise
and data transfer bandwidth limitations are presented in a
real event camera. This triggers us to develop proper imaging devices to capture paired high speed HDR videos and
events. Besides, these works [22, 32, 33] either ignore temporal constraints, or use a suboptimal flow warping loss.
These also affect the video reconstruction quality.
In this paper, we make full use of the high frame rate and
HDR features of event streams, to reconstruct high speed
HDR videos from events. Specifically, we propose a convolutional recurrent neural network for high speed HDR
video reconstruction. In order to minimize the temporal discontinuity along frame sequences, a temporal consistency
constraint is designed based on the physical formation of
events. In addition, we collect paired high speed HDR and
event data in real scenes through our elaborately designed
imaging prototype, which will be accessible publicly to facilitate other researchers in this field. Experimental results
show that our method can achieve state-of-the-art reconstruction performance, and introducing paired real-world
data in the training stage further help the model to handle

2024

