FedDG: Federated Domain Generalization on Medical Image Segmentation
via Episodic Learning in Continuous Frequency Space

1

Quande Liu1 , Cheng Chen1 , Jing Qin2 , Qi Dou1, *, Pheng-Ann Heng1
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
School of Nursing, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University
{qdliu, cchen, qdou, pheng}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, harry.qin@polyu.edu.hk

Abstract

: Source domain

?

: Unseen domain
: Data parivacy

Data collaboration across multiple medical institutions is
increasingly desired to build accurate and robust data-driven
deep networks for medical image segmentation [7, 18, 50].
Federated learning (FL) [20] has recently opened the door
for a promising privacy-preserving solution, which allows
training a model on distributed datasets while keeping data
* Corresponding author

Local data

: Central server

Local episodic learning
Transformed data with
multi-source distributions

: Model

...

1. Introduction

Local client k

(a)

...

Federated learning allows distributed medical institutions to collaboratively learn a shared prediction model
with privacy protection. While at clinical deployment, the
models trained in federated learning can still suffer from
performance drop when applied to completely unseen hospitals outside the federation. In this paper, we point out and
solve a novel problem setting of federated domain generalization (FedDG), which aims to learn a federated model
from multiple distributed source domains such that it can
directly generalize to unseen target domains. We present
a novel approach, named as Episodic Learning in Continuous Frequency Space (ELCFS), for this problem by enabling each client to exploit multi-source data distributions
under the challenging constraint of data decentralization.
Our approach transmits the distribution information across
clients in a privacy-protecting way through an effective continuous frequency space interpolation mechanism. With the
transferred multi-source distributions, we further carefully
design a boundary-oriented episodic learning paradigm to
expose the local learning to domain distribution shifts and
particularly meet the challenges of model generalization in
medical image segmentation scenario. The effectiveness
of our method is demonstrated with superior performance
over state-of-the-arts and in-depth ablation experiments on
two medical image segmentation tasks. The code is available at https://github.com/liuquande/FedDG-ELCFS.

?

Amplitude spectrum
(frequency space)

(b)

Figure 1. (a) The novel problem setting of federated domain generalization (FedDG), which aims to learn a federated model from
multiple decentralized source domains such that it can directly
generalize to completely unseen target domains. (b) Our main
idea to tackle FedDG by transferring distribution information in
frequency space and episodic learning at each local client.

locally. The paradigm works in a way that each local client
(e.g., hospital) learns from their own data, and only aggregates the model parameters at a certain frequency at the central server to generate a global model. All the data samples
are kept within each local client during federated training.
Although FL has witnessed some pilot progress on medical image segmentation tasks [4, 44, 49], all existing works
only focus on improving model performance on the internal
clients, while neglecting model generalizability onto unseen
domains outside the federation. This is a crucial problem
impeding wide applicability of FL models in real practice.
The testing medical images encountered in unseen hospitals can differ significantly from the source clients in terms
of data distributions, due to the variations in imaging scanners and protocols. How to generalize the federated model
under such distribution shifts is technically challenging yet
unexplored so far. In this work, we identify the novel problem setting of Federated Domain Generalization (FedDG),
which aims to learn a federated model from multiple decentralized source domains such that it can directly generalize
to completely unseen domains, as illustrated in Fig. 1 (a).
Unseen domain generalization (DG) is an active research
topic with different methods being proposed [3, 8, 11, 24,
25, 26, 29, 37, 43], but the federated paradigm with dis-

1013

