Hierarchical Lovász Embeddings for Proposal-free Panoptic Segmentation
Tommi Kerola1 * Jie Li2 Atsushi Kanehira1 Yasunori Kudo1 Alexis Vallet1
1
Preferred Networks, Inc. 2 Toyota Research Institute (TRI)

Adrien Gaidon2

Abstract
Panoptic segmentation brings together two separate tasks:
instance and semantic segmentation. Although they are related, unifying them faces an apparent paradox: how to
learn simultaneously instance-specific and category-specific
(i.e. instance-agnostic) representations jointly. Hence, stateof-the-art panoptic segmentation methods use complex models with a distinct stream for each task. In contrast, we propose Hierarchical Lovász Embeddings, per pixel feature
vectors that simultaneously encode instance- and categorylevel discriminative information. We use a hierarchical
Lovász hinge loss to learn a low-dimensional embedding
space structured into a unified semantic and instance hierarchy without requiring separate network branches or
object proposals. Besides modeling instances precisely in a
proposal-free manner, our Hierarchical Lovász Embeddings
generalize to categories by using a simple Nearest-ClassMean classifier, including for non-instance “stuff” classes
where instance segmentation methods are not applicable.
Our simple model achieves state-of-the-art results compared
to existing proposal-free panoptic segmentation methods on
Cityscapes, COCO, and Mapillary Vistas. Furthermore, our
model demonstrates temporal stability between video frames.

1. Introduction
Holistic scene understanding is an important task in computer vision, where a model is trained to explain each pixel
in an image, whether that pixel describes stuff – uncountable
regions of similar texture such as grass, road or sky – or thing
– a countable object with individually identifying characteristics, such as people or cars. While holistic scene understanding received some early attention [49, 55, 48], modern
deep learning-based methods have mainly tackled the tasks
of modeling stuff and things independently under the task
names semantic segmentation and instance segmentation.
Recently, Kirillov et al. proposed the panoptic quality (PQ)
metric for unifying these two parallel tracks into the holistic
task of panoptic segmentation [24]. Panoptic segmentation
* Correspondence to tommi@preferred.jp

Figure 1. Example panoptic segmentation using our method (bottom left). Predictions are decoded from our Hierarchical Lovász
Embeddings, which encode both instance and class information.
The rightmost columns illustrate distances in embedding space
between all pixels and a target pixel in red (warmer colors denote
smaller distances). We can see the hierarchical structure: pixels on
the same instance being closest, and pixels on other instances in
the same category being closer than pixels from other categories.

is a key step for visual understanding, with applications in
fields such as autonomous driving or robotics, where it is
crucial to know both the locations of dynamically trackable
things, as well as static stuff classes. For example, an autonomous car needs to be able to both avoid other cars with
high precision, as well as understand the location of the road
and sidewalk to stay on a desired path.
A strong but complex baseline for panoptic segmentation
is to run independent methods for semantic segmentation
and instance segmentation, and then fusing the results. To
improve upon this, previous works combine both tasks in a
joint model [52, 23, 27]. Early methods focus more on a joint
model and the majority of them leverage two-stage instance
detection models [43, 52, 23, 29, 13]; some recent works
propose bottom-up [15, 9, 53], yet instance and semantic
segmentation are still treated separately. Performing panoptic
segmentation as a single task without duplicated information
across sub-tasks remains an interesting question.
Intuitively, instances are contained in semantics, where
semantic representations have higher variance in the embedding space to describe a general category, whereas instances
have smaller variance to capture object-specific characteristics. This constitutes a natural hierarchical relationship
between instances and semantics (cf. Figure 4).
In this work, we propose to model panoptic segmentation
as a unified task via a novel formulation of the problem:
learning hierarchical pixel embeddings. Creating a unified
embedding for the task opens up the potential of leverag-

14413

