End-to-end High Dynamic Range Camera Pipeline Optimization
Nicolas Robidoux1
Luis E. Garcı́a Capel1
1

Dong-eun Seo1
Avinash Sharma1

Algolux

Abstract
The real world is a 280 dB High Dynamic Range (HDR)
world which imaging sensors cannot record in a single shot.
HDR cameras acquire multiple measurements with different exposures, gains and photodiodes, from which an Image Signal Processor (ISP) reconstructs an HDR image.
Dynamic scene HDR image recovery is an open challenge
because of motion and because stitched captures have different noise characteristics, resulting in artifacts that ISPs
must resolve in real time at double-digit megapixel resolutions. Traditionally, ISP settings used by downstream vision
modules are chosen by domain experts; such frozen camera
designs are then used for training data acquisition and supervised learning of downstream vision modules. We depart
from this paradigm and formulate HDR ISP hyperparameter search as an end-to-end optimization problem, proposing a mixed 0th and 1st -order block coordinate descent optimizer that jointly learns sensor, ISP and detector network
weights using RAW image data augmented with emulated
SNR transition region artifacts. We assess the proposed
method for human vision and image understanding. For
automotive object detection, the method improves mAP and
mAR by 33% over expert-tuning and 22% over state-of-theart optimization methods, outperforming expert-tuned HDR
imaging and vision pipelines in all HDR laboratory rig and
field experiments.

1. Introduction
Real-world scenes have dynamic ranges that often exceed 1,000,000 :1 (120 dB) [50] and, in extreme cases
like tunnel exit in direct sunlight, reach over 200 dB.
This dynamic range must be captured by vision algorithms
for safety-critical decision making in robotics and navigation. Existing sensors cannot capture High Dynamic Range
(HDR) in a single shot [9, 12, 38]. As a result, modern
cameras rely on sequentially and spatially-multiplexed acquisition techniques, combining data acquired with different exposure times, gains and photodiodes.

2

Federico Ariza1
Felix Heide1,2

Princeton University

Image Signal Processors (ISPs) are low-level pipelines
implemented in hardware that convert RAW sensor pixel
data into images suitable for human viewing or scene understanding tasks such as object detection and classification.
ISPs thus form an essential interface and abstraction layer
between the sensor and the display or computer vision module. ISP processing blocks are configured with tens to hundreds of adjustable hyperparameters which define its static
and dynamic behavior [44, 46, 49, 58], for example adaptation to noise level. Choosing optimal ISP hyperparameter
values is challenging as they depend on the context in which
the camera is used (portraits and landscapes vs. all-weather
autonomous driving), on the specifics of the lens and sensor (before the ISP), and on the downstream task (display to
human viewers vs. object detection).
Traditionally, imaging experts have manually selected
ISP hyperparameter values using charts and visual inspection [44, 58]. The potential of automated loss-based
hardware ISP hyperparameter optimization in the lowdynamic range (LDR) context, using differentiable approximations [58] or 0th -order (derivative-free) methods [44, 46],
was recently established. These methods rely on gain
separability and consequently are limited to LDR image
processing; HDR optimization requires novel approaches.
End-to-end loss-based optimization has not included sensor hyperparameters and work on the optimization of nondifferentiable ISPs for CV [44, 58] has kept the downstream
Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) detector fixed. In
this work, we tackle HDR and jointly optimize the sensor,
ISP and CNN.
The search for optimal HDR imaging pipelines is an
open problem central to imaging and vision tasks in uncontrolled in-the-wild scenarios. Real-time applications, e.g.,
in robotics and autonomous driving, and high sensor resolutions, up to triple-digit megapixel counts, mandate efficient
hardware implementations [6]. Multiplexing makes HDR
processing an open challenge. Motion causes ghosting artifacts when captures acquired sequentially or with different
exposure times are stitched together [14]. Split-pixel sensors, with two or more diodes per pixel [60], reduce motion blur discrepancies but are often used with multiple ex-

6297

