Data-Uncertainty Guided Multi-Phase Learning for
Semi-Supervised Object Detection
Zhenyu Wang
Yali Li *
Ye Guo
Lu Fang
Shengjin Wang
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
{wangzy20, guo-y18}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {liyali13, fanglu, wgsgj}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
In this paper, we delve into semi-supervised object detection where unlabeled images are leveraged to break through
the upper bound of fully-supervised object detection. Previous semi-supervised methods based on pseudo labels are
severely degenerated by noise and prone to overfit to noisy
labels, thus are deficient in learning different unlabeled
knowledge well. To address this issue, we propose a datauncertainty guided multi-phase learning method for semisupervised object detection. We comprehensively consider
divergent types of unlabeled images according to their difficulty levels, utilize them in different phases, and ensemble
models from different phases together to generate ultimate
results. Image uncertainty guided easy data selection and
region uncertainty guided RoI Re-weighting are involved in
multi-phase learning and enable the detector to concentrate
on more certain knowledge. Through extensive experiments
on PASCAL VOC and MS COCO, we demonstrate that our
method behaves extraordinarily compared to baseline approaches and outperforms them by a large margin, more
than 3% on VOC and 2% on COCO.

1. Introduction
With the success of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) [19, 22], object detection methods have been promoted rapidly in recent years. Plenty of object detection
models [12, 11, 36, 34, 27] achieve superior performance
on benchmark datasets [10, 26]. However, these models
are heavily dependent on a large amount of fully-supervised
data with complete category and bounding box annotations,
which are labor-intensive to collect [20].
To address the preceding problems, semi-supervised object detection (SSOD) [37] receives much attention recently.
It exploits a large amount of unlabeled data to boost the
performance of fully-supervised object detection, especially
when only limited labeled data are available. Currently,
many SSOD methods [33] are established on pseudo labels
* Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

Figure 1: Frameworks for previous pseudo-label based
one-phase training (a) and our multi-phase method (b).
Image-level uncertainty based selection and region-level
uncertainty based re-weighting guide our multi-phase learning for handling noise in pseudo labels.
[23] and adopt the one-phase learning scheme in Fig. 1a.
With a pre-trained fully-supervised model on labeled images, pseudo annotations of unlabeled images are obtained.
These pseudo labels are treated as groundtruth of unlabeled
data and are integrated with annotations of labeled data to
train the SSOD model.
Despite that the one-phase learning is somewhat effective for SSOD, it is insufficient for knowledge excavation to
exploit the unlabeled data only once. The reason lies in the
fact that noise is inherently attached to pseudo annotations.
Deep learning based models have the potential to fit any
training annotation, even the incorrect ones. When pseudo
annotations are noisy with some false information, detection models are also able to ”learn” to fit them. This fitting
ability to incorrect annotations surpasses the representative

4568

