From Shadow Generation to Shadow Removal
Zhihao Liu1 , Hui Yin1,∗ , Xinyi Wu2 , Zhenyao Wu2 , Yang Mi3 , Song Wang2, *
1

Beijing Jiaotong University, China

2

University of South Carolina, USA

3

China Agriculture University, China

{16120394,hyin}@bjtu.edu.cn,{xinyiw,zhenyao}@email.sc.edu,miy@cau.edu.cn,songwang@cec.sc.edu

Abstract
Shadow removal is a computer-vision task that aims to
restore the image content in shadow regions. While almost all recent shadow-removal methods require shadowfree images for training, in ECCV 2020 Le and Samaras
introduces an innovative approach without this requirement
by cropping patches with and without shadows from shadow
images as training samples. However, it is still laborious
and time-consuming to construct a large amount of such
unpaired patches. In this paper, we propose a new G2RShadowNet which leverages shadow generation for weaklysupervised shadow removal by only using a set of shadow
images and their corresponding shadow masks for training. The proposed G2R-ShadowNet consists of three subnetworks for shadow generation, shadow removal and refinement, respectively and they are jointly trained in an endto-end fashion. In particular, the shadow generation subnet stylises non-shadow regions to be shadow ones, leading to paired data for training the shadow-removal sub-net.
Extensive experiments on the ISTD dataset and the Video
Shadow Removal dataset show that the proposed G2RShadowNet achieves competitive performances against the
current state of the arts and outperforms Le and Samaras’
patch-based shadow-removal method.

1. Introduction
Shadows are areas of darkness in a scene where the light
is fully or partially occluded. Shadows are very common in
natural images and might bring challenges to many existing computer vision tasks [24, 12, 18, 14]. Shadow removal
by restoring the image information in shadow regions have
been a long studied research problem [2, 15, 27, 19, 40, 23]
and has been shown to be beneficial to improve the performance in various tasks.
Recently, with the use of the convolutional neural networks (CNNs), many learning based shadow removal approaches [25, 32, 9, 10, 16, 22, 20, 17] have been proposed,
* Co-corresponding authors. Code is available at https://github.
com/hhqweasd/G2R-ShadowNet.

SR

Figure 1. An illustration of our basic idea of incorporating shadow
generation for learning shadow removal by using only shadow images. The pixels located in the pink and green boundaries of the
input shadow image form the shadow and random non-shadow regions, respectively. The pink and green arrows stand for the masking operation that only preserves the region with the value of 1 on
the mask, while the orange and blue arrows represent the process
of shadow generation and shadow removal, respectively.

resulting in significantly better performance than the traditional ones [4, 8, 13, 38]. For most of them [25, 32, 9, 16]
a set of paired shadow images and their corresponding
shadow-free version are used to train the network in a fullysupervised manner. However, it is difficult to capture and
collect such paired image data in uncontrolled natural environment due to the illumination change from time to time. If
we capture such data pairs in a controlled lab environment,
limited scenarios might also weaken the generalisation ability of the trained model.
To address these problems, recent researches [10, 22]
start to explore unsupervised methods for shadow removal
by using unpaired shadow and shadow-free images. However, these unsupervised methods might introduce huge domain gap between the shadow and shadow-free images in
the training set. In addition, in practice, it is still difficult
to capture a large set of shadow-free images with good variety. To handle this problem, in their ECCV20 paper [17],
Le and Samaras introduces a novel unsupervised shadow
removal method using only shadow images. More specifically, they leverage the fact that a shadow image usually
contains both shadow and non-shadow regions. This way,
a set of shadow and shadow-free patches can be cropped to

4927

