Semi-Supervised Video Deraining with Dynamical Rain Generator
Zongsheng Yue1 , Jianwen Xie2 , Qian Zhao1 , Deyu Meng1,3, *
1
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
2
Cognitive Computing Lab, Baidu Research, Bellevue, USA
3
The Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau, China
zsyzam@gmail.com, jianwen@ucla.edu, timmy.zhaoqian@gmail.com, dymeng@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
https://github.com/zsyOAOA/S2VD

Abstract
While deep learning (DL)-based video deraining methods have achieved significant successes in recent years, they
still have two major drawbacks. Firstly, most of them are
insufficient to model the characteristics of rain layers contained in rainy videos. In fact, the rain layers exhibit strong
visual properties (e.g., direction, scale, and thickness) in
spatial dimension and causal properties (e.g., velocity and
acceleration) in temporal dimension, and thus can be modeled by the spatial-temporal process in statistics. Secondly,
current DL-based methods rely heavily on the labeled training data, whose rain layers are synthetic, thus leading to a
deviation from real data. Such a gap between synthetic and
real data sets results in poor performance when applying
them to real scenarios. To address these issues, this paper
proposes a new semi-supervised video deraining method, in
which a dynamical rain generator is employed to fit the rain
layer for the sake of better depicting its intrinsic characteristics. Specifically, the dynamical generator consists of one
emission model and one transition model to simultaneously
encode the spatial appearance and temporal dynamics of
rain streaks, respectively, both of which are parameterized
by deep neural networks (DNNs). Furthermore, different
prior formats are designed for the labeled synthetic and
unlabeled real data so as to fully exploit their underlying
common knowledge. Last but not least, we design a Monte
Carlo-based EM algorithm to learn the model. Extensive
experiments are conducted to verify the superiority of the
proposed semi-supervised deraining model.

1. Introduction
Rain is a very common bad weather that exists in many
videos. The appearance of rain not only negatively affects
the visual quality of the video, but also seriously deterio* Corresponding author.

rates the performance of subsequent video processing algorithms, e.g., semantic segmentation [38], object detection
[9], and autonomous driving [7]. Thus, as a necessary video
pre-processing step, video deraining has attracted much attentions from the computer vision community.
As an ill-posed inverse problem raised by Garg and Nayar [15], various methods have been proposed to handle the
video deraining task [47]. Most of the traditional methods
focus on exploiting rational prior knowledge for the background or rain layers so as to obtain a proper separation
between them. For example, low-rankness [23, 24, 53] is
widely used to encode the temporal correlations of background video. As for rain streaks, many visual characteristics, such as photometric appearance [16], geometrical
features [41], chromatic consistency [36], local structure
correlations [8] and multi-scale convolutional sparse coding [31], have been explored in the past few years. Different from these deterministic assumptions for rain streaks,
Wei et al. [53] firstly regard them as random variables,
and use Gaussian mixture model (GMM) to fit them. Albeit substantiated to be effective in some ideal scenarios,
these traditional methods are mainly limited by the subjective manually-designed prior knowledge and huge computation burden.
Recently, owning to the powerful nonlinear fitting capability of DNNs, DL-based methods facilitate significant
improvements for the video deraining task. The core idea
of this methodology is to directly train a derainer parameterized by DNNs based on synthetic rainy/clean video pairs
in an end-to-end manner. Most of these methods leverage
different technologies, e.g., superpixel alignment [6], duallevel flow [56] and self-learning [58], to extract clean backgrounds from rainy videos. In addition, Liu et al. [34, 35]
design a recurrent network to jointly perform both the rain
degradation classification and rain removal tasks.
Even though these DL-based methods have achieved impressive deraining results on some synthetic benchmarks,
there still exists large room to further increase the perfor-

642

