Partial Feature Selection and Alignment for Multi-Source Domain Adaptation
Yangye Fu1 , Ming Zhang1,2 , Xing Xu1 *, Zuo Cao2 , Chao Ma2 , Yanli Ji1 , Kai Zuo2 , and Huimin Lu3
1
Center for Future Media & School of Computer Science and Engineering
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, China 2 MeiTuan
3
Department of Mechanical and Control Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Japan

Abstract
Multi-Source Domain Adaptation (MSDA), which dedicates to transfer the knowledge learned from multiple
source domains to an unlabeled target domain, has drawn
increasing attention in the research community. By assuming that the source and target domains share consistent key
feature representations and identical label space, existing
studies on MSDA typically utilize the entire union set of features from both the source and target domains to obtain the
feature map and align the map for each category and domain. However, the default setting of MSDA may neglect
the issue of “partialness”, i.e., 1) a part of the features contained in the union set of multiple source domains may not
present in the target domain; 2) the label space of the target domain may not completely overlap with the multiple
source domains. In this paper, we unify the above two cases
to a more generalized MSDA task as Multi-Source Partial
Domain Adaptation (MSPDA). We propose a novel model
termed Partial Feature Selection and Alignment (PFSA) to
jointly cope with both MSDA and MSPDA tasks. Specifically, we firstly employ a feature selection vector based on
the correlation among the features of multiple sources and
target domains. We then design three effective feature alignment losses to jointly align the selected features by preserving the domain information of the data sample clusters in
the same category and the discrimination between different classes. Extensive experiments on various benchmark
datasets for both MSDA and MSPDA tasks demonstrate that
our proposed PFSA approach remarkably outperforms the
state-of-the-art MSDA and unimodal PDA methods.

1. Introduction
Domain adaptation methods focus on reducing the domain shift [21, 30] between a single labeled source domain
and an unlabeled target domain. Recently, a more practical task termed Multi-Source Domain Adaptation (MSDA),
which dedicates to transfer the knowledge learned from
* Corresponding author.

multiple source domains to an unlabeled target domain, has
drawn much attention in the research community.
With MSDA datasets [20, 22], a variety of approaches
have been proposed aiming at different application scenarios, e.g., text classification [8], semantic segmentation [33],
person re-identification [7], and visual sentiment classification [13]. Recently, different MSDA strategies, such as adversarial learning [24, 32], and source distilling [34], have
been proposed to improve the performance on target domain
using labeled source domains. However, most of the existing MSDA methods conduct feature alignment on the entire
common features, ignoring the fact that some of the source
features may not present in the target domain, which may
contribute to negative transfer especially when the target
domain only shares a part of features with distinct source
domains. More practically, the label space of the target domain is unknown, i.e., the label shift between the source and
the target domain is ubiquitous.
Although several partial domain adaptation (PDA) researches [2, 3, 4, 31] have reported promising results, very
few previous works have paid attention to the situation
where multiple source domains are introduced while the
target domain does not share the identical label space as
the source domains. Thus, we raise a more challenging
but practical research topic named Multi-Source Partial Domain Adaptation (MSPDA): Leveraging multiple source domains with distinct label spaces, and perform tasks on the
target domain that does not share an identical label space
with any specific source domain. As illustrated in Figure
1, we make a comparison between the problem settings of
MSDA and MSPDA tasks. In MSDA tasks, all source domains and the target domain share an identical label space,
so all circles completely overlap each other. As for MSPDA
tasks, any pair of domains do not perfectly share the label
space, so some domain-specific labels can be witnessed. In
other words, the MSDA task can be considered as a special
case of the MSPDA task.
In this paper, we propose a novel end-to-end trainable model termed Partial Feature Selection and Alignment
(PFSA) to jointly tackle both MSDA and MSPDA problems. Based on the assumption that all of the target’s in-

16654

