Positive-Unlabeled Data Purification in the Wild for Object Detection
Jianyuan Guo1,2 , Kai Han1 , Han Wu2 , Chao Zhang3∗, Xinghao Chen1 ,
Chunjing Xu1 , Chang Xu2 , Yunhe Wang1∗
1

Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies. 2 School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, University of Sydney.
3
Key Lab of Machine Perception (MOE), Dept. of Machine Intelligence, Peking University.

{jianyuan.guo, kai.han, yunhe.wang}@huawei.com; chzhang@cis.pku.edu.cn c.xu@sydney.edu.au

Abstract
Deep learning based object detection approaches have
achieved great progress with the benefit from large amount
of labeled images. However, image annotation remains a
laborious, time-consuming and error-prone process. To further improve the performance of detectors, we seek to exploit all available labeled data and excavate useful samples from massive unlabeled images in the wild, which is
rarely discussed before. In this paper, we present a positiveunlabeled learning based scheme to expand training data
by purifying valuable images from massive unlabeled ones,
where the original training data are viewed as positive data
and the unlabeled images in the wild are unlabeled data. To
effectively utilized these purified data, we propose a selfdistillation algorithm based on hint learning and ground
truth bounded knowledge distillation. Experimental results
verify that the proposed positive-unlabeled data purification
can strengthen the original detector by mining the massive
unlabeled data. In particular, our method boosts the mAP
of FPN by +2.0% on COCO benchmark.

1. Introduction
As a fundamental but challenging task in computer vision, object detection has attracted increasing attention from
both academia and industry due to its significant role in numerous fields, including autonomous driving and surveillance video analysis. Recently, many object detection methods [4, 42, 28, 31, 41, 15, 9, 25, 14] have been proposed
and achieved great progress, pushing the related applications forward to the real world. However, most existing
methods rely on a great volume of fine annotated images as
training data to obtain a high-performance detector as illustrated in Figure 1(c) and keep benefiting from more available labeled data [30, 10, 24]. When the labeled data are
scarce, detectors are easy to severely overfit and fail to gen∗ Corresponding author.

eralize. However, it is a time-consuming and expensive process to build a qualified object detection dataset. According
to [45, 50], it takes annotators about 42 seconds to perform
one annotation task after they receive a thorough training
on that project. A label composed of bounding box coordinates and corresponding category needs to be annotated for
multiple objects in one image, each with a different label.
Many works have observed heavy dependence of object detection task on huge amount of training data. Some
of them try to tackle it from few-shot learning perspective [59, 22, 47, 11, 12, 53], which eliminates this phenomenon by transferring knowledge from data-abundant
base classes to the data-scarce novel classes as illustrated in
Figure 1(a). However, the inherent data imbalance problem
proposes an even greater challenge for these novel methods, e.g. the “train2017” set of COCO benchmark [30] contains 26k annotation boxes for category ”person” while only
198 for “hair drier”. Such cases of data scarce problem can
hardly be handled by few-shot learning.
Another trend of eliminating label dependence in object detection belongs to semi-supervised learning [44, 40,
46, 48, 34, 49, 52]. This line of work either generates labeled/unlabeled data by splitting a fully annotated dataset,
or directly using unlabeled data that have the same distribution with labeled ones as shown in Figure 1(b). The former
usually needs a predefined data scale and inevitably limit
the performance of detectors, while the latter often results
in the largely neglected problem of dataset bias, which is a
well known limitation of semi-supervised learning [35].
In contrast to the existing methods which only utilize
limited data, this paper aims at both improving the performance of object detectors and eliminating label dependence by exploiting massive unlabeled data from the wild.
As shown in Figure 1(d), the detector not only exploits as
much well annotated data (e.g. COCO [30] and VOC [10])
as possible, but also is provided with unlimited unlabeled
data from the wild (e.g. Flickr [19], ImageNet1 [5] and
1 Although ImageNet has image-level labels, there is no extra box-level
annotation, we choose to ignore all labels and treat the images as unlabeled.

2653

