Focus on Local: Detecting Lane Marker from Bottom Up via Key Point
Zhan Qu∗ Huan Jin Yang Zhou Zhen Yang Wei Zhang
Noah’s Ark Lab, Huawei Technologies
{quzhan, jinhuan3, zhouyang116, yang.zhen, wz.zhang}@huawei.com
Abstract
Mainstream lane marker detection methods are implemented by predicting the overall structure and deriving
parametric curves through post-processing. Complex lane
line shapes require high-dimensional output of CNNs to
model global structures, which further increases the demand for model capacity and training data. In contrast,
the locality of a lane marker has finite geometric variations
and spatial coverage. We propose a novel lane marker detection solution, FOLOLane, that focuses on modeling local patterns and achieving prediction of global structures
in a bottom-up manner. Specifically, the CNN models lowcomplexity local patterns with two separate heads, the first
one predicts the existence of key points, and the second refines the location of key points in the local range and correlates key points of the same lane line. The locality of
the task is consistent with the limited FOV of the feature in
CNN, which in turn leads to more stable training and better
generalization. In addition, an efficiency-oriented decoding algorithm was proposed as well as a greedy one, which
achieving 36% runtime gains at the cost of negligible performance degradation. Both of the two decoders integrated
local information into the global geometry of lane markers.
In the absence of a complex network architecture design, the
proposed method greatly outperforms all existing methods
on public datasets while achieving the best state-of-the-art
results and real-time processing simultaneously.

1. Introduction
In autonomous driving system (ADS), lane detection
plays an important role. On the one hand, the location of
host and other trafﬁc participants in the lane forms the basis of autonomous driving decisions. On the other hand,
the geometry of a lane marker can be viewed as an important landmark of the environment and aligned with a highresolution or vector map for high-precision positioning. At
the same time, lane detection has been widely used in Ad∗ Z. Qu is the corresponding author.

vanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) and is the basis
for some common features such as Lane Keep Assist (LKA)
and Adaptive Cruise Control (ACC).
Recent advances in lane detection can be attributed to
the development of convolutional neural networks (CNN).
Most existing methods adopt well-studied frameworks such
as semantic segmentation and object detection to parse lane
markers and transform the network output into parametric
curves through post-processing. However, the mostly used
frameworks can not be seamlessly generalized to curvedshaped lane lines because lane detection task requires precise representation of local positions and global shapes simultaneously, showing their own limitations.
The semantic segmentation-based approach predicts binary masks of lane marker regions, inserts clustering models into training and inference, groups masked pixels into
individual instances, and ﬁnally uses curve ﬁtting to parametric results. However, the clustering procedure complicates the training and inference pipeline. In addition, pixellevel inputs to curve ﬁtting are often redundant and noisy, all
of which bring negative impact to the accuracy of the ﬁnal
results. Fig.1(a) shows several cases where the prediction
errors may increase. Object detection approaches are originally designed for compact target and produce bounding
box as output, which is insensitive to pixel-level error when
faced with large-scale object. As for lane markers, they
typically span half or more of the image, and pixel-level localization errors signiﬁcantly impair detection performance,
which can be attributed to the limited ﬁeld of view (FOV)
of features learned through CNN being insufﬁcient to model
content that is too far apart. Fig.1(b) illustrates the effect of
FOV in complex scenario. Moreover, most of these solutions model global geometry directly, and the network must
produce high-dimensional outputs to describe the curves.
Theoretically, however, uncompact outputs increase the demand for data and model capacity, ultimately masking the
generalization ability of the resulting model.
Although the global structure of lane markers has some
complexity, we note that local lane markers are extremely
simple and that global lane markers can be approximated
by a combination of local line segments. Moreover, spa-

14122

