Hardness Sampling for Self-Training Based Transductive Zero-Shot Learning
Liu Bo,12 Qiulei Dong,134 Zhanyi Hu12
1
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
2
School of Future Technology, UCAS 3 School of Artificial Intelligence, UCAS
4
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
liubo2017@ia.ac.cn {qldong,huzy}@nlpr.ia.ac.cn,Corresponding author:Qiulei Dong

Abstract
Transductive zero-shot learning (T-ZSL) which could alleviate the domain shift problem in existing ZSL works, has
received much attention recently. However, an open problem in T-ZSL: how to effectively make use of unseen-class
samples for training, still remains. Addressing this problem, we first empirically analyze the roles of unseen-class
samples with different degrees of hardness in the training
process based on the uneven prediction phenomenon found
in many ZSL methods, resulting in three observations. Then,
we propose two hardness sampling approaches for selecting
a subset of diverse and hard samples from a given unseenclass dataset according to these observations. The first one
identifies the samples based on the class-level frequency of
the model predictions while the second enhances the former by normalizing the class frequency via an approximate
class prior estimated by an explored prior estimation algorithm. Finally, we design a new Self-Training framework
with Hardness Sampling for T-ZSL, called STHS, where an
arbitrary inductive ZSL method could be seamlessly embedded and it is iteratively trained with unseen-class samples selected by the hardness sampling approach. We introduce two typical ZSL methods into the STHS framework
and extensive experiments demonstrate that the derived TZSL methods outperform many state-of-the-art methods on
three public benchmarks. Besides, we note that the unseenclass dataset is separately used for training in some existing
transductive generalized ZSL (T-GZSL) methods, which is
not strict for a GZSL task. Hence, we suggest a more strict
T-GZSL data setting and establish a competitive baseline on
this setting by introducing the proposed STHS framework to
T-GZSL.

1. Introduction
Recently, zero-shot learning (ZSL), which aims to recognize unseen-class samples given a set of labeled seen-class
samples and the semantic features of both the seen and un-

seen classes, has attracted increasing attention in the fields
of machine learning and computer vision. The key to ZSL
is to learn an appropriate mapping between visual and semantic features, which could be adapted to the unseen-class
domain.
According to whether the unlabeled unseen-class samples are available for training, the existing ZSL methods
could be divided into two categories: inductive ZSL (IZSL) methods [5, 49, 42, 17, 51, 12, 13, 36, 20, 22, 10]
where only the labeled seen-class samples are available for
training and transductive ZSL (T-ZSL) methods [35, 33, 43,
18, 28, 46, 38, 39, 25] where both the labeled seen-class
samples and the unlabeled unseen-class samples are available for training. As pointed out in [15, 38, 46, 25] that
the I-ZSL methods generally suffer from the domain shift
problem that the learned model from the seen-class domain
may not be suitable for the unseen-class one. In contrast
to the I-ZSL methods, the T-ZSL methods could alleviate
the domain shift problem to some extent due to the used
unseen-class samples. However, it still remains the following open problem for T-ZSL: how to make use of unlabeled
unseen-class samples for training more effectively?
Addressing this problem, we firstly investigate the prediction accuracies of unseen classes on the public dataset
by several popular I-ZSL methods, finding an uneven prediction phenomenon that for each of these methods, its prediction accuracies of some unseen classes are considerably
different from those of the other unseen classes, that is to
say, it is relatively harder to classify some unseen classes
but easier to classify the others. The uneven prediction phenomenon encourages us to further investigate the roles of
unseen-class samples with different degrees of classification
hardness in the training process, resulting in three observations: When unseen-class samples are available for training,
(1) samples from ‘hard’ classes are more effective for improving the performance of a given ZSL method than those
from ‘easy’ classes; (2) the predicted pseudo labels of the
hard classes are less noisy than those of the easy classes;
(3) the diversity of hard classes is beneficial to improve the

16499

