Source-Free Domain Adaptation for Semantic Segmentation
Yuang Liu , Wei Zhang*, Jun Wang*
East China Normal University, Shanghai, China
{frankliu624, zhangwei.thu2011, wongjun}@gmail.com

Abstract
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) can tackle the
challenge that convolutional neural network (CNN)-based
approaches for semantic segmentation heavily rely on the
pixel-level annotated data, which is labor-intensive. However, existing UDA approaches in this regard inevitably require the full access to source datasets to reduce the gap
between the source and target domains during model adaptation, which are impractical in the real scenarios where
the source datasets are private, and thus cannot be released
along with the well-trained source models. To cope with this
issue, we propose a source-free domain adaptation framework for semantic segmentation, namely SFDA, in which
only a well-trained source model and an unlabeled target
domain dataset are available for adaptation. SFDA not only
enables to recover and preserve the source domain knowledge from the source model via knowledge transfer during
model adaptation, but also distills valuable information from
the target domain for self-supervised learning. The pixeland patch-level optimization objectives tailored for semantic
segmentation are seamlessly integrated in the framework.
The extensive experimental results on numerous benchmark
datasets highlight the effectiveness of our framework against
the existing UDA approaches relying on source data.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation has been a critical computer vision task, which aims to segment and parse a scene image into different image regions associated with semantic
categories. It is critical for precisely understanding the visual scene and can be applied to numerous potential applications, such as autonomous driving [7], visual grounding [20, 45, 39], and image editing [31]. But the success
of current segmentation techniques depends on large-scale
densely-labeled datasets that are prohibitively expensive to
be collected in reality. For instance, it takes about 90 minutes to manually annotate a Cityscapes image. An intuitive
method to address this issue is transferring knowledge from
* Corresponding author.


Source
Domain

Ground-Truth
Shared


Target
Domain

Pseudo-Label

Figure 1. Overview of source-free UDA for segmentation.

existing models trained on source datasets to the unlabeled
target domain. However, it tends to be hindered by the issue
of domain shift which is caused by various data distributions
in source and target domains.
Unsupervised domain adaptation (UDA) [13, 54, 19, 6]
for semantic segmentation has been proposed to address this
issue and generalize the well-trained models on an unlabeled
target domain, avoiding expensive data annotation. All the
methods suppose that both the well-trained source models
and labeled source datasets are available. This is because
source data plays a vital role in retaining valuable source
knowledge during adaptation training and reducing the crossdomain discrepancy iteratively. However, in some crucial
areas like autonomous driving, the source datasets may be
private and commercial, making only the source models
and unlabeled target datasets available. Due to the lack of
supervision of the source domain and the uncertainty of
target pseudo-labels, none of these UDA methods can work
in such source-free scenarios.
With these insights, we formulate a new but important
problem — source-free domain adaptation for semantic segmentation, in which only a well-trained source model and
an unlabeled target domain dataset are available for adaptation. Recently, a tiny number of source-free UDA methods [25, 24, 27, 38, 22, 26] have been developed to tackle a

similar issue on image classification. However, the image

level computer vision 
task just associates the label with a
whole image, which is fundamentally different from image


1215





