Read and Attend:
Temporal Localisation in Sign Language Videos
Gül Varol1,2∗ Liliane Momeni1∗ Samuel Albanie1∗ Triantafyllos Afouras1∗ Andrew Zisserman1
1
Visual Geometry Group, University of Oxford, UK
2
LIGM, École des Ponts, Univ Gustave Eiffel, CNRS, France
{gul,liliane,albanie,afourast,az}@robots.ox.ac.uk
https://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/˜vgg/research/bslattend/

Abstract

1. Introduction
Sign languages are visual languages that, for deaf
communities, represent the natural means of communication [43]. Our goal in this paper is to identify and temporally localise instances of signs among sequences of continuous sign language. Achieving automatic sign localisation enables a diverse range of practical applications:
construction of sign language dictionaries to support language learners, indexing of signing content to enable efficient search and “intelligent fast-forward” to topics of interest, automatic sign language dataset construction, “wakeword” recognition for signers [34] and tools to assist linguistic analysis of large-scale signing corpora.
In recent years, there has been a great deal of progress

Attention score

The objective of this work is to annotate sign instances
across a broad vocabulary in continuous sign language. We
train a Transformer model to ingest a continuous signing
stream and output a sequence of written tokens on a largescale collection of signing footage with weakly-aligned subtitles. We show that through this training it acquires the
ability to attend to a large vocabulary of sign instances in
the input sequence, enabling their localisation. Our contributions are as follows: (1) we demonstrate the ability
to leverage large quantities of continuous signing videos
with weakly-aligned subtitles to localise signs in continuous sign language; (2) we employ the learned attention to
automatically generate hundreds of thousands of annotations for a large sign vocabulary; (3) we collect a set of
37K manually verified sign instances across a vocabulary
of 950 sign classes to support our study of sign language
recognition; (4) by training on the newly annotated data
from our method, we outperform the prior state of the art
on the BSL-1K sign language recognition benchmark.

“The ﬁrst plants to choose when planning any garden”

plant

garden

garden
plant

plant

Time frames

Figure 1. Sign localisation emerges from sequence prediction.
In this work, we show that the ability to localise instances of signs
emerges naturally by training a Transformer model [45] to perform a sequence prediction task on hundreds of hours of continuous signing videos with weakly-aligned subtitles.

in temporally localising human actions within video
streams [39, 51] and spotting words in spoken languages
through aural [15] and visual [30, 40] keyword spotting
methods. In both cases, a key driver of progress has been the
availability of large-scale annotated datasets, enabling the
powerful representation learning abilities of convolutional
neural networks to be brought to bear on the task.
By contrast, annotated datasets for sign language are limited in scale and typically orders of magnitude smaller than
their spoken counterparts [5]. Widely used datasets such
as RWTH-PHOENIX [9, 26] and the CSL dataset [23] provide continuous sign annotations in the form of glosses1 or
free-form sentences, but lack precise temporal annotations
and are limited in content diversity, vocabulary, and scale.
Large-scale collections of continuous signing videos exist,
but are limited to sparse annotation coverage [2, 36].
In the absence of large-scale annotated training data, in
this work we turn to a readily available and large-scale
source: sign-interpreted TV broadcast footage together with
1 Glosses are atomic lexical units used to annotate sign languages.

∗ Equal contribution

16857

