Mutual Graph Learning for Camouflaged Object Detection
Qiang Zhai1,‡ Xin Li2,‡ Fan Yang2, * Chenglizhao Chen3 Hong Cheng1 Deng-Ping Fan4
1
UESTC 2 Group 42 (G42) 3 Qingdao University 4 Inception Institute of AI (IIAI)
‡ Equal contributions

Abstract
Automatically detecting/segmenting object(s) that blend
in with their surroundings is difficult for current models. A major challenge is that the intrinsic similarities between such foreground objects and background surroundings make the features extracted by deep model indistinguishable. To overcome this challenge, an ideal model
should be able to seek valuable, extra clues from the given
scene and incorporate them into a joint learning framework for representation co-enhancement. With this inspiration, we design a novel Mutual Graph Learning (MGL)
model, which generalizes the idea of conventional mutual
learning from regular grids to the graph domain. Specifically, MGL decouples an image into two task-specific feature maps — one for roughly locating the target and the
other for accurately capturing its boundary details — and
fully exploits the mutual benefits by recurrently reasoning
their high-order relations through graphs. Importantly,
in contrast to most mutual learning approaches that use
a shared function to model all between-task interactions,
MGL is equipped with typed functions for handling different complementary relations to maximize information interactions. Experiments on challenging datasets, including
CHAMELEON, CAMO and COD10K, demonstrate the effectiveness of our MGL with superior performance to existing state-of-the-art methods. Code is available at https:
//github.com/fanyang587/MGL.

1. Introduction
Camouflage is an important skill in nature, because it
helps certain animals hide from their predators by blending in with their surroundings. The ability of camouflaging, which is closely related to how human perception
works, has attracted increasing research attention over past
decades. Biological and psychological studies show that it
is hard for human beings to quickly spot camouflaged animals or objects [4, 48]. A possible reason is that the primi* Corresponding author: Fan Yang (fanyang uestc@hotmail.com)

Recurrent

𝐹""
𝐹"!

𝐹"
𝐹!

Figure 1: Illustration of MGL. Given an image (a), we use
a ResNet-FCN as the backbone (b) to extract task-specific
features for the camouflaged object detection (COD) and
camouflaged object-aware edge extraction (COEE), respectively (c). Then, we exploit the mutual benefits from both
tasks by reasoning about their mutual relations with the cooperation of the Region-Induced Graph Reasoning (RIGR)
module and Edge-Constricted Graph Reasoning (ECGR)
module in a recurrent manner (d). Finally, the evolved features (e) are mapped into the results (f).
tive function of our visual system may be designed to detect
topological properties [2], thus making it difficult to identity camouflaged animals/objects that break up visual edge
information of their ‘true’ bodies. In spite of these biology discoveries, how to make up for this ‘flaw’ in human
perception by Machine is, unfortunately, still an underexplored topic in computer vision.
Identifying a camouflaged object from its background,
also known as camouflaged object detection (COD) [7], is a
valuable, yet challenging task [9]. ‘Seeing through camouflage’ has promising prospects for facilitating various reallife tasks, including image retrieval [29], species discovery [42], traffic risk management, medical image analysis [10, 12, 58], etc. However, the existing deep models are
still incapable of fully resolving the intrinsic visual similarities between foreground objects and background surroundings. To overcome this difficulty, current approaches distill
additional knowledge by extracting auxiliary features from
the shared context, e.g., features for identification [9] or
classification [20], to significantly augment the underlying

12997

