Depth from Camera Motion and Object Detection
Brent A. Griffin
University of Michigan

Jason J. Corso
Stevens Institute for Artificial Intelligence

griffb@umich.edu

jcorso@stevens.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses the problem of learning to estimate the depth of detected objects given some measurement of camera motion (e.g., from robot kinematics or vehicle odometry). We achieve this by 1) designing a recurrent neural network (DBox) that estimates the depth of objects using a generalized representation of bounding boxes
and uncalibrated camera movement and 2) introducing the
Object Depth via Motion and Detection Dataset (ODMD).
ODMD training data are extensible and configurable, and
the ODMD benchmark includes 21,600 examples across
four validation and test sets. These sets include mobile
robot experiments using an end-effector camera to locate
objects from the YCB dataset and examples with perturbations added to camera motion or bounding box data. In addition to the ODMD benchmark, we evaluate DBox in other
monocular application domains, achieving state-of-the-art
results on existing driving and robotics benchmarks and estimating the depth of objects using a camera phone.

1. Introduction
With the progression of high-quality datasets and subsequent methods, our community has seen remarkable advances in image segmentation [27, 54], video object segmentation [35, 38], and object detection [4, 16, 32], sometimes with a focus on a specific application like driving
[5, 11, 43]. However, applications like autonomous vehicles and robotics require a three-dimensional (3D) understanding of the environment, so they frequently rely on 3D
sensors (e.g., LiDAR [10] or RGBD cameras [8]). Although
3D sensors are great for identifying free space and motion
planning, classifying and understanding raw 3D data is a
challenging and ongoing area of research [25, 28, 33, 39].
On the other hand, RGB cameras are inexpensive, ubiquitous, and interpretable by countless vision methods.
To bridge the gap between 3D applications and progress
in video object segmentation, in recent work [14], we developed a method of video object segmentation-based visual
servo control, object depth estimation, and mobile robot

Figure 1. Depth from Camera Motion and Object Detection.
Object detectors can reliably place bounding boxes on target objects in a variety of settings. Given a sequence of bounding boxes
and camera movement distances between observations (e.g., from
robot kinematics, top), our network (DBox) estimates each object’s depth (bottom). This result is from the ODMD Robot Set.

grasping using a single RGB camera. For object depth estimation, specifically, we used the optical expansion [22, 46]
of segmentation masks with z-axis camera motion to analytically solve for depth [14, VOS-DE (20)]. In subsequent work [15], we introduced the first learning-based
method (ODN) and benchmark dataset for estimating Object Depth via Motion and Segmentation (ODMS), which
includes test sets in robotics and driving. From the ODMS
benchmark, ODN improves accuracy over VOS-DE in multiple domains, especially those with segmentation errors.
Motivated by these developments [14, 15], this paper ad-

1397

