Camouflaged Object Segmentation with Distraction Mining
Haiyang Mei1
Ge-Peng Ji2,4
Ziqi Wei3,⋆
Xin Yang1,⋆
1
2
Dalian University of Technology
Wuhan University

Xiaopeng Wei1
Deng-Ping Fan4
3
4
Tsinghua University
IIAI

https://mhaiyang.github.io/CVPR2021_PFNet/index

Abstract
Camouflaged object segmentation (COS) aims to identify objects that are “perfectly” assimilate into their surroundings, which has a wide range of valuable applications.
The key challenge of COS is that there exist high intrinsic
similarities between the candidate objects and noise background. In this paper, we strive to embrace challenges towards effective and efficient COS. To this end, we develop
a bio-inspired framework, termed Positioning and Focus
Network (PFNet), which mimics the process of predation
in nature. Specifically, our PFNet contains two key modules, i.e., the positioning module (PM) and the focus module
(FM). The PM is designed to mimic the detection process in
predation for positioning the potential target objects from
a global perspective and the FM is then used to perform
the identification process in predation for progressively refining the coarse prediction via focusing on the ambiguous
regions. Notably, in the FM, we develop a novel distraction
mining strategy for the distraction discovery and removal,
to benefit the performance of estimation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our PFNet runs in real-time (72
FPS) and significantly outperforms 18 cutting-edge models
on three challenging datasets under four standard metrics.

1. Introduction
Camouflage is the concealment of animals or objects by
any combination of material, coloration, or illumination, for
making the target objects hard to see (crypsis) or disguising
them as something else (mimesis) [47]. Benefiting from
the capability of finding out the camouflaged objects that
are “seamlessly” embedded in their surroundings, camouflaged object segmentation (COS) has a wide range of valuable applications in different fields, ranging from medical
diagnosis (e.g., polyp segmentation [13] and lung infection
segmentation [14]), industry (e.g., inspection of unqualified
products on the automatic production line), agriculture (e.g.,
⋆ Xin Yang (xinyang@dlut.edu.cn) and Ziqi Wei are the corresponding authors.

Image

SINet

Ours

GT

Figure 1. Visual examples of camouflaged object segmentation.
While the state-of-the-art method SINet [12] confused by the
background region which shares similar appearance with the camouflaged objects (pointed to by a arrow in the top row) or the camouflaged region that cluttered in the background (pointed to by a
arrow in the bottom row), our method can eliminate these distractions and generate accurate segmentation results.

locust detection to prevent invasion), security and surveillance (e.g., search-and-rescue mission and the detection of
pedestrians or obstacles in bad weather for automatic driving), scientific research (e.g., rare species discovery), to art
(e.g., photo-realistic blending and recreational art).
However, COS is a fundamentally challenging task due
to the fact that the camouflage strategy works by deceiving
the visual perceptual system of the observer [47] and thus
a significant amount of visual perception knowledge [50] is
required to eliminate the ambiguities caused by the high intrinsic similarities between the target object and the background. Research into camouflaged object segmentation
has a long and rich history in many fields such as biology
and art [47]. Early methods are dedicated to distinguishing the foreground and background based on handcrafted
low-level features such as texture [45], 3D convexity [39]
and motion [28]. These features, however, have limited capability to distinguish between the camouflaged and noncamouflaged objects, so the approaches based on them often
fail in complex scenes. Despite the recently proposed deep
learning-based approaches [26, 12, 58] have achieved performance improvement to some extent, there is still a large
room for exploring the effective way of accurate COS.
In nature, prey animals make use of mechanisms such

8772

