PLADE-Net: Towards Pixel-Level Accuracy for Self-Supervised Single-View
Depth Estimation with Neural Positional Encoding and Distilled Matting Loss
Juan Luis Gonzalez Bello

Munchurl Kim†

juanluisgb@kaist.ac.kr

mkimee@kaist.ac.kr

Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology

Figure 1. Our proposed PLADE-Net with Neural Positional-Encoding and distilled matting loss estimates depths with pixel-level accuracy.

Abstract
In this paper, we propose a self-supervised singleview pixel-level accurate depth estimation network, called
PLADE-Net. The PLADE-Net is the first work that shows
remarkable accuracy levels, exceeding 95% in terms of the
δ 1 metric on the challenging KITTI dataset. Our PLADENet is based on a new network architecture with neural
positional encoding and a novel loss function that borrows from the closed-form solution of the matting Laplacian
to learn pixel-level accurate depth estimation from stereo
images. Neural positional encoding allows our PLADENet to obtain more consistent depth estimates by letting
the network reason about location-specific image properties such as projection (and potentially lens) distortions.
Our novel distilled matting Laplacian loss allows our network to predict sharp depths at object boundaries and more
consistent depths in highly homogeneous regions. Our
proposed method outperforms all previous self-supervised
single-view depth estimation methods by a large margin
on the challenging KITTI dataset, with unparalleled levels of accuracy. Furthermore, our PLADE-Net, naively
extended for stereo inputs, outperforms the most recent
self-supervised stereo methods, even without any advanced
blocks like 1D correlations, 3D convolutions, or spatial
pyramid pooling. We present extensive ablation studies and
experiments that support our method’s effectiveness on the
KITTI, CityScapes, and Make3D datasets.

1. Introduction
Recent advances in deep learning have shown state-ofthe-art (SOTA) results on the challenging single-view depth
estimation (SVDE) and stereo disparity estimation (SDE)
tasks. In particular, self-supervised methods for SVDE have
reached performance levels similar or even superior to the
fully-supervised networks [16, 17, 14]. However, the previous SOTA self-supervised methods are unable to predict accurate pixel-level depth estimates, which are often observed
along the object’s depth boundaries. Predicting pixel-level
accurate 3D geometries is essential for robotic grasping,
augmented reality, navigation, and 3D object detection.
In this paper, we present a pixel-level accurate depth estimation network (PLADE-Net) with neural positional encoding and a distilled matting Laplacian loss, both of which
allow for consistent depth estimates in homogeneous areas and sharp depth predictions along the object boundaries. Our PLADE-Net outperforms the most recent selfsupervised SOTA methods [16, 17, 14, 41, 1] (both mono
and stereo) by large margins, achieving unparalleled accuracy on the challenging KITTI dataset while keeping a low
number of parameters. This paper’s contributions are:
1. We propose to exploit and distill the closed-form solution of the matting Laplacian [28] for self-supervision,
leading to a novel loss function that allows for pixel-level
†Corresponding author.

16851

