CoCosNet v2: Full-Resolution Correspondence Learning for Image Translation
Xingran Zhou1 * Bo Zhang2 Ting Zhang2 Pan Zhang4 Jianmin Bao2
Dong Chen2 Zhongfei Zhang3 Fang Wen2
1

Zhejiang University

2

Microsoft Research Asia

3

Binghamton University

4

USTC

Abstract
We present the full-resolution correspondence learning
for cross-domain images, which aids image translation. We
adopt a hierarchical strategy that uses the correspondence
from coarse level to guide the fine levels. At each hierarchy, the correspondence can be efficiently computed via
PatchMatch that iteratively leverages the matchings from
the neighborhood. Within each PatchMatch iteration, the
ConvGRU module is employed to refine the current correspondence considering not only the matchings of larger
context but also the historic estimates. The proposed CoCosNet v2, a GRU-assisted PatchMatch approach, is fully
differentiable and highly efficient. When jointly trained with
image translation, full-resolution semantic correspondence
can be established in an unsupervised manner, which in turn
facilitates the exemplar-based image translation. Experiments on diverse translation tasks show that CoCosNet v2
performs considerably better than state-of-the-art literature
on producing high-resolution images.

1. Introduction
Image-to-image translation learns the mapping between
image domains and has shown success in a wide range of
applications [28, 10, 38, 45, 58]. Particularly, exemplar
based image translation allows more flexible user control
by conditioning the translation on a specific exemplar with
the desired style. However, simultaneously producing high
quality while being faithful to the exemplar is non-trivial,
whereas it becomes rather challenging for producing highresolution images.
Early studies [9, 19, 55, 54, 47, 5] directly learn the mapping through generative adversarial networks [14, 35], yet
they fail to leverage the information in the exemplar. Later,
a series of methods [12, 17, 39] propose to refer to the exemplar image during the translation, by modulating the feature
normalization according to the style of the exemplar image.
However, as the modulation is applied uniformly, only the
global style can be transferred whereas the detailed textures
are washed out in the final output.
* Author did this work during his internship at Microsoft Research Asia.

Figure 1: Image translation at resolution 512×512 for poseto-body (DeepFashion) and at resolution 1024×1024 for
edge-to-face (MetFaces). For each task, the 1st row shows
the exemplar images, and the 2nd row shows the translation
outputs.
Very recently, CoCosNet [56] established the dense semantic correspondence between cross-domain images. In
this way the network could make use of the fine textures
from the exemplar, which eases the hallucination for the
local textures. However, prohibitive memory footprint occurs when estimating high-resolution correspondence, as
the matching requires to compute the pairwise similarities
among all locations of the input feature maps, while lowresolution correspondences (e.g., 64×64) cannot guide the
network to leverage the fine structures from the exemplar.
In this paper, we propose the cross-domain correspondence learning, in full-resolution for the first time, which
leads to high-resolution translated images in photo-realistic
quality, as the network can leverage the meticulous details

11465

