See through Gradients: Image Batch Recovery via GradInversion
Hongxu Yin, Arun Mallya, Arash Vahdat, Jose M. Alvarez, Jan Kautz, Pavlo Molchanov
NVIDIA
{dannyy, amallya, avahdat, josea, jkautz, pmolchanov}@nvidia.com

Private Data (Client)

Abstract
Client

Training deep neural networks requires gradient estimation from data batches to update parameters. Gradients
per parameter are averaged over a set of data and this has
been presumed to be safe for privacy-preserving training
in joint, collaborative, and federated learning applications.
Prior work only showed the possibility of recovering input
data given gradients under very restrictive conditions – a
single input point, or a network with no non-linearities, or
a small 32 ˆ 32 px input batch. Therefore, averaging gradients over larger batches was thought to be safe. In this
work, we introduce GradInversion, using which input images
from a larger batch (8 – 48 images) can also be recovered
for large networks such as ResNets (50 layers), on complex
datasets such as ImageNet (1000 classes, 224 ˆ 224 px). We
formulate an optimization task that converts random noise
into natural images, matching gradients while regularizing
image fidelity. We also propose an algorithm for target class
label recovery given gradients. We further propose a group
consistency regularization framework, where multiple agents
starting from different random seeds work together to find
an enhanced reconstruction of the original data batch. We
show that gradients encode a surprisingly large amount of
information, such that all the individual images can be recovered with high fidelity via GradInversion, even for complex
datasets, deep networks, and large batch sizes.

1. Introduction
Sharing weight updates or gradients during training is
the central idea behind collaborative, distributed, and federated learning of deep networks [1, 22, 24, 25, 28]. In the
basic setting of federated stochastic gradient descent, each
device learns on local data, and shares gradients to update a
global model. Alleviating the need to transmit training data
offers several key advantages. This keeps user data private,
allaying concerns related to user privacy, security, and other
proprietary concerns. Further, this eliminates the need to
store, transfer, and manage possibly large datasets. With this
framework, one can train a model on medical data without
access to any individual’s data [3, 32], or perception model

Averaged
Gradients

Model

dataset boundary (presumed safe)

Server

GradInversion
Recovery from Averaged Gradients (Server)

(a) Inverting averaged gradients to recover original image batches
shared optimizer
Input
random seed 1

R

ﬁdelity

.
.
.

Model

Input
random seed N

Intermediate
image
random seed 1

Image generator

Averaged
Gradients

Optimizer
R

grad

Gradient
matching loss
Label recovery

Final
Result

Optimizer
.
.
.

Rgroup
Group
Registration

Intermediate
image
random seed N

Registered
average image

(b) Overview of our proposed GradInversion method
Figure 1: We propose (a) GradInversion to recover hidden training
image batches with high fidelity via inverting averaged gradients.
GradInversion formulates (b) an optimization process that transforms noise to input images (Sec. 3.1). It starts with label restoration from the gradient of the fully connected layer (Sec. 3.2), then
optimizes inputs to match target gradients under fidelity regularization (Sec. 3.3) and registration-based group consistency regularization (Sec. 3.4) to improve reconstruction quality. This enables
recovery of 224 ˆ 224 pixel ImageNet samples from ResNet-50
batch gradients, which was previously impossible (please zoom
into examples above. More in Sec. 4).

for autonomous driving without invasive data collection [41].
While this setting might seem safe at first glance, a few
recent works have begun to question the central premise of
federated learning - is it possible for gradients to leak private
information of the training data? Effectively serving as a
“proxy” of the training data, the link between gradients to the
data in fact offers potential for retrieving information: from
revealing the positional distribution of original data [33, 44],
to even enabling pixel-level detailed image reconstruction
from gradients [13, 53, 55]. Despite remarkable progress, in-

16337

