Enhance Curvature Information by Structured Stochastic Quasi-Newton
Methods
Minghan Yang1,2 , Dong Xu1,2 , Hongyu Chen1 , Zaiwen Wen2,3,4 , Mengyun Chen5
1
School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University, China
2
Beijing International Center for Mathematical Research, Peking University, China
3
Center for Data Science, Peking University, China
4
National Engineering Laboratory for Big Data Analysis and Applications, Peking University, China
5
Huawei Technologies Co. Ltd, China
{yangminghan, taroxd, hongyuchen, wenzw}@pku.edu.cn ,chenmengyun1@huawei.com

Abstract
In this paper, we consider stochastic second-order methods
for minimizing a finite summation of nonconvex functions.
One important key is to find an ingenious but cheap scheme
to incorporate local curvature information. Since the true
Hessian matrix is often a combination of a cheap part
and an expensive part, we propose a structured stochastic quasi-Newton method by using partial Hessian information as much as possible. By further exploiting either the
low-rank structure or the kronecker-product properties of
the quasi-Newton approximations, the computation of the
quasi-Newton direction is affordable. Global convergence
to stationary point and local superlinear convergence rate
are established under some mild assumptions. Numerical
results on logistic regression, deep autoencoder networks
and deep convolutional neural networks show that our proposed method is quite competitive to the state-of-the-art
methods.

1. Introduction
Consider the large-scale finite-sum optimization problem:
N

minn Ψ(θ) =

θ∈R

1 X
ψi (θ),
N i=1

(1)

where θ is the decision variable, ψi is the component function and N is the number of functions. For many cases, ψi
is related to the data point (xi , yi ), i.e.,
ψi (θ) = ℓ (f (xi , θ), yi ) ,
m

(2)

where f (xi , θ) ∈ R is the output of xi through certain
model and ℓ is the loss function to measure the prediction

error. The numbers n and N can be very huge. For example, the number of parameters n is 175 billion in GPT-3
[5]. Problem (1) widely arises in many applications such as
deep learning [13, 23, 34] and statistical learning [16, 37].
The first-order type methods are dominant approaches for
the problem (1). The classical stochastic gradient descent
method (SGD) [31] falls into this type and extensions of
SGD have been widely studied in [1, 20, 27] for better practical performance and theoretical properties.
Recently, stochastic second-order methods have gained increasing attention. Since the computation and inversion of
the Hessian matrix in the large-scale applications is costly,
various strategies to approximate the Hessian have been developed in [6, 26, 30, 32, 40, 41]. In deep learning, stochastic second-order methods are expected to address the scalability issue with large batch size. The Hessian-free method
[25] uses the conjugate-gradient (CG) method to obtain
a descent direction by utilizing Hessian-vector products.
The Gauss-Newton matrix is investigated to approximate
the Hessian matrix in [35] and a practical block-diagonal
approximation to the Gauss-Newton matrix is studied in
[4]. The so-called KFAC method developed in [15] utilizes the kronecker-factored approximation to Fisher information matrix (FIM). Its efficiency has been demonstrated
in large-scale distributed parallel computing [29]. A Newton method for convolutional neural networks (CNN) is investigated in [38].
In this paper, we consider a structured quasi-Newton (QN)
framework to enhance curvature information. This idea has
been studied in a few second-order methods. For example,
on the nonlinear least squares problems with large residual, approaches that compensate the Gauss-Newton matrix
by a quasi-Newton approximation to the complicate part of
the Hessian matrix are often much better [28, 36, 44]. This

10654

