Progressive Stage-wise Learning for Unsupervised
Feature Representation Enhancement
Zefan Li14 *

Chenxi Liu2†

Alan Yuille2

leezf@sjtu.edu.cn

cxliu@waymo.com

alan.l.yuille@gmail.com

Bingbing Ni14‡

Wenjun Zhang1

Wen Gao3

nibingbing@sjtu.edu.cn

zhangwenjun@sjtu.edu.cn

wgao@pku.edu.cn

Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2 Johns Hopkins University 3 Peking University
MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, AI Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University

Abstract
𝒢#

1. Introduction
Aiming at learning features from label-free data, unsupervised representation learning, including self-supervised
learning, is an important problem to study. Many efforts
have been made, to bridge the performance gap between
supervised and unsupervised learning algorithms. These
methods can be roughly divided into two categories: i)
handcrafted pretext tasks, that learns data-level invariant
features (e.g., jigsaw puzzle [38], image rotation [21], image colorization [13]) and ii) contrastive visual representation learning, which learns the similarity and dissimilarity
* Work done while visiting Johns Hopkins University.
† Now at Waymo.
‡ Corresponding author.

Permutation Set 𝒞

Multi-Level Task Design

Jigsaw Puzzle Task 𝒢

Unsupervised learning methods have recently shown
their competitiveness against supervised training. Typically, these methods use a single objective to train the entire network. But one distinct advantage of unsupervised
over supervised learning is that the former possesses more
variety and freedom in designing the objective. In this
work, we explore new dimensions of unsupervised learning
by proposing the Progressive Stage-wise Learning (PSL)
framework. For a given unsupervised task, we design multilevel tasks and define different learning stages for the deep
network. Early learning stages are forced to focus on lowlevel tasks while late stages are guided to extract deeper
information through harder tasks. We discover that by progressive stage-wise learning, unsupervised feature representation can be effectively enhanced. Our extensive experiments show that PSL consistently improves results for
the leading unsupervised learning methods.

𝒢"

𝒢!

Unsupervised/self-supervised Task

Progressive Stage-wise Learning

1
4

𝑆#
𝑆"
𝑆!

Figure 1. We present the framework of the proposed Progressive Stage-wise Learning (PSL) algorithm, aiming for improving unsupervised/self-supervised task. We take the jigsaw puzzle task G for example. We first do multi-level task partition
G → {G1 , G2 , G3 } with an increased task complexity and perform
progressive stage-wise training for different learning stages of the
network. The black arrow denotes forward pass while colored arrow represents the backward pass of each learning stage (i.e., S1 ,
S2 , and S3 ).

between data pairs [9, 10, 11, 26]. For approaches using
pretext tasks, they usually generate pseudo labels based on
some data attributes and learn visual features through corresponding objective functions of the pretext tasks. Therefore, the final performance of these approaches is highly related to how the pretext tasks were initially designed. Most
pretext tasks are designed heuristically, limiting the quality of learned representation. Contrastive learning methods
usually generate positive/negative sample pairs through a
set of image transformations and learn visual representation by bringing positive sample pairs closer while pushing
negative sample pairs away from each other. The design
of the contrastive loss and the configuration of image transformations are essential to the quality of the resulting net-

9767

