Neighborhood Normalization for Robust Geometric Feature Learning
Xingtong Liu * 1 , Benjamin D. Killeen ∗1 , Ayushi Sinha1 , Masaru Ishii2 , Gregory D. Hager1 , Russell H.
Taylor1 , and Mathias Unberath1
1

2

Johns Hopkins University
Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions
{xingtongliu, unberath}@jhu.edu

Abstract
Extracting geometric features from 3D models is a
common first step in applications such as 3D registration,
tracking, and scene flow estimation. Many hand-crafted
and learning-based methods aim to produce consistent
and distinguishable geometric features for 3D models with
partial overlap. These methods work well in cases where
the point density and scale of the overlapping 3D objects
are similar, but struggle in applications where 3D data
are obtained independently with unknown global scale and
scene overlap. Unfortunately, instances of this resolution
mismatch are common in practice, e.g., when aligning
data from multiple sensors. In this work, we introduce
a new normalization technique, Batch-Neighborhood
Normalization, aiming to improve robustness to mean-std
variation of local feature distributions that presumably
can happen in samples with varying point density. We
empirically demonstrate that the presented normalization
method’s performance compares favorably to comparison
methods in indoor and outdoor environments, and on a
clinical dataset, on common point registration benchmarks
in both standard and, particularly, resolution-mismatch settings. The source code and clinical dataset are available at
https://github.com/lppllppl920/NeighborhoodNormalizationPytorch.

1. Introduction
Estimating point correspondences between 3D models is
a key step in many computer vision tasks, e.g. 3D registration, tracking, and scene flow estimation pipelines. 3D descriptors facilitate this process by extracting discriminative
and consistent geometric features for estimating correspondences, including hand-crafted features [41, 22, 42, 52], and
* These authors contributed equally to this work

learning-based descriptors [54, 25, 13, 12, 19]. Learningbased descriptors have gained prominence in recent years,
achieving superior performance on common point cloud
registration benchmarks [54, 18], but in general, these methods assume that the point density or resolution of different
point clouds is the same. This is a reasonable assumption
when using voxel grid downsampling to pre-process data
since the resolution depends on a fixed voxel size.
However, resolution mismatch can often occur when
data are not measured in physical 3D Euclidean space. Reconstructions from monocular videos, for example, are inherently scale-ambiguous. Without additional prior knowledge such as scene overlap ratio between samples, a consistent voxel size for grid downsampling is difficult to obtain,
inevitably leading to variable point density across samples.
Similarly, stereo camera setups are vulnerable to calibration errors that affect the accuracy of the depth estimation,
so that the choice of the camera affects point cloud resolution. Even when physical distances can be estimated or
measured from 3D sensors without errors, resolution mismatch can still arise due to hardware discretization, which
results in the same scene producing point clouds with different resolutions when captured from different distances.
High-resolution samples can be downsampled in this case,
but this leads to computation inefficiency and information
loss. Consequently, it is desirable to develop 3D geometric feature learning techniques that are robust to resolution
mismatch.
We hypothesize that the lack of robustness to resolution
mismatch is due in part to the global nature of common
normalization methods in convolutional neural networks
(CNNs), which are the basis of learning-based descriptors.
When two point clouds exhibit resolution mismatch, corresponding regions contain different numbers and distributions of points, making a common feature representation
more difficult to learn. This is especially challenging when
global scales of samples are unknown, which, without ad-

13049

