Collaborative Spatial-Temporal Modeling for Language-Queried
Video Actor Segmentation
Tianrui Hui1,2∗ Shaofei Huang1,2,5∗ Si Liu3† Zihan Ding3 Guanbin Li4,7
Wenguan Wang6 Jizhong Han1,2 Fei Wang5
1
Institute of Information Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2
School of Cyber Security, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Institute of Artificial Intelligence, Beihang University
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University
5
SenseTime Research 6 Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich 7 Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou
𝑻 Frames

Abstract
Target Frame

Language-queried video actor segmentation aims to predict the pixel-level mask of the actor which performs the
actions described by a natural language query in the target frames. Existing methods adopt 3D CNNs over the
video clip as a general encoder to extract a mixed spatiotemporal feature for the target frame. Though 3D convolutions are amenable to recognizing which actor is performing the queried actions, it also inevitably introduces misaligned spatial information from adjacent frames, which
confuses features of the target frame and yields inaccurate segmentation. Therefore, we propose a collaborative
spatial-temporal encoder-decoder framework which contains a 3D temporal encoder over the video clip to recognize the queried actions, and a 2D spatial encoder over the
target frame to accurately segment the queried actors. In
the decoder, a Language-Guided Feature Selection (LGFS)
module is proposed to flexibly integrate spatial and temporal features from the two encoders. We also propose
a Cross-Modal Adaptive Modulation (CMAM) module to
dynamically recombine spatial- and temporal-relevant linguistic features for multimodal feature interaction in each
stage of the two encoders. Our method achieves new stateof-the-art performance on two popular benchmarks with
less computational overhead than previous approaches.

1. Introduction
Deep models have achieved notable progress in computer vision and other fields [10, 26, 24, 17]. Languagequeried video actor segmentation [12] is an emerging task
∗ Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

Temporal Modeling

Spatial Modeling
Prediction

(c)

(e)

(d)

Query: A white and brown cat is jumping backward

Figure 1. Illustration of our motivation. (a) The target frame. (b)
The input video clip. (c) The spatial encoder can generate fine
segmentation but may misidentify other actors due to weak action recognition ability. (d) The temporal encoder can recognize
which actor is performing the queried action but may introduce
misaligned spatial feature into the target frame, yielding inaccurate
segmentation. (e) By integrating spatial and temporal encoders,
the correct actor in the target frame can be well segmented.

whose goal is to predict pixel-level mask for the actor performing some actions in a video described by a natural language query. Different from language-queried video spatial or temporal localization [44, 3, 1, 47], this task requires
more fine-grained spatial-temporal modeling and visuallinguistic interaction to generate pixel-level prediction, thus
is more challenging. At the intersection of computer vision
and natural language processing [16, 18, 46, 25, 11, 31], this
task enjoys a wide range of applications such as languagedriven video editing [21], intelligent surveillance video processing [34] and human-robot interaction [29].

4187

