SceneGraphFusion: Incremental 3D Scene Graph Prediction
from RGB-D Sequences
Shun-Cheng Wu1

Johanna Wald1 Keisuke Tateno2
1
Technische Universität München

Nassir Navab1 Federico Tombari1,2
2
Google

shunchengwu.github.io/SceneGraphFusion

a)

b)

c)
d)

cabinet

wall
ﬂoor
cabinet

chair

chair

table

table
door
window
standing on

attached on

bookshelf

ﬂoor

counter
other furn.

Figure 1. We create a globally consistent 3D scene graph b) by fusing predictions of a graph neural network (GNN) from an incremental
geometric segmentation created from an RGB-D sequence a). Our method merges nodes on the same object instance and naturally grows
and improves over time when new segments and surfaces are discovered, see c). As a by-product, our method produces accurate panoptic
segmentation of large-scale 3D scans. The nodes represent the different object segments.

Abstract
Scene graphs are a compact and explicit representation successfully used in a variety of 2D scene understanding tasks. This work proposes a method to incrementally
build up semantic scene graphs from a 3D environment
given a sequence of RGB-D frames. To this end, we aggregate PointNet features from primitive scene components
by means of a graph neural network. We also propose a
novel attention mechanism well suited for partial and missing graph data present in such an incremental reconstruction scenario. Although our proposed method is designed
to run on submaps of the scene, we show it also transfers
to entire 3D scenes. Experiments show that our approach
outperforms 3D scene graph prediction methods by a large
margin and its accuracy is on par with other 3D semantic
and panoptic segmentation methods while running at 35Hz.

1. Introduction
High-level scene understanding is a fundamental task in
computer vision required for many applications in fields

such as robotics and augmented or mixed reality. Boosted
by the availability of inexpensive depth sensors, real-time
dense SLAM algorithms [33, 21, 35, 56] and large scale
3D datasets [5, 53], the research focus has shifted from reconstructing the 3D scene geometry to enhancing the 3D
maps with semantic information about scene components.
Several methods have deployed a neural network to process a complete 3D scan of a scene [5, 10, 41, 39, 24,
18, 17, 16, 9]. However, these all require 3D geometry
as prior information and they typically operate in an offline fashion, i.e. without satisfying real-time requirements,
which are fundamental for many real-world applications.
Real-time scene understanding that incrementally built 3D
scans poses important challenges such as handling partial,
incomplete, and ambiguous scene geometry where object
shapes may change dramatically over time. Learning a robust 3D feature that can cope with this variability is difficult.
Furthermore, fusing multiple, potentially contradictory network predictions to ensure consistency in the global map, is
also challenging. Recently, in the image domain, semantic
scene graphs have been used to derive relationships among
scene entities [26, 57, 34, 59, 15]. Scene graphs demonstrated to be a powerful abstract representation for scene

7515

