MOOD: Multi-level Out-of-distribution Detection
Ziqian Lin∗ , Sreya Dutta Roy*, Yixuan Li
Department of Computer Sciences
University of Wisconsin-Madison
zlin284, duttaroy, sharonli@wisc.edu

Abstract
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is essential to prevent anomalous inputs from causing a model to fail during
deployment. While improved OOD detection methods have
emerged, they often rely on the final layer outputs and require a full feedforward pass for any given input. In this
paper, we propose a novel framework, multi-level out-ofdistribution detection (MOOD), which exploits intermediate classifier outputs for dynamic and efficient OOD inference. We explore and establish a direct relationship between the OOD data complexity and optimal exit level, and
show that easy OOD examples can be effectively detected
early without propagating to deeper layers. At each exit, the
OOD examples can be distinguished through our proposed
adjusted energy score, which is both empirically and theoretically suitable for networks with multiple classifiers. We
extensively evaluate MOOD across 10 OOD datasets spanning a wide range of complexities. Experiments demonstrate that MOOD achieves up to 71.05% computational
reduction in inference, while maintaining competitive OOD
detection performance.

1. Introduction
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection has become a central building block for safely deploying machine learning
models in the real world, where the testing data may be distributionally different from the training data. Existing OOD
detection methods commonly rely on a scoring function that
derives statistics from the penultimate layer or output layer
of the neural network [13, 31, 34, 32, 41, 15]. As a result,
existing solutions require a full feedforward pass for any
given test-time input and utilize a fixed amount of computation. This can be undesirable for safety-critical applications
such as self-driving cars, where higher computational cost
directly translates into higher latency for the model to take
prevention in the presence of OOD driving scenes. Fur-

ther, the computational cost of OOD detection can be exacerbated by the over-parameterization of neural networks,
which nowadays have reached unprecedented depth and capacity. For example, recent computer vision models [18]
can have over 900 million parameters, which unavoidably
incurs high computational demand during inference time.
This motivates the following unexplored question: how can
we enable out-of-distribution detection that can adjust and
save computations adaptively on-the-fly?
In this paper, we take the first step to explore the feasibility and efficacy of an adaptive OOD detection framework
based on intermediate classifier outputs. Adaptive OOD detection offers several compelling yet untapped advantages.
It allows exploiting the intrinsic complexity of OOD examples which may vary at a wide spectrum (see Figure 1). Ideally, easy samples could be detected at the early layer, while
more complex ones could still be propagated to the deeper
layers for more confident decisions. For example, it might
be sufficient to utilize coarse-level features such as color to
detect an OOD image of grayscale MNIST digit [25], for a
model tasked to classify color images of animals. Secondly,
adaptive OOD detection allows flexibility in controlling the
computational cost. This is a valuable property in many scenarios, where the computational budget may change over
time or vary across different devices.
Formally, we propose a novel framework, Multi-level
Out-of-distribution Detection (MOOD), which exploits the
aforementioned benefits and allows resource-efficient OOD
detection. In designing MOOD, we identify three key technical challenges: (1) how to set up an adaptive network with
intermediate exits for both OOD detection and classification; (2) how to dynamically choose the optimal exit conditioned on test-time inputs; and (3) at a given exit, how to
derive effective OOD scoring function to differentiate between in- vs. out-of-distribution data?
This paper contributes the following technical components by carefully addressing the three challenges above.
• First, we propose intermediate OOD detectors operating at varying depths of the network and enabling dynamic OOD inference. Each intermediate detector is

* Authors contributed equally.

15313

