Rich Context Aggregation with Reflection Prior for Glass Surface Detection
Jiaying Lin
Zebang He
Rynson W.H. Lau†
City University of Hong Kong

Abstract
Glass surfaces appear everywhere. Their existence can
however pose a serious problem to computer vision tasks.
Recently, a method is proposed to detect glass surfaces by
learning multi-scale contextual information. However, as it
is only based on a general context integration operation and
does not consider any specific glass surface properties, it
gets confused when the images contain objects that are similar to glass surfaces and degenerates in challenging scenes
with insufficient contexts. We observe that humans often
rely on identifying reflections in order to sense the existence
of glass and on locating the boundary in order to determine the extent of the glass. Hence, we propose a model for
glass surface detection, which consists of two novel modules: (1) a rich context aggregation module (RCAM) to extract multi-scale boundary features from rich context features for locating glass surface boundaries of different sizes
and shapes, and (2) a reflection-based refinement module
(RRM) to detect reflection and then incorporate it so as to
differentiate glass regions from non-glass regions. In addition, we also propose a challenging dataset consisting of
4,012 glass images with annotations for glass surface detection. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed model
outperforms state-of-the-art methods from relevant fields.

1. Introduction
Glass surfaces are large glass regions such as windows,
glass doors and glass walls. They are very popular and
appear almost everywhere in our daily life. Although they
are very useful in many ways, their existence can pose a
serious problem to computer vision tasks. For example, if
we are unable to detect the presence of glass surfaces, a
robot or a drone may easily crash into glass surfaces. Thus,
it is of vital importance to detect and separate glass surfaces
from other objects for better scene understanding.
There have been some works focusing on the transparent object detection problem. As transparent objects tend
to have certain shapes or thicker boundaries for defracting light, most existing methods are based on detecting
shapes [24] or boundaries via polarization [13] and explicit
† Rynson Lau is the corresponding author, and he leads this project.

Input

GT

GDNet [20] TransLab [30]

Ours

Figure 1: Two popular scenarios where existing methods [20, 30] fail. GDNet [20] is based on extracting/integrating abundant context features for glass surface
detection. As it does not consider any specific glass properties, it tends to fail in scenes with insufficient contexts (e.g.,
top row where the glass surface covers almost the whole image) or with glass-lookalike regions (e.g., bottom row where
the center region is not covered by glass). TransLab [30] is
based on a boundary-guided network for transparent object
detection. It also fails to detect glass surfaces correctly. Our
method, which considers reflections and boundaries, can accurately detect the glass surfaces in these complex scenes.

edge supervision [30]. However, as glass surfaces typically
do not process these properties, these methods developed
for detecting transparent objects cannot be easily adopted
to address the glass surface detection problem. Recently,
Mei et al. [20] make the first attempt to develop the GDNet
model for glass surface detection by integrating multi-level
context information. While GDNet has a simple structure,
it does not consider any specific properties of glass surfaces
and its performance gain is mainly coming from a general
context integrating structure based on dilation convolutions.
Figure 1 shows two common but challenging scenarios.
As the top image does not provide sufficient boundary context, GDNet fails to recognize the glass surface. As the middle region of the bottom image is not a glass surface but
looks like one, GDNet gets confused and mis-recognizes it
as a glass surface. TransLab [30] also fails to detect the
glass surface in the top row as the glass boundary is not obvious, and mis-recognizes the non-glass region in the bottom image as a glass surface.
113415

