AdaBins: Depth Estimation Using Adaptive Bins
Shariq Farooq Bhat
KAUST

Ibraheem Alhashim
KAUST

Peter Wonka
KAUST

shariq.bhat@kaust.edu.sa

ibraheem.alhashim@kaust.edu.sa

pwonka@gmail.com

Abstract
We address the problem of estimating a high quality
dense depth map from a single RGB input image. We start
out with a baseline encoder-decoder convolutional neural network architecture and pose the question of how the
global processing of information can help improve overall
depth estimation. To this end, we propose a transformerbased architecture block that divides the depth range into
bins whose center value is estimated adaptively per image.
The final depth values are estimated as linear combinations
of the bin centers. We call our new building block AdaBins.
Our results show a decisive improvement over the state-ofthe-art on several popular depth datasets across all metrics.
We also validate the effectiveness of the proposed block with
an ablation study and provide the code and corresponding
pre-trained weights of the new state-of-the-art model.

1. Introduction
This paper tackles the problem of estimating a high quality dense depth map from a single RGB input image. This
is a classical problem in computer vision that is essential
for many applications [26, 30, 16, 6]. In this work, we propose a new architecture building block, called AdaBins that
leads to a new state-of-the-art architecture for depth estimation on the two most popular indoor and outdoor datasets,
NYU [36] and KITTI [13].
The motivation for our work is the conjecture that current
architectures do not perform enough global analysis of the
output values. A drawback of convolutional layers is that
they only process global information once the tensors reach
a very low spatial resolution at or near the bottleneck. However, we believe that global processing is much more powerful when done at high resolution. Our general idea is to
perform a global statistical analysis of the output of a traditional encoder-decoder architecture and to refine the output
with a learned post-processing building block that operates
at the highest resolution. As a particular realization of this
idea, we propose to analyze and modify the distribution of
the depth values.

Figure 1: Illustration of AdaBins: Top: input RGB images.
Middle: depth predicted by our model. Bottom: histogram
of depth values of the ground truth (blue) and predicted bin
density (red) with depth values increasing from left to right.
Note that the predicted bin-centers are focused near smaller
depth values for closeup images but are widely distributed
for images with a wider range of depth values.

Depth distribution corresponding to different RGB inputs can vary to a large extent (see Fig. 1). Some images
have most of the objects located over a very small range of
depth values. Closeup images of furniture will, for example,
contain pixels most of which are close to the camera while
other images may have depth values distributed over a much
broader range, e.g. a corridor, where depth values range
from a small value to the maximum depth supported by the
network. Along with the ill-posed nature of the problem,
such a variation in depth distribution makes depth regression in an end-to-end manner an even more difficult task.
Recent works have proposed to exploit assumptions about
indoor environments such as planarity constraints [25, 21]
to guide the network, which may or may not hold for a realworld environment, especially for outdoors scenes.
Instead of imposing such assumptions, we investigate an
approach where the network learns to adaptively focus on
regions of the depth range which are more probable to occur

4009

