img2pose: Face Alignment and Detection via 6DoF, Face Pose Estimation
Vı́tor Albiero1,∗ , Xingyu Chen2,∗ , Xi Yin2 , Guan Pang2 , Tal Hassner2
1
University of Notre Dame
2
Facebook AI

Figure 1: We estimate the 6DoF rigid transformation of a 3D face (rendered in silver), aligning it with even the tiniest faces,
without face detection or facial landmark localization. Our estimated 3D face locations are rendered by descending distances
from the camera, for coherent visualization.

Abstract
We propose real-time, six degrees of freedom (6DoF),
3D face pose estimation without face detection or landmark
localization. We observe that estimating the 6DoF rigid
transformation of a face is a simpler problem than facial
landmark detection, often used for 3D face alignment. In
addition, 6DoF offers more information than face bounding
box labels. We leverage these observations to make multiple
contributions: (a) We describe an easily trained, efficient,
Faster R-CNN–based model which regresses 6DoF pose for
all faces in the photo, without preliminary face detection.
(b) We explain how pose is converted and kept consistent
between the input photo and arbitrary crops created while
training and evaluating our model. (c) Finally, we show
how face poses can replace detection bounding box training labels. Tests on AFLW2000-3D and BIWI show that
our method runs at real-time and outperforms state of the
art (SotA) face pose estimators. Remarkably, our method
also surpasses SotA models of comparable complexity on
the WIDER FACE detection benchmark, despite not been
optimized on bounding box labels.
∗ Joint first authorship.

All experiments reported in this paper were performed at the University of Notre Dame.

1. Introduction
Face detection is the problem of positioning a box to
bound each face in a photo. Facial landmark detection
seeks to localize specific facial features: e.g., eye centers,
tip of the nose. Together, these two steps are the cornerstones of many face-based reasoning tasks, most notably
recognition [18, 47, 48, 49, 74, 76] and 3D reconstruction [20, 30, 71, 72]. Processing typically begins with
face detection followed by landmark detection in each detected face box. Detected landmarks are matched with corresponding ideal locations on a reference 2D image or a 3D
model, and then an alignment transformation is resolved using standard means [16, 39]. The terms face alignment and
landmark detection are thus sometimes used interchangeably [3, 15, 38].
Although this approach was historically successful, it
has drawbacks. Landmark detectors are often optimized
to the particular nature of the bounding boxes produced by
specific face detectors. Updating the face detector therefore
requires re-optimizing the landmark detector [4, 21, 50, 79].
More generally, having two successive components implies
separately optimizing two steps of the pipeline for accuracy
and – crucially for faces – fairness [1, 2, 35]. In addition,
SotA detection and pose estimation models can be computationally expensive (e.g., ResNet-152 used by the full Reti-

7617

