Backdoor Attacks Against Deep Learning Systems in the Physical World
Emily Wenger, Josephine Passananti, Arjun Nitin Bhagoji, Yuanshun Yao, Haitao Zheng, Ben Y. Zhao
Department of Computer Science, University of Chicago
{ewenger, josephinep, abhagoji, ysyao, htzheng, ravenben}@uchicago.edu

Abstract
Backdoor attacks embed hidden malicious behaviors
into deep learning models, which only activate and cause
misclassifications on model inputs containing a specific
“trigger.” Existing works on backdoor attacks and defenses,
however, mostly focus on digital attacks that apply digitally
generated patterns as triggers. A critical question remains
unanswered: “can backdoor attacks succeed using physical objects as triggers, thus making them a credible threat
against deep learning systems in the real world?”
We conduct a detailed empirical study to explore this
question for facial recognition, a critical deep learning task.
Using 7 physical objects as triggers, we collect a custom
dataset of 3205 images of 10 volunteers and use it to study
the feasibility of “physical” backdoor attacks under a variety of real-world conditions. Our study reveals two key
findings. First, physical backdoor attacks can be highly
successful if they are carefully configured to overcome the
constraints imposed by physical objects. In particular, the
placement of successful triggers is largely constrained by
the target model’s dependence on key facial features. Second, four of today’s state-of-the-art defenses against (digital) backdoors are ineffective against physical backdoors,
because the use of physical objects breaks core assumptions
used to construct these defenses.
Our study confirms that (physical) backdoor attacks are
not a hypothetical phenomenon but rather pose a serious
real-world threat to critical classification tasks. We need
new and more robust defenses against backdoors in the
physical world.

1. Introduction
Despite their known impact on numerous applications
from facial recognition to self-driving cars, deep neural networks (DNNs) are vulnerable to a range of adversarial attacks [4, 29, 16, 28, 21, 2, 6]. One such attack is the backdoor attack [10, 23], in which an attacker corrupts (i.e. poisons) a dataset to embed hidden malicious behaviors into
models trained on this dataset. These behaviors only acti-

vate on inputs containing a specific “trigger” pattern.
Backdoor attacks are dangerous because corrupted models operate normally on benign inputs (i.e. achieve high
classification accuracy), but consistently misclassify any
inputs containing the backdoor trigger. This dangerous
property has galvanized efforts to investigate backdoor attacks and their defenses, from government funding initiatives (e.g. [39]) to numerous defenses that either identify
corrupted models or detect inputs containing triggers [5, 9,
11, 33, 42].
Current literature on backdoor attacks and defenses
mainly focuses on digital attacks, where the backdoor trigger is a digital pattern (e.g. a random pixel block in Figure 1a) that is digitally inserted into an input. These digital
attacks assume attackers have run-time access to the image
processing pipeline to digitally modify inputs [15]. This
rather strong assumption significantly limits the applicability of backdoor attacks to real-world settings.
In this work, we consider a more realistic form of the
backdoor attack. We use everyday, physical objects as backdoor triggers, included naturally in training images, thus
eliminating the need to compromise the image processing
pipeline to add the trigger to inputs. An attacker can activate the attack simply by wearing/holding the physical trigger object, e.g. a scarf or earrings. We call these “physical”
backdoor attacks. The natural question arises: “can backdoor attacks succeed using physical objects as triggers, thus
making them a credible threat against deep learning systems in the real world?”
To answer this question, we perform a detailed empirical
study on the training and execution of physical backdoor
attacks under a variety of real-world settings. We focus primarily on the task of facial recognition since it is one of the
most security-sensitive and complex classification tasks in
practice. Using 7 physical objects as triggers, we collect a
custom dataset of 3205 face images of 10 volunteers∗ . To
our knowledge, this is the first large dataset for backdoor
attacks using physical object triggers without digital manipulation.
∗ We followed IRB-approved steps to protect the privacy of our study
participants. For more details, see §3.1.

6206

