Scalability vs. Utility: Do We Have to Sacrifice One for the Other in Data
Importance Quantification?
Ruoxi Jia1
Fan Wu2∗
Xuehui Sun3∗
Jiacen Xu4∗
David Dao5
6
5
2
Bhavya Kailkhura
Ce Zhang
Bo Li
Dawn Song7
1
2
3
4
5
Virginia Tech
UIUC
Shanhai Jiaotong University
UC Irvine
ETH Zurich
6
7
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
UC Berkeley
ruoxijia@vt.edu

{fanw6,lbo}@illinois.edu

{david.dao,ce.zhang}@inf.ethz.ch

Abstract
Quantifying the importance of each training point to a
learning task is a fundamental problem in machine learning
and the estimated importance scores have been leveraged
to guide a range of data workflows such as data summarization and domain adaption. One simple idea is to use
the leave-one-out error of each training point to indicate its
importance. Recent work has also proposed to use the Shapley value, as it defines a unique value distribution scheme
that satisfies a set of appealing properties. However, calculating Shapley values is often expensive, which limits its
applicability in real-world applications at scale. Multiple
heuristics to improve the scalability of calculating Shapley
values have been proposed recently, with the potential risk
of compromising their utility in real-world applications.
How well do existing data quantification methods perform on existing workflows? How do these methods compare
with each other, empirically and theoretically? Must we
sacrifice scalability for the utility in these workflows when
using these methods? In this paper, we conduct a novel theoretical analysis comparing the utility of different importance
quantification methods, and report extensive experimental
studies on existing and proposed workflows such as noisy label detection, watermark removal, data summarization, data
acquisition, and domain adaptation. We show that Shapley
value approximation based on a KNN surrogate over pretrained feature embeddings obtains comparable utility with
existing algorithms while achieving significant scalability
improvement, often by orders of magnitude. Our theoretical
analysis also justifies its advantage over the leave-one-out
error.
The code is available at https://github.com/AIsecure/Shapley-Study.
∗ Equal contribution.

zidaneandmessi@sjtu.edu.cn
kailkhura1@llnl.gov

jiacenx@uci.edu

dawnsong@gmail.com

1. Introduction
Understanding the importance of a single training example, relative to other training examples, to a learning task is a
fundamental problem in machine learning (ML) which could
have profound impact on a range of applications including
interpretability, robustness, data acquisition, data valuation,
among others [12, 7, 14].
In this paper, we are driven by two questions around this
fundamental problem. Our contribution is a novel theoretical
analysis and thorough experimental studies towards understanding both questions.
Q1: Leave-one-out vs. Shapley? Given a training set D,
a validation set Dval and a learning algorithm A, let the
utility UA,Dval (D) be the validation accuracy of the model
trained on D using A, recently there have been two lines of
work in assigning relative importance to a data point z ∈ D.
A. Leave-one-out (LOO)-based Method & Influence
Function. One natural way to assign importance to z is by
calculating its contribution to the rest of training data:
vloo (z) ∝ UA,Dval (D) − UA,Dval (D\{z})

When we need to assign such an importance score to all data
points in the training set, we need to train a large number of
models. Thus researchers have proposed efficient techniques
to approximate this score, e.g., via influence function [14].
B. Shapley-based Method. Another natural way to assign importance to z is inspired by cooperative game theory
and to use the Shapley value [12, 7]:
νshap (z) ∝

1
N

X
S⊆D\{z}

1
N −1
|S|



 UA,Dval (S ∪ {z}) − UA,Dval (S)

Both approaches have recently been explored by researchers
and have been applied to a range of ML tasks including noisy
label detection, watermark removal, data summarization,
active data acquisition, and domain adaptation [12, 7, 14].

8239

