Curriculum Graph Co-Teaching for Multi-Target Domain Adaptation
Subhankar Roy1,2 *, Evgeny Krivosheev1∗ , Zhun Zhong1†, Nicu Sebe1 , Elisa Ricci1,2
1
University of Trento, Italy 2 Fondazione Bruno Kessler, Italy
Project Page: https://roysubhankar.github.io/graph-coteaching-adaptation

Abstract
In this paper we address multi-target domain adaptation
(MTDA), where given one labeled source dataset and multiple unlabeled target datasets that differ in data distributions, the task is to learn a robust predictor for all the target domains. We identify two key aspects that can help to
alleviate multiple domain-shifts in the MTDA: feature aggregation and curriculum learning. To this end, we propose Curriculum Graph Co-Teaching (CGCT) that uses a
dual classifier head, with one of them being a graph convolutional network (GCN) which aggregates features from
similar samples across the domains. To prevent the classifiers from over-fitting on its own noisy pseudo-labels we
develop a co-teaching strategy with the dual classifier head
that is assisted by curriculum learning to obtain more reliable pseudo-labels. Furthermore, when the domain labels are available, we propose Domain-aware Curriculum
Learning (DCL), a sequential adaptation strategy that first
adapts on the easier target domains, followed by the harder
ones. We experimentally demonstrate the effectiveness of
our proposed frameworks on several benchmarks and advance the state-of-the-art in the MTDA by large margins
(e.g. +5.6% on the DomainNet).

1. Introduction
Deep learning models suffer from the well known drawback of failing to generalize well when deployed in the real
world. The gap in performance arises due to the difference in the distributions of the training (a.k.a source) and
the test (a.k.a target) data, which is popularly referred to
as domain-shift [46]. Since, collecting labeled data for every new operating environment is prohibitive, a rich line of
research, called Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA),
has evolved to tackle the task of leveraging the source data
to learn a robust predictor on a desired target domain.
In the literature, UDA methods have predominantly been
designed to adapt from a single source domain to a single
target domain (STDA). Such methods include optimizing
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author

statistical moments [48, 26, 45, 35, 4, 5, 6, 36], adversarial training [11, 47, 25], generative modelling [39, 17, 23],
to name a few. However, given the proliferation in unlabeled data acquisition, the need to adapt to just a single target domain has lost traction in the real world scenarios. As
the number of target domains grows, the number of models
that need to be trained also scales linearly. For this reason, the research focus has very recently been steered to address a more practical scenario of adapting simultaneously
to multiple target domains from a single source domain.
This adaptation setting is formally termed as Multi-target
Domain Adaptation (MTDA). The goal of the MTDA is to
learn more compact representations with a single predictor
that can perform well in all the target domains. Straightforward application of the STDA methods for the MTDA
may be sub-optimal due to the presence of multiple domainshifts, thereby leading to negative transfer [54, 9]. Thus, the
desideratum to align multiple data distributions makes the
MTDA considerably more challenging.
In this paper we build our framework for the MTDA pivoted around two key concepts: feature aggregation and curriculum learning. Firstly, we argue that given the intrinsic
nature of the task, learning robust features in a unified space
is a prerequisite for attaining minimum risk across multiple
target domains. For this purpose we propose to represent
the source and the target samples as a graph and then leverage Graph Convolutional Networks [19] (GCN) to aggregate semantic information from similar samples in a neighbourhood across different domains. For the GCN to be operative, partial relationships among the samples (nodes) in
the graph must at least be known apriori in the form of class
labels. However, this information is absent for the target
samples. To this end, we design a co-teaching framework
where we train two classifiers: a MLP classifier and a GCN
classifier that provide target pseudo-labels to each other.
On the one hand, the MLP classifier is utilized to make
the GCN learn the pairwise similarity between two nodes
in the graph. While, on the other hand, the GCN classifier, due to its feature aggregation property, provides better
pseudo-labels to assist the training of the MLP classifier.
Given that co-teaching works on the assumption that differ-

5351

