Learning Affinity-Aware Upsampling for Deep Image Matting∗
Yutong Dai1 ,
1
The University of Adelaide

Hao Lu2 ,
Chunhua Shen1
2
Huazhong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
We show that learning affinity in upsampling provides
an effective and efficient approach to exploit pairwise interactions in deep networks. Second-order features are commonly used in dense prediction to build adjacent relations
with a learnable module after upsampling such as non-local
blocks. Since upsampling is essential, learning affinity in
upsampling can avoid additional propagation layers, offering the potential for building compact models. By looking at
existing upsampling operators from a unified mathematical
perspective, we generalize them into a second-order form
and introduce Affinity-Aware Upsampling (A2 U) where upsampling kernels are generated using a light-weight lowrank bilinear model and are conditioned on second-order
features. Our upsampling operator can also be extended
to downsampling. We discuss alternative implementations
of A2 U and verify their effectiveness on two detail-sensitive
tasks: image reconstruction on a toy dataset; and a largescale image matting task where affinity-based ideas constitute mainstream matting approaches. In particular, results on the Composition-1k matting dataset show that A2 U
achieves a 14% relative improvement in the SAD metric
against a strong baseline with negligible increase of parameters (< 0.5%). Compared with the state-of-the-art matting
network, we achieve 8% higher performance with only 40%
model complexity.

1. Introduction
The similarity among positions, a.k.a. affinity, is commonly investigated in dense prediction tasks [22, 4, 8, 36,
20]. Compared with directly fitting ground truths using
first-order features, modeling similarity among different positions can provide second-order information. There currently exist two solutions to learn affinity in deep networks:
i) learning an affinity map before a non-deep backend and ii)
defining a learnable affinity-based module to propagate information. We are interested in end-to-end affinity learning,
∗ HL’s contribution was made when he was with The University of Adelaide. YD and HL contributed equally. Correspondence should be addressed to CS (email: chunhua@icloud.com).

Figure 1 – Visualization of upsampled feature maps with various
upsampling operators. From left to right, the input RGB image,
feature maps after the last upsampling using nearest neighbor interpolation, bilinear upsampling, and our proposed affinity-aware
upsampling, respectively. Our method produces better details with
clear connectivity.

because classic methods often build upon some assumptions, rendering weak generalization in general cases. Existing approaches typically propagate or model affinity after
upsampling layers or before the last prediction layer. While
affinity properties are modeled, they sometimes may not be
effective for the downstream tasks. For instance,the work in
[20] requires a feature encoding block besides the encoderdecoder architecture to learn affinity. The work in [4] needs
more iterations to refine the feature maps according to their
affinity at the last stage. As shown in Fig. 1, one plausible
reason is that pairwise similarity is damaged during upsampling. In addition, it is inefficient to construct interactions
between high-dimensional feature maps. We therefore pose
the question: Can we model affinity earlier in upsampling
in an effective and efficient manner?
Many widely used upsampling operators interpolate values following a fixed rule at different positions. For instance, despite reference positions may change in bilinear
upsampling, it always interpolates values based on relative spatial distances. Recently, the idea of learning to upsample emerges [24, 25, 35]. A learnable module is often built to generate upsampling kernels conditioned on
feature maps to enable dynamic, feature-dependent upsampling behaviors. Two such representative operators include
CARAFE [35] and IndexNet [25]. In our experiments, we
find that CARAFE may not work well in low-level vision
tasks where details need to be restored. IndexNet instead
can recover details much better. We believe that one important reason is that IndexNet encodes, stores, and delivers
spatial information prior to downsampling. But computation can be costly when the network goes deep. This mo-

6841

