Learning by Watching
Jimuyang Zhang Eshed Ohn-Bar
Boston University
{zhangjim, eohnbar}@bu.edu

Abstract

Learning By Watching
Ego
Expert

When in a new situation or geographical location, human drivers have an extraordinary ability to watch others
and learn maneuvers that they themselves may have never
performed. In contrast, existing techniques for learning to
drive preclude such a possibility as they assume direct access to an instrumented ego-vehicle with fully known observations and expert driver actions. However, such measurements cannot be directly accessed for the non-ego vehicles
when learning by watching others. Therefore, in an application where data is regarded as a highly valuable asset, current approaches completely discard the vast portion of the
training data that can be potentially obtained through indirect observation of surrounding vehicles. Motivated by this
key insight, we propose the Learning by Watching (LbW)
framework which enables learning a driving policy without requiring full knowledge of neither the state nor expert
actions. To increase its data, i.e., with new perspectives
and maneuvers, LbW makes use of the demonstrations of
other vehicles in a given scene by (1) transforming the egovehicle’s observations to their points of view, and (2) inferring their expert actions. Our LbW agent learns more
robust driving policies while enabling data-efficient learning, including quick adaptation of the policy to rare and
novel scenarios. In particular, LbW drives robustly even
with a fraction of available driving data required by existing methods, achieving an average success rate of 92% on
the original CARLA benchmark with only 30 minutes of total driving data and 82% with only 10 minutes.

1. Introduction
Modern autonomous driving systems primarily rely on
collecting vast amounts of data through a fleet of instrumented and operated vehicles in order to train imitation and
machine learning algorithms [4, 7, 15]. This process generally assumes direct knowledge of the sensory state of an
ego-vehicle as well as the control actions of the expert operator. As driving algorithms largely depend on such costly
training data to learn to drive safely, it is regarded as a
highly valuable asset.

Imitation

Agent

Observed

Observed

Estimated State

Inferred Action

Traditional Imitation Learning

Ego

Observed
Expert

Imitation

Agent

Ego
Action
State

Figure 1: Learning to Drive by Watching Others. While
existing imitation learning approaches solely utilize data
from an ego-vehicle perspective, our proposed Learning by
Watching (LbW) framework learns a more robust and dataefficient policy from all available demonstration sources in
a scene.
Unfortunately, such data requirements have resulted in
self-captured data being amassed in the hands of a few isolated organizations, thereby hindering the progress, accessibility, and utility of autonomous driving technologies. First,
while technological giants such as Uber, Tesla, Waymo and
other developers may spend significant efforts instrumenting and operating their own vehicles, it is difficult to completely capture all of the driving modes, environments, and
events that the real-world presents. Consequently, learned
agents may not be able to safely handle diverse cases, e.g.,
a new scenario or maneuver that is outside of their in-house
collected dataset. Second, while small portions of driving
data may be shared, i.e., for research purposes, the bulk of
it is predominantly kept private due to its underlying worth.
Finally, we can also see how this current practice may lead
to significant redundancy and thus stagnation in development. How can we advance the underlying development
process of safe and scalable autonomous vehicles?
In an application where the lack of a data point could
mean the difference between a potential crash or a safe maneuver, we sought to develop a more efficient and shared
paradigm to ensure safe driving. Towards this goal, we propose the LbW framework for learning to drive by watching other vehicles in the ego-vehicle’s surroundings. Motivated by how human drivers are able to quickly learn from
demonstrations provided by other drivers and vehicles, our

12711

