BABEL: Bodies, Action and Behavior with English Labels
Abhinanda R. Punnakkal∗,1
Arjun Chandrasekaran∗,1
Nikos Athanasiou1
Alejandra Quirós-Ramı́rez2
Michael J. Black1
1

Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany

2

Universität Konstanz, Konstanz, Germany

{apunnakkal, achandrasekaran, nathanasiou, alejandra.quiros, black}@tue.mpg.de

Abstract
Understanding the semantics of human movement – the
what, how and why of the movement – is an important problem that requires datasets of human actions with semantic labels. Existing datasets take one of two approaches.
Large-scale video datasets contain many action labels but
do not contain ground-truth 3D human motion. Alternatively, motion-capture (mocap) datasets have precise body
motions but are limited to a small number of actions. To
address this, we present BABEL, a large dataset with language labels describing the actions being performed in mocap sequences. BABEL consists of language labels for over
43 hours of mocap sequences from AMASS, containing over
250 unique actions. Each action label in BABEL is precisely
aligned with the duration of the corresponding action in the
mocap sequence. BABELalso allows overlap of multiple actions, that may each span different durations. This results
in a total of over 66000 action segments. The dense annotations can be leveraged for tasks like action recognition, temporal localization, motion synthesis, etc. To demonstrate
the value of BABEL as a benchmark, we evaluate the performance of models on 3D action recognition. We demonstrate that BABEL poses interesting learning challenges
that are applicable to real-world scenarios, and can serve
as a useful benchmark for progress in 3D action recognition. The dataset, baseline methods, and evaluation code
are available and supported for academic research purposes at https://babel.is.tue.mpg.de/.

1. Introduction
A key goal in computer vision is to understand human
movement in semantic terms. Relevant tasks include predicting semantic labels for a human movement, e.g., action
recognition [12], video description [37], temporal localization [26, 39], and generating human movement that is conditioned on semantics, e.g., motion synthesis conditioned
∗ Denotes equal contribution.

Sequence label: jump over= obstacle [BABEL, others]

stand

transition

run

transition

support body with
right hand

Frame labels [BABEL]

jump over
obstacle

Figure 1. People moving naturally often perform multiple actions
simultaneously, and sequentially, with transitions between them.
Existing large-scale 3D mocap datasets, however, describe an entire sequence with only a single action label. In BABEL, all frames
and all actions are labeled. Each frame label is precisely aligned
with the frames representing the action (colored wedge). This includes simultaneous actions (overlapping wedges) and transitions
between actions (gray wedges).

on actions [10], or sentences [3, 17].
Large-scale datasets that capture variations in human
movement and language descriptions that express the semantics of these movements, are critical to making progress
on these challenging problems. Existing datasets contain
detailed action descriptions for only 2D videos, e.g., ActivityNet [26], AVA [9] and HACS [39]. The large scale 3D
datasets that contain action labels, e.g., NTU RGB+D 60
[27] and NTU RGB+D 120 [40] do not contain ground truth
3D human motion but only noisy estimates. On the other
hand, motion-capture (mocap) datasets [2, 8, 11, 14] are
small in scale and are only sparsely labeled with very few
actions. We address this shortcoming with BABEL, a large
dataset of diverse, densely annotated, actions with labels for
all the actions in a motion capture (mocap) sequence.
We acquire action labels for sequences in BABEL, at
two different levels of resolution. Similar to existing mocap datasets, we collect a sequence label that describes the
action being performed in the entire sequence, e.g., jump
over obstacle in Fig. 1. At a finer-grained resolution,
the frame labels describe the action being performed at each
frame of the sequence, e.g., stand, run, etc. The frame

722

