Learning the Best Pooling Strategy for Visual Semantic Embedding
Jiacheng Chen1∗
1

Hexiang Hu2∗

ByteDance AI Lab

2

Hao Wu1

University of Southern California

Abstract
Visual Semantic Embedding (VSE) is a dominant approach for vision-language retrieval, which aims at learning
a deep embedding space such that visual data are embedded
close to their semantic text labels or descriptions. Recent
VSE models use complex methods to better contextualize and
aggregate multi-modal features into holistic embeddings.
However, we discover that surprisingly simple (but carefully selected) global pooling functions (e.g., max pooling)
outperform those complex models, across different feature
extractors. Despite its simplicity and effectiveness, seeking
the best pooling function for different data modality and
feature extractor is costly and tedious, especially when the
size of features varies (e.g., text, video). Therefore, we propose a Generalized Pooling Operator (GPO), which learns
to automatically adapt itself to the best pooling strategy for
different features, requiring no manual tuning while staying
effective and efficient. We extend the VSE model using this
proposed GPO and denote it as VSE∞.
Without bells and whistles, VSE∞ outperforms previous
VSE methods significantly on image-text retrieval benchmarks across popular feature extractors. With a simple adaptation, variants of VSE∞ further demonstrate its strength by
achieving the new state of the art on two video-text retrieval
datasets. Comprehensive experiments and visualizations
confirm that GPO always discovers the best pooling strategy
and can be a plug-and-play feature aggregation module for
standard VSE models. Code and pre-trained models are
available at http://jcchen.me/vse_infty/

1. Introduction
Recognizing and describing the visual world with natural
language is an essential capability for artificial intelligence.
It motivates the research of image-text matching, which
challenges a learning agent to establish accurate and generalizable alignment between visual and textual data, so that one
can identify images or videos by text queries or vice versa.
Visual semantic embedding (VSE) [9, 10, 22] tackles this
∗ Authors contributed equally

Yuning Jiang3

Changhu Wang1
3

Alibaba Inc

challenge by learning a semantic embedding space, where
the distance between paired visual and textual instances in
the embedding space is optimized to be small. The core idea
of the VSE has three steps:
Step 1. Extract a set (or sequence) of features from data,
using feature extractors (e.g., ConvNets for visual data).
Step 2. Contextualize and aggregate the extracted features
to project them into the joint embedding space as holistic
vectors, using feature aggregators.
Step 3. Compute the matching score between embeddings
with a similarity metric (e.g., cosine distance).
With the feature extractor determined, one might expect that
a complex aggregator is required to achieve good results.
However, we show (in § 3) that a surprisingly simple and
efficient aggregator, a carefully selected pooling function
(e.g., max pooling), can surpass prior state-of-the-art VSE
methods with complex aggregators [17, 27, 43, 45, 46].
Such pooling functions are both simple and effective.
However, searching for the optimal pooling requires extensive manual tuning and repetitive experiments (e.g., grid
search) for each data modality and features, which is tedious
and costly as it enumerates over a combinatorial number of
configurations. This search procedure could be even more
complicated when the sets of features have varying sizes.
Can we discover the best pooling strategy automatically?
In this paper, we propose a novel parameterized pooling operator, Generalized Pooling Operator (GPO), to fully exploit
the strengths of pooling-based feature aggregation. GPO
generalizes over various pooling functions and learns to adjust itself to the best one for different data modalities and
feature extractors. Specifically, GPO learns a generator that
predicts the pooling coefficients to weight the elements of
sorted feature vectors, and use their weighted sum as the
pooling output. The coefficient generator is instantiated as a
tiny sequence model to handle variable-sized features. GPO
learns to adapt to the optimal pooling strategy, and improve
VSE models at a negligible extra computational cost.
With the proposed GPO, we build our multi-modal matching system as VSE∞, which extends a standard VSE
framework[22] by using GPO as the feature aggregators for
both visual and text features. We train our system optimizing
a margin-based triplet ranking objective similar to [9], with

15789

