Prototype-Guided Saliency Feature Learning for Person Search
Hanjae Kim1 , Sunghun Joung1 , Ig-Jae Kim2 , and Kwanghoon Sohn1,∗
1
Yonsei University 2 Korea Institute of Science and Technology (KIST)
{incohjk,sunghunjoung,khsohn}@yonsei.ac.kr, drjay@kist.re.kr

Abstract
Existing person search methods integrate person detection and re-identification (re-ID) module into a unified system. Though promising results have been achieved, the
misalignment problem, which commonly occurs in person
search, limits the discriminative feature representation for
re-ID. To overcome this limitation, we introduce a novel
framework to learn the discriminative representation by utilizing prototype in OIM loss. Unlike conventional methods
using prototype as a representation of person identity, we
utilize it as guidance to allow the attention network to consistently highlight multiple instances across different poses.
Moreover, we propose a new prototype update scheme with
adaptive momentum to increase the discriminative ability
across different instances. Extensive ablation experiments
demonstrate that our method can significantly enhance the
feature discriminative power, outperforming the state-ofthe-art results on two person search benchmarks including
CUHK-SYSU and PRW.

1. Introduction
Person search aims to localize a target person in a
gallery of pedestrian images. While inputs of person reidentification (re-ID) task are auto-detected person bounding boxes [15], those of person search task are in-the-wild
image containing large amounts of backgrounds. The simplest way to solve the person search problem is to crop
all the pedestrians adopting off-the-shelf detector [21], and
pass them into re-ID module as [1]. This, however, divide
the two tasks which affect each other into separate tasks
and are inefficient in real-world applications. To address
this, recent methods [30, 18, 2, 40] formulate detection and
re-ID into a unified framework by sharing the backbone network, and train both tasks in an end-to-end fashion.
The main goal of person search, as well as re-ID is to
generate a discriminative feature from an image for matching the same class (identity) to the target person. Existing methods focus on feature representation learning [29]
∗ Corresponding author

(a)

(b)

(c)

Figure 1. Examples of misalignment problem in person search task
caused by (a) the presence of other instances, (b) mis-detection and
(c) background objects.

to classify different instances in a gallery of pedestrian images. However, as shown in Fig. 1, misalignment issue
arises from occlusion with other instances or background
objects, and false positives from detector that hinder robust
feature representation. To overcome this, recent methods
[16, 39, 37, 24, 25] exploit attention mechanism to obtain
a saliency map emphasizing discriminative parts of human
(e.g. clothes or handbags). However, person detection and
re-ID are inherently contradictory [32], since the former
aims to classify everyone in an image into person class,
while the latter aims to distinguish individual person for
identification. It limits the applicability of attention mechanism in conventional re-ID methods to the person search
framework.
On the other hand, loss functions for training the feature representation such as cross-entropy [35] or triplet loss
[5] are widely used in re-ID community, in order to make
the same identities be closer in embedding space, while dif-

4865

