TSGCNet: Discriminative Geometric Feature Learning with Two-Stream Graph
Convolutional Network for 3D Dental Model Segmentation
Lingming Zhang1 ∗

Yue Zhao1 ∗

Deyu Meng2 3
Zhiming Cui4 5
Chenqiang Gao1 †
Xinbo Gao1
2
567†
Chunfeng Lian
Dinggang Shen
1
Chongqing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Chongqing, China
2
Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China
3
Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau, China
4
The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
5
School of Biomedical Engineering, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China
6
Shanghai United Imaging Intelligence Co., Ltd., Shanghai, China
7
Department of Artificial Intelligence, Korea University, Seoul 02841, Republic of Korea

Abstract
Conventional
single-stream network

The ability to segment teeth precisely from digitized 3D
dental models is an essential task in computer-aided orthodontic surgical planning. To date, deep learning based
methods have been popularly used to handle this task.
State-of-the-art methods directly concatenate the raw attributes of 3D inputs, namely coordinates and normal vectors of mesh cells, to train a single-stream network for
fully-automated tooth segmentation. This, however, has the
drawback of ignoring the different geometric meanings provided by those raw attributes. This issue might possibly
confuse the network in learning discriminative geometric
features and result in many isolated false predictions on the
dental model. Against this issue, we propose a two-stream
graph convolutional network (TSGCNet) to learn multiview geometric information from different geometric attributes. Our TSGCNet adopts two graph-learning streams,
designed in an input-aware fashion, to extract more discriminative high-level geometric representations from coordinates and normal vectors, respectively. These feature representations learned from the designed two different streams
are further fused to integrate the multi-view complementary information for the cell-wise dense prediction task. We
evaluate our proposed TSGCNet on a real-patient dataset
of dental models acquired by 3D intraoral scanners, and
experimental results demonstrate that our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art methods for 3D shape
segmentation.

∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

A
B
C

Our two-stream
network

Figure 1. An illustration of 3D dental model. In the local space
indicated by the blue box, cell A and cell B are spatially close but
with much different normal vectors (indicated by the black arrows
in the zoomed view). In contrast, cell A and cell C have similar normal vectors but are far from each other. It suggests that
coordinates and normal vectors provide completely different geometric information. Hence, simply concatenating them as a single
feature vector (commonly used in the conventional single-stream
networks) cannot properly integrate such complementary information to learn more discriminative geometric representations for cell
classification, which will result in many isolated false predictions
on dental model (as indicated by one of red dotted circle).

1. Introduction
An essential task in computer-aided-design system for
orthodontic treatment is to provide accurate segmentation of
teeth on digitalized 3D dental models reconstructed by intraoral scanners (IOS). This segmentation information can
be used for aiding clinical diagnose, providing digital teeth
shape information for personal surgical-orthodontic planning, quantifying the difference between expected and clinical treatment results to adjust orthodontic treatment plan,
etc. However, segmenting each tooth from the gingiva is

6699

