Cross-MPI: Cross-scale Stereo for Image Super-Resolution
using Multiplane Images
Yuemei Zhou1,2 , Gaochang Wu3 , Ying Fu4 , Kun Li5 , Yebin Liu1
1

Tsinghua University, 2 ZhuoHe Tech, 3 Northeastern University, 4 Beijing Institute of Technology,5 Tianjin University

zym18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, wugc@mail.neu.edu.com, fuying@bit.edu.cn, lik@tju.edu.cn,
liuyebin@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Various combinations of cameras enrich computational photography, among which reference-based superresolution (RefSR) plays a critical role in multiscale imaging systems. However, existing RefSR approaches fail to
accomplish high-fidelity super-resolution under a large resolution gap, e.g., 8× upscaling, due to the lower consideration of the underlying scene structure. In this paper, we
aim to solve the RefSR problem in actual multiscale camera
systems inspired by multiplane image (MPI) representation.
Specifically, we propose Cross-MPI, an end-to-end RefSR
network composed of a novel plane-aware attention-based
MPI mechanism, a multiscale guided upsampling module as
well as a super-resolution (SR) synthesis and fusion module.
Instead of using a direct and exhaustive matching between
the cross-scale stereo, the proposed plane-aware attention
mechanism fully utilizes the concealed scene structure for
efficient attention-based correspondence searching. Further combined with a gentle coarse-to-fine guided upsampling strategy, the proposed Cross-MPI can achieve a robust and accurate detail transmission. Experimental results
on both digitally synthesized and optical zoom cross-scale
data show that the Cross-MPI framework can achieve superior performance against the existing RefSR methods and
is a real fit for actual multiscale camera systems even with
large-scale differences.

1. Introduction
With computational photography prospering over the
past few decades, higher-quality and fidelity imaging is in
sustained demand for both industry and daily life. Hybrid
multiscale imaging camera systems [27, 29, 9, 19] stand
out for their capability to compose different camera characteristics and obtain a much higher spatial bandwidth. Hybrid multiscale imaging has been successfully applied in
various imaging systems, including hybrid light field cameras [27], gigapixel video systems [29], and mobile phones

Figure 1: Top: Our Cross-MPI network takes cross-scale
stereo images as input and generates super-resolved MPIs
through a delicate plane-aware attention mechanism and an
effective multiscale guided upsampling module. Bottom:
An 8× SR comparison between Cross-MPI and the stateof-the-art RefSR work, CrossNet [37] and TTSR [28], along
with our intermediate depth estimation result.
with multi-camera systems [9, 19]. To realize hybrid multiscale imaging, one of the key issues is how to match and
fuse cross-resolution images from different cameras under
certain perspective parallax.
Reference-based image super-resolution (RefSR) has
been proposed to solve the cross-scale reconstruction problem and applied to gigapixel video systems [29] or hybrid light field imaging systems [1, 27]. RefSR aims to
super-resolve a low-resolution (LR) image through additional high-resolution (HR) reference image(s). Unlike
data-driven single image super-resolution (SISR) [16, 33,
32, 14, 17], which only utilizes prior knowledge learned
from massive data to build an upsampling model, RefSR
can produce much more satisfactory results due to the additional HR references, especially for upsampling factors

14842

