Objects are Different: Flexible Monocular 3D Object Detection
Yunpeng Zhang, Jiwen Lu,* Jie Zhou
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, China
Department of Automation, Tsinghua University, China
zhang-yp19@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; {lujiwen,jzhou}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
The precise localization of 3D objects from a single image without depth information is a highly challenging problem. Most existing methods adopt the same approach for
all objects regardless of their diverse distributions, leading
to limited performance for truncated objects. In this paper, we propose a flexible framework for monocular 3D object detection which explicitly decouples the truncated objects and adaptively combines multiple approaches for object depth estimation. Specifically, we decouple the edge
of the feature map for predicting long-tail truncated objects so that the optimization of normal objects is not influenced. Furthermore, we formulate the object depth estimation as an uncertainty-guided ensemble of directly regressed
object depth and solved depths from different groups of
keypoints. Experiments demonstrate that our method outperforms the state-of-the-art method by relatively 27% for
the moderate level and 30% for the hard level in the test
set of KITTI benchmark while maintaining real-time efficiency. Code will be available at https://github.
com/zhangyp15/MonoFlex.

1. Introduction
3D object detection is an indispensable premise for
machines to perceive the physical environment and has
been widely used in autonomous driving and robot navigation. In this work, we focus on solving the problem with
only information from monocular images. Most existing
methods for 3D object detection require the LiDAR sensors [22, 33, 35, 40, 41, 49] for precise depth measurements
or stereo cameras [8, 24, 37, 45] for stereo depth estimation,
which greatly increases the implementation costs of practical systems. Therefore, monocular 3D object detection has
been a promising solution and received much attention in
the community [2, 3, 7, 10, 13, 20, 27, 31, 34].
For the challenging localization of 3D objects, most ex* Corresponding author

(a) M3D-RPN [3]

(b) D4LCN [13]

(c) Baseline

(d) Ours

Figure 1: Qualitative comparison among prior arts [3, 13],
our baseline, and the proposed method. The cyan and pink
bounding boxes represent detected cars and pedestrians.
Our approach can effectively detect the heavily truncated
object highlighted by the red arrow.
isting methods handle different objects with a unified approach. For example, [10, 25, 28, 52] utilize fully convolutional nets to predict objects of diverse distributions with
shared kernels. However, we observe that the equal and
joint processing of all objects can lead to unsatisfied performance: (1) As shown in Figure 1, the heavily truncated
objects can be hardly detected by state-of-the-art methods [3, 13] but these objects are important to the safety of
autonomous vehicles. (2) We empirically found that these
hard samples can increase the learning burden and affect the
prediction of general objects. Thus, unified approaches can
fail in both finding every object and predicting precise 3D
locations. To this end, we propose a flexible detector that
considers the difference among objects and estimates their
3D locations in an adaptive way. Since the estimation of an
object’s 3D location is usually decomposed into finding the
projected 3D center and the object depth [10, 28, 36, 52],
we also consider the flexibility from these two aspects.
To localize the projected 3D center, we divide objects
according to whether their projected centers are “inside” or
“outside” the image. Then we represent inside objects exactly as the projected centers and outside objects as delicately chosen edge points so that two groups of objects are
handled by the inner and edge regions of the feature map respectively. Considering it is still difficult for convolutional

3289

