Not just Compete, but Collaborate: Local Image-to-Image Translation via
Cooperative Mask Prediction
Daejin Kim1 Mohammad Azam Khan2 Jaegul Choo1
1
KAIST 2 Dhaka Power Distribution Company Ltd.
{kiddj,jchoo}@kaist.ac.kr, azam@dpdc.org.bd

Bangs

Black hair

Blond hair

Eyeglasses

Gender

Pale skin

Age

tG

At

CA

M-

con

sis

AN tent

At

tG

AN

Input

Figure 1: Results of facial attribute editing (256 × 256), and the Grad-CAM for each attribute. The first two rows are the
results from the original AttGAN while the latter two are those from the AttGAN trained with our proposed CAM-consistency
loss.

Abstract
Facial attribute editing aims to manipulate the image
with the desired attribute while preserving the other details. Recently, generative adversarial networks along with
the encoder-decoder architecture have been utilized for this
task owing to their ability to create realistic images. However, the existing methods for the unpaired dataset cannot
still preserve the attribute-irrelevant regions properly due to
the absence of the ground truth image. This work proposes
a novel, intuitive loss function called the CAM-consistency
loss, which improves the consistency of an input image in
image translation. While the existing cycle-consistency loss
ensures that the image can be translated back, our approach
makes the model further preserve the attribute-irrelevant

regions even in a single translation to another domain by
using the Grad-CAM output computed from the discriminator. Our CAM-consistency loss directly optimizes such
a Grad-CAM output from the discriminator during training, in order to properly capture which local regions the
generator should change while keeping the other regions
unchanged. In this manner, our approach allows the generator and the discriminator to collaborate with each other to
improve the image translation quality. In our experiments,
we validate the effectiveness and versatility of our proposed
CAM-consistency loss by applying it to several representative models for facial image editing, such as StarGAN,
AttGAN, and STGAN.

6509

