Positive Sample Propagation along the Audio-Visual Event Line
Jinxing Zhou1,2

Liang Zheng3∗ Yiran Zhong3 Shijie Hao1,2 Meng Wang1,2 *
1
Hefei University of Technology
2
Intelligent Interconnected Systems Laboratory of Anhui Province
3
Australian National University
{zhoujxhfut, hfut.hsj, eric.mengwang}@gmail.com,
{liang.zheng, yiran.zhong}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Visual and audio signals often coexist in natural environments, forming audio-visual events (AVEs). Given a video,
we aim to localize video segments containing an AVE and
identify its category. In order to learn discriminative features for a classifier, it is pivotal to identify the helpful (or
positive) audio-visual segment pairs while filtering out the
irrelevant ones, regardless whether they are synchronized
or not. To this end, we propose a new positive sample propagation (PSP) module to discover and exploit the closely
related audio-visual pairs by evaluating the relationship
within every possible pair. It can be done by constructing an all-pair similarity map between each audio and visual segment, and only aggregating the features from the
pairs with high similarity scores. To encourage the network to extract high correlated features for positive samples, a new audio-visual pair similarity loss is proposed.
We also propose a new weighting branch to better exploit
the temporal correlations in weakly supervised setting. We
perform extensive experiments on the public AVE dataset
and achieve new state-of-the-art accuracy in both fully and
weakly supervised settings, thus verifying the effectiveness
of our method.

1. Introduction
Recent literature has shown that by fusing multimodality information can lead to better deep feature presentation, i.e., audio-visual fusion [2] and text-visual fusion [20]. However, building a large scale multi-modality
pre-training datasets would require heavy manual labours to
clean and annotate the raw video sets. To relief the manual
labour, recent work either focuses on learning from noise
supervision [5, 12] or tries to automatically filter out unpaired samples [28].
The task of Audio-Visual Event (AVE) localization [28]
* Corresponding author.

Audio
component

hum

hum

hum

hum

hum

man

man

bus

bus

road

Event/BG

background

background

event

event

background

Category
of Event

background

background

bus

bus

background

Visual
component

Figure 1. An illustration of the AVE localization task. Each video
segment is composed of an audio and a visual component. In this
example, the “hum” of the bus exists in all the segments (audio
modality), but the visual images of the “bus” only appear in the
third and fourth segments (visual modality). So only these two
segments (red boxes) are localized as (bus) event, the remaining
are recognized as background.

is served for the latter purpose. An AVE often refers as an
event that is both audible and visible in a video segment,
i.e., a sound source appears in an image (visible) while the
source of the sound also exists in audio portion (audible).
As shown in Fig. 1, a bus humming is an AVE in the third
and fourth segments as we can see a bus and hear it humming simultaneously in these video segments. The AVE
localization task is to find these video segments that contain
an audio-visual event and classify it into a certain category1 .
There are two relations that need to be considered in
the AVE task: intra-modal relations and cross-modal relations. The former often addresses temporal relations in
one single modality while the later also takes audio and visual relations into account. The pioneer work [14, 28] often tries to regress the class by concatenating features from
synchronized audio-visual pairs. Since these methods do
not explicitly consider the intra-modal or cross-modal relations, their accuracy is often unsatisfying. The follow1 Note that there is a fundamental difference between the Multimedia
Event Detection (MED) task and the AVE localization task: MED is a
retrieval task that aims to find video clips that are associated with a particular event from a video archive while AVE localization is a classification
problem.

8436

