CLCC: Contrastive Learning for Color Constancy
Yi-Chen Lo*, Chia-Che Chang*, Hsuan-Chao Chiu, Yu-Hao Huang,
Chia-Ping Chen, Yu-Lin Chang, Kevin Jou
MediaTek Inc., Hsinchu, Taiwan
{yichen.lo, chia-che.chang, Hsuanchao.Chiu, justin-yh.huang,
chiaping.chen, yulin.chang, kevin.jou}@mediatek.com

Abstract
In this paper, we present CLCC, a novel contrastive learning framework for color constancy. Contrastive learning
has been applied for learning high-quality visual representations for image classification. One key aspect to yield
useful representations for image classification is to design
illuminant invariant augmentations. However, the illuminant
invariant assumption conflicts with the nature of the color
constancy task, which aims to estimate the illuminant given
a raw image. Therefore, we construct effective contrastive
pairs for learning better illuminant-dependent features via
a novel raw-domain color augmentation. On the NUS-8
dataset, our method provides 17.5% relative improvements
over a strong baseline, reaching state-of-the-art performance
without increasing model complexity. Furthermore, our
method achieves competitive performance on the Gehler
dataset with 3× fewer parameters compared to top-ranking
deep learning methods. More importantly, we show that
our model is more robust to different scenes under close
proximity of illuminants, significantly reducing 28.7% worstcase error in data-sparse regions. Our code is available at
https:// github.com/ howardyclo/ clcc-cvpr21.

1. Introduction
The human visual system can perceive the same canonical color of an object even under different illuminants.
This feature can be mimicked by computational color constancy, an essential task in the camera pipeline that processes
raw sensor signals to sRGB images. Conventional methods [10, 20, 21, 40, 60] utilize statistical properties of the
scene to cope with this ill-posed problem, such as the most
widely used gray world assumption. Such statistical methods, however, often fail where their assumptions are violated
in complex scenes.
* Indicates equal contribution.

Close

Close

Far

Far
Input

Representation

Output

Figure 1: Our main idea of CLCC: The scene-invariant,
illuminant-dependent representation of the same scene under
different illuminants should be far from each other, while
different scenes under the same illuminant should be close
to each other.

Until recently, deep learning based methods [31, 48, 66,
67] have been applied to the color constancy problem and
achieve considerable quality improvements on challenging
scenes. Yet, this ill-posed and sensor-dependent task still
suffers from the difficulty of collecting massive paired data
for supervised training.
When learning with insufficient training data, a common issue frequently encountered is the possibility of learning spurious correlations [62] or undesirable biases from
data [59]: misleading features that work for most training
samples but do not always hold in general. For instance,
previous research has shown that a deep object-recognition
model may rely on the spuriously correlated background
instead of the foreground object to make predictions [65] or
be biased towards object textures instead of shapes [24]. In
the case of color constancy, outdoor scenes often have higher
correlations with high color temperature illuminants than
indoor scenes. Thus, deep learning models may focus on
scene related features instead of illuminant related features.

8053

