Cylindrical and Asymmetrical 3D Convolution Networks
for LiDAR Segmentation
Xinge Zhu1 * Hui Zhou1∗ Tai Wang1 Fangzhou Hong7
Yuexin Ma2 5 Wei Li3 Hongsheng Li1 6 Dahua Lin1 4
1

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, CUHK
3

5

Inceptio

4

2

ShanghaiTech University

Centre of Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence

Shanghai Engineering Research Center of Intelligent Vision and Imaging

6

School of CST, Xidian University

Abstract
State-of-the-art methods for large-scale driving-scene
LiDAR segmentation often project the point clouds to 2D
space and then process them via 2D convolution. Although
this corporation shows the competitiveness in the point
cloud, it inevitably alters and abandons the 3D topology
and geometric relations. A natural remedy is to utilize the
3D voxelization and 3D convolution network. However, we
found that in the outdoor point cloud, the improvement obtained in this way is quite limited. An important reason is
the property of the outdoor point cloud, namely sparsity and
varying density. Motivated by this investigation, we propose a new framework for the outdoor LiDAR segmentation,
where cylindrical partition and asymmetrical 3D convolution networks are designed to explore the 3D geometric pattern while maintaining these inherent properties. Moreover,
a point-wise refinement module is introduced to alleviate
the interference of lossy voxel-based label encoding. We
evaluate the proposed model on two large-scale datasets,
i.e., SemanticKITTI and nuScenes. Our method achieves
the 1st place in the leaderboard of SemanticKITTI and outperforms existing methods on nuScenes with a noticeable
margin, about 4%. Furthermore, the proposed 3D framework also generalizes well to LiDAR panoptic segmentation
and LiDAR 3D detection.

1. Introduction
3D LiDAR sensor has become an indispensable device
in modern autonomous driving vehicles. It captures more
precise and farther-away distance measurements of the sur* denotes the equal contribution and code at https : / /
github . com / xinge008 / Cylinder3D. Corresponding email:
zhuxinge123@gmail.com

7

Nanyang Technological University

rounding environments than conventional visual cameras.
The measurements of the sensor naturally form 3D point
clouds that can be used to realize a thorough scene understanding for autonomous driving planning and execution, in
which LiDAR segmentation is crucial for driving-scene understanding. It aims to identify the pre-defined categories
of each 3D point, such as car, truck etc., which provides
point-wise perception information of the overall 3D scene.
Recently, the advances in deep learning have significantly pushed forward the state of the art in image segmentation. Some existing LiDAR segmentation approaches
follow this route to project the 3D point clouds onto a 2D
space and process them via 2D convolution networks, including range image based [23, 37] and bird’s-eye-view image based [46]. However, this group of methods lose and
alter the accurate 3D geometric information during the 3Dto-2D projection (as shown in the top row of Fig. 1a).
A natural alternative is to utilize the 3D partition and 3D
convolution networks to process the point cloud and maintain their 3D geometric relations. However, in our initial attempts, we directly apply the 3D voxelization [12, 7] and 3D
convolution networks to outdoor LiDAR point cloud, only
to find very limited performance gain (as shown in Fig. 1b).
Our investigation into this issue reveals a key difficulty of
outdoor LiDAR point cloud, namely sparsity and varying
density, which is also the key difference to indoor scenes
with dense and uniform-density points. However, previous 3D voxelization methods consider the point cloud as
a uniform one and split them via the uniform cube, while
neglecting the varying-density property of outdoor point
cloud. Consequently, this effect to apply the 3D partition
to outdoor point cloud is met with fundamental difficulty.
Motivated by these findings, we propose a new framework to outdoor LiDAR segmentation that consists of two
key components, i.e., 3D cylindrical partition and asymmetrical 3D convolution networks, which maintain the 3D ge-

9939

