Back-tracing Representative Points for Voting-based
3D Object Detection in Point Clouds
Bowen Cheng1 , Lu Sheng1 *, Shaoshuai Shi2 , Ming Yang1 , Dong Xu3
1
College of Software, Beihang University
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 3 The University of Sydney
{chengbowen052, lsheng, viv}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
3D object detection in point clouds is a challenging vision task that benefits various applications for understanding the 3D visual world. Lots of recent research focuses
on how to exploit end-to-end trainable Hough voting for
generating object proposals. However, the current voting
strategy can only receive partial votes from the surfaces
of potential objects together with severe outlier votes from
the cluttered backgrounds, which hampers full utilization of
the information from the input point clouds. Inspired by
the back-tracing strategy in the conventional Hough voting
methods, in this work, we introduce a new 3D object detection method, named as Back-tracing Representative Points
Network (BRNet), which generatively back-traces the representative points from the vote centers and also revisits complementary seed points around these generated points, so as
to better capture the fine local structural features surrounding the potential objects from the raw point clouds. Therefore, this bottom-up and then top-down strategy in our BRNet enforces mutual consistency between the predicted vote
centers and the raw surface points and thus achieves more
reliable and flexible object localization and class prediction results. Our BRNet is simple but effective, which significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art methods on two
large-scale point cloud datasets, ScanNet V2 (+7.5% in
terms of mAP@0.50) and SUN RGB-D (+4.7% in terms of
mAP@0.50), while it is still lightweight and efficient.

1. Introduction
As one of the fundamental tasks that aims at understanding 3D visual world, 3D object detection would like to
predict amodal 3D bounding boxes and associated semantic labels of objects in real 3D scenes. 3D object detection technologies would significantly benefit various downstream real world applications such as augmented reality,
* Lu Sheng is the corresponding author.

ssshi@ee.cuhk.edu.hk

dong.xu@sydney.edu.au

l Vote Cluster

--- Ground Truth Bounding Box

l Corresponding Seed Points

--- Predicted Bounding Box

(a) Partial coverage

(b) Outliers

Figure 1. The votes generated by VoteNet [20] and its variants
usually suffer from (a) partial coverage of the object surfaces, (b)
outliers from the cluttered background. By examining the corresponding seed points, the generated proposals from these votes
receive erratic features with respect to the objects, and may be less
reliable for predicting accurate bounding boxes, orientations and
even semantic classes. Best viewed on screen.

robotics and etc. In this work, we focus on 3D object detection from point clouds. It is even more challenging because the irregular, sparse and orderless characteristics of
this special 3D input make it a hard task to design reliable
point-based 3D object detection systems by leveraging the
recent progress in 2D object detection.
While earlier works resorted to reordering point clouds
into regular forms [3, 7, 32, 33, 43], or applying predefined
shape templates [15, 19, 40], VoteNet [20] and its variants [36, 41, 2, 1] have shown a great success in designing end-to-end 3D object detection networks based on raw
point clouds. VoteNet reformulates the traditional Hough
voting process into a point-wise regression problem, and
generates an object proposal by sampling a number of seed
points from the input point cloud whose votes are within the
same cluster. The aggregated feature in each vote cluster is
then used to estimate the 3D bounding box (e.g. center, size
and orientation) and the associated semantic label.
Therefore, the quality of the regressed votes principally
determine the reliability of the generated proposals, and
then the performance on the object detector. However, although the clustered vote centers are quite accurate, the

8963

