DyGLIP: A Dynamic Graph Model with Link Prediction for
Accurate Multi-Camera Multiple Object Tracking
Kha Gia Quach1 , Pha Nguyen2 , Huu Le3 , Thanh-Dat Truong4 , Chi Nhan Duong1
Minh-Triet Tran5 , Khoa Luu4
1
Concordia University, CANADA 2 VinAI Research, VIETNAM
3
Chalmers University of Technology, SWEDEN 4 University of Arkansas, USA
5
University of Science, VNU-HCM, VIETNAM
1

{dcnhan, kquach}@ieee.org, 2 v.phana@vinai.io, 3 huul@chalmers.se,
4

{tt032, khoaluu}@uark.edu, 5 tmtriet@fit.hcmus.edu.vn

Abstract
Multi-Camera Multiple Object Tracking (MC-MOT) is
a significant computer vision problem due to its emerging
applicability in several real-world applications. Despite a
large number of existing works, solving the data association
problem in any MC-MOT pipeline is arguably one of the
most challenging tasks. Developing a robust MC-MOT system, however, is still highly challenging due to many practical issues such as inconsistent lighting conditions, varying
object movement patterns, or the trajectory occlusions of
the objects between the cameras. To address these problems, this work, therefore, proposes a new Dynamic Graph
Model with Link Prediction (DyGLIP) approach 1 to solve
the data association task. Compared to existing methods,
our new model offers several advantages, including better feature representations and the ability to recover from
lost tracks during camera transitions. Moreover, our model
works gracefully regardless of the overlapping ratios between the cameras. Experimental results show that we outperform existing MC-MOT algorithms by a large margin on
several practical datasets. Notably, our model works favorably on online settings but can be extended to an incremental approach for large-scale datasets.

1. Introduction
Multi-Camera Multiple Object Tracking (MC-MOT)
plays an essential role in computer vision due to its potential
in many real-world applications such as self-driving cars,
crowd behavior analysis, anomaly detection, etc. Although
recent Multi-Camera Multiple Object Tracking (MC-MOT)
1 Visit https://github.com/uark-cviu/DyGLIP for the implementation of DyGLIP.

Figure 1. Top: Pedestrians in the MCT dataset [9], Bottom: Cars
in the CityFlow dataset [37].

methods have achieved promising results in several largescale datasets, there are still many challenges that need to be
addressed. Among them, data association, a crucial step in
determining the performance of an MC-MOT pipeline, has
attracted a considerable amount of attention lately. While

13784

