Patch-VQ: ‘Patching Up’ the Video Quality Problem
†

Zhenqiang Ying1*, Maniratnam Mandal1*, Deepti Ghadiyaram2 , Alan Bovik1
1
University of Texas at Austin, 2 Facebook AI

†

{zqying, mmandal}@utexas.edu, deeptigp@fb.com, bovik@ece.utexas.edu

Abstract
No-reference (NR) perceptual video quality assessment
(VQA) is a complex, unsolved, and important problem for
social and streaming media applications. Efficient and accurate video quality predictors are needed to monitor and
guide the processing of billions of shared, often imperfect, user-generated content (UGC). Unfortunately, current
NR models are limited in their prediction capabilities on
real-world, “in-the-wild” UGC video data. To advance
progress on this problem, we created the largest (by far)
subjective video quality dataset, containing 38, 811 realworld distorted videos and 116, 433 space-time localized
video patches (‘v-patches’), and 5.5M human perceptual
quality annotations. Using this, we created two unique
NR-VQA models: (a) a local-to-global region-based NR
VQA architecture (called PVQ) that learns to predict global
video quality and achieves state-of-the-art performance
on 3 UGC datasets, and (b) a first-of-a-kind space-time
video quality mapping engine (called PVQ Mapper) that
helps localize and visualize perceptual distortions in space
and time. The entire dataset and prediction models are
freely available at https://live.ece.utexas.edu/
research.php..

1. Introduction
User-generated content (UGC) and video streaming have
exploded on social media platforms such as Facebook, Instagram, YouTube, and TikTok, each supporting millions
and billions of users [63]. It has been estimated that each
day, about 4 billion video views occur on Facebook [60]
and 1 billion hours are viewed on YouTube [62]. Given
the tremendous prevalence of Internet videos, it would be
of great value to measure and control the quality of UGC
videos, both on capture devices and at social media sites
where they are uploaded, encoded, processed, and analyzed.
Full-reference (FR) video quality assessment (VQA)
models perceptually compare quality against pristine
videos, while no-reference (NR) models involve no such
∗† Equal contribution

Fig. 1: Modeling local to global perceptual quality: From each video, we extract three spatio-temporal video patches (Sec. 3.1), which along with their subjective
scores, are fed to the proposed video quality model. By integrating spatial (2D) and
spatio-temporal (3D) quality-sensitive features, our model learns spatial and temporal
distortions, and can robustly predict both global and local quality, a temporal quality
series, as well as space-time quality maps (Sec. 5.2). Best viewed in color.

comparison. Thus, NR video quality monitoring could
transform the processing and interpretation of videos on
smartphones, social media, telemedicine, surveillance, and
vision-guided robotics, in ways that FR models are unable to. Unfortunately, measuring video quality without a
pristine reference is very hard. Hence, though FR models are successfully deployed at the largest scales [78], NR
video quality prediction on UGC content remains largely
unsolved, for several reasons.
First, UGC video distortions arise from highly diverse
capture conditions, unsteady hands of content creators, imperfect camera devices, processing and editing artifacts,
frame rates, compression and transmission artifacts, and the
way they are perceived by viewers. Inter-mixing of distortions is common, creating complex, composite distortions
that are harder to model in videos. Moreover, it is wellknown that the technical degree of distortion (e.g. amount
of blur, blocking, or noise) does not correlate well with
perceptual quality [75], because of neurophysiological processes that induce masking [47]. Indeed, equal amounts of
distortions may very differently affect the quality of two different videos [52].
Second, most existing video quality resources are too

14019

