Learning to Relate Depth and Semantics for Unsupervised Domain Adaptation
Suman Saha*
ETH Zurich

Anton Obukhov*
ETH Zurich

Danda Pani Paudel
ETH Zurich

Stamatios Georgoulis
ETH Zurich

Menelaos Kanakis
ETH Zurich

Yuhua Chen
ETH Zurich

Luc Van Gool
ETH Zurich, KU Leuven

Abstract
We present an approach for encoding visual task relationships to improve model performance in an Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) setting. Semantic segmentation and monocular depth estimation are shown to
be complementary tasks; in a multi-task learning setting,
a proper encoding of their relationships can further improve performance on both tasks. Motivated by this observation, we propose a novel Cross-Task Relation Layer
(CTRL), which encodes task dependencies between the semantic and depth predictions. To capture the cross-task relationships, we propose a neural network architecture that
contains task-specific and cross-task refinement heads. Furthermore, we propose an Iterative Self-Learning (ISL) training scheme, which exploits semantic pseudo-labels to provide extra supervision on the target domain. We experimentally observe improvements in both tasks’ performance
because the complementary information present in these
tasks is better captured. Specifically, we show that: (1)
our approach improves performance on all tasks when they
are complementary and mutually dependent; (2) the CTRL
helps to improve both semantic segmentation and depth estimation tasks performance in the challenging UDA setting;
(3) the proposed ISL training scheme further improves the
semantic segmentation performance. The implementation is
available at https://github.com/susaha/ctrl-uda.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation and monocular depth estimation
are two important computer vision tasks that allow us to
perceive the world around us and enable agents’ reasoning,
e.g., in an autonomous driving scenario. Moreover, these
tasks have been shown to be complementary to each other,
i.e., information from one task can improve the other task’s
performance [27, 40, 57]. Domain Adaptation (DA) [11]
Corresponding author: Suman Saha (suman.saha@vision.ee.ethz.ch)
* Equal contribution.

Figure 1: Semantic segmentation improvement with our approach to unsupervised domain adaptation over the stateof-the-art DADA [59] method. Left to right: Cityscapes
test images, DADA, and the proposed method (CTRL). Our
model correctly segments the “bus”, “rider”, and “wall”
classes underrepresented in the target domain (highlighted).

refers to maximizing model performance in an environment
with a smaller degree of supervision (the target domain) relative to what the model was trained on (the source domain).
Unsupervised Domain Adaptation (UDA) assumes only access to the unannotated samples from the target domain at
train time – the setting of interest in this paper.
Recent domain adaptation techniques [32, 59] proposed
to leverage depth information available in the source domain to improve semantic segmentation on the target domain. However, they lack an explicit multi-task formulation to relate depth and semantics, that is to say, how each
semantic category relates to different depth levels. The
term depth levels refers to different discrete ranges of depth
values, i.e., “near” (1-5m); “medium-range” (5-20m), or
“far” (>20m). This paper aims to design a model that
learns explicit relationships between different visual semantic classes and depth levels within the UDA context.
To this end, we design a network architecture and a
new multitask-aware feature space alignment mechanism
for UDA. First, we propose a Cross-Task Relation Layer

8197

