Feature Decomposition and Reconstruction Learning for
Effective Facial Expression Recognition
Delian Ruan1,2 , Yan Yan1∗, Shenqi Lai2 , Zhenhua Chai2 , Chunhua Shen3 , Hanzi Wang1
1
Xiamen University, China 2 Vision Intelligence Center, Meituan 3 University of Adelaide

Abstract
Closing eyes

In this paper, we propose a novel Feature Decomposition
and Reconstruction Learning (FDRL) method for effective
facial expression recognition. We view the expression information as the combination of the shared information (expression similarities) across different expressions and the
unique information (expression-specific variations) for each
expression. More specifically, FDRL mainly consists of two
crucial networks: a Feature Decomposition Network (FDN)
and a Feature Reconstruction Network (FRN). In particular, FDN first decomposes the basic features extracted from
a backbone network into a set of facial action-aware latent
features to model expression similarities. Then, FRN captures the intra-feature and inter-feature relationships for latent features to characterize expression-specific variations,
and reconstructs the expression feature. To this end, two
modules including an intra-feature relation modeling module and an inter-feature relation modeling module are developed in FRN. Experimental results on both the in-thelab databases (including CK+, MMI, and Oulu-CASIA) and
the in-the-wild databases (including RAF-DB and SFEW)
show that the proposed FDRL method consistently achieves
higher recognition accuracy than several state-of-the-art
methods. This clearly highlights the benefit of feature decomposition and reconstruction for classifying expressions.

1. Introduction
Facial expression is one of the most natural and universal signals for human beings to express their inner states
and intentions [4]. Over the past few decades, Facial Expression Recognition (FER) has received much attention in
computer vision, due to its various applications including
virtual reality, intelligent tutoring systems, health-care, etc.
[29]. According to psychological studies [9], the FER task
is to classify an input facial image into one of the following seven categories: angry (AN), disgust (DI), fear (FE),
∗ Corresponding author (email: yanyan@xmu.edu.cn).

NE

SA

HA

Frowning brows

Opening mouths

SU

FE

AN

DI

HA

AN

DI

SA

FE

Figure 1 – The images in each group show a similar facial action,
but they are from different expressions. Images are from the
RAF-DB database [13].

happy (HA), sad (SA), surprise (SU), and neutral (NE).
A variety of FER methods [3, 13, 20, 26] have been proposed to learn holistic expression features by disentangling
the disturbance caused by various disturbing factors, such
as pose, identity, illumination, and so on. However, these
methods neglect the fact that the extracted expression features corresponding to some expressions may still not be
easily distinguishable, mainly because of high similarities
across different expressions.
An example is shown in Figure 1. We can observe that
some facial images corresponding to the NE, SA, HA, and
DI expressions exhibit closing eyes. The facial images corresponding to the SU, FE, AN, and HA expressions all show
opening mouths, while those corresponding to the AN, DI,
SA, and FE expressions show frowning brows. The images
from different facial expressions in each group give a similar facial action, where the distinctions between some expressions are subtle. Therefore, how to learn effective finegrained expression features to identify subtle differences in
expressions by considering similar facial actions is of great
importance.
The expression information is composed of the shared
information (expression similarities) across different expressions and the unique information (expression-specific
variations) for each expression. The expression similari-

7660

