Glancing at the Patch: Anomaly Localization with
Global and Local Feature Comparison

1

Shenzhi Wang1 Liwei Wu1 Lei Cui1 Yujun Shen2
SenseTime Research 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong

{wangshenzhi, wuliwei, cuilei}@sensetime.com

sy116@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Anomaly localization, with the purpose to segment the
anomalous regions within images, is challenging due to
the large variety of anomaly types. Existing methods
typically train deep models by treating the entire image
as a whole yet put little effort into learning the local
distribution, which is vital for this pixel-precise task. In this
work, we propose an unsupervised patch-based approach
that gives due consideration to both the global and local
information. More concretely, we employ a Local-Net and
Global-Net to extract features from any individual patch
and its surrounding respectively. Global-Net is trained
with the purpose to mimic the local feature such that
we can easily detect an abnormal patch when its feature
mismatches that from the context. We further introduce
an Inconsistency Anomaly Detection (IAD) head and a
Distortion Anomaly Detection (DAD) head to sufficiently
spot the discrepancy between global and local features.
A scoring function derived from the multi-head design
facilitates high-precision anomaly localization. Extensive
experiments on a couple of real-world datasets suggest that
our approach outperforms state-of-the-art competitors by a
sufficiently large margin.

(a)
match / mismatch
surrounding
Global-Net

(b)

multi-heads

global feature

Local-Net

patch

local feature

1. Introduction

Figure 1. (a) Anomaly localization results where our approach
can precisely segment the anomalous regions. From top to
bottom: abnormal samples, ground-truth, and anomaly score maps
produced by our algorithm. (b) Concept diagram of global
and local feature comparison. Local-Net and Global-Net are
employed to extract features from a patch and its surrounding
respectively. Multiple anomaly detection heads are designed to
determine whether the global and local features match or not.

Anomaly detection has received broad attention in recent
years due to its wide applications in industrial inspection [6,
7, 48, 11, 10, 32], medical diagnosis [51, 5, 46, 42],
and surveillance [27, 30, 36]. Its primary goal is to
identify anomalies from normal samples, usually treated
as a bi-classification problem. Considering the ambiguous
definition of anomaly types as well as the great imbalance
between sufficient normal data and scarce abnormal data, a
common practice is to learn the distribution of anomaly-free
data and then use it as a criterion to detect outliers [43, 38,
42, 41, 14, 48].
Recent development of deep neural networks has significantly advanced this task with a more powerful capability

in representation learning [7, 48, 28]. Most existing
algorithms deploy deep models to spot anomalies at the
instance level (i.e., abnormal images belongs to different
categories against normal ones) by extracting global feature
from the entire image [14, 38, 49, 22, 37, 43, 2]. However,
in many real cases, the anomalies simply differ from the
regular data at some local areas [6, 32], as shown in Fig. 1a.
From this perspective, localizing the anomalous regions at
the pixel level is far more practical.
To solve this pixel-precise task, one feasible solution
is to adopt generative models, such as Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs) [42, 41, 47] and Auto-Encoders

254

