Rainbow Memory: Continual Learning with a Memory of Diverse Samples
Jihwan Bang1,∗
Heesu Kim2,3,∗
YoungJoon Yoo2,3
Search Solutions, Inc1
NAVER CLOVA2

Jung-Woo Ha2,3
Jonghyun Choi4,†
NAVER AI Lab3
GIST4

{jihwan.bang,heesu.kim89,youngjoon.yoo,jungwoo.ha}@navercorp.com, jhc@gist.ac.kr

Continual learning is a realistic learning scenario for
AI models. Prevalent scenario of continual learning, however, assumes disjoint sets of classes as tasks and is less
realistic rather artificial. Instead, we focus on ‘blurry’ task
boundary; where tasks shares classes and is more realistic and practical. To address such task, we argue the importance of diversity of samples in an episodic memory.
To enhance the sample diversity in the memory, we propose a novel memory management strategy based on persample classification uncertainty and data augmentation,
named Rainbow Memory (RM). With extensive empirical
validations on MNIST, CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and ImageNet
datasets, we show that the proposed method significantly
improves the accuracy in blurry continual learning setups,
outperforming state of the arts by large margins despite
its simplicity. Code and data splits will be available in
https://github.com/clovaai/rainbow-memory.

1. Introduction
Continual learning (CL) or class incremental learning
(CIL) is known to particularly suffer from the catastrophic
forgetting with respect to model generalization, due to inaccessibility to the data of previous tasks. It is because the
class distributions of each task continuously change given
a task stream. This makes continual learning particularly
challenging; most AI models suffer from under real-world
application scenarios across various domains [38, 20, 30].
To address the issue of changing data distribution for continual learning, there are many approaches proposed such
as momentum matching [29], sample generation [42, 46,
24, 43], regularization on parameters [27, 5], and samplingbased memory management [38, 39].
However, they are mostly evaluated in a rather artificial task setup of disjoint, where tasks do not share the
classes [37]. For real-world applications, we consider a
∗ indicates equal contribution. † indicates corresponding author.

freq.

class 1
class 2
class 3

Abstract

freq.

Class Distribution

class

class

Current Task

Previous Task
…

t=T-1

+

+
Sampling

Sampling

<Episodic Memory>

<Episodic Memory>

Augment

Augment

t=T

Figure 1: Blurry-CIL (class incremental learning) setup (top) and
overview of our proposed approach (bottom). In the blurry-CIL,
the tasks share classes, contrary to conventional disjoint-CIL. Proposed memory management strategy updates an episodic memory
with samples of the current task to keep diverse exemplars in the
memory. Data augmentation (DA) further enhances the diversity
of the kept exemplars.

more realistic and practical setting of blurry-CIL where the
classes shared across the tasks [38] (illustrated at the top of
Figure 1). The blurry-CIL setup requires that (1) each task
is given sequentially as a stream, (2) the majority (assigned)
classes of tasks differ from each other, and (3) a model can
leverage only a very small portion of data of previous tasks.
For instance, suppose an e-commerce service that categorizes new items with their images taken by a seller. For each
category, the number of newly registered items conspicuously depend on various factors such as season and transient event. The popularity period of items varies according
to their characteristics as shown in Figure 2; e.g., swimming
suits are prevalent in summer and padding jumper are much
more registered in winter.
In recent literature, the methods storing a small portion
of old data have shown promising results in preserving the
information of old classes when training new classes for the
blurry-CIL setup [38], thus alleviating catastrophic forgetting [16]. This strategy naturally raises the question: what
is the optimal strategies to manage the memory? Since the
number of stored samples is much smaller than that of the
18218

