Learning by Aligning Videos in Time
Sanjay Haresh∗ Sateesh Kumar∗ Huseyin Coskun Shahram N. Syed
Andrey Konin M. Zeeshan Zia Quoc-Huy Tran
Retrocausal, Inc.
Seattle, WA
www.retrocausal.ai

Input Video 1
Encoder
Embedding Video 1

Time

Temporal Alignment Loss
+
Temporal Regularization

Time
Encoder

Embedding Video 2

Input Video 2
Image Space

Embedding Space

Temporal Video Alignment

Figure 1: We propose a self-supervised method to learn video representations by aligning videos in time, despite many
differences between the videos such as appearance, motion, and viewpoint. We optimize the embedding space by using both
the temporal alignment loss between the videos and the temporal regularization applied separately on each video. Our learned
representations can be useful for many video-based temporal understanding tasks such as temporal video alignment.

Abstract
We present a self-supervised approach for learning video
representations using temporal video alignment as a pretext task, while exploiting both frame-level and video-level
information. We leverage a novel combination of temporal alignment loss and temporal regularization terms, which
can be used as supervision signals for training an encoder
network. Specifically, the temporal alignment loss (i.e.,
Soft-DTW) aims for the minimum cost for temporally aligning videos in the embedding space. However, optimizing
solely for this term leads to trivial solutions, particularly,
one where all frames get mapped to a small cluster in
the embedding space. To overcome this problem, we propose a temporal regularization term (i.e., Contrastive-IDM)
which encourages different frames to be mapped to different points in the embedding space. Extensive evaluations
on various tasks, including action phase classification, action phase progression, and fine-grained frame retrieval, on
three datasets, namely Pouring, Penn Action, and IKEA
ASM, show superior performance of our approach over
state-of-the-art methods for self-supervised representation
learning from videos. In addition, our method provides sig-

nificant performance gain where labeled data is lacking.

1. Introduction
There are just three problems in computer vision:
registration, registration, and registration.
Takeo Kanade

Lukas-Kanade and Iterative Closest Point have been
amongst the most ubiquitous building blocks in artificial
perception literature. Yet spatio-temporal registration has
received little attention in the present deep learning renaissance. Correspondingly, we add to a small number of recent
approaches [14, 39] that have revived temporal alignment
as a means of improving video representation learning. In
order to learn perfect alignment of two videos, a learning
algorithm must be able to disentangle phases of the activity in time while simultaneously associating visually similar frames in the two different videos. We demonstrate
that learning in this manner generates representations that
are effective for downstream tasks that rely on fine-grained
∗ indicates joint first author.
{sanjay,sateesh,huseyin,shahram,andrey,zeeshan,huy}@retrocausal.ai

5548

