BBAM: Bounding Box Attribution Map for Weakly Supervised
Semantic and Instance Segmentation

1

Jungbeom Lee1
Jihun Yi1
Chaehun Shin1
Sungroh Yoon1,2,∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
2
ASRI, INMC, ISRC, and Institute of Engineering Research, Seoul National University
{jbeom.lee93, t080205, chaehuny, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Weakly supervised segmentation methods using bounding
box annotations focus on obtaining a pixel-level mask from
each box containing an object. Existing methods typically
depend on a class-agnostic mask generator, which operates
on the low-level information intrinsic to an image. In this
work, we utilize higher-level information from the behavior
of a trained object detector, by seeking the smallest areas
of the image from which the object detector produces almost the same result as it does from the whole image. These
areas constitute a bounding-box attribution map (BBAM),
which identifies the target object in its bounding box and
thus serves as pseudo ground-truth for weakly supervised
semantic and instance segmentation. This approach significantly outperforms recent comparable techniques on both
the PASCAL VOC and MS COCO benchmarks in weakly
supervised semantic and instance segmentation. In addition,
we provide a detailed analysis of our method, offering deeper
insight into the behavior of the BBAM. The code is available
at: https://github.com/jbeomlee93/BBAM .

1. Introduction
Object segmentation is one of the most important steps in
image recognition. Advances in deep learning have greatly
improved the performance of semantic and instance segmentation [8, 23] through the use of huge amounts of pixel-level
annotated training data. However, annotating with pixel-level
masks requires a lot of effort. According to Bearman et
al. [4], constructing a pixel-level mask for an image containing an average of 2.8 objects takes about 4 minutes. This
is why weakly supervised methods have been proposed, in
which segmentation networks are trained using annotations
that are less detailed than pixel-level masks, such as bounding boxes [11, 31, 61], or image-level tags [1, 2, 36].
The most easily obtainable annotation is the class label.
∗ Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.

Labeling an image with class labels takes around 20 seconds [4], but it only indicates that objects of certain classes
are depicted and gives no information about their locations
in the image. Moreover, class labels provide no help in separating different objects of the same class, which is the goal
of instance segmentation.
Bounding boxes provide information about individual
objects and their locations. Bounding box annotation takes
about 38.1 seconds per image [5], which is much more attractive than constructing pixel-level masks. Many researchers
have tackled semantic segmentation [11, 31, 34, 61] and
instance segmentation [3, 27, 31, 41, 63] using bounding
box annotations as a search space in which a class-agnostic
object mask can be found by an off-the-shelf object mask
generator. These are mostly based on GrabCut [54] or multiscale combinatorial grouping (MCG) [50]. Those mask
generators operate on the low-level information of images,
such as the color or brightness of pixels, and this limits the
quality of the resulting mask. Thus, applying these mask
generators to bounding box annotations requires additional
steps such as estimating what proportion of the pixels in a
bounding-box belong to the corresponding object [34, 61],
iterative refinement of an estimated mask [11], and auxiliary
attention modules [34].
We propose a pixel-level method of localizing a target
object inside its bounding box using a trained object detector.
We make use of attribution maps obtained from the trained
object detector, which highlight the image regions that the
detector focuses on in conducting object detection. Inspired
by the perturbation methods used to explain the output of
image classifiers [10, 17, 18], we introduce a bounding box
attribution map (BBAM) which provides an indication of
the smallest areas of an image that are sufficient to make an
object detector produce almost the same result as that from
the original image. The BBAM identifies the area occupied
by the object in each bounding box predicted by the trained
object detector. Since this localization takes place at the pixel
level, it can be used as a pseudo ground truth for weakly
supervised learning of semantic and instance segmentation.

2643

