High-fidelity Face Tracking for AR/VR via Deep Lighting Adaptation
1

Lele Chen1,2

Chen Cao

Captured image

Normal map

Fernando De la Torre1
1
Facebook Reality Labs

Fully-lit avatar

Jason Saragih1 Chenliang Xu2
2
Univeristy of Rochester

Relit avatar

Yaser Sheikh1

Relit avatar under different viewpoints

Figure 1. High-fidelity face tracking results using our method. From left to right: Input image captured by an iPhone, normal map, fully-lit
avatar (avatar before relighting), relit avatar (avatar after relighting), and relit avatar under different viewpoints. Please notice the specular
highlight changes on the avatars under different viewpoints.

Abstract
3D video avatars can empower virtual communications
by providing compression, privacy, entertainment, and a
sense of presence in AR/VR. Best 3D photo-realistic AR/VR
avatars driven by video, that can minimize uncanny effects,
rely on person-specific models. However, existing personspecific photo-realistic 3D models are not robust to lighting,
hence their results typically miss subtle facial behaviors and
cause artifacts in the avatar. This is a major drawback for
the scalability of these models in communication systems
(e.g., Messenger, Skype, FaceTime) and AR/VR. This paper
addresses previous limitations by learning a deep learning
lighting model, that in combination with a high-quality 3D
face tracking algorithm, provides a method for subtle and
robust facial motion transfer from a regular video to a 3D
photo-realistic avatar. Extensive experimental validation
and comparisons to other state-of-the-art methods demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed framework in realworld scenarios with variability in pose, expression, and
illumination. Our project page can be found at this website.

1. Introduction
Currently, video conferencing (e.g., Zoom, Skype, Messenger) is the best 2D available technology for internet communication. To allow for more advance levels of communication and sense of presence, Augmented Reality (AR) and
Virtual Reality (VR) technologies aim to build 3D personalized avatars, and superimpose virtual objects in the real
space. If successful, this new form of face-to-face interaction will allow extended remote work experiences that can
improve productivity, reducing cost and stress of commuting, have a huge impact on the environment, and overall
improving the work/life balance.
Today most real-time systems for avatars in AR are
cartoon-like (e.g., Apple Animoji, Tiktok FaceAnimation,
Hyprsense, Loom AI); on the other hand, digital creators in
movies have developed uncanny digital humans using advanced computer graphics technology and person-specific
(PS) models (e.g., Siren). While some of these avatars can
be driven in real-time from egocentric cameras (e.g., Doug
character made by digital domain), building the PS model is
an extremely time-consuming and hand-tuned process that

13059

