Greedy Hierarchical Variational Autoencoders for Large-Scale Video
Prediction
Bohan Wu, Suraj Nair, Roberto Martín-Martín, Li Fei-Fei†, Chelsea Finn†
Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305
{bohanwu, surajn, robertom, feifeili, cbfinn}@cs.stanford.edu

Abstract
A video prediction model that generalizes to diverse
scenes would enable intelligent agents such as robots to
perform a variety of tasks via planning with the model.
However, while existing video prediction models have
produced promising results on small datasets, they suffer from severe underfitting when trained on large and
diverse datasets. To address this underfitting challenge,
we first observe that the ability to train larger video
prediction models is often bottlenecked by the memory
constraints of GPUs or TPUs. In parallel, deep hierarchical latent variable models can produce higher quality
predictions by capturing the multi-level stochasticity of
future observations, but end-to-end optimization of such
models is notably difficult. Our key insight is that greedy
and modular optimization of hierarchical autoencoders
can simultaneously address both the memory constraints
and the optimization challenges of large-scale video prediction. We introduce Greedy Hierarchical Variational
Autoencoders (GHVAEs), a method that learns highfidelity video predictions by greedily training each level
of a hierarchical autoencoder. In comparison to stateof-the-art models, GHVAEs provide 17-55% gains in
prediction performance on four video datasets, a 3540% higher success rate on real robot tasks, and can
improve performance monotonically by simply adding
more modules. Visualization and more details are at
https: // sites. google. com/ view/ ghvae .

1. Introduction
A core aspect of intelligence is the ability to predict
the future. Indeed, if equipped with an accurate video
prediction model, an intelligent agent such as a robot
may be able to perform a variety of tasks using raw
pixel inputs. For example, algorithms such as visual
foresight [1] can leverage an action-conditioned video
† Equal advising and ordered alphabetically.

Figure 1: Greedy Hierarchical Variational Autoencoders (GHVAEs). Unlike traditional hierarchical variational autoencoders (VAEs), a GHVAE model trains each
encoder-decoder module greedily using the frozen weights
of the previously-trained modules. Greedy training circumvents fitting the entire model into memory and enables larger
models to be trained within the same GPU or TPU memory.
Further, greedy training improves the optimization stability
of such a hierarchical model by breaking the bidirectional
dependencies among individual latent variables. As a result, given the current image, xt , GHVAE predicts a more
accurate next image, x̂t+1 , than a hierarchical VAE. Each
module is optimized sequentially, and all modules are used
at test time.

prediction model to plan a sequence of actions that accomplish the desired task objective. Importantly, such
video prediction models can in principle be trained with
broad, unlabeled datasets, and building methods that
can learn from large, diverse offline data is a recipe that
has seen substantial success in visual [2] and language [3]
12318

