Implicit Feature Alignment: Learn to Convert Text Recognizer to Text Spotter
Tianwei Wang,∗1 2 Yuanzhi Zhu,∗1 2 Lianwen Jin,1 3 Dezhi Peng,1 Zhe Li,1
Mengchao He,2 Yongpan Wang,2 Canjie Luo1
1
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology.
2
Alibaba Group. 3 Guangdong Artificial Intelligence and Digital Economy Laboratory.
{wangtw, z.yuanzhi, zheli0205}@foxmail.com, {eelwjin, eedzpeng}@scut.edu.cn,
mengchao.hmc@alibaba-inc.com, yongpan@taobao.com, canjie.luo@gmail.com.

Abstract
Text recognition is a popular research subject with many
associated challenges. Despite the considerable progress
made in recent years, the text recognition task itself is still
constrained to solve the problem of reading cropped line
text images and serves as a subtask of optical character
recognition (OCR) systems. As a result, the final text recognition result is limited by the performance of the text detector. In this paper, we propose a simple, elegant and effective paradigm called Implicit Feature Alignment (IFA),
which can be easily integrated into current text recognizers, resulting in a novel inference mechanism called IFAinference. This enables an ordinary text recognizer to process multi-line text such that text detection can be completely freed. Specifically, we integrate IFA into the two
most prevailing text recognition streams (attention-based
and CTC-based) and propose attention-guided dense prediction (ADP) and Extended CTC (ExCTC). Furthermore,
the Wasserstein-based Hollow Aggregation Cross-Entropy
(WH-ACE) is proposed to suppress negative predictions
to assist in training ADP and ExCTC. We experimentally
demonstrate that IFA achieves state-of-the-art performance
on end-to-end document recognition tasks while maintaining the fastest speed, and ADP and ExCTC complement
each other on the perspective of different application scenarios. Code will be available at https://github.com/WangTianwei/Implicit-feature-alignment.

1. Introduction
Text is extensively used in people’s daily life, delivering
rich and useful visual information. Reading text in images
is one of the most important tasks in the field of computer
∗ Equal contribution. This work is done during Tianwei Wang and
Yuanzhi Zhu’s internship at Alibaba Group. Lianwen Jin is the corresponding author.

Segmentation-based
text recognition

Training

Inference

Label: x1, y1, h1, w1, ї;
x2, y2, h2, w2, ੮; …

Line-level recognition

Character-level annotation

CTC-based or
Attention-based text
recognition

DetectionRecognition text
spotter

Implicit Feature
Alignment

Label: ї੮澝৆ੈৱї੮

Line-level recognition

Line-level annotation

Label: x1, y1, h1, w1,
ї੮澝৆ੈৱї੮; …

Page-level recognition

Line-level annotation with
bounding-box of each line

Label: ї੮澝৆ੈৱї੮

Line-level annotation

Page-level recognition

Line-level recognition

Figure 1. The development of text recognizers.

vision.
Most OCR systems follow the pipeline that first uses a
text detector to detect the location of each text line and then
recognizes the detected line texts with a text recognizer. Under this pipeline, the performance of the entire system is
determined by the cascading of each module, and the performance degradation of each module leads to the deterioration of the overall performance. Although many end-toend (E2E) OCR methods [4, 7, 15, 22, 26, 29, 31, 38] have
been proposed in recent years, they have still used such a
pipeline, and considerable efforts have been made to better
develop the bridge between text detectors and text recognizers. Thus, the error accumulation problem has not been
solved. To remedy this issue, a direct way is shortening this

5973

