SelfSAGCN: Self-Supervised Semantic Alignment for Graph Convolution
Network
Xu Yang1 , Cheng Deng1∗, Zhiyuan Dang1 , Kun Wei1 , Junchi Yan2
School of Electronic Engineering, Xidian University, Xian 710071, China
2
Department of CSE, and MoE Key Lab of Artificial Intelligence, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
1

{xuyang.xd, zhiyuandang, chdeng.xd, weikunsk}@gmail.com,
yanjunchi@sjtu.edu.cn

Abstract
Graph convolution networks (GCNs) are a powerful
deep learning approach and have been successfully applied
to representation learning on graphs in a variety of realworld applications. Despite their success, two fundamental
weaknesses of GCNs limit their ability to represent graphstructured data: poor performance when labeled data are
severely scarce and indistinguishable features when more
layers are stacked. In this paper, we propose a simple yet
effective Self-Supervised Semantic Alignment Graph Convolution Network (SelfSAGCN), which consists of two crux
techniques: Identity Aggregation and Semantic Alignment, to overcome these weaknesses. The behind basic idea is
the node features in the same class but learned from semantic and graph structural aspects respectively, are expected
to be mapped nearby. Specifically, the Identity Aggregation is applied to extract semantic features from labeled nodes, the Semantic Alignment is utilized to align node features obtained from different aspects using the class central
similarity. In this way, the over-smoothing phenomenon is
alleviated, while the similarities between the unlabeled features and labeled ones from the same class are enhanced.
Experimental results on five popular datasets show that the
proposed SelfSAGCN outperforms state-of-the-art methods
on various classification tasks.

1. Introduction
Graphs, representing entities and their relationships,
have been successfully applied to a wide range of applications [36, 4], such as social networks [26], knowledge
graphs [34], and molecular structures [8]. In recent years,
many studies focus on developing deep learning approaches
for graph structure data [38], leading to rapid development
in the field of graph convolution networks (GCNs) [13, 7].
∗ Corresponding author.

GCNs, generalizing deep convolutional neural network (CNN) [30] to graph-structured data, apply the linear transformation and graph aggregation to all the neighbors of a node and adopt a nonlinear activation function to obtain lowdimensional features for graph nodes.
Normally, GCNs can be categorized into spatial and
spectral convolution methods [39, 12]. The operation on
node neighbor groups is utilized to define the graph convolution layer in the spatial methods. Diffusion-Convolutional
Neural Network (DCNN) [1] adopts a graph diffusion module to incorporate the contextual information of the node.
MoNet [24] integrates CNN and provides a unified generalization of CNN architectures on graphs. Moreover,
Graph Attention Network (GAT) [29] is utilized to semisupervised classification task by designing an attention layer, which can learn the weight of each neighbor for feature
aggregation. For spectral methods, the graph convolution
operation is defined by the spectral representation of graphs.
The Fourier domain based on eigen-decomposition of graph
Laplacian matrix [2] is proposed to define graph convolution, and the spectral filters based on Chebyshev expansion
of the Laplacian are provided to avoid the high computational complexity of eigen-decomposition [6]. More recently, Kipf et al. [13] proposed a simple Graph Convolutional Network (GCN) for semi-supervised learning. Simplifying Graph Convolutional (SGC) [31] is proposed to capture
higher-order information in the graph by applying the Kth power of the graph convolution matrix in a single neural
network layer.
Despite their significant success, the performance of current GCNs drops sharply with a diminishing number of labeled nodes per class. It is easy to cause the over-fitting
problem with severely scarce labeled nodes, which exhibits
a large testing error even though its training error is small.
The reason for this phenomenon is the GCNs rely on graph
structure to realize feature propagation, whereas it cannot
effectively propagate the labels to the entire graph when

16775

