Adversarially Adaptive Normalization for Single Domain Generalization
Xinjie Fan1,∗ , Qifei Wang2 , Junjie Ke2 , Feng Yang2 , Boqing Gong2 , Mingyuan Zhou1
1
The University of Texas at Austin 2 Google Research
xfan@utexas.edu, {qfwang, junjiek, fengyang, bgong}@google.com
mingyuan.zhou@mccombs.utexas.edu

Abstract
Single domain generalization aims to learn a model that
performs well on many unseen domains with only one domain data for training. Existing works focus on studying
the adversarial domain augmentation (ADA) to improve
the model’s generalization capability. The impact on domain generalization of the statistics of normalization layers is still underinvestigated. In this paper, we propose
a generic normalization approach, adaptive standardization and rescaling normalization (ASR-Norm), to complement the missing part in previous works. ASR-Norm learns
both the standardization and rescaling statistics via neural
networks. This new form of normalization can be viewed
as a generic form of the traditional normalizations. When
trained with ADA, the statistics in ASR-Norm are learned
to be adaptive to the data coming from different domains,
and hence improves the model generalization performance
across domains, especially on the target domain with large
discrepancy from the source domain. The experimental results show that ASR-Norm can bring consistent improvement to the state-of-the-art ADA approaches by 1.6%, 2.7%,
and 6.3% averagely on the Digits, CIFAR-10-C, and PACS
benchmarks, respectively. As a generic tool, the improvement introduced by ASR-Norm is agnostic to the choice of
ADA methods.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in various areas [25, 28] where the training and test data are sampled from the same domain. In real applications, however,
there is a great chance of applying a deep learning model to
the data from a new domain unseen in the training dataset.
The model that performs well on the training domain often
cannot maintain a consistent performance on a new domain
[5, 53], due to the cross-domain distributional shift [37].
To address the potential discrepancies between the training and test domains, a number of works [6, 20, 61] have
been proposed to learn domain-invariant features using the
∗ The main work was done during an internship at Google Research.

Figure 1: Illustration of single domain generalization with
the PACS [30] benchmark. The dataset contains 4 domains:
art paint, cartoon, sketch, and photo domains, which share
the same categories that include dog, elephant, giraffe, guitar, house, horse, and person. Single domain generalization
aims at training a model on one source domain data (art
paint domain in the shown case), while generalizing well to
other domains with very different visual presentations.
training data from multiple source domains [30, 45] to improve the model’s generalization capability across domains.
However, acquiring multi-domain training data is both challenging and expensive. Alternatively, a more practical but
less investigated solution is to train the model on a single
source domain data and enhance its capability of generalizing to other unseen domains (see the example in Fig. 1).
This emerging learning paradigm is referred to as single domain generalization [42].
Existing works on single domain generalization [20, 42,
52, 53, 60] try to improve the generalization capability
through adversarial domain augmentation (ADA), which
synthesizes new training images in an adversarial way to
mimic virtual challenging domains. The model therefore
learns the domain-invariant features to improve its generalization performance. In this work, we propose to tackle
the single domain generalization challenge from a different perspective, building an adaptive normalization in the
ADA framework to improve the model’s domain general18208

