Progressive Modality Reinforcement for Human Multimodal Emotion
Recognition from Unaligned Multimodal Sequences
Fengmao Lv1,2

Xiang Chen3

Yanyong Huang2∗ Lixin Duan4

Guosheng Lin5∗

1

2

Southwest Jiaotong University
Center of Statistical Research, Southwestern University of Finance and Economics
3
Platform and Content Group, Tencent
4
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China
5
Nanyang Technological University

fengmaolv@126.com

{chx245296678,lxduan}@gmail.com

Abstract
Human multimodal emotion recognition involves timeseries data of different modalities, such as natural language, visual motions, and acoustic behaviors. Due to
the variable sampling rates for sequences from different
modalities, the collected multimodal streams are usually
unaligned. The asynchrony across modalities increases the
difficulty on conducting efficient multimodal fusion. Hence,
this work mainly focuses on multimodal fusion from unaligned multimodal sequences. To this end, we propose
the Progressive Modality Reinforcement (PMR) approach
based on the recent advances of crossmodal transformer.
Our approach introduces a message hub to exchange information with each modality. The message hub sends common
messages to each modality and reinforces their features via
crossmodal attention. In turn, it also collects the reinforced
features from each modality and uses them to generate a reinforced common message. By repeating the cycle process,
the common message and the modalities’ features can progressively complement each other. Finally, the reinforced
features are used to make predictions for human emotion.
Comprehensive experiments on different human multimodal
emotion recognition benchmarks clearly demonstrate the
superiority of our approach.

1. Introduction
Human multimodal emotion recognition focuses on recognizing the sentiment attitude of humans from video
clips [26, 16, 25, 17, 5]. This task involves time-series
∗ Corresponding authors.

huangyy@swufe.edu.cn

gslin@ntu.edu.sg

data of different modalities, e.g., natural language, facial
gestures, and acoustic behaviors. The multimodal setting
can provide rich information for thorough sentiment understanding. In practice, however, the collected multimodal
streams are usually asynchronous, due to the variable sampling rates for sequences from different modalities. For example, the video frame with a depressed facial expression
may relate to a negative word spoken in the past. The asynchrony across different modalities can increase the difficulty
on conducting efficient multimodal fusion.
The previous works address the above issues by predefined word-level alignment [22, 13, 19, 24]. To this
end, the visual and acoustic sequences are first manually
aligned in the resolution of the textual words. Multimodal
fusion is then conducted on the aligned time steps. However, the manual word-alignment process is usually laborintensive and requires domain knowledge. Recently, Tsai
et al. propose the Multimodal Transformer (MulT) approach to fuse crossmodal information from unaligned data
sequences [18]. Their approach introduces the modality
reinforcement unit to reinforce a target modality with information from a source modality by learning the directional pairwise attention between elements across modalities (see Fig. 1(a)), based on the recent advances of transformer [20]. By exploring the crossmodal interaction between elements via the crossmodal attention operations,
MulT can implement multimodal fusion from asynchronous
sequences without explicitly aligning the data.
In their approach, however, the modality reinforcement
of each direction is performed independently and does not
exchange information with each other. Hence, the multimodal fusion only appears between each directional modality pair, but not across all the modalities involved in human

2554

