Topological Planning with Transformers for Vision-and-Language Navigation
Kevin Chen1

Junshen K. Chen1
1

Jo Chuang1

2

Stanford University

Abstract
Conventional approaches to vision-and-language navigation (VLN) are trained end-to-end but struggle to perform well in freely traversable environments. Inspired by
the robotics community, we propose a modular approach
to VLN using topological maps. Given a natural language
instruction and topological map, our approach leverages
attention mechanisms to predict a navigation plan in the
map. The plan is then executed with low-level actions (e.g.
FORWARD , ROTATE) using a robust controller. Experiments
show that our method outperforms previous end-to-end approaches, generates interpretable navigation plans, and exhibits intelligent behaviors such as backtracking.

1. Introduction
Enabling robots to understand natural language and carry
out communicated tasks has long been desired. A critical
step towards this goal in the context of mobile robotics is
vision-and-language navigation (VLN) [4]. In VLN, the
agent is provided with a navigation instruction such as:
“Exit the bedroom, walk to the end of the hall, and enter
the kitchen on your right.” The agent is then expected to
follow the instruction and move to the specified destination.
The majority of VLN systems [16, 20, 24, 29, 30, 43, 48,
55] are end-to-end deep learning models and utilize unstructured memory such as LSTM [22]. These methods work
well when the movement is constrained to pre-defined locations, but performance drops significantly when the agent
is allowed to move freely [26]. Moreover, learning to perform navigation, including mapping, planning, and control,
in a fully end-to-end manner can be difficult and expensive.
Such approaches often require millions of frames of experience [9, 47, 50], and yet performance substantially degrades
without ground truth odometry [9, 50].
To address the aforementioned issues, recent visual robot
navigation literature has explored using structured memory
(e.g. metric maps, topological memory) and using a modular approach, where the algorithm is explicitly divided into

Marynel Vázquez2

Silvio Savarese1

Yale University

relevant subcomponents such as mapping, planning, and
control [6, 7, 8, 15, 17, 23, 33, 39]. These approaches have
been demonstrated to work well for tasks such as target image navigation and environment exploration. However, they
have not been well studied in the context of VLN.
In this work, we employ a modular approach and leverage topological maps for VLN. Topological maps, inspired in part by cognitive science, typically represent environments as graphs where nodes correspond to places
and edges denote environment connectivity or reachability.
Compared with metric maps, topological maps eliminate
the need for meticulous map construction. They promote
efficient planning, interpretable navigation plans, and navigation robustness using cheaper sensors [33, 44]. In particular, the symbolic nature of topological maps lends them
suitable for navigation with language [32, 44], as the space
discretization provided by the maps can facilitate learning a
relationship between instructions and spatial locations.
Importantly, using topological maps synergizes well
with sequence prediction models. Predicting a navigation plan in a topological map bears many similarities
with predicting sequences for language tasks such as language modeling and neural machine translation (NMT). By
drawing the parallel between navigation planning and language sequence prediction, we can leverage powerful attention mechanisms [46] that have enabled significant breakthroughs in language tasks for the navigation problem. Recently, these attention-based models have even been demonstrated to achieve comparable performance to convolutional
neural networks on image recognition tasks [14].
We propose using a cross-modal attention-based transformer to compute navigation plans in topological maps
based on language instructions. Whereas a language model
predicts a word at a time, our transformer predicts one topological map node in the navigation plan at a time. Structuring our model in this manner allows the agent to attend
to relevant portions of the navigation instruction and relevant spatial regions of the navigation environment during
the navigation planning process. For example, this enables
our model to relate the word “bedroom” in a navigation instruction to the physical room in the environment.

11276

