Actor-Context-Actor Relation Network for Spatio-Temporal Action Localization
Junting Pan1∗
Yu Liu4
1

Siyu Chen4∗
Jing Shao4

Mike Zheng Shou2
Hongsheng Li1,3

CUHK-SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 Columbia University
3
School of CST, Xidian University 4 SenseTime Research
Abstract

Localizing persons and recognizing their actions from
videos is a challenging task towards high-level video understanding. Recent advances have been achieved by modeling
direct pairwise relations between entities. In this paper, we
take one step further, not only model direct relations between
pairs but also take into account indirect higher-order relations established upon multiple elements. We propose to
explicitly model the Actor-Context-Actor Relation, which
is the relation between two actors based on their interactions with the context. To this end, we design an ActorContext-Actor Relation Network (ACAR-Net) which builds
upon a novel High-order Relation Reasoning Operator and
an Actor-Context Feature Bank to enable indirect relation
reasoning for spatio-temporal action localization. Experiments on AVA and UCF101-24 datasets show the advantages
of modeling actor-context-actor relations, and visualization
of attention maps further verifies that our model is capable of
finding relevant higher-order relations to support action detection. Notably, our method ranks first in the AVA-Kinetics
action localization task of ActivityNet Challenge 2020, outperforming other entries by a significant margin (+6.71
mAP). The code is available online.1

1. Introduction
Spatio-temporal action localization, which requires localizing persons and recognizing their actions from videos,
is an important task that has drawn increasing attention in
recent years [15, 12, 8, 46, 35, 58, 52, 54, 41, 29, 55, 17, 20].
Unlike object detection which can be accomplished solely
by observing visual appearances, activity recognition usually
demands for reasoning about the actors’ interactions with the
surrounding context, including environments, other people
and objects. Take Fig. 1 as an example. To recognize the
action “ride” of the person in the red bounding box, we need
∗ Equal contribution
1 https://github.com/Siyu-C/ACAR-Net

Actor of Interest

Actor of Interest
Supporting Actor
Context

Actor-Context

Actor-Actor

Actor of Interest

Actor of Interest

Supporting Actor

Supporting Actor
Context

Object

Ride

Actor-Actor & Actor-Object

Drive

Actor-Context-Actor (ours)

Figure 1. We contrast our Actor-Context-Actor relation modeling
with existing relation reasoning approaches for action localization.
Reasoning relations between pairs of entities may not always be
sufficient for correctly predicting the action labels of all individuals.
Our method not only reasons relations between actors, but also
models connections between different actor-context relations. As
an illustration, the relation between the blue actor and the steering
wheel (drive) serves as a crucial clue for recognizing the action
being performed by the red actor (ride).

to observe that he is inside a car, and there is a driver next
to him. Therefore, most recent progress in spatio-temporal
action detection has been driven by the success of relation
modeling. These approaches focus on modeling relationships in terms of pairwise interactions between entities.
However, it is not always the case that relations between
elements can be formulated in terms of pairs; often, higherorder relations provide crucial clues for accurate action detection. In Fig. 1, it is difficult to infer the action of the
red actor given only its relation with the blue actor, or only
with the scene context (steering wheel). Instead, in order to
identify that the red actor performs the action “ride”, one has
to reason over the interaction between the blue actor and the
context (drive). In other words, it is necessary to capture the

464

