Physically-aware Generative Network for 3D Shape Modeling
Mariem Mezghanni*

Malika Boulkenafed

André Lieutier

Maks Ovsjanikov*

LIX, Ecole Polytechnique, IP Paris*

Shapes are often designed to satisfy structural properties and serve a particular functionality in the physical
world. Unfortunately, most existing generative models focus primarily on the geometric or visual plausibility, ignoring the physical or structural constraints. To remedy this,
we present a novel method aimed to endow deep generative
models with physical reasoning. In particular, we introduce
a loss and a learning framework that promote two key characteristics of the generated shapes: their connectivity and
physical stability. The former ensures that each generated
shape consists of a single connected component, while the
latter promotes the stability of that shape when subjected
to gravity. Our proposed physical losses are fully differentiable and we demonstrate their use in end-to-end learning. Crucially we demonstrate that such physical objectives
can be achieved without sacrificing the expressive power
of the model and variability of the generated results. We
demonstrate through extensive comparisons with the stateof-the-art deep generative models, the utility and efficiency
of our proposed approach, while avoiding the potentially
costly differentiable physical simulation at training time.

1. Introduction
3D shape generation is a central problem in both computer vision and computer graphics. The main challenge
is to minimize manual intervention in the design process,
while enabling the creation of new, diverse and plausible
shapes. Early efforts focused on synthesizing new shapes by
borrowing and assembling parts from existing collections,
combining probabilistic models with geometric constraints,
e.g., [23, 12, 39] among many others. More recently, deep
generative methods, in particular, adversarial networks [28]
and variational auto-encoders [51] have gained popularity in
various applications showing promising results. However,
existing works only focus on geometric, visual and structural plausibility, largely ignoring the fact that synthesized

PQ-Net based model

Abstract

IM-Net based model

mezghanni,maks@lix.polytechnique.fr

Figure 1: Visual results for 3D shape generation. We sample vectors from the latent space of IM-Net [15] and PQ-Net [71] that we
decode using the corresponding baseline network (first row) and
our generative network trained with the proposed physical losses
(second row). Problematic regions are marked by red ovals. The
resulting shapes become more connected and physically stable.

shapes are also expected to satisfy physical and functional
constrains. Consequently, the generated content might appear to be a convincing example of a particular category
(e.g. a chair, a car etc.) but there is no guarantee that it
can be feasible and functional in the physical world. There
has been a steady stream of works in the design community
in studying 3D shapes from a functional perspective [36].
But, previous attempts in developing generative neural networks for unstructured [28, 51, 30] and structured [13, 44]
3D shapes have not yet jointly leveraged the power of analyzing geometric, physical and functional representations.
Although it seems relatively straightforward for a human
designer to make cognitive connections between geometry,
physics and functionality, it is still challenging to train intelligent models to do the same.
In this paper, we introduce a physically-aware generative modeling method that makes a step to overcome these
limitations (cf Figure 1). We seek a latent representation
that incorporates geometric, structural and physical information. Such a latent space enables many non-trivial applications including generating novel and realistic shapes,
physical shape optimization, etc. To this end, we introduce
a loss that endows existing deep generative models of 3D
shapes with physical reasoning.

9330

