Semi-supervised Synthesis of High-Resolution Editable Textures for 3D Humans
Bindita Chaudhuri1∗ , Nikolaos Sarafianos2 , Linda Shapiro1 , Tony Tung2
1
University of Washington, 2 Facebook Reality Labs Research, Sausalito
1
{bindita,shapiro}@cs.washington.edu, 2 {nsarafianos,tony.tung}@fb.com

Figure 1. Given a segmentation map defining the layout of semantic regions in a texture map, our proposed method generates diverse
high-resolution texture maps which are then used to render 3D humans. Each example shows a UV map in the inset and the corresponding
3D mesh rendered with the map. The style of each region/class can be controlled individually by manipulating the input style vectors. Note
that along each column, the styles of the same classes are the same (for example, the man in the first row and the woman in the second row
of the first column are wearing green colored pants).

Abstract
We introduce a novel approach to generate diverse high
fidelity texture maps for 3D human meshes in a semisupervised setup. Given a segmentation mask defining the
layout of the semantic regions in the texture map, our network generates high-resolution textures with a variety of
styles, that are then used for rendering purposes. To accomplish this task, we propose a Region-adaptive Adversarial
Variational AutoEncoder (ReAVAE) that learns the probability distribution of the style of each region individually so
that the style of the generated texture can be controlled by

sampling from the region-specific distributions. In addition,
we introduce a data generation technique to augment our
training set with data lifted from single-view RGB inputs.
Our training strategy allows the mixing of reference image
styles with arbitrary styles for different regions, a property
which can be valuable for virtual try-on AR/VR applications. Experimental results show that our method synthesizes better texture maps compared to prior work while enabling independent layout and style controllability.
∗ This work was conducted during an internship at FRL Research.

7991

