KeepAugment: A Simple Information-Preserving
Data Augmentation Approach
Chengyue Gong1 , Dilin Wang2 , Meng Li2 , Vikas Chandra2 , Qiang Liu1
1
University of Texas at Austin 2 Facebook
{cygong, lqiang}@cs.utexas.edu,

Abstract
Data augmentation (DA) is an essential technique for
training state-of-the-art deep learning systems. In this paper, we empirically show that the standard data augmentation methods may introduce distribution shift and consequently hurt the performance on unaugmented data during
inference. To alleviate this issue, we propose a simple yet
effective approach, dubbed KeepAugment, to increase the
fidelity of augmented images. The idea is to use the saliency
map to detect important regions on the original images and
preserve these informative regions during augmentation.
This information-preserving strategy allows us to generate
more faithful training examples. Empirically, we demonstrate that our method significantly improves upon a number of prior art data augmentation schemes, e.g. AutoAugment, Cutout, random erasing, achieving promising results
on image classification, semi-supervised image classification, multi-view multi-camera tracking and object detection.

{wdilin, meng.li, vchandra}@fb.com

the augmentation is not properly modulated. For example,
as shown in Figure 1, random Cutout (Figure 1 (a2) and
(b2)) or RandAugment (Figure 1 (a3) and (b3)) may destroy the key characteristic information of original images
that is responsible for classification, creating augmented images to have wrong or ambiguous labels.
In this work, we propose KeepAugment, a simple yet
powerful adaptive data augmentation approach that aims to
increase the fidelity of data augmentation by always keeping important regions untouched during augmentation. The
idea is very simple: at each training step, we first score
the importance of different regions of the original images
using attribution methods such as saliency-map [28]; then
we perform data augmentation in an adaptive way, such
that regions with high importance scores always remain intact. This is achieved by either avoiding cutting critical
high-score areas (see Figure 1(a5) and (b5)), or pasting the
patches with high importance scores to the augmented images (see Figure 1(a6) and (b6)).

1. Introduction
Recently, data augmentation is proven to be a crucial
technique for solving various challenging deep learning
tasks, including image classification [e.g. 8, 39, 4, 5], natural language understanding [e.g. 7], speech recognition [25]
and semi-supervised learning [e.g. 36, 29, 1]. Notable examples include regional-level augmentation methods, such
as Cutout [8] and CutMix [39], which mask or modify
randomly selected rectangular regions of the images; and
image-level augmentation approaches, such as AutoAugment [4] and Fast Augmentation [18]), which leverage reinforcement learning to find optimal policies for selecting
and combining different label-invariant transforms (e.g., rotation, color-inverting, flipping).
Although data augmentation increases the effective data
size and promotes diversity in training examples, it inevitably introduces noise and ambiguity into the training
process. Hence the overall performance would deteriorate if

Although KeepAugment is very simple and computationally efficient, the empirical results on a variety of vision tasks show that it can significantly improve the prior
art data augmentation (DA) baselines. Specifically, for image classification, we achieve improvements on existing DA
techniques, including Cutout [8], AutoAugment [4],
and CutMix [39], boosting the performance on CIFAR-10
and ImageNet across various neural architectures. In particular, we achieve 98.7% test accuracy on CIFAR-10 using PyramidNet-ShakeDrop [38] by applying our method
on top of AutoAugment. When applied to multi-view
multi-camera tracking, we improve upon the recent state-ofthe-art results on the Market1501 [44] dataset. In addition,
we demonstrate that our method can be applied to semisupervised learning and the model trained on ImageNet using our method can be transferred to COCO 2017 objective detection tasks [21] and allows us to improve the strong
Detectron2 baselines [35].

1055

