Turning Frequency to Resolution: Video Super-resolution via Event Cameras
Yongcheng Jing1 , Yiding Yang2 , Xinchao Wang3,2 , Mingli Song4 , Dacheng Tao1
1
The University of Sydney, 2 Stevens Institute of Technology,
3
National University of Singapore, 4 Zhejiang University
{yjin9495, dacheng.tao}@sydney.edu.au, yyang99@stevens.edu,
xinchao@nus.edu.sg, brooksong@zju.edu.cn

Ground Truth

VSR: 48 FPS Video
(PSNR: 31.72)

VSR: 12 FPS Video
(PSNR: 30.75)

VSR: 4 FPS Video
(PSNR: 29.60)

Ground Truth

VSR: 48 FPS Video
(PSNR: 29.64)

VSR: 12 FPS Video
(PSNR: 29.08)

VSR: 4 FPS Video
(PSNR: 28.30)

Figure 1. Influence of temporal frequency on the performance of VSR. A higher frame rate, and hence a smaller displacement between
consecutive frames, yields enhanced VSR results obtained by a state-of-the-art approach [53], as evidenced by the rising PSNRs.

Abstract
State-of-the-art video super-resolution (VSR) methods
focus on exploiting inter- and intra-frame correlations
to estimate high-resolution (HR) video frames from lowresolution (LR) ones. In this paper, we study VSR from
an exotic perspective, by explicitly looking into the role of
temporal frequency of video frames. Through experiments,
we observe that a higher frequency, and hence a smaller
pixel displacement between consecutive frames, tends to deliver favorable super-resolved results. This discovery motivates us to introduce Event Cameras, a novel sensing device that responds instantly to pixel intensity changes and
produces up to millions of asynchronous events per second,
to facilitate VSR. To this end, we propose an Event-based
VSR framework (E-VSR), of which the key component is an
asynchronous interpolation (EAI) module that reconstructs
a high-frequency (HF) video stream with uniform and tiny
pixel displacements between neighboring frames from an
event stream. The derived HF video stream is then encoded
into a VSR module to recover the desired HR videos. Furthermore, an LR bi-directional interpolation loss and an HR
self-supervision loss are also introduced to respectively regulate the EAI and VSR modules. Experiments on both realworld and synthetic datasets demonstrate that the proposed
approach yields results superior to the state of the art.

1. Introduction
The goal of video super-resolution (VSR) is to recover a
high-resolution (HR) video frame from a sequence of lowresolution (LR) frames. With the prevalence of recent HR
display technology, VSR techniques have been attracting increasing attention from both the academic and the industrial
community. Various applications of VSR include entertainment [21], surveillance [26], as well as medical and satellite
imaging [8]. Recently, VSR has also been applied to facilitate high-level vision tasks like action recognition [63].
State-of-the-art VSR techniques have relied on deep neural networks to model intra-frame correlations and interframe coherence, so as to recover HR frames. They can
be broadly categorized into two streams, the ones based on
convolutional neural network (CNN) [53, 50, 24, 61, 18, 13]
and those based on recurrent neural network (RNN) [11, 48,
37, 4, 12, 9]. The former category retains temporal information by concatenating multiple consecutive frames as inputs
to produce a single HR estimate. The latter category, on the
other hand, relies on recurrent connections to capture the
temporal dependencies across a sequence of video frames.
Both categories have demonstrated visually plausible and
quantitatively encouraging results.
Unlike existing approaches that focus on spatial and temporal dependencies, we study the VSR task from an exotic

7772

