Three Ways to Improve Semantic Segmentation
with Self-Supervised Depth Estimation
Lukas Hoyer
ETH Zurich

Dengxin Dai
ETH Zurich

Yuhua Chen
ETH Zurich

lhoyer@student.ethz.ch

dai@vision.ee.ethz.ch

yuhua.chen@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Adrian Köring
University of Bonn

Suman Saha
ETH Zurich

Luc Van Gool
ETH Zurich & KU Leuven

adrian.koering@uni-bonn.de

suman.saha@vision.ee.ethz.ch

vangool@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
Training deep networks for semantic segmentation requires large amounts of labeled training data, which
presents a major challenge in practice, as labeling segmentation masks is a highly labor-intensive process. To
address this issue, we present a framework for semisupervised semantic segmentation, which is enhanced by
self-supervised monocular depth estimation from unlabeled
image sequences. In particular, we propose three key contributions: (1) We transfer knowledge from features learned
during self-supervised depth estimation to semantic segmentation, (2) we implement a strong data augmentation
by blending images and labels using the geometry of the
scene, and (3) we utilize the depth feature diversity as well
as the level of difficulty of learning depth in a studentteacher framework to select the most useful samples to be
annotated for semantic segmentation. We validate the proposed model on the Cityscapes dataset, where all three
modules demonstrate significant performance gains, and
we achieve state-of-the-art results for semi-supervised semantic segmentation. The implementation is available at
https://github.com/lhoyer/improving_segmentation_
with_selfsupervised_depth.

1. Introduction
Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) [31] have
achieved state-of-the-art results for various computer vision tasks including semantic segmentation [36, 4]. However, training CNNs typically requires large-scale annotated
datasets, due to millions of learnable parameters involved.
Collecting such training data relies primarily on manual annotation. For semantic segmentation, the process can be
particularly costly, due to the required dense annotations.

For example, annotating a single image in the Cityscapes
dataset took on average 1.5 hours [8].
Recently, self-supervised learning has shown to be a
promising replacement for manually labeled data. It aims
to learn representations from the structure of unlabeled
data, instead of relying on a supervised loss, which involves manual labels. The principle has been successfully
applied in depth estimation for stereo pairs [14] or image sequences [69]. Additionally, semantic segmentation
is known to be tightly coupled with depth. Several works
have reported that jointly learning segmentation and supervised depth estimation can benefit the performance of both
tasks [57]. Motivated by these observations, we investigate
the question: How can we leverage self-supervised depth
estimation to improve semantic segmentation?
In this work, we propose a threefold approach to utilize
self-supervised monocular depth estimation (SDE) [14, 69,
15] to improve the performance of semantic segmentation
and to reduce the amount of annotation needed. Our contributions span across the holistic learning process from data
selection, over data augmentation, up to cross-task representation learning, while being unified by the use of SDE.
First, we employ SDE as an auxiliary task for semantic image segmentation under a transfer learning and multitask learning framework and show that it noticeably improves the performance of semantic segmentation, especially when supervision is limited. Previous works only
cover full supervision [29], pretraining [23], or improving
SDE instead of segmentation [18]. Second, we propose a
strong data augmentation strategy, DepthMix, which blends
images as well as their labels according to the geometry of
the scenes obtained from SDE. In comparison to previous
methods [65, 43], DepthMix explicitly respects the geometric structure of the scenes and generates fewer artifacts (see
Fig. 1). And third, we propose an Automatic Data Selection
for Annotation, which selects the most useful samples to be

11130

