Dual Pixel Exploration: Simultaneous Depth Estimation and Image Restoration
Liyuan Pan 1,2,∗, Shah Chowdhury 1,3,∗, Richard Hartley 1 , Miaomiao Liu 1 ,
Hongguang Zhang 1,4 , and Hongdong Li 1
1
Australian National University 2 A&F, CSIRO 3 Data61, CSIRO 4 SE Institute, AMS
{liyuan.pan,Shah.Chowdhury}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
The dual-pixel (DP) hardware works by splitting each
pixel in half and creating an image pair in a single snapshot. Several works estimate depth/inverse depth by treating the DP pair as a stereo pair. However, dual-pixel disparity only occurs in image regions with the defocus blur.
The heavy defocus blur in DP pairs affects the performance
of matching-based depth estimation approaches. Instead of
removing the blur effect blindly, we study the formation of
the DP pair which links the blur and the depth information. In this paper, we propose a mathematical DP model
which can benefit depth estimation by the blur. These explorations motivate us to propose an end-to-end DDDNet
(DP-based Depth and Deblur Network) to jointly estimate
the depth and restore the image. Moreover, we define a reblur loss, which reflects the relationship of the DP image
formation process with depth information, to regularise our
depth estimate in training. To meet the requirement of a
large amount of data for learning, we propose the first DP
image simulator which allows us to create datasets with DP
pairs from any existing RGBD dataset. As a side contribution, we collect a real dataset for further research. Extensive experimental evaluation on both synthetic and real
datasets shows that our approach achieves competitive performance compared to state-of-the-art approaches.

1. Introduction
The Dual-Pixel (DP) sensor has been used by DSLR
(digital single-lens reflex camera) and smartphone cameras
to aid focusing. Though the DP sensor is designed for autofocus [32, 16, 15], it is used in applications such as, depth
estimation [10, 29, 43], defocus deblurring [1], reflection
removal [30], and shallow Depth-of-Field (DoF) images
synthesis [36]. In this paper, we model the imaging process
of the DP sensor theoretically, and show its effectiveness for
simultaneous depth estimation and image deblurring.
∗ Equal contribution

(a) Inputs

(b) Ours

(c) GT

Figure 1. The pipeline of our approach. (a) The input of our
DDDNet. A red line in each DP image is drawn to indicate a small
shift between the left and right sub-aperture views. (b) Our deblurred image and estimated inverse depth map. (c) The GroundTruth (GT) sharp image and inverse depth map. The input DP pair
is from a real-world DP sensor, or generated by our simulator.

A DP camera simultaneously captures two images, one
formed from light rays passing through the right half of the
aperture, and one from those passing through the left half of
the aperture. Because of the displacement of these two halfapertures, the two images form a stereo pair. The primary
role of DP cameras is to enable auto-focus. The set of points
in the world that are exactly in focus forms a plane parallel
to the lens (perpendicular to the axis of the camera), and
points that lie on this plane are both in focus, and imaged
with zero-disparity in the two images. Points that lie further
away from the camera are imaged with positive disparity
in the two images and those that are closer have negative
disparity. By detecting and modelling these disparities, it
is possible to compute scene depth, as in standard stereo
imaging. (In auto-focus these disparities are used to move
the sensor, or the lens, to focus on any part of the scene.)
At the same time, points other than those lying on the infocus plane will be significantly out of focus, which raises
the possibility of using depth-from-defocus techniques to
estimate depth in the scene. This out-of-focus effect is
more significant than with ordinary stereo pairs, making
stereo matching potentially more challenging for DP cameras. However, because of the small base-line, between the

4340

