Semi-Supervised 3D Hand-Object Poses Estimation
with Interactions in Time
Shaowei Liu*1

Annotated Dataset

Hanwen Jiang*1 Jiarui Xu1 Sifei Liu2
1
UC San Diego 2 NVIDIA

Testing

Videos in the Wild
Frames + Pseudo-label

Model
Deploy

…

SelfTraining

…

Xiaolong Wang1

Better Performance
Before

After

Cross-Domain
Generalization

Figure 1: The proposed semi-supervised learning framework and results. We train an initial model on an annotated dataset, and deploy it
on a large-scale video dataset to collect pseudo-labels. We leverage spatial-temporal consistency to select pseudo-labels for self-training.
After the semi-supervised learning, both the performance of hand-object pose estimation and hand pose generalization are improved.

Abstract
Estimating 3D hand and object pose from a single image is an extremely challenging problem: hands and objects
are often self-occluded during interactions, and the 3D annotations are scarce as even humans cannot directly label
the ground-truths from a single image perfectly. To tackle
these challenges, we propose a unified framework for estimating the 3D hand and object poses with semi-supervised
learning. We build a joint learning framework where we perform explicit contextual reasoning between hand and object
representations. Going beyond limited 3D annotations in a
single image, we leverage the spatial-temporal consistency
in large-scale hand-object videos as a constraint for generating pseudo labels in semi-supervised learning. Our method
not only improves hand pose estimation in challenging realworld dataset, but also substantially improve the object pose
which has fewer ground-truths per instance. By training with
large-scale diverse videos, our model also generalizes better
across multiple out-of-domain datasets. Project page and
code: https://stevenlsw.github.io/Semi-Hand-Object

1. Introduction
Hands are humans’ primary means of interacting with
the physical world. Capturing the 3D pose of the hands
and the objects interacted by hands is a crucial step in un* Equal contribution.

derstanding human actions. It is also the central part for a
variety of applications including augmented reality [44, 25],
third-person imitation learning [17, 10], and human-machine
interaction [58]. While 3D pose estimation on hands and
objects have been studied for a long time in computer vision
captured with depth cameras [72, 36, 34, 69, 32] or RGB-D
sensors [70, 49, 38, 54, 11] in controlled environments, recent research has also achieved encouraging results on pose
estimation from a single monocular RGB image [75, 37, 66].
Despite the efforts, current approaches still highly rely on
human annotations for 3D poses, which are extremely difficult to obtain: Researchers have been collecting data with
motion capture [50, 13, 74], or aligning mesh models to the
real images [19, 30, 16, 4]. Given insufficient annotations
for supervised learning, it limits the trained model from generalizing to novel scenes and out-of-domain environments.
To enable better estimation performance and generalization
ability, we look into video data of hands and objects in the
wild, without using the 3D annotations.
Specifically, we propose to exploit hand-object interactions over time. The poses of the hands and objects are
usually highly correlated: The 3D pose of the hand when
it is grasping the object often indicates the orientation of
the object; the object pose also provides constraints on how
the hand can approach and interact with the object. When
observing from the videos, the 3D poses for both hands and
objects should change smoothly and continuously. This continuity provides a cue for selecting coherent and accurate
3D hand and object pose estimation results when human

14687

