Improving Weakly Supervised Visual Grounding
by Contrastive Knowledge Distillation
Liwei Wang 1∗ Jing Huang 2∗ Yin Li 3 Kun Xu 4 Zhengyuan Yang 5 Dong Yu 4
1
The Chinese University of Hong Kong 2 University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
3
University of Wisconsin-Madison 4 Tencent AI Lab, Bellevue 5 University of Rochester
Training

Abstract

Inference
Predicted
Box

Soft Labels
from Detector Class Predictions

Weakly supervised phrase grounding aims at learning
region-phrase correspondences using only image-sentence
pairs. A major challenge thus lies in the missing links between image regions and sentence phrases during training.
To address this challenge, we leverage a generic object detector at training time, and propose a contrastive learning
framework that accounts for both region-phrase and imagesentence matching. Our core innovation is the learning of
a region-phrase score function, based on which an imagesentence score function is further constructed. Importantly,
our region-phrase score function is learned by distilling from
soft matching scores between the detected object names and
candidate phrases within an image-sentence pair, while the
image-sentence score function is supervised by ground-truth
image-sentence pairs. The design of such score functions
removes the need of object detection at test time, thereby
significantly reducing the inference cost. Without bells and
whistles, our approach achieves state-of-the-art results on
visual phrase grounding, surpassing previous methods that
require expensive object detectors at test time.

1. Introduction
Visual phrase grounding — finding regions associated
with phrases in a sentence description of the image, is an
important problem at the intersection of computer vision
and natural language processing. Most of the existing approaches [15, 39, 46] follow a fully supervised paradigm
that requires the labeling of bounding boxes for each phrase.
These fine-grained annotations are unfortunately expensive
to obtain and thus difficult to scale. Consequently, weakly
supervised grounding has recently received considerable attention [42, 51, 50, 56, 6, 53, 54, 14, 45]. In this setting, only
images and their sentence descriptions are given at training
time. At inference time, given an image sentence pair, a
method is asked to link regions to sentence phrases.
∗ equal contribution. Contact: lwwang@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

Grounding Model

Grounding Model

Predictions

Predictions

shirt: 0.04

shirt: 0.04

shirt: 0.87
shirt: 0.04

Query=
“light blue shirt”

Figure 1: Our method uses object detector predictions to
guide the learning of region-phrase matching in training.
At the inference time, our method no longer requires object
detectors and directly predicts the box with the highest score.
A major challenge of weakly supervised grounding is
to distinguish among many “concurrent” visual concepts.
For example, the region of a dog and that of its head are
likely to co-occur in images associated with the phrase “a
running puppy.” Without knowing the ground-truth regionphrase matching, learning to link the region of dog (but
not dog head) to its corresponding phrase becomes very
challenging. To address this challenge, recent methods [6,
14, 45, 18] leverage generic object detectors for training
and/or inference. A detector provides high quality object
regions, as well as their category labels that can be further
matched to candidate phrases, thereby bringing in external
knowledge about region-phrase matching and thus helping
to disambiguate those “concurrent” concepts. However, it
remains unclear about the best practices of using an external
object detector for weakly supervised grounding.
In this paper, we focus on developing a principled approach to distill knowledge from a generic object detector
for weakly supervised phrase grounding. To this end, we
present a simple method under the framework of contrastive
learning. Specifically, our model learns a score function
between region-phrase pairs, guided by two levels of similarity constraints encoded using noise-contrastive estimation
(NCE) loss [19] during training. The first level of region-

14090

