Learning by Planning: Language-Guided Global Image Editing
Jing Shi1
1

Ning Xu2 Yihang Xu1 Trung Bui2
1
University of Rochester

{j.shi,chenliang.xu}@rochester.edu

1

Franck Dernoncourt2
2
Adobe Research

yxu74@u.rochester.edu

2

{nxu,bui,dernonco}@adobe.com

Abstract

1. Introduction
Image editing is ubiquitous in our daily life, especially
when posting photos on social media such as Instagram or
Facebook. However, editing images using professional software like PhotoShop requires background knowledge for
image processing and is time-consuming for the novices
who want to quickly edit the image following their intention and post to show around. Furthermore, as phones and
tablets becoming users’ major mobile terminal, people prefer to take and edit photos on mobile devices, making it
even more troublesome to edit and select regions on the
small screen. Hence, automatic image editing guided by
the user’s voice input (e.g. Siri, Cortana) can significantly
alleviate such problems. We research global image editing
via language: given a source image and a language editing request, generate a new image transformed under this
request, as firstly proposed in [34]. Such a task is challenging because the model has to not only understand the
language but also edit the image with high fidelity. Rulebased methods [22, 21] transfer the language request into
sentence templates and further map the templates into a se-

Output

Operation Planning Input
Request: Make the image lighter

Recently, language-guided global image editing draws
increasing attention with growing application potentials.
However, previous GAN-based methods are not only confined to domain-specific, low-resolution data but also lacking in interpretability. To overcome the collective difficulties, we develop a text-to-operation model to map the vague
editing language request into a series of editing operations,
e.g., change contrast, brightness, and saturation. Each operation is interpretable and differentiable. Furthermore,
the only supervision in the task is the target image, which
is insufficient for a stable training of sequential decisions.
Hence, we propose a novel operation planning algorithm
to generate possible editing sequences from the target image as pseudo ground truth. Comparison experiments on
the newly collected MA5k-Req dataset and GIER dataset
show the advantages of our methods. Code is available at
https://github.com/jshi31/T2ONet.

Chenliang Xu1

Language-Guided Image Editing Input
target #%

intermediate images #$

input #!

≈

"!

""

Contrast (-1.1) Tone Curve

"#
Color Curve

Figure 1. Language-Guided Global Image Editing: given the input image I0 and the request, we predict a sequence of actions at
to edit the image progressively with a series of intermediate images It generated. And the final edited image is our output, which
should accord with the request. Operation Planning: the input image I0 and target image Ig are given, and we plan a sequence of
action to make the final edited image reach the target image Ig .

quence of executable editing operations. However, they require additional language annotations and suffer from unspecific editing requests. [30] directly maps the language to
operations with the capability to accept the vague editing request, yet still need the operation annotation for training. A
more prevalent track is the GAN-based method [34], which
models the visual and textual information by inserting the
image and language features into a neural network generator that directly outputs the edited image. However, GANbased models lack the interpretability about how an image
was edited through a sequence of common editing operations (e.g. tone, brightness). Thus, they fail to allow users
to modify the editing results interactively. Moreover, GANs
struggle with high-resolution images and is data-hungry.
To provide an interpretable yet practical method for
language-guided global image editing, in this paper, we propose a Text-to-Operation Network (T2ONet). The network
sequentially selects the best operations from a set of predefined everyday editing operations to edit the image progressively according to the language’s comprehension and the
visual editing feedback. As the operations are resolutionindependent, such method will not deteriorate the image
resolution. Fig. 1 shows the process of mimicking human
experts for professional photo editing and opens the possibility for human-computer interactions in future work.

13590

