Domain-Independent Dominance of Adaptive Methods
Pedro Savarese
TTI-Chicago

David McAllester
TTI-Chicago

Sudarshan Babu
TTI-Chicago

Michael Maire
University of Chicago

savarese@ttic.edu

mcallester@ttic.edu

sudarshan@ttic.edu

mmaire@uchicago.edu

Abstract
From a simplified analysis of adaptive methods, we derive AvaGrad, a new optimizer which outperforms SGD on
vision tasks when its adaptability is properly tuned. We observe that the power of our method is partially explained
by a decoupling of learning rate and adaptability, greatly
simplifying hyperparameter search. In light of this observation, we demonstrate that, against conventional wisdom,
Adam can also outperform SGD on vision tasks, as long
as the coupling between its learning rate and adaptability
is taken into account. In practice, AvaGrad matches the
best results, as measured by generalization accuracy, delivered by any existing optimizer (SGD or adaptive) across
image classification (CIFAR, ImageNet) and character-level
language modelling (Penn Treebank) tasks. When training
GANs, AvaGrad improves upon existing optimizers.1

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks are notoriously difficult and costly
to train due to the non-convexity of the underlying objective
coupled with limitations of first-order methods, like vanishing and shattered gradients [15, 16, 2]. Architectural designs
such as normalization layers [19, 1] and residual connections
[12] facilitate training by improving gradient statistics, and
are broadly used in practice. However, modern architectures
often contain modules with different functionalities, such
as attention heads [41] and gating mechanisms [17], whose
parameter gradients naturally present distinct statistics.
Adaptive gradient methods such as AdaGrad [8] and
Adam [21] are particularly suitable for training complex
networks, as they designate per-parameter learning rates
which are dynamically adapted based on individual gradient
statistics collected during training. Although widely adopted,
recent works have shown shortcomings in both theoretical
and practical aspects of adaptive methods, such as nonconvergence [34] and poor generalization [42].
Moreover, SGD is still dominant when training relatively
1 AvaGrad is available at github.com/lolemacs/avagrad

simple architectures such as ResNets [12, 13] and DenseNets
[18], where model-based methods [19, 12] suffice to overcome the obstacles of training deep networks.
A clear trend in the literature is that SGD is more commonly adopted in computer vision tasks, where convolutional networks are prominent [35, 4, 40], while adaptive
methods are typically employed in natural language processing tasks, where the most successful networks are either
recurrent [17, 30] or attention-based [7, 41]. This situation
persists despite the fact that considerable effort has been put
into the design of sophisticated adaptive methods, with the
goal of providing SGD-like performance in computer vision
tasks and formal convergence guarantees.
Newly-proposed optimizers typically offer convergence
guarantees for stochastic convex problems [34, 27, 37], but,
as we will see, either fail to match SGD’s performance when
training simpler networks, or behave similarly to SGD and
thus underperform Adam when training complex models.
The behavior of recently-proposed adaptive methods when
training deep networks is unclear due to the scarcity of nonconvex guarantees and analyses.
In this paper, we focus on the question of whether an
optimizer can be dominant in multiple domains. That is,
we are concerned with finding conditions and properties for
which an optimization method trains convolutional networks
as well as SGD, while at the same time being able to train
more complex models as well as Adam. We refer to this
property as domain-independent dominance.
We start in Section 3 by analyzing the convergence of
adaptive methods for stochastic non-convex problems,
pro√
viding a sufficient condition to guarantee a O(1/ T ) convergence rate – the same as SGD. Moreover, we later (Section 8)
propose a simple procedure that, given an arbitrary adaptive
method, produces a similar optimizer that √
satisfies said condition and hence offers a guaranteed O(1/ T ) convergence
rate for stochastic non-convex problems. From this result,
we also show how Adam can provably achieve SGD-like
convergence in stochastic non-convex problems given proper
tuning of its adaptability parameter ǫ, and show how this
does not contradict [34].
Further inspecting the convergence rate of adaptive meth116286

