Few-shot Image Generation via Cross-domain Correspondence
Utkarsh Ojha1,2
Yijun Li1
Jingwan Lu1
Alexei A. Efros1,3
Yong Jae Lee2
Eli Shechtman1
Richard Zhang1
1

Adobe Research

2

3

UC Davis

UC Berkeley

Few-shot Adaptation

Large scale pre-training
from FFHQ…

…to paintings

…to babies

𝑧

𝑧

𝑧

Training
images

Resulting
generator

𝐺𝑠

𝐺𝑠→𝑡

GAN adaptation

𝐺𝑠→𝑡

Figure 1: Given a model trained on a large source dataset (Gs ), we propose to adapt it to arbitrary image domains, so that the
resulting model (Gs→t ) captures these target distributions using extremely few training samples. In the process, our method
discovers a one-to-one relation between the distributions, where noise vectors map to corresponding images in the source and
target. Consequently, one can imagine how a natural face would look if Amedeo Modigliani had painted it, or how the face
would look in its baby form.

Abstract
Training generative models, such as GANs, on a target domain containing limited examples (e.g., 10) can easily result in overfitting. In this work, we seek to utilize a
large source domain for pretraining and transfer the diversity information from source to target. We propose to
preserve the relative similarities and differences between
instances in the source via a novel cross-domain distance
consistency loss. To further reduce overfitting, we present
an anchor-based strategy to encourage different levels of
realism over different regions in the latent space. With extensive results in both photorealistic and non-photorealistic
domains, we demonstrate qualitatively and quantitatively
that our few-shot model automatically discovers correspondences between source and target domains and generates

more diverse and realistic images than previous methods.

1. Introduction
Consider 10 portrait paintings by the incomparable
Amedeo Modigliani [34], shown in Fig. 1 (middle). Given
only these 10 paintings, would it be possible to train a model
which can generate infinitely many paintings in the style of
Modigliani? Unfortunately, contemporary generative models [11, 12, 13, 27, 3] require thousands of images to train
properly, not 10. This problem is of practical importance,
since many such domains of interest have a very limited collection of images (e.g., there are just 10 examples per artist
in the Artistic-Faces dataset [34]).
Transfer learning serves as an alternative to training from
scratch and has been explored in the context of generative

10743

