Deep Lucas-Kanade Homography for Multimodal Image Alignment
Yiming Zhao

Xinming Huang
Ziming Zhang
Worcester Polytechnic Institute
100 Institute Rd, Worcester, MA, USA
{yzhao7, xhuang, zzhang15}@wpi.edu

Abstract
Estimating homography to align image pairs captured
by different sensors or image pairs with large appearance
changes is an important and general challenge for many
computer vision applications. In contrast to others, we propose a generic solution to pixel-wise align multimodal image pairs by extending the traditional Lucas-Kanade algorithm with networks. The key contribution in our method
is how we construct feature maps, named as deep LucasKanade feature map (DLKFM). The learned DLKFM can
spontaneously recognize invariant features under various
appearance-changing conditions. It also has two nice properties for the Lucas-Kanade algorithm: (1) The template
feature map keeps brightness consistency with the input
feature map, thus the color difference is very small while
they are well-aligned. (2) The Lucas-Kanade objective
function built on DLKFM has a smooth landscape around
ground truth homography parameters, so the iterative solution of the Lucas-Kanade can easily converge to the ground
truth. With those properties, directly updating the LucasKanade algorithm on our feature maps will precisely align
image pairs with large appearance changes. We share the
datasets, code, and demo video online 1 .

1. Introduction
Pixel-wise alignment of multimodal image pair is an important problem for many computer vision applications in
the field of medical imaging [12], remote sensing [45], and
robotics [5]. For example, in the task of GPS denied navigation [16], the drone needs to align the RGB image from the
camera with the existing map from the satellite. Aligning
those two images suffers from multimodal color representations as well as appearance changes. In Fig. 1, we show
a cross-season image pair with appearance changes and a
Google Map and Satellite image pair with multimodal pat1 Codebase link:
https://github.com/placeforyiming/CVPR21-DeepLucas-Kanade-Homography. Dr. Xinming Huang is the project manager
of this paper, please contact him for further information.

Figure 1. (Left) One image pair from our cross-season dataset captured in Google Earth. Plant and traffic are changing textures.
Our DLKFM distinguishes invariant features which are roads and
buildings. (Right) One image pair from our Google Map and
Satellite dataset. Template comes from the static map and the input is the corresponding satellite map. Our DLKFM distinguishes
invariant features which are those map labels. The red polygon is
the ground truth position of the template on the input image.

tern representations. To solve this problem, we propose a
generic pipeline by extending the traditional Lucas-Kanade
(LK) algorithm with neural networks. The key component
is how to extract the feature map, named as deep LucasKanade feature map (DLKFM). DLKFM is able to spontaneously recognize invariant features in various multimodal
cases, like the roads and houses in the cross-season example or map labels in the Google Map and Satellite example. DLKFM also helps the LK to converge successfully by
shaping the landscape of the objective function.
Homography or perspective transform is a general 2D
image transformation, which maps pixel from one image to
the other, denoted as x̂ = Ĥ x̂′ , where x̂ and x̂′ are homogeneous coordinates, Ĥ is an arbitrary 3 × 3 matrix. However,
in 3D computer vision, parallax arises due to the change of
the viewpoint, thus creates ambiguity for aligning 2D images. In this paper, we consider the same flat world assumption as [16], that the depth disparity is negligible like
some UAV and remote sensing applications [32, 46]. Then,
aligning the image pair is equivalent to estimating the ho-

15950

