Action Shuffle Alternating Learning for Unsupervised Action Segmentation
Jun Li
Oregon State University

Sinisa Todorovic
Oregon State University

liju2@oregonstate.edu

sinisa@oregonstate.edu

Abstract
This paper addresses unsupervised action segmentation.
Prior work captures the frame-level temporal structure of
videos by a feature embedding that encodes time locations
of frames in the video. We advance prior work with a
new self-supervised learning (SSL) of a feature embedding
that accounts for both frame- and action-level structure of
videos. Our SSL trains an RNN to recognize positive and
negative action sequences, and the RNN’s hidden layer is
taken as our new action-level feature embedding. The positive and negative sequences consist of action segments sampled from videos, where in the former the sampled action
segments respect their time ordering in the video, and in
the latter they are shuffled. As supervision of actions is not
available and our SSL requires access to action segments,
we specify an HMM that explicitly models action lengths,
and infer a MAP action segmentation with the Viterbi algorithm. The resulting action segmentation is used as pseudoground truth for estimating our action-level feature embedding and updating the HMM. We alternate the above steps
within the Generalized EM framework, which ensures convergence. Our evaluation on the Breakfast, YouTube Instructions, and 50Salads datasets gives superior results to
those of the state of the art.

1. Introduction
This paper is about unsupervised action segmentation,
where the goal is to localize salient latent actions in
untrimmed videos. The actions are salient as differences
in their features allow for segmentation, and the actions are
latent as they may not have a distinct semantic meaning,
since no supervision about the actions is available. The
ground truth can be used only for evaluation. This is a longstanding vision problem with a wide range of applications.
It can be used for mapping a long video to a significantly
shorter sequence of action segments, and thus for facilitating and reducing complexity of subsequent video interpretation. It can also be used in applications where manual
video annotation is prohibitively expensive or not reliable.

In this paper, we focus on a particular setting studied
in recent work [18], where all videos show the same activity (e.g., a cooking activity) which can be decomposed
into a temporal sequence of simpler actions (e.g., cooking
includes cutting, mixing, peeling). While the activity exhibits variations across videos, they are mostly manifested
in varying lengths and features of each action of the activity,
whereas variations in the total number and temporal ordering of actions are limited by the very nature of the activity
(e.g., cooking usually requires a certain order of actions).
For such a setting, related work [18] makes the following
restrictive assumptions that every action appears only once,
and all actions always occur and follow the same temporal
ordering in all videos, referred to as fixed transcript. Based
on these assumptions, they learn a temporal feature embedding by training a regression model to predict a temporal
position of every frame in the video, where the frame positions are normalized to the video length. Then, they use
the K-means for clustering these embedded features of all
video frames, and interpret the resulting clusters as representing the latent actions. After computing a likelihood for
every cluster, they run the standard Viterbi algorithm on every video for localizing the latent actions.
We make three contributions, as illustrated in Fig. 1.
First, we relax the above assumption about the fixed temporal ordering of actions in videos. We specify a Hidden
Markov Model (HMM), and thus infer a MAP ordering of
actions, instead of the fixed transcript. Unlike [18], our
HMM explicitly models the varying lengths of latent actions, and thus constrains implausible solutions in the domain (e.g., chopping cannot take a few frames). Also, our
HMM uses a multilayer perceptron (MLP) for estimating
the likelihood of the frame labeling with the latent actions.
Second, we specify a new self-supervised learning (SSL)
for action-level temporal feature embedding. As other SSL
approaches [18, 22, 13, 19, 5, 14, 8, 3, 33], ours exploits the
temporal structure of videos, where the structure we mean
that videos are sequences of actions with small variations
in action ordering. However, the cited references typically
focus on capturing the temporal structure at the frame level
(e.g., by shuffling or permuting frames [22, 19], encoding

12628

