No Shadow Left Behind: Removing Objects and their Shadows using
Approximate Lighting and Geometry
Edward Zhang1

Ricardo Martin-Brualla2
Janne Kontkanen2
1,2
Brian Curless
1
University of Washington 2 Google

Approximate Lighting
& Geometry

Input Image

Object Removed

Object to Remove

Object Replaced

Figure 1: We present a method to remove an object and its shadows from an image, to enable applications like home refurnishing. Our
method takes as input an image, approximate scene lighting and geometry, and an object mask, and generates a new version of the image
that depicts the scene as if the object had not been present. This not only includes inpainting the occluded pixels, but removing any shadows
cast by the object.

Abstract
Removing objects from images is a challenging technical
problem that is important for many applications, including
mixed reality. For believable results, the shadows that the
object casts should also be removed. Current inpaintingbased methods only remove the object itself, leaving shadows behind, or at best require specifying shadow regions to
inpaint. We introduce a deep learning pipeline for removing a shadow along with its caster. We leverage rough scene
models in order to remove a wide variety of shadows (hard
or soft, dark or subtle, large or thin) from surfaces with a
wide variety of textures. We train our pipeline on synthetically rendered data, and show qualitative and quantitative
results on both synthetic and real scenes.

1. Introduction
Mixed reality aims to seamlessly combine the virtual and
the real. As one example, imagine an interior design app
that lets you try out new furniture. Most previous work in
augmented reality focuses on inserting virtual objects – for
instance, putting a virtual sofa into your living room. The
scope of these applications can be greatly expanded by also

enabling manipulation of real-world objects – imagine removing the futon that you intend to replace with the sofa,
and moving a coffee table over to make more room for it.
Previous work on object removal has focused solely on
the inpainting problem – that is, replacing the pixels previously occupied by the removed object. However, for realistic results, we need to remove the sofa and the shadows it
casts on the wall and the ﬂoor, as well as the reﬂection on
the hardwood ﬂoor. For the purposes of this paper, we focus
only on the shadow removal problem.
Existing inpainting-based approaches for object removal
either ignore the shadows of the object, or mark them to
be inpainted as well. However, very large shadows may
leave little image content to copy pixels from. Furthermore,
this approach requires segmenting out the object’s shadow
in addition to the object itself – a difﬁcult task, as varying
lighting conditions can cause multiple shadows, very soft
shadows, or overlapping shadows, and a surface texture may
have dark regions that could be mistaken for shadows.
Inspired by Debevec’s [9] work in virtual insertion of objects in scenes, we use a scene proxy to help determine the
visual effects of a scene manipulation. Debevec performs
the scene edit on the proxy model, and renders the proxy
pre- and post-edit. The pixelwise difference between the
116397

