S3 : Neural Shape, Skeleton, and Skinning Fields for 3D Human Modeling
Ze Yang1,2 Shenlong Wang1,2 Sivabalan Manivasagam1,2 Zeng Huang3
Wei-Chiu Ma1,4 Xinchen Yan1 Ersin Yumer1 Raquel Urtasun1,2
Uber Advanced Technologies Group 2 University of Toronto,
3
University of Southern California 4 Massachusetts Institute of Techonology
1

{zeyang, slwang, manivasagam, urtasun}@cs.toronto.edu,
zenghuan@usc.edu, weichium@mit.edu, {xcyan, yumer}@uber.com

and/or

Image

LiDAR

Shape

Skeleton

Skinning

Re-animated shapes

Figure 1: Given a single image and/or a single LiDAR sweep as input, our model infers shape, skeleton and skinning jointly,
which can then be used to generate animated 3D characters in novel poses.

Abstract
Constructing and animating humans is an important component for building virtual worlds in a wide variety of applications such as virtual reality or robotics testing in simulation. As there are exponentially many variations of humans with different shape, pose and clothing, it is critical
to develop methods that can automatically reconstruct and
animate humans at scale from real world data. Towards this
goal, we represent the pedestrian’s shape, pose and skinning
weights as neural implicit functions that are directly learned
from data. This representation enables us to handle a wide
variety of different pedestrian shapes and poses without explicitly fitting a human parametric body model, allowing us
to handle a wider range of human geometries and topologies.
We demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach on various
datasets and show that our reconstructions outperform existing state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, our re-animation
experiments show that we can generate 3D human animations at scale from a single RGB image (and/or an optional
LiDAR sweep) as input.

1. Introduction
Realistic, articulated human simulation is an important
task with a wide range applications. It helps to bring characters to life in video games and movies [61], provides realistic AR/VR experiences in the context of sports [71, 67]

and social media [12], and is starting to play an important
role in realistic simulations for testing robotic systems in
both indoor [51, 58, 39] and outdoor environments [20, 64].
Traditionally, human reconstruction and animation is a timeconsuming manual process. An artistic designer needs to
create a scale-appropriate "joint estimation" that specifies the
human’s degrees of freedom, "reconstruct" the human 3D
mesh geometry, and "skin" the mesh by describing how the
vertex positions deform as a function of the skeleton joints
pose. Finally, the artist must specify the pose sequence that
enacts an animation. This manual approach is neither costeffective nor efficient if we want to reconstruct and animate
3D humans at scale, for example by digitizing millions of
different pedestrians observed in urban city scenes.
Automating the human reconstruction and animation is
very challenging as there are large variations in pedestrian
shape, pose, clothing, and accoutrement. Most existing animatable human modeling methods are pipelined systems
consisting of a set of modules that run separately [59, 53, 61].
Typically, the first module performs joint estimation using marker [17] or markerless [11] motion capture. From
either dense 3D scans or images, the system then reconstructs shape [14, 6, 34, 30, 66, 5, 25, 4, 21, 49] and texture [56, 55, 41]. The estimated pose skeleton is further
associated with the mesh typically via closed-form skinning
models [27, 28] with hand-designed or automatic weight
painting [8, 19]. Unfortunately, for existing approaches to
work successfully, they typically rely on an expensive 3D

13284

