Semi-supervised Semantic Segmentation with Directional Context-aware
Consistency
Xin Lai1 *
Zhuotao Tian1∗
Li Jiang1
Shu Liu2
Hengshuang Zhao3
Liwei Wang1
Jiaya Jia1,2
1
2
The Chinese University of Hong Kong SmartMore 3 University of Oxford
{xinlai,zttian,lijiang,lwwang,leojia}@cse.cuhk.edu.hk

sliu@smartmore.com

hengshuang.zhao@eng.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
Semantic segmentation has made tremendous progress in
recent years. However, satisfying performance highly depends on a large number of pixel-level annotations. Therefore, in this paper, we focus on the semi-supervised segmentation problem where only a small set of labeled data is
provided with a much larger collection of totally unlabeled
images. Nevertheless, due to the limited annotations, models may overly rely on the contexts available in the training
data, which causes poor generalization to the scenes unseen before. A preferred high-level representation should
capture the contextual information while not losing selfawareness. Therefore, we propose to maintain the contextaware consistency between features of the same identity but
with different contexts, making the representations robust to
the varying environments. Moreover, we present the Directional Contrastive Loss (DC Loss) to accomplish the consistency in a pixel-to-pixel manner, only requiring the feature
with lower quality to be aligned towards its counterpart.
In addition, to avoid the false-negative samples and filter
the uncertain positive samples, we put forward two sampling strategies. Extensive experiments show that our simple yet effective method surpasses current state-of-the-art
methods by a large margin and also generalizes well with
extra image-level annotations.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation, as a fundamental tool, has profited many downstream applications, and deep learning further boosts this area with remarkable progress. However,
training a strong segmentation network highly relies on sufficient finely annotated data to yield robust representations
for input images, and dense pixel-wise labeling is rather
time-consuming, e.g., the annotation process costs more
than 1.5h on average for a single image in Cityscapes [12].
* Equal Contribution

Input

SupOnly

Ours

Figure 1. Grad-CAM [46] visualizations of the regional contribution to the feature of interest (i.e., the yellow cross shown in the
input). The red region corresponds to high contribution. SupOnly:
the model trained with only 1/8 labeled data. More illustrations
are shown in the supplementary.

To alleviate this problem, weaker forms of segmentation
annotation, e.g., bounding boxes [13, 48], image-level labels [56, 1, 44] and scribbles [34, 51, 52], have been exploited to supplement the limited pixel-wise labeled data.
Still, collecting these weak labels requires additional human efforts. Instead, in this paper, we focus on the semisupervised scenario where the segmentation models are
trained with a small set of labeled data and a much larger
collection of unlabeled data.
Segmentation networks can not predict a label for each
pixel merely based on its RGB values. Therefore, the contextual information is essential for semantic segmentation.
Iconic models (e.g., DeepLab [7] and PSPNet [60]) have
also shown satisfying performance by adequately aggregating the contextual cues to individual pixels before making
final predictions. However, in the semi-supervised setting,
models are prone to overfit the quite limited training data,
which results in poor generalization on the scenes unseen
during training. In this case, models are easy to excessively
rely on the contexts to make predictions. Empirically, as
shown in Fig. 1, we find that after training with only the labeled data, features of train and person overly focus on the
contexts of sky and dog but overlook themselves. Therefore, to prevent the model abusing the contexts and also

1205

