Gradient Forward-Propagation for Large-Scale Temporal Video Modelling
Mateusz Malinowski∗
DeepMind

Dimitrios Vytiniotis
DeepMind

Grzegorz Świrszcz
DeepMind

Viorica Pătrăucean
DeepMind

João Carreira
DeepMind

Abstract
How can neural networks be trained on large-volume
temporal data efficiently? To compute the gradients required
to update parameters, backpropagation blocks computations
until the forward and backward passes are completed. For
temporal signals, this introduces high latency and hinders
real-time learning. It also creates a coupling between consecutive layers, which limits model parallelism and increases
memory consumption. In this paper, we build upon Sideways, which avoids blocking by propagating approximate
gradients forward in time, and we propose mechanisms for
temporal integration of information based on different variants of skip connections. We also show how to decouple
computation and delegate individual neural modules to different devices, allowing distributed and parallel training.
The proposed Skip-Sideways achieves low latency training,
model parallelism, and, importantly, is capable of extracting
temporal features, leading to more stable training and improved performance on real-world action recognition video
datasets such as HMDB51, UCF101, and the large-scale
Kinetics-600. Finally, we also show that models trained with
Skip-Sideways generate better future frames than Sideways
models, and hence they can better utilize motion cues.

1. Introduction
Popular deep video models generally rely on spatiotemporal convolutional networks (3D CNNs) [12, 18, 52,
55, 63] or recurrent networks [16, 24, 34] that are trained
with backpropagation (BP) using stochastic gradient descent
(SGD) [7, 19, 29, 33, 46, 57, 58, 60, 64]. This is a powerful
training paradigm but also an expensive one as it needs to
store all the activations in memory to compute Jacobian tensors for the gradient calculations. First, all the activations
are computed in the forward mode, from the beginning to
the end of the sequence. Next, gradients are computed in
the reverse direction, from the end to the beginning. All that
∗ The corresponding author: mateuszm@google.com

severely limits the scale at which we can train temporal models on large-volume sequences such as videos. Therefore,
typically these video models are trained on short video clips
(about 2.5s at usual frame rate), in offline batch mode.
Sideways [38] is a recent training technique for video
models that decouples the computation along the depth of
the network and introduces computation steps. As a new
frame is fed into the processing pipeline, each layer independently updates the internal state of the network by computing
new activations and gradients. Next, these are passed to the
layers above and below in the next computation step (see
Figure 1 left). Moreover, the information cannot be backpropagated to the same units that produced the activations
as this happened in the past computation steps. One may
say that “everything flows forward in time”, including the
backward pass. Due to these properties, Sideways is more
biologically plausible than the regular backprop, as it does
not block the computation and respects the arrow of time.
Although Sideways, as originally proposed, operates in
a temporal forward fashion, it is not a temporal model per
se, as it has access only to the present frame at each time
step. This results in improved memory efficiency similar to
single-frame models, making it suitable for real-time applications. However, this comes with the cost of not integrating
information temporally, which limits the expressive power
of the resulting models.
In this work, we show that it is possible for models to
process one frame at a time similar to Sideways, while still
being able to extract temporal features. We do this by introducing shortcut (skip) connections in addition to direct
connections between the layers of the model. We study the
training dynamics of the resulting training procedure, which
we call Skip-Sideways, and show that shortcut connections
lead to more stable training and higher accuracy.
Regular skip connections [21] alter the information flow
along the data path of the network by allowing activations
to ‘skip’ layers, creating data shortcuts. In the proposed
Skip-Sideways, activations and gradients along the shortcut
connections are also sent forward in time, effectively creating data paths across time, making it possible to extract

9249

