Rethinking Semantic Segmentation from a Sequence-to-Sequence Perspective
with Transformers
Sixiao Zheng1 * Jiachen Lu1 Hengshuang Zhao2 Xiatian Zhu3 Zekun Luo4 Yabiao Wang4
Yanwei Fu1 Jianfeng Feng1 Tao Xiang3, 5 Philip H.S. Torr2 Li Zhang1†
1
Fudan University 2 University of Oxford 3 University of Surrey
4
Tencent Youtu Lab 5 Facebook AI
https://fudan-zvg.github.io/SETR

Abstract
Most recent semantic segmentation methods adopt
a fully-convolutional network (FCN) with an encoderdecoder architecture. The encoder progressively reduces
the spatial resolution and learns more abstract/semantic
visual concepts with larger receptive fields. Since context
modeling is critical for segmentation, the latest efforts have
been focused on increasing the receptive field, through either dilated/atrous convolutions or inserting attention modules. However, the encoder-decoder based FCN architecture remains unchanged. In this paper, we aim to provide
an alternative perspective by treating semantic segmentation as a sequence-to-sequence prediction task. Specifically,
we deploy a pure transformer (i.e., without convolution and
resolution reduction) to encode an image as a sequence of
patches. With the global context modeled in every layer of
the transformer, this encoder can be combined with a simple
decoder to provide a powerful segmentation model, termed
SEgmentation TRansformer (SETR). Extensive experiments
show that SETR achieves new state of the art on ADE20K
(50.28% mIoU), Pascal Context (55.83% mIoU) and competitive results on Cityscapes. Particularly, we achieve the
first position in the highly competitive ADE20K test server
leaderboard on the day of submission.

1. Introduction
Since the seminal work of [35], existing semantic segmentation models have been dominated by those based on
fully convolutional network (FCN). A standard FCN seg* Work done while Sixiao Zheng was interning at Tencent Youtu Lab.
† Li Zhang (lizhangfd@fudan.edu.cn) is the corresponding author with

School of Data Science, Fudan University. Yanwei Fu is with the School
of Data Science, MOE Frontiers Center for Brain Science, and Shanghai
Key Lab of Intelligent Information Processing, Fudan University. Jianfeng
Feng is with the Institute of Science and Technology for Brain-Inspired
Intelligence, Fudan University.

mentation model has an encoder-decoder architecture: the
encoder is for feature representation learning, while the decoder for pixel-level classification of the feature representations yielded by the encoder. Among the two, feature representation learning (i.e., the encoder) is arguably the most
important model component [7, 27, 55, 58]. The encoder,
like most other CNNs designed for image understanding,
consists of stacked convolution layers. Due to concerns
on computational cost, the resolution of feature maps is reduced progressively, and the encoder is hence able to learn
more abstract/semantic visual concepts with a gradually increased receptive field. Such a design is popular due to two
favorable merits, namely translation equivariance and locality. The former respects well the nature of imaging process [56] which underpins the model generalization ability
to unseen image data. Whereas the latter controls the model
complexity by sharing parameters across space. However, it
also raises a fundamental limitation that learning long-range
dependency information, critical for semantic segmentation
in unconstrained scene images [1,48], becomes challenging
due to still limited receptive fields.
To overcome this aforementioned limitation, a number
of approaches have been introduced recently. One approach
is to directly manipulate the convolution operation. This includes large kernel sizes [39], atrous convolutions [7, 21],
and image/feature pyramids [58]. The other approach is to
integrate attention modules into the FCN architecture. Such
a module aims to model global interactions of all pixels in
the feature map [47]. When applied to semantic segmentation [24, 28], a common design is to combine the attention
module to the FCN architecture with attention layers sitting
on the top. Taking either approach, the standard encoderdecoder FCN model architecture remains unchanged. More
recently, attempts have been made to get rid of convolutions
altogether and deploy attention-alone models [46] instead.
However, even without convolution, they do not change the
nature of the FCN model structure: an encoder downsam-

6881

