Adaptive Prototype Learning and Allocation for Few-Shot Segmentation
Gen Li1,3 , Varun Jampani2 , Laura Sevilla-Lara1 , Deqing Sun2 , Jonghyun Kim3 , Joongkyu Kim3 *
1

University of Edinburgh

2

Google Research

Abstract

1. Introduction
Humans have a remarkable ability to learn how to recognize novel objects after seeing only a handful of exemplars.
On the other hand, deep learning based computer vision systems have made tremendous progress, but have largely depended on large-scale training sets. Also, deep networks
mostly work with predefined classes and are incapable of
generalizing to new ones. The field of few-shot learning
studies the development of such learning ability in artificial
learning systems, where only a few examples of the new
category are available.
In this work, we tackle the few-shot segmentation problem, where the target is learning to segment objects in a
given query image while only a few support images with
ground-truth segmentation masks are available. This is a
* Corresponding author
1 Code is available at https://git.io/ASGNet.

Sungkyunkwan University

Support Mask

Expand

Pool
Support

Query

(a) Single prototype learning
Support Mask

Cluster

…

Prototype learning is extensively used for few-shot segmentation. Typically, a single prototype is obtained from the
support feature by averaging the global object information.
However, using one prototype to represent all the information may lead to ambiguities. In this paper, we propose two
novel modules, named superpixel-guided clustering (SGC)
and guided prototype allocation (GPA), for multiple prototype extraction and allocation. Specifically, SGC is a
parameter-free and training-free approach, which extracts
more representative prototypes by aggregating similar feature vectors, while GPA is able to select matched prototypes
to provide more accurate guidance. By integrating the SGC
and GPA together, we propose the Adaptive Superpixelguided Network (ASGNet), which is a lightweight model
and adapts to object scale and shape variation. In addition,
our network can easily generalize to k-shot segmentation
with substantial improvement and no additional computational cost. In particular, our evaluations on COCO demonstrate that ASGNet surpasses the state-of-the-art method by
5% in 5-shot segmentation.1

3

Allocate

Support

Query

(b) Adaptive prototype learning and allocation

Figure 1. Comparison between (a) single prototype learning and
(b) proposed adaptive prototype learning and allocation. We utilize superpixel-guided clustering to generate multiple prototypes
and then allocate them pixel-wise to query feature.

challenging problem as the test data are novel categories
which do not exist in the training set, and there are usually
large variations in appearance and shape between the support and query images.
Current few-shot segmentation networks usually extract
features from both query and support images, and then propose different approaches for feature matching and object
mask transfer from support to query image. This feature
matching and mask transfer are usually performed in one
of two ways: prototypical feature learning or affinity learning. Prototypical learning techniques condense the masked
object features in a support image into a single or few prototypical feature vectors. Then these techniques find the pixel
locations of similar features in the query image to segment
the desired object. A key advantage of prototype learning is
that the prototypical features are more robust to noise than
pixel features. However, prototypical features inevitably
drop spatial information, which is important when there is a
large variation in the object appearance between the support
and query images. In addition, most prototypical learning

8334

