Robust Consistent Video Depth Estimation
Johannes Kopf
Facebook

Xuejian Rong
Facebook

Jia-Bin Huang
Virginia Tech

https://robust-cvd.github.io

Figure 1: Robust consistent video depth estimation of dynamic scenes. Our method estimates a smooth camera
trajectory and detailed and stable dense depth map on challenging hand-held cellphone videos. Our method supports both
still (static) and dynamic camera motion.

Abstract

We present an algorithm for estimating consistent dense
depth maps and camera poses from a monocular video.
We integrate a learning-based depth prior, in the form of
a convolutional neural network trained for single-image
depth estimation, with geometric optimization, to estimate
a smooth camera trajectory as well as detailed and stable depth reconstruction. Our algorithm combines two
complementary techniques: (1) flexible deformation-splines
for low-frequency large-scale alignment and (2) geometryaware depth filtering for high-frequency alignment of fine
depth details. In contrast to prior approaches, our method
does not require camera poses as input and achieves robust reconstruction for challenging hand-held cell phone
captures containing a significant amount of noise, shake,
motion blur, and rolling shutter deformations. Our method
quantitatively outperforms state-of-the-arts on the Sintel
benchmark for both depth and pose estimations and attains
favorable qualitative results across diverse wild datasets.

1. Introduction
Dense per-frame depth is an important intermediate representation that is useful for many video-based applications,
such as 3D video stabilization [37], augmented reality (AR)
and special video effects [59, 39], and for converting videos
for virtual reality (VR) viewing [22]. However, estimating
accurate and consistent depth maps for casually captured
videos still remains very challenging. Cell phones contain
small image sensors that may produce noisy images, especially in low lighting situations. They use a rolling shutter that may result in wobbly image deformations. Handheld captured casual videos often contain camera shake and
motion blur, and dynamic objects, such as people, animals,
and vehicles. In addition to all these degradations, there exist well-known problems for 3D reconstruction that are not
specific to video, including poorly textured image regions,
repetitive patterns, and occlusions.
Traditional algorithms for dense reconstruction that
combine Structure from Motion (SFM) and Multi-view
Stereo (MVS) have difficulties dealing with these challenges. The SFM step suffers from the limitations of accuracy and availability of correspondence and often fails

1611

