Semantic Segmentation for Real Point Cloud Scenes
via Bilateral Augmentation and Adaptive Fusion

1

Shi Qiu1,2 , Saeed Anwar1,2 and Nick Barnes1
Australian National University, 2 Data61-CSIRO, Australia
{shi.qiu, saeed.anwar, nick.barnes}@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Given the prominence of current 3D sensors, a finegrained analysis on the basic point cloud data is worthy of
further investigation. Particularly, real point cloud scenes
can intuitively capture complex surroundings in the real
world, but due to 3D data’s raw nature, it is very challenging for machine perception. In this work, we concentrate on
the essential visual task, semantic segmentation, for largescale point cloud data collected in reality. On the one hand,
to reduce the ambiguity in nearby points, we augment their
local context by fully utilizing both geometric and semantic features in a bilateral structure. On the other hand, we
comprehensively interpret the distinctness of the points from
multiple resolutions and represent the feature map following an adaptive fusion method at point-level for accurate
semantic segmentation. Further, we provide specific ablation studies and intuitive visualizations to validate our key
modules. By comparing with state-of-the-art networks on
three different benchmarks, we demonstrate the effectiveness of our network.

1. Introduction
As 3D data acquisition techniques develop rapidly, different types of 3D scanners, e.g. LiDAR scanners [22] and
RGB-D cameras [10] are becoming popular in our daily
life. Basically, 3D scanners can capture data that enables
AI-driven machines to better see and recognize the world.
As a fundamental data representation, point clouds can be
easily collected using 3D scanners, retaining abundant information for further investigation. Therefore, point cloud
analysis is playing an essential role in 3D computer vision.
Research has shown great success in terms of basic classification of small-scale point clouds (i.e., objects containing a few thousand points): for example, face ID [16] is
now a widely used bio-identification for mobile devices.
Researchers have recently been investigating a fine-grained
analysis of large and complex point clouds [44, 26, 19, 48]

Figure 1: Examples of semantic segmentation for real point cloud
scenes, where the main differences are highlighted and zoomedin. The upper row shows an indoor working environment with
∼0.9 million points: RandLA-Net [19] falsely classifies the wall
around the room corner, while our result is much closer to the
ground-truth. The lower row is an outdoor traffic scene containing
∼32 thousand points, where a small bike on the right is correctly
identified by our network (in blue), while RandLA-Net mislabels
it as vegetation (in green).

because of the tremendous potential in applications such as
autonomous driving, augmented reality, robotics, etc. This
paper focuses on the semantic segmentation task to identify
each point’s semantic label for real point cloud scenes.
Although there are many notable works [41, 35, 55] addressing the semantic segmentation of 2D images which
have a simpler structure, point clouds are scattered, irregular, unordered, and unevenly distributed in 3D space, making the corresponding task much more challenging, especially for large scenes made of millions or even billions
of points collected from the real world. To deal with
the 3D data, many papers try to build data-driven models
using deep learning. Specifically, Guo et al. [13] summarizes the Convolutional Neural Network (CNN) models targeting point clouds into three streams: projectionbased, discretization-based, and point-based methods. As
a projection-based example, Lawin et al. [27] virtually
projects 3D point clouds onto images and applies a conventional FCN [35] to analyze the 2D multi-view representations. Similarly, the discretization-based approaches
model point clouds as voxels [20] or lattices [42] for CNN
processing, and finally interpolate the semantic results back

1757

