Learning Dynamics via Graph Neural Networks for
Human Pose Estimation and Tracking

1

Yiding Yang1 *, Zhou Ren2 , Haoxiang Li2 , Chunluan Zhou2 , Xinchao Wang1,3†, Gang Hua2
Stevens Institute of Technology, 2 Wormpex AI Research, 3 National University of Singapore
{yyang99, hli18, xinchao.wang}@stevens.edu, renzhou200622@gmail.com,
czhou002@e.ntu.edu.sg, ganghua@gmail.com

Abstract
Multi-person pose estimation and tracking serve as crucial steps for video understanding. Most state-of-the-art approaches rely on first estimating poses in each frame and
only then implementing data association and refinement.
Despite the promising results achieved, such a strategy is
inevitably prone to missed detections especially in heavilycluttered scenes, since this tracking-by-detection paradigm
is, by nature, largely dependent on visual evidences that
are absent in the case of occlusion. In this paper, we propose a novel online approach to learning the pose dynamics, which are independent of pose detections in current
fame, and hence may serve as a robust estimation even in
challenging scenarios including occlusion. Specifically, we
derive this prediction of dynamics through a graph neural
network (GNN) that explicitly accounts for both spatialtemporal and visual information. It takes as input the historical pose tracklets and directly predicts the corresponding poses in the following frame for each tracklet. The
predicted poses will then be aggregated with the detected
poses, if any, at the same frame so as to produce the final
pose, potentially recovering the occluded joints missed by
the estimator. Experiments on PoseTrack 2017 and PoseTrack 2018 datasets demonstrate that the proposed method
achieves results superior to the state of the art on both human pose estimation and tracking tasks.

1. Introduction
Multi-person pose estimation and tracking find their applications in a wide spectrum of scenarios including behavior analysis and action recognition, and have therefore received increasing attention in recent years [45, 32, 19]. Despite often coupled together, they focus on slightly different aspects: the former aims to locate human joints in each
* The work is partially done when the author is an internship at Wormpex AI Research.
† Corresponding author.

History Poses

t-2

t-1

Pose Estimation (HRNet)

Ours

t

t

Figure 1. By modeling the pose dynamics from history poses
through a graph neural network, our method learns a pose prediction that is robust to challenging scenes, such as motion blur (top)
and occlusion (bottom). In both cases, the visual-based HRNet [37] fails to locate the joints, yet our approach delivers dependable pose estimations.

frame of an input video, while the latter one aims to associate joints that belong to the same human across frames. It
has been long considered as a challenging task due to various factors, including but not limited to camera motions,
complex backgrounds, and mutual occlusions.
Thanks to the recent advances of deep learning techniques, pose estimation and tracking have witnessed unprecedented results in the past years. Existing methods can
be broadly categorized into two streams, bottom-up methods [32, 19, 55, 18] and top-down methods [45, 53, 40].
Bottom-up methods first generate joint candidates and then
group the joints into a person detection. The grouped joints
are then associated across frames to generate the final pose
tracking results. Top-down methods, on the other hand, first
detect human candidates in a single frame and then estimate
the human poses for each candidate. The estimated human
poses are associated across frames to achieve pose tracking. Methods from both streams have produced promising

8074

