Complete & Label: A Domain Adaptation Approach to Semantic Segmentation
of LiDAR Point Clouds
Li Yi

Boqing Gong
Thomas Funkhouser
Google Research

{ericyi, bgong, tfunkhouser}@google.com

Abstract
We study an unsupervised domain adaptation problem for
the semantic labeling of 3D point clouds, with a particular
focus on domain discrepancies induced by different LiDAR
sensors. Based on the observation that sparse 3D point
clouds are sampled from 3D surfaces, we take a Complete
and Label approach to recover the underlying surfaces before passing them to a segmentation network. Specifically,
we design a Sparse Voxel Completion Network (SVCN) to
complete the 3D surfaces of a sparse point cloud. Unlike
semantic labels, to obtain training pairs for SVCN requires
no manual labeling. We also introduce local adversarial
learning to model the surface prior. The recovered 3D surfaces serve as a canonical domain, from which semantic
labels can transfer across different LiDAR sensors. Experiments and ablation studies with our new benchmark for
cross-domain semantic labeling of LiDAR data show that the
proposed approach provides 6.3-37.6% better performance
than previous domain adaptation methods.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation of LiDAR point clouds is important
for many applications, including autonomous driving, semantic mapping, and construction site monitoring to name a
few. Given a LiDAR sweep (frame), the goal is to produce a
semantic label for each point.
Although there is a great potential for deep neural networks on this semantic segmentation task, their performance
is limited by the availability of labeled training data. Acquiring manual labels for 3D points is very expensive. Several
datasets have recently been released by autonomous driving
companies [1, 4, 5, 13, 14, 25, 27, 51]. However, each has
a different configuration of LiDAR sensors, which produce
different 3D sampling patterns (Figure 1), and each covers distinct geographic regions with distinct distributions of
scene contents. As a result, deep networks trained on one
dataset do not perform well on others.

(a) captured by a 64-beam LiDAR (b) captured by a 32-beam LiDAR

Figure 1. The sampling discrepancy between point clouds captured
by two LiDAR sensors. All figures are best viewed in color.

There is a domain adaptation problem. While the mismatch of scene contents is similar to those studied in 2D
visual domain adaptation [36, 8], the sampling mismatch is
unique to 3D point clouds. Each time a new LiDAR sensor
configuration is selected, data is acquired with a different
3D sampling pattern, so models trained on the old data are
no longer effective, and new labeled data must be acquired
for supervised training in the conventional machine learning
paradigm. In contrast, domain adaptation aims to take better
advantage of the old labeled data by revealing unlabeled data
of the new LiDAR configuration to a machine learner so that
it can account for the new scenarios.
To address the sampling caused domain gap, we observe
that LiDAR samples have an underlying geometric structure,
and domain adaptation can be performed more effectively
with a 3D model leveraging that structure. Specifically, assuming the physical world is composed of 3D surfaces, and
that LiDAR sensor samples come from those surfaces, we
address the domain adaption problem by transforming it into
a 3D surface completion task. That is, if we can recover the
underlying complete 3D surfaces from sparse LiDAR point
samples, and train networks that operate on the completed
surfaces, then we can leverage the labeled data from any
LiDAR scanner to work on the data from any other.
The motivation for this approach is that surface completion is an easier task than semantic segmentation. First, there
are strong priors on the shapes of 3D surfaces encountered in
the real world, and thus a network trained to densify a point
cloud can learn and leverage those priors with relatively little

15363

