Inception Convolution with Efficient Dilation Search
Jie Liu1∗ , Chuming Li2∗ , Feng Liang2,5 , Chen Lin3 , Ming Sun2,5 , Junjie Yan2 , Wanli Ouyang4 , Dong Xu4
1
Beihang University, 2 SenseTime Research
3
University of Oxford, 4 The University of Sydney, 5 Shanghai Al Laboratory
ljie@buaa.edu.cn, chen.lin@eng.ox.ac.uk, {wanli.ouyang, dong.xu}@sydney.edu.au
{lichuming, liangfeng, sunming1, yanjunjie}@sensetime.com

Inception
convolution

Abstract
As a variant of standard convolution, a dilated convolution can control effective receptive fields and handle large
scale variance of objects without introducing additional
computational costs. To fully explore the potential of dilated convolution, we proposed a new type of dilated convolution (referred to as inception convolution), where the
convolution operations have independent dilation patterns
among different axes, channels and layers. To develop a
practical method for learning complex inception convolution based on the data, a simple but effective search algorithm, referred to as efficient dilation optimization (EDO),
is developed. Based on statistical optimization, the EDO
method operates in a low-cost manner and is extremely fast
when it is applied on large scale datasets. Empirical results
validate that our method achieves consistent performance
gains for image recognition, object detection, instance segmentation, human detection, and human pose estimation.
For instance, by simply replacing the 3 × 3 standard convolution in the ResNet-50 backbone with inception convolution, we significantly improve the AP of Faster R-CNN from
36.4% to 39.2% on MS COCO.

1. Introduction
As an important concept of convolution neural network,
the receptive field has been extensively studied. In [29],
Luo et al. showed that the intensity in each receptive field
roughly obeys a Gaussian distribution and only few pixels
around the central part of the receptive field can effectively
contribute to the response of the output neuron. Furthermore, in the previous works [23, 32], a more carefully defined optimal receptive field (ORF) has been evaluated for
different tasks.
The requirement of the optimal receptive field is due to
the variance of the input image sizes or the scales of objects
∗ Equal contribution

……

Inception
convolution

……

……

Figure 1. Inception convolution contains rich dilation patterns
along both spatial axes and channels in each convolution layer.

of interest. For instance, for image classification, the input
sizes tend to be small (e.g, 224 × 224), while for object detection, the input sizes are much larger and the objects can
be from a large range of scales. Correspondingly, different
tasks would require different ERFs. The different requirements of ERFs from different tasks makes it necessary to
develop a general and practical optimization algorithm to
learn the optimal ERF for a specific task.
As discussed in [29], the dilation value of dilated convolution kernels is a highly effective hyper-parameter to
control the receptive field for different tasks. The work in
[23] proposed to assign different dilation values at different
stages of a CNN, which achieves consistent performance
improvements. Subsequently, NATS [32] divided a convolution operation into different groups with each having
independent dilation values. However, they apply the standard network architecture search methods in the relatively
coarse search spaces, which neglects the fine-grained inner
structure of dilated convolution. Therefore, in this work,
we focus on exploring the search problem in the dilation
domain to efficiently learn the optimal receptive field.
First of all, we would like to have a more flexible search
space when compared with [23]. Flexibility can make us
learn the optimal receptive field in order to better fit to different datasets. As shown in Figure 1, we propose a new
type of dilated convolution, called Inception Convolution,
which contains as much as possible dilation patterns. In the

11486

