Towards Evaluating and Training Verifiably Robust Neural Networks
Zhaoyang Lyu1,2 Minghao Guo1,2 Tong Wu1,2 Guodong Xu1,2 Kehuan Zhang2 Dahua Lin1,3
1
SenseTime-CUHK Joint Lab 2 The Chinese University of Hong Kong
3
Centre of Perceptual and Interactive Intelligence
lyuzhaoyang@link.cuhk.edu.hk, {gm019, wt020, xg018, khzhang, dhlin}@ie.cuhk.edu.hk

Abstract
Recent works have shown that interval bound propagation (IBP) can be used to train verifiably robust neural networks. Reseachers observe an intriguing phenomenon on
these IBP trained networks: CROWN, a bounding method
based on tight linear relaxation, often gives very loose
bounds on these networks. We also observe that most neurons become dead during the IBP training process, which
could hurt the representation capability of the network.
In this paper, we study the relationship between IBP and
CROWN, and prove that CROWN is always tighter than
IBP when choosing appropriate bounding lines. We further
propose a relaxed version of CROWN, linear bound propagation (LBP), that can be used to verify large networks
to obtain lower verified errors than IBP. We also design
a new activation function, parameterized ramp function
(ParamRamp), which has more diversity of neuron status
than ReLU. We conduct extensive experiments on MNIST,
CIFAR-10 and Tiny-ImageNet with ParamRamp activation
and achieve state-of-the-art verified robustness. Code is
available at https://github.com/ZhaoyangLyu/
VerifiablyRobustNN .

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks achieve state-of-the-art performance in many tasks, e.g., image classification, object detection, and instance segmentation, but they are vulnerable
to adversarial attacks. A small perturbation that is imperceptible to humans can mislead a neural network’s prediction [22, 4, 1, 13, 3]. To mitigate this problem, Madry et
al. [15] develop an effective framework to train robust neural networks. They formulate adversarial training as a robust optimization problem. Specifically, they use projected
gradient descent (PGD) to find the worst-case adversarial
example near the original image and then minimize the loss
at this point during training. Networks trained under this
framework achieve state-of-the-art robustness under many
attacks [34, 26, 18]. However, these networks are only emperically robust, but not verifiably robust. They become vulnerable when stronger attacks are presented [24, 6, 23].

(a) Constant

(b) Tight

(c) Adaptive: Case |l| > u

(d) Adaptive: Case |l| ≤ u

Figure 1. Illustration of different strategies to choose bounding
lines for the three status of a ReLU neuron. Dead: l ≤ u ≤ 0;
Unstable: l < 0 < u; Alive: 0 ≤ l ≤ u. [l, u] is the input range
of the neuron. (a) chooses constant bounding lines. (b) is the tight
strategy. (c) and (d) are the two cases of unstable neurons in the
adaptive strategy. The adaptive strategy chooses the same bounding lines as the tight strategy for dead and alive neurons. See more
details in Appendix A.7.

This leads to the development of robustness verification,
which aims to provide a certificate that a neural network
gives consistent predictions for all inputs in some set, usually an lp ball around a clean image. The key of robustness verification is to compute the lower and upper bounds
of the output logits when input can take any value in the lp
ball. The exact bounds can be computed through Satisfiability Modulo Theory [11] or solving a Mixed Integer Linear
Programming (MILP) problem [23, 5]. Relaxed bounds can
be obtained by reduce the bound computation problem to
a linear programming (LP) problem [28] or a semidefinite
programming (SDP) problem [7]. However, these programming based methods are expensive and difficult to scale to
large networks. To this end, another approach that makes
linear relaxations of the nonlinear activation functions in a
network is proposed [20, 21, 25, 27, 33, 12]. Figure 1 illustrates different strategies to make linear relaxations of a

4308

