Railroad is not a Train: Saliency as Pseudo-pixel Supervision
for Weakly Supervised Semantic Segmentation
Seungho Lee∗
Yonsei University

Minhyun Lee∗
Yonsei University

Jongwuk Lee
Sungkyunkwan University

seungholee@yonsei.ac.kr

lmh315@yonsei.ac.kr

jongwuklee@skku.edu

Hyunjung Shim†
Yonsei University
kateshim@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract
Existing studies in weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) using image-level weak supervision have several limitations: sparse object coverage, inaccurate object boundaries, and co-occurring pixels from non-target
objects. To overcome these challenges, we propose a
novel framework, namely Explicit Pseudo-pixel Supervision
(EPS), which learns from pixel-level feedback by combining two weak supervisions; the image-level label provides
the object identity via the localization map and the saliency
map from the off-the-shelf saliency detection model offers
rich boundaries. We devise a joint training strategy to fully
utilize the complementary relationship between both information. Our method can obtain accurate object boundaries
and discard co-occurring pixels, thereby significantly improving the quality of pseudo-masks. Experimental results
show that the proposed method remarkably outperforms existing methods by resolving key challenges of WSSS and
achieves the new state-of-the-art performance on both PASCAL VOC 2012 and MS COCO 2014 datasets. The code is
available at https://github.com/halbielee/EPS.

1. Introduction
Weakly-supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS) utilizes weak supervision (e.g., image-level labels [36, 37],
scribbles [29], or bounding boxes [22]) and aims at
achieving competitive performances to the fully-supervised
model, which requires pixel-level labels. Most existing
studies adopt image-level labels as the weak supervision of
the segmentation model. The overall pipeline of WSSS consists of two stages. Firstly, pseudo-masks are generated for
∗ indicates an equal contribution.
† Hyunjung Shim is a corresponding author.

person
train
car

(a) Groundtruth

(b) Saliency map

(c) Localization map

(d) Our EPS

Figure 1. Motivating example of utilizing both the saliency map
and the localization map for WSSS. (a) Groundtruth, (b) saliency
map via PFAN [51], (c) localization map via CAM [52] and (d)
our EPS utilizing both the saliency map and the localization map
for training a classifier. Note that the saliency map cannot capture
person and car while our result can correctly restore them, and the
localization map overly captures two objects.

target objects using an image classifier. Then, the segmentation model is trained using the pseudo-masks as supervision. The prevalent technique for generating pseudo-masks
is class activation mapping (CAM) [52], which provides object localization maps corresponding to their image-level
labels. Because of the supervision gap between the fully
(i.e., pixel-level annotations) and weakly (i.e., image-level
labels) supervised semantic segmentation, WSSS has the
following key challenges: 1) the localization map only captures a small fraction of target objects [52], 2) it suffers from
the boundary mismatch of the objects [23], and 3) it hardly
separates co-occurring pixels from target objects (e.g., the
railroad from a train) [25].

5495

