Embedding Transfer with Label Relaxation for Improved Metric Learning
Sungyeon Kim1
Dongwon Kim1
Minsu Cho1,2
Suha Kwak1,2
Dept. of CSE, POSTECH1
Graduate School of AI, POSTECH2
{sungyeon.kim, kdwon, mscho, suha.kwak}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract
This paper presents a novel method for embedding transfer, a task of transferring knowledge of a learned embedding model to another. Our method exploits pairwise similarities between samples in the source embedding space
as the knowledge, and transfers them through a loss used
for learning target embedding models. To this end, we design a new loss called relaxed contrastive loss, which employs the pairwise similarities as relaxed labels for intersample relations. Our loss provides a rich supervisory signal beyond class equivalence, enables more important pairs
to contribute more to training, and imposes no restriction
on manifolds of target embedding spaces. Experiments on
metric learning benchmarks demonstrate that our method
largely improves performance, or reduces sizes and output
dimensions of target models effectively. We further show
that it can be also used to enhance quality of self-supervised
representation and performance of classification models. In
all the experiments, our method clearly outperforms existing embedding transfer techniques.

1. Introduction
Deep metric learning aims to learn an embedding space
where samples of the same class are grouped tightly together. Such an embedding space has played important
roles in many tasks including image retrieval [19, 20, 29,
40, 41], few-shot learning [35, 39, 42], zero-shot learning [3, 58], and self-supervised representation learning [4,
14, 44]. In these tasks, the performance and efficiency of
models rely heavily on the quality and dimension of their
learned embedding spaces. To obtain high-quality and compact embedding spaces, previous methods have proposed
new metric learning losses [19, 29, 40, 41, 46, 52], advanced sampling strategies [13, 22, 47, 49], regularization
techniques [18, 28], or ensemble models [21, 30, 31].
For the same purpose, we study transferring knowledge
of a learned embedding model (source) to another (target),
which we call embedding transfer. This task can be considered as a variant of knowledge distillation [16] that focuses

on metric learning instead of classification. The knowledge captured by the source embedding model can provide
rich information beyond class labels such as intra-class variations and degrees of semantic affinity between samples.
Given a proper way to transfer the knowledge, embedding
transfer enables us to improve the performance of target embedding models or compress them, as knowledge distillation does for classification models [11, 16, 36, 50, 55].
Existing methods for embedding transfer extract knowledge from a source embedding space in forms of probability distributions of samples [33], their geometric relations [32, 53], or the rank of their similarities [6]. The
knowledge is then transferred by forcing target models to
approximate those extracted patterns directly in their embedding spaces. Although these methods shed light on the
effective yet less explored approach to enhancing the performance of metric learning, there is still large room for further
improvement. In particular, they fail to utilize detailed intersample relations in the source embedding space [6, 33] or
blindly accept the transferred knowledge without considering the importance of samples [32, 53].
This paper presents a new embedding transfer method
that overcomes the above limitations. Our method defines
the knowledge as pairwise similarities between samples in a
source embedding space. Pairwise similarities are useful to
characterize an embedding space in detail, thus have been
widely used for learning embedding spaces [12, 37, 40, 46]
and identifying underlying manifolds of data [9, 43]. Also,
they capture detailed inter-sample relations, which are missing in probability distributions [33] and the rank of similarities [6] used as knowledge in previous work.
To transfer the knowledge effectively, we propose a new
loss, called relaxed contrastive loss, that is used for learning
target embedding models with the knowledge in the form
of pairwise similarities. Our loss utilizes the pairwise similarities as relaxed labels of inter-sample relations, unlike
conventional metric learning losses that rely on binary labels indicating class equivalence between samples (i.e., 1 if
two samples are of the same class and 0 otherwise) as supervision. By replacing the binary labels with the pairwise
similarities, our loss can provide rich supervision beyond

3967

