ARVo: Learning All-Range Volumetric Correspondence for Video Deblurring
Dongxu Li∗,1,2 , Chenchen Xu∗,1,2 , Kaihao Zhang∗,†,1 ,
Xin Yu3 , Yiran Zhong1 , Wenqi Ren4 , Hanna Suominen1,5 , Hongdong Li1
1
ANU, 2 DATA61-CSIRO, 3 UTS, 4 IIE-CAS, 5 University of Turku

(a) Input

(b) Su et al. [36]

(c) STFAN [56]

(d) TSP [26]

(e) ARVo (Ours)

(f) Ground-truth

Figure 1: Qualitative comparisons of different models on the newly introduced HFR-DVD dataset. The dataset features sharp
frames captured with a high frame-rate at 1,000 fps, providing more realistic motion blurs and less artefacts. Our model
matches pixel-pairs across all the spatial range in the feature space, thus having a better capacity to build correspondence
with large pixel displacements. This makes our model more favorable to handle blurs, especially due to fast motions.

Abstract
Video deblurring models exploit consecutive frames to
remove blurs from camera shakes and object motions. In
order to utilize neighboring sharp patches, typical methods rely mainly on homography or optical flows to spatially
align neighboring blurry frames. However, such explicit approaches are less effective in the presence of fast motions
with large pixel displacements. In this work, we propose
a novel implicit method to learn spatial correspondence
among blurry frames in the feature space. To construct distant pixel correspondences, our model builds a correlation
volume pyramid among all the pixel-pairs between neighboring frames. To enhance the features of the reference
frame, we design a correlative aggregation module that
maximizes the pixel-pair correlations with its neighbors
based on the volume pyramid. Finally, we feed the aggregated features into a reconstruction module to obtain the restored frame. We design a generative adversarial paradigm
to optimize the model progressively. Our proposed method
is evaluated on the widely-adopted DVD dataset, along with
∗ Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author: kaihao.zhang@anu.edu.au.

a newly collected High-Frame-Rate (1000 fps) Dataset for
Video Deblurring (HFR-DVD). Quantitative and qualitative experiments show that our model performs favorably
on both datasets against previous state-of-the-art methods,
confirming the benefit of modeling all-range spatial correspondence for video deblurring.

1. Introduction
Hand-held devices are popular in capturing videos of
dynamic scenes, where prevalent high-speed object movements and abrupt camera shakes lead to undesirable blurs
in videos. To this end, the task of video deblurring aims to
improve the video quality by restoring sharp frames from
blurry video sequences and benefits a wide range of vision
applications [18, 14, 13, 20, 19, 21, 53, 57].
Video deblurring methods remove blurs by taking advantage of sharper scene patches from neighboring frames [23,
3]. However, since neighboring frames are usually not spatially aligned with the reference frame due to motions, it
is non-trivial to construct visual correspondence between
frames. Existing works mainly tackle the misalignment between frames using homography or optical flows. Some

7721

