Continuous Face Aging via Self-estimated Residual Age Embedding
Zeqi Li*
ModiFace

Ruowei Jiang
ModiFace

Parham Aarabi
ModiFace

lizeqi@cs.toronto.edu

irene@modiface.com

parham@modiface.com

Abstract
Face synthesis, including face aging, in particular, has
been one of the major topics that witnessed a substantial improvement in image fidelity by using generative adversarial
networks (GANs). Most existing face aging approaches divide the dataset into several age groups and leverage groupbased training strategies, which lacks the ability to provide
fine-controlled continuous aging synthesis in nature. In this
work, we propose a unified network structure that embeds
a linear age estimator into a GAN-based model, where the
embedded age estimator is trained jointly with the encoder
and decoder to estimate the age of a face image and provide a personalized target age embedding for age progression/regression. The personalized target age embedding
is synthesized by incorporating both personalized residual
age embedding of the current age and exemplar-face aging
basis of the target age, where all preceding aging bases are
derived from the learned weights of the linear age estimator.
This formulation brings the unified perspective of estimating the age and generating personalized aged face, where
self-estimated age embeddings can be learned for every single age. The qualitative and quantitative evaluations on different datasets further demonstrate the significant improvement in the continuous face aging aspect over the state-ofthe-art.

1. Introduction
Face aging, also known as age progression, aims to aesthetically render input face images with natural aging and
rejuvenating effects while preserving identity information
of the individual. With recent advances in deep learning,
face synthesis has also shown substantial improvement on
image fidelity and the age precision in the simulated face
images [10, 41, 24]. A major challenge to solve a variety
of remaining problems (e.g. continuous aging) is the lack
of data. For example, many research works of face aging
[20, 41, 43, 10] need to group images into 4-5 age groups
* This work is done during Zeqi Li’s full-time employment at ModiFace.

(such as <30, 30-40, 40-50, 50+) and can only generate images within a target age group, due to the limited amount
of data at each age. Another important problem is how to
maintain personal traits in age progression, as aging patterns may differ for each individual.
Traditional face aging contains mainly two approaches:
physical model-based [3, 42] and prototype-based [37, 16].
The physical model-based methods often consist of complex physical modeling, considering skin wrinkles, face
shape, muscle changes, and hair color, etc. This type of
method typically requires a tremendous amount of data and
is very expensive computationally. Prototype-based methods firstly explore group-based designs by computing an average face within the pre-defined age groups, which fails
to retain personalized aging information. Further, all those
methods are not applicable to continuous face aging.
Following the success of recent generative models, such
as variational autoencoders (VAEs) and generative adversarial networks (GANs) [9], on the image translation tasks,
researchers have dedicated efforts in adapting those methods to face synthesis. IPCGAN [41] has shown significant
progress in generating face images with evident aging effects by enforcing an age estimation loss. Later variation
[43] creates a pyramid structure for the discriminator to improve face aging understanding at multiple scales. Continuous aging was not explored among these methods. He et
al. [10] introduced a multi-branch generator for the groupbased training and proposed the idea to approximate continuous aging via linear interpolation of latent representations
between two adjacent age groups. The authors of [24] also
tackle the problem using a similar linear interpolation approach, which is performed on the learned age latent code
between two neighboring groups instead. These types of
methods make an assumption that the age progression is linear between the two adjacent groups and the learned group
embedding can be used directly as the median age embedding. Consequently, this may result in a shift of target age
in the generated images. Intuitively, this nonlinearity can be
interpreted as: people do not age at the same speed for different stages. Moreover, such interpolation-based methods
may alter personal traits when disentanglement is imperfect.
115008

