Anti-Adversarially Manipulated Attributions for Weakly and Semi-Supervised
Semantic Segmentation

1

Jungbeom Lee1
Eunji Kim1
Sungroh Yoon1,2,∗
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea
2
ASRI, INMC, ISRC, and Institute of Engineering Research, Seoul National University
{jbeom.lee93, kce407, sryoon}@snu.ac.kr

Abstract
Weakly supervised semantic segmentation produces a
pixel-level localization from a classifier, but it is likely to
restrict its focus to a small discriminative region of the target
object. AdvCAM is an attribution map of an image that is manipulated to increase the classification score. This manipulation is realized in an anti-adversarial manner, which perturbs
the images along pixel gradients in the opposite direction
from those used in an adversarial attack. It forces regions initially considered not to be discriminative to become involved
in subsequent classifications, and produces attribution maps
that successively identify more regions of the target object.
In addition, we introduce a new regularization procedure
that inhibits the incorrect attribution of regions unrelated
to the target object and limits the attributions of the regions
that already have high scores. On PASCAL VOC 2012 test
images, we achieve mIoUs of 68.0 and 76.9 for weakly and
semi-supervised semantic segmentation respectively, which
represent a new state-of-the-art. The code is available at:
https://github.com/jbeomlee93/AdvCAM .

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation involves the allocation of a semantic label to each pixel of an image. It is an essential task
in image recognition and scene understanding. Deep neural networks (DNNs) have facilitated tremendous progress
in semantic segmentation [8, 22]; but they require a large
number of training images annotated with pixel-level labels. Preparing such a training dataset is very expensive:
pixel-level annotation of images containing an average of
2.8 objects takes about 4 minutes [4] per image, and a single
large (2048×1024) image depicting a complicated scene
requires more than 90 minutes for pixel-level annotation [9].
The need for pixel-level annotation is addressed by
weakly supervised learning, in which a segmentation network is trained on images with less comprehensive anno∗ Correspondence to: Sungroh Yoon <sryoon@snu.ac.kr>.

(a)

(d)

(b)

Image

(c)

: Original image

: Manipulated image

: Decision boundary

: Manipulation

Iter 0 (CAM)

Iter 15

Iter 30

Figure 1: Conceptual description of image manipulation
methods for weakly supervised semantic segmentation: (a)
erasure [21, 57, 63]; (b) FickleNet [29]; and (c) AdvCAM.
(d) Examples of successive attribution maps obtained from
iteratively manipulated images.
tations that are cheaper to obtain than pixel-level labels.
Weakly supervised methods can use scribbles [54], points [4],
bounding boxes [26, 51], and class labels [2, 6, 29, 48] as
annotations. Labeling an image with class labels takes about
20 seconds [4], making class labels the cheapest option. In
addition, many public datasets are already annotated with
class labels [10, 12], and automated web searches can also
provide images with class labels [20, 30, 47] although the accuracy of such labels may be low. These considerations make
class labels the most popular form of weak supervision.
Most weakly supervised segmentation methods that use
class labels depend on attribution maps obtained from a
trained classifier [46, 64]. Such a map identifies the image
regions on which the classifier concentrated. However, these
important, or discriminative, regions are relatively small,
and most attribution maps do not represent the whole region occupied by a target object, which makes those attribution maps unsuitable for training a semantic segmentation
network. Therefore, many researchers have tried to extend

4071

