Shallow Feature Matters for Weakly Supervised Object Localization
Jun Wei1,2,† Qin Wang 1,2,† Zhen Li1,2,∗ Sheng Wang5 S.Kevin Zhou4,3,1 Shuguang Cui1,2
1
School of Science and Engineering, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (Shenzhen)
2
Shenzhen Research Institute of Big Data 3 University of Science and Technology of China
4
Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences 5 CryoEM Center, SUSTech
{junwei@link., qinwang1@., lizhen@}cuhk.edu.cn, s.kevin.zhou@gmail.com

Abstract
Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) aims to
localize objects by only utilizing image-level labels. Class
activation maps (CAMs) are the commonly used features
to achieve WSOL. However, previous CAM-based methods did not take full advantage of the shallow features,
despite their importance for WSOL. Because shallow features are easily buried in background noise through conventional fusion. In this paper, we propose a simple but
effective Shallow feature-aware Pseudo supervised Object
Localization (SPOL) model for accurate WSOL, which
makes the utmost of low-level features embedded in shallow layers. In practice, our SPOL model first generates the
CAMs through a novel element-wise multiplication of shallow and deep feature maps, which filters the background
noise and generates sharper boundaries robustly. Besides,
we further propose a general class-agnostic segmentation
model to achieve the accurate object mask, by only using
the initial CAMs as the pseudo label without any extra annotation. Eventually, a bounding box extractor is applied to
the object mask to locate the target. Experiments verify that
our SPOL outperforms the state-of-the-art on both CUB200 and ImageNet-1K benchmarks, achieving 93.44% and
67.15% (i.e., 3.93% and 2.13% improvement) Top-5 localization accuracy, respectively.

1. Introduction
Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) aims to
locate objects by using only image-level labels. Since no
expensive bounding box annotations are required, WSOL
has attracted lots of attentions in various applications, e.g.
lesion localization for medical image diagnosis, imagelabel guided retrieval, etc [28, 25, 2, 18, 1, 24, 22, 11, 14,
26, 20, 10, 23].
Existing WSOL methods are mainly based on the class
∗ Corresponding author. † Equal contribution.

Figure 1. (a) CAM-based pipeline for Weakly Supervised Object Localization (WSOL). F represents different fusion strategies.
Here multiplication and addition based fusion methods for CAMs
are compared. (b) GT-known Loc comparison using fused CAMs
through different fusion strategies from different layers. In practice, Fusex means the last X stage features of ResNet50 are aggregated, e.g. Fuse1 represents the original CAMs.

activation maps (CAMs) [28]. However, CAM-based models are initially trained for classification, where the network
objective is inconsistent with localization. Specifically,
classification prefers features with semantic meanings, usually derived from deep layers of convolutional neural networks (CNNs). In contrast, shallow features, derived from
the shallow layers of CNNs, have less semantics but are rich
in details, which have clearer edges and less distortion. Unfortunately, direct fusion of shallow and deep features is invalid for WSOL due to the following two defects: 1) The
meaningful information embedded in the shallow features
cannot be well captured through weak supervision, due to
the large interference of background noise. To better elaborate this statement, we illustrate the CAM-based WSOL
pipeline in Fig. 1 (a). Within this pipeline, features of different layers from ResNet50 [3] are firstly aggregated to form
the fused CAMs. As the fused CAMs obtained through addition operation shown in Fig. 1 (a), the shallow features are
buried and not fully utilized, leading to inferior CAMs. To
make it general, as shown in Fig. 1 (b), we further test other

5993

