Scale-Aware Graph Neural Network for Few-Shot Semantic Segmentation
Guo-Sen Xie1 , Jie Liu1 , Huan Xiong1,3 *, Ling Shao2
1

Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI, UAE 2 Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence, UAE
3
Harbin Institute of Technology, China

Abstract
Few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) aims to segment
unseen class objects given very few densely-annotated support images from the same class. Existing FSS methods find
the query object by using support prototypes or by directly
relying on heuristic multi-scale feature fusion. However,
they fail to fully leverage the high-order appearance relationships between multi-scale features among the supportquery image pairs, thus leading to an inaccurate localization of the query objects. To tackle the above challenge, we
propose an end-to-end scale-aware graph neural network
(SAGNN) by reasoning the cross-scale relations among the
support-query images for FSS. Specifically, a scale-aware
graph is first built by taking support-induced multi-scale
query features as nodes and, meanwhile, each edge is modeled as the pairwise interaction of its connected nodes. By
progressive message passing over this graph, SAGNN is
capable of capturing cross-scale relations and overcoming object variations (e.g., appearance, scale and location),
and can thus learn more precise node embeddings. This
in turn enables it to predict more accurate foreground objects. Moreover, to make full use of the location relations
across scales for the query image, a novel self-node collaboration mechanism is proposed to enrich the current
node, which endows SAGNN the ability of perceiving different resolutions of the same objects. Extensive experiments
on PASCAL-5i and COCO-20i show that SAGNN achieves
state-of-the-art results.

1. Introduction
Deep convolutional neural networks [14,29,40] have advanced the development of many downstream vision tasks,
such as semantic segmentation [1, 3, 21, 25, 49], which is a
dense prediction task. To achieve an effective segmentation
model, e.g. Deeplab [3], large amounts of pixel-wise image annotations are required for model training, which are
costly and time consuming to acquire. Weakly supervised
* Corresponding author

Shared
Backbone

(a) Support Image
Shared
Backbone

Global or Multiple
Local Prototypes

⊙

Multi-scale
Feature Modeling

Query Image

Prediction

Shared
Backbone

(b) Support Image
Shared
Backbone
Query Image

⊙

Prediction
Scale-Aware
Graph

Scale-Aware
Node Embedding

Embedded Nodes

Cross-Scale Relation Reasoning on

Figure 1. Comparisons of SAGNN and existing FSS models. (a)
Existing methods usually first generate a global or multiple local
prototypes by masked averaging/clustering over the foreground of
the support image. Then these support prototypes are applied to
query features (and/or their multi-scale counterparts) for the later
prediction of the query mask. However, this paradigm segments
the human region to horse. This happens because it is difficult to
fully capture the object variations (e.g., the scale, appearance, and
spatial location of horse in the support and query images are different from each other) by such limited prototypes. (b) Our SAGNN
can well estimate the foreground horse in the query image. It benefits from our scale-aware node embedding and cross-scale relation
reasoning on the scale-aware graph. Zoom in for details.

learning [23, 43] can alleviate the annotation costs to some
extent; however, the model performance drops significantly
under this scenario. Moreover, both fully and weakly supervised models suffer poor generalization to unseen domains
with only a few densely-annotated training images available. As such, few-shot semantic segmentation (FSS) [27]
is proposed for dealing with the unseen object segmentation
and data annotation issue.
FSS aims to segment the foreground object of an unseen
class in a query image by merely utilizing a few (one) annotated support images (image), where both the support/query
images share a common unseen class. Typically, a base
training set with annotations, which has different object
categories from the unseen class set, can assist the learning of the FSS model. Inspired by few-shot classification
and meta-learning [30], the segmentor can be trained by

5475

