PlückerNet: Learn to Register 3D Line Reconstructions
Liu Liu, Hongdong Li, Haodong Yao and Ruyi Zha
Australian National University, Canberra, Australia
Liu.Liu@anu.edu.au

Abstract
Aligning
two
partially-overlapped
3D
line
reconstructions in Euclidean space is challenging, as
we need to simultaneously solve correspondences and
relative pose between line reconstructions. This paper
proposes a neural network based method and it has three
modules connected in sequence: (i) a Multilayer Perceptron
(MLP) based network takes Plücker representations of
lines as inputs, to extract discriminative line-wise features
and matchabilities (how likely each line is going to have a
match), (ii) an Optimal Transport (OT) layer takes two-view
line-wise features and matchabilities as inputs to estimate
a 2D joint probability matrix, with each item describes the
matchness of a line pair, and (iii) line pairs with Top-K
matching probabilities are fed to a 2-line minimal solver in
a RANSAC framework to estimate a six Degree-of-Freedom
(6-DoF) rigid transformation. Experiments on both indoor
and outdoor datasets show that registration (rotation and
translation) precision of our method outperforms baselines
significantly.

1. Introduction
Lines contain strong structural geometry information of
environments (even for texture-less indoor scenes), and
are widely used in many applications, e.g., SLAM [47,
64], visual servoing [3, 30], event camera [50, 38, 39],
image restoration [43, 36, 37], place recognition [48, 27]
and camera pose estimation [28, 24]. 3D lines can be
obtained from structure from motion [49], SLAM [61]
or laser scanning [31].
Compared with 3D points,
scene represented by lines is more complete and requires
significantly less amount of storage [22, 18, 59]. Given
3D line reconstructions, a fundamental problem is how to
register them (Figure 1). This technique can be used in
building a complete 3D map, robot localization, SLAM, etc.
This paper studies the problem of aligning two partiallyoverlapped 3D line reconstructions in Euclidean space. This
is not doable for traditional methods as it’s very hard to find
line matches by only checking 3D line coordinates, often

Figure 1: Our problem is to align two partially-overlapped
line reconstructions or, equivalently, to estimate the relative
pose between two line reconstructions. Left: Red and Black
lines (depicting street-view buildings and landmarks) are in two
different coordinate systems from the Semantic3D dataset [14].
Right: our method is able to successfully align the two line
reconstructions in a one-shot manner.

one needs to manually set line matches [6, 5] or assumes
lines are mostly located on planes [22] and windows [9].
With deep neural networks, we give a learning-based
solution, dubbed as PlückerNet.
It is non-trivial to learn from lines, as we need to
carefully handle line parameterization and geometry. For
example, local structure defined by geometric nearest
neighbor is a core-component in point-based networks
(e.g., PointNet++ [42]). However, for line-based network,
defining geometric nearest neighbor is non-trivial as there is
no universally agreed error metric for comparing lines [6].
We parameterize a 3D line using a deterministic 6-dim
Plücker [41] representation with a 3-dim direction vector
lying on a 3D unit hemisphere and a 3-dim moment vector.
To capture local line structure, for each line, we first extract
local features in the subspace of direction and moment, and
then combine them to obtain a global high-dim line feature.
To make line-wise features discriminative for matching, we
use a graph neural network with attention mechanism [44,
45], as it can integrate contextual cues considering high-dim
feature embedding relationships.
As we are addressing a partial-to-partial matching
problem, lines do not necessarily have to match. We
model the likelihood that a given line has a match

1842

