Explicit Knowledge Incorporation for Visual Reasoning
Yifeng Zhang∗, Ming Jiang∗, Qi Zhao
University of Minnesota
{zhan6987, mjiang, qzhao}@umn.edu

Abstract
Existing explainable and explicit visual reasoning methods only perform reasoning based on visual evidence but do
not take into account knowledge beyond what is in the visual scene. To addresses the knowledge gap between visual
reasoning methods and the semantic complexity of realworld images, we present the first explicit visual reasoning
method that incorporates external knowledge and models
high-order relational attention for improved generalizability and explainability. Specifically, we propose a knowledge
incorporation network that explicitly creates and includes
new graph nodes for entities and predicates from external
knowledge bases to enrich the semantics of the scene graph
used in explicit reasoning. We then create a novel GraphRelate module to perform high-order relational attention on
the enriched scene graph. By explicitly introducing structured external knowledge and high-order relational attention, our method demonstrates significant generalizability
and explainability over the state-of-the-art visual reasoning
approaches on the GQA and VQAv2 datasets.

1. Introduction
Visual question answering (VQA) aims to answer natural language questions about a visual scene. It is a challenging task requiring a deep understanding of both vision
and language inputs, as well as knowledge to answer openended questions. While deep neural networks (DNNs) are
extraordinarily powerful, most DNN-based VQA methods
are black boxes driven by superficial correlations between
questions and answers [2]. These models are therefore limited in making inferences or generalizations. They also
fall short in explaining their decision-making process, especially with complex questions requiring multiple reasoning
steps to answer. The lack of generalizability or explainability in DNN models slows down their applications in many
domains, such as healthcare, security, and finance.
Recent studies aim to address these problems by rep∗ These authors contributed equally.

suit

Question: Is the man to the
right of the hammer wearing
a shirt?

man

Answer: yes
External
Knowledge

hammer

over
wearing
leftOf
hammer

rightOf

man

suit

on

shirt

under

ng]

e[weari

G-Relat

Figure 1. Explicit visual reasoning methods often fail when the
observation does not provide sufficient knowledge. Our method
addresses this problem by generating scene graphs with explicit
knowledge incorporation (e.g., suit-over-shirt) and inferring highorder relations (e.g., man-wearing-suit-over-shirt) with a novel
G-Relate neural module.

resenting the visual information as a structured scene
graph [24] or converting the question into a program of executable neural modules [11, 12]. These explainable and
explicit reasoning models have achieved remarkable performances on synthetic scenes and questions [14]. However,
due to the complexity of real-world images and questions,
they are still far from satisfactory when tested on more general VQA datasets [5, 13]. These data-driven methods depend on the accuracy and completeness of the detected objects and their relations, and are ignorant of commonsense
or other useful knowledge beyond visual observations. For
example, as shown in Fig. 1, to answer the question “Is the
man to the right of the hammer wearing a shirt?” visual
reasoning models need to detect the shirt and attend to it if
it exists. The reasoning task in this example is challenging
as the shirt is undetectable from the scene. On the other
hand, humans can easily integrate the observation that “the
man is wearing a suit” and the commonsense knowledge
that “suits are commonly dressed over shirts”, to infer the
high-order relation between man and shirt. In this work, to
achieve generalizability and explainability in visual reason-

1356

