Hybrid Rotation Averaging: A Fast and Robust Rotation Averaging Approach
Yu Chen

Ji Zhao

Laurent Kneip

Peking University

TuSimple

ShanghaiTech University

hackerdreamer34@gmail.com

zhaoji84@gmail.com

lkneip@shanghaitech.edu.cn

Abstract
We address rotation averaging (RA) and its application
to real-world 3D reconstruction. Local optimisation based
approaches are the de facto choice, though they only guarantee a local optimum. Global optimisers ensure global optimality in low noise conditions, but they are inefficient and
may easily deviate under the influence of outliers or elevated noise levels. We push the envelope of rotation averaging by leveraging the advantages of a global RA method
and a local RA method. Combined with a fast view graph
filtering as preprocessing, the proposed hybrid approach is
robust to outliers. We further apply the proposed hybrid
rotation averaging approach to incremental Structure from
Motion (SfM), the accuracy and robustness of SfM are both
improved by adding the resulting global rotations as regularisers to bundle adjustment. Overall, we demonstrate
high practicality of the proposed method as bad camera
poses are effectively corrected and drift is reduced.

1. Introduction
Rotation averaging is a problem that consists of estimating absolute camera orientations that agree as well as possible with a set of pairwise relative orientations. Errors expressing disagreements between estimated absolute orientations and the measured relative orientations are hereby distributed over each pairwise constraint. Rotation averaging
is essential in global or hierarchical Structure from Motion
(SfM) [29, 15, 36, 49, 50], as well as Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [7] where it can accelerate
camera pose estimation and reduce drift accumulation.
In global SfM, we typically start by constructing a view
graph G that encodes all connections between pairs of views
i and j by an edge (i, j), each one including the relative
motion between image i and image j. Rotation averaging
then gives us the absolute orientation of each view, and it is
typically followed by a translation averaging step [25, 31,
21, 51] to also obtain absolute positions. Triangulation of

Figure 1. Reconstructions generated from the Trafalgar
dataset [45], where 7085 out of 15685 images have been
registered, and the rotation averaging step only took 4.2 s.

3D points and joint optimisation over all parameters (i.e.
bundle adjustment [39]) completes the reconstruction. In
SLAM, rotation averaging has been used in the back-end
pose graph optimisation [33, 7] to flexibly encounter large
drift accumulations or—more generally—replace the timeconsuming bundle adjustment step.
Rotation averaging was first proposed using the quaternion representation [22]. Later solutions can be categorised
into approaches based on either local and global optimisation. Local optimisation approaches such as the one presented by Chatterjee and Govindu [8] are well studied and
practical. However, these methods only return the nearest local minimum. To overcome this limitation, the community has also proposed global optimisation approaches
[40, 33, 18, 17, 16]. Though the retrieval of global optima can be guaranteed, they have large computational cost
and high sensitivity against outliers, and thus are impractical when applied to large-scale SfM problems.
In this paper, we focus on improving the efficiency and
robustness of the rotation averaging method, and on pushing its application to challenging scenes. We make a combination of a global solver and a local solver to solve rotation averaging, which guarantees global optimality and has
strong resilience against outliers. Rotation averaging based
on chordal distances can be reformulated as a semi-definite
program (SDP) with a low-rank constraint. Taking advantage of the low-rank factorisation of the original SDP, we

10358

