Combined Depth Space based Architecture Search For Person Re-identification
Hanjun Li1,4 , Gaojie Wu1 , Wei-Shi Zheng1,2,3, *
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, China
2
Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518005, China
3
Key Laboratory of Machine Intelligence and Advanced Computing, Ministry of Education, China
4
Pazhou Lab, Guangzhou, China
lihj85@mail2.sysu.edu.cn, wugj7@mail2.sysu.edu.cn,wszheng@ieee.org

Abstract
Most works on person re-identification (ReID) take advantage of large backbone networks such as ResNet, which
are designed for image classification instead of ReID, for
feature extraction. However, these backbones may not be
computationally efficient or the most suitable architectures
for ReID. In this work, we aim to design a lightweight and
suitable network for ReID. We propose a novel search space
called Combined Depth Space (CDS), based on which we
search for an efficient network architecture, which we call
CDNet, via a differentiable architecture search algorithm.
Through the use of the combined basic building blocks in
CDS, CDNet tends to focus on combined pattern information that is typically found in images of pedestrians. We
then propose a low-cost search strategy named the Top-k
Sample Search strategy to make full use of the search space
and avoid trapping in local optimal result. Furthermore, an
effective Fine-grained Balance Neck (FBLNeck), which is
removable at the inference time, is presented to balance the
effects of triplet loss and softmax loss during the training
process. Extensive experiments show that our CDNet (∼1.8
M parameters) has comparable performance with state-ofthe-art lightweight networks.

1. Introduction
Person re-identification (ReID) aims to retrieve images
of a specific person from different surveillance cameras.
Since AlexNet [15] was proposed in the ILSVRC-2012
[3], convolution neural networks (CNNs) have become increasingly popular. With the emergence of complex models [32, 28, 6], people tend to utilize them as backbones
to achieve higher performance on the ReID task. However, there are two obvious drawbacks to such implementations. First, they rely deeply on the performance of the
* Corresponding author

Figure 1. Note that paired salient objects of different sizes can be
commonly found in pedestrian images. Our CBlock is designed to
explicitly learn such combined patterns.

backbone and limit researchers to explore more suitable
network architectures for ReID. Second, these backbones
require large computational resources and time costs at inference time, making them unaffordable for some practical/edge devices with limited computing resources, such as
intelligent surveillance cameras. Instead, by deploying a
lightweight network across a number of surveillance cameras, only the features these devices extract need to be gathered to retrieve the target person, which is much faster than
gathering raw images and processing them with very large
backbone networks. For these reasons, we aim to construct
a lightweight network that is computationally efficient and
more suitable for ReID.
In recent years, Neural Architecture Search (NAS) has
been utilized to search lightweight but effective networks.
[50] takes 2000 GPU days to search the NASNet via reinforcement learning, which is far too long for most of researchers. To reduce the expensive search cost, [20] proposes a novel algorithm called differentiable architecture
search (DARTS) using gradient descent, which dramatically reduces the search cost to 4 GPU days. Although the
searched network architecture is very small, this method
still has a few drawbacks. (1) The cell contains numerous complex connections, which are detrimental to parallel
computing. [19] also notes that the irregular cell structures

6729

