Self-Point-Flow: Self-Supervised Scene Flow Estimation from Point Clouds with
Optimal Transport and Random Walk
Ruibo Li1,2 , Guosheng Lin1,2∗, Lihua Xie3
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
2
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
3
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
E-mail: ruibo001@e.ntu.edu.sg , {gslin, elhxie}@ntu.edu.sg
1

Abstract
Due to the scarcity of annotated scene flow data, selfsupervised scene flow learning in point clouds has attracted
increasing attention. In the self-supervised manner, establishing correspondences between two point clouds to approximate scene flow is an effective approach. Previous
methods often obtain correspondences by applying pointwise matching that only takes the distance on 3D point coordinates into account, introducing two critical issues: (1)
it overlooks other discriminative measures, such as color
and surface normal, which often bring fruitful clues for accurate matching; and (2) it often generates sub-par performance, as the matching is operated in an unconstrained
situation, where multiple points can be ended up with the
same corresponding point. To address the issues, we formulate this matching task as an optimal transport problem.
The output optimal assignment matrix can be utilized to
guide the generation of pseudo ground truth. In this optimal transport, we design the transport cost by considering
multiple descriptors and encourage one-to-one matching by
mass equality constraints. Also, constructing a graph on the
points, a random walk module is introduced to encourage
the local consistency of the pseudo labels. Comprehensive
experiments on FlyingThings3D and KITTI show that our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance among selfsupervised learning methods. Our self-supervised method
even performs on par with some supervised learning approaches, although we do not need any ground truth flow
for training.

1. Introduction
Scene flow estimation aims to obtain a 3D vector field
of points in dynamic scenes, and describes the motion state
of each point. Recently, with the popularity of 3D sensors
∗ Corresponding author: G. Lin. (e-mail: gslin@ntu.edu.sg )

Acc02: 61.8%

Acc02: 26.3%

(a)

(b)

Acc02: 100%

Acc02: 85.3%

(c)

(d)

Figure 1. Pseudo ground truth between two point clouds produced by different methods. The green line represents the correct
pseudo ground truth whose relative error is less than 10%. The
red line represents the wrong pseudo ground truth. (a) pseudo
ground truth produced by nearest neighbor search with only 3D
point coordinate as measure; (b) pseudo ground truth produced by
our optimal transport module; (c) pseudo ground truth produced
by our optimal transport module and then refined by our random
walk module; (d) ground truth.

and the great success of deep learning in 3D point cloud
tasks, directly estimating the scene flow from point clouds
by deep neural networks (DNNs) is an active research topic.
DNNs are data-driven, and the supervised training of DNNs
requires a large amount of training data with ground truth
labels. However, for the scene flow estimation task, no sensor can capture optical flow ground truth in complex environments [19], which makes real-world scene flow ground
truth hard to obtain. Due to the scarcity of the ground truth
data, recent deep learning based point cloud scene flow estimation methods [14, 7, 38, 23] turn to synthetic data, e.g.
the FlyingThings3D dataset [18], for supervised training.
However, the domain gap between synthetic data and realistic data is much likely to make the trained models perform
poorly in real-world scenes.

15577

