TDN: Temporal Difference Networks for Efficient Action Recognition
Limin Wang Zhan Tong Bin Ji Gangshan Wu
State Key Laboratory for Novel Software Technology, Nanjing University, China
07wanglimin@gmail.com, tongzhan@smail.nju.edu.cn, binjinju@smail.nju.edu.cn, gswu@nju.edu.cn

Abstract

56

TDNEN
30M

100M

150M

TDN16F

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have witnessed great progress for
action recognition in videos [14, 29, 38, 31, 6, 26, 37]. Temporal modeling is crucial for capturing motion information
in videos for action recognition, and this is usually achieved
by two kinds of mechanisms in the current deep learning
approaches. One common method is to use a two-stream
network [29], where one stream is on RGB frames to extract appearance information, and the other is to leverage
optical flow as an input to capture movement information.
This method turns out to be effective for improving action
recognition accuracy but requires high computational con-

54

# Parameters

TDN8F

TEINetEN

52

Accuracy (%)

Temporal modeling still remains challenging for action
recognition in videos. To mitigate this issue, this paper
presents a new video architecture, termed as Temporal Difference Network (TDN), with a focus on capturing multiscale temporal information for efficient action recognition.
The core of our TDN is to devise an efficient temporal module (TDM) by explicitly leveraging a temporal difference
operator, and systematically assess its effect on short-term
and long-term motion modeling. To fully capture temporal
information over the entire video, our TDN is established
with a two-level difference modeling paradigm. Specifically,
for local motion modeling, temporal difference over consecutive frames is used to supply 2D CNNs with finer motion
pattern, while for global motion modeling, temporal difference across segments is incorporated to capture long-range
structure for motion feature excitation. TDN provides a simple and principled temporal modeling framework and could
be instantiated with the existing CNNs at a small extra computational cost. Our TDN presents a new state of the art
on the Something-Something V1 & V2 datasets and is on
par with the best performance on the Kinetics-400 dataset.
In addition, we conduct in-depth ablation studies and plot
the visualization results of our TDN, hopefully providing insightful analysis on temporal difference modeling. We release the code at https://github.com/MCG-NJU/TDN.

TEINet16F
TSMEN

50

TEINet8F
TSM16F

48

ECOEnLite

46
TSM8F
NL 13 D

44
0

50

100

150

200

250

300

350

400

FLOPs/Video (G)

Figure 1. Video classification performance comparison on
Something-Something V1 [8] in terms of Top1 accuracy, computational cost, and model size. Our proposed TDN achieves the best
trade-off between accuracy and efficiency, when compared with
previous methods such as NL I3D [40], ECO [46], TSM [19] and
TEINet [20].

sumption for optical flow calculation. Another alternative
approach is to use 3D convolutions [12, 31] or temporal
convolutions [33, 41, 25] to implicitly learn motion features
from RGB frames. However, 3D convolutions often lack
specific consideration in the temporal dimension and might
bring higher computational cost as well. Therefore, designing an effective temporal module of high motion modeling
power and low computational consumption is still a challenging problem for video recognition.
This paper aims to present a new temporal modeling
mechanism by introducing a temporal difference based
module (TDM). Temporal derivative (difference) is highly
relevant with optical flow [11], and has shown effectiveness
in action recognition by using RGB difference as an approximate motion representation [38, 43]. However, these
approaches simply treat RGB difference as another video
modality and train a different network to fuse with the RGB
network. Instead, we aim to present a unified framework
to capture appearance and motion information jointly, by
generalizing the idea of temporal difference into a principled and efficient temporal module for end-to-end network

1895

