Involution: Inverting the Inherence of Convolution for Visual Recognition
Duo Li1 Jie Hu2 Changhu Wang2 Xiangtai Li3 Qi She2 Lei Zhu3 Tong Zhang1 Qifeng Chen1
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology1 ByteDance AI Lab2 Peking University3
duo.li@connect.ust.hk {hujie.frank, wangchanghu}@bytedance.com {tongzhang, cqf}@ust.hk

Abstract

tion kernels via restricting their spatial span to no more than
3 × 3, since the advent of the seminal VGGNet [34].

Convolution has been the core ingredient of modern neural networks, triggering the surge of deep learning in vision. In this work, we rethink the inherent principles of
standard convolution for vision tasks, specifically spatialagnostic and channel-specific. Instead, we present a novel
atomic operation for deep neural networks by inverting
the aforementioned design principles of convolution, coined
as involution. We additionally demystify the recent popular self-attention operator and subsume it into our involution family as an over-complicated instantiation. The
proposed involution operator could be leveraged as fundamental bricks to build the new generation of neural networks for visual recognition, powering different deep learning models on several prevalent benchmarks, including ImageNet classification, COCO detection and segmentation,
together with Cityscapes segmentation. Our involutionbased models improve the performance of convolutional
baselines using ResNet-50 by up to 1.6% top-1 accuracy,
2.5% and 2.4% bounding box AP, and 4.7% mean IoU absolutely while compressing the computational cost to 66%,
65%, 72%, and 57% on the above benchmarks, respectively.
Code and pre-trained models for all the tasks are available
at https://github.com/d-li14/involution.

On the one hand, although the nature of spatial-agnostic
along with spatial-compact makes sense in enhancing the
efficiency and interpreting the translation equivalence, it deprives convolution kernels of the ability to adapt to diverse
visual patterns with respect to different spatial positions.
Besides, locality constrains the receptive field of convolution, posing challenges for capturing long-range spatial interactions in a single shot. On the other hand, as is known
to us all, inter-channel redundancy inside convolution filters
stands out in many successful deep neural networks [19],
casting the large flexibility of convolution kernels with respect to different channels into doubt.

1. Introduction
Albeit the rapid advance of neural network architectures,
convolution remains the building mainstay of deep neural
networks. Drawn inspiration from the classical image filtering methodology, convolution kernels enjoy two remarkable
properties that contribute to its magnetism and popularity,
namely, spatial-agnostic and channel-specific. In the spatial extent, the former property guarantees the efficiency of
convolution kernels by reusing them among different locations and pursues translation equivalence [52]. In the channel domain, a spectrum of convolution kernels is responsible for collecting diverse information encoded in different
channels, satisfying the latter property. Furthermore, modern neural networks appreciate the compactness of convolu-

To conquer the aforementioned limitations, we present
the operation coined as involution that has symmetrically
inverse inherent characteristics compared to convolution,
namely, spatial-specific and channel-agnostic. Concretely
speaking, involution kernels are distinct in the spatial extent but shared across channels. Being subject to its spatialspecific peculiarity, if involution kernels are parameterized
as fixed-sized matrices like convolution kernels and updated
using the back-propagation algorithm, the learned involution kernels would be impeded from transferring between
input images with variable resolutions. To the end of handling variable feature resolutions, an involution kernel belonging to a specific spatial location is possible to be generated solely conditioned on the incoming feature vector at the
corresponding location itself, as an intuitive yet effective instantiation. Besides, we alleviate the redundancy of kernels
by sharing the involution kernel along the channel dimension. Taken the above two factors together, the computational complexity of an involution operation scales up linearly with the number of feature channels, based on which
an extensive coverage in the spatial dimension is allowed
for the dynamically parameterized involution kernels. By
virtue of an inverted designing scheme, our proposed involution has two-fold privileges over convolution: (i) involution could summarize the context in a wider spatial arrangement, thus overcome the difficulty of modeling long-range
interactions well; (ii) involution could adaptively allocate

12321

