SCALE: Modeling Clothed Humans with a
Surface Codec of Articulated Local Elements
Qianli Ma1,2 Shunsuke Saito1† Jinlong Yang1 Siyu Tang2 Michael J. Black1
1
Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems, Tübingen, Germany 2 ETH Zürich
{qma,ssaito,jyang,black}@tuebingen.mpg.de,

Query poses

Predicted Articulated Local Elements

{siyu.tang}@inf.ethz.ch

with normals

with texture neural rendered

meshed

Figure 1: SCALE. Given a sequence of posed but minimally-clothed 3D bodies, SCALE predicts 798 articulated surface
elements (patches, each visualized with a unique color) to dress the bodies with realistic clothing that moves and deforms
naturally even in the presence of topological change. The resulting dense point sets have correspondence across different
poses, as shown by the consistent patch colors. The result also includes predicted surface normals and texture, with which
the point cloud can either be turned into a 3D mesh or directly rendered as realistic images using neural rendering techniques.

Abstract
Learning to model and reconstruct humans in clothing
is challenging due to articulation, non-rigid deformation,
and varying clothing types and topologies. To enable learning, the choice of representation is the key. Recent work
uses neural networks to parameterize local surface elements. This approach captures locally coherent geometry and non-planar details, can deal with varying topology, and does not require registered training data. However, naively using such methods to model 3D clothed humans fails to capture fine-grained local deformations and
generalizes poorly. To address this, we present three key
innovations: First, we deform surface elements based on
a human body model such that large-scale deformations
caused by articulation are explicitly separated from topological changes and local clothing deformations. Second,
we address the limitations of existing neural surface elements by regressing local geometry from local features, significantly improving the expressiveness. Third, we learn a
pose embedding on a 2D parameterization space that encodes posed body geometry, improving generalization to
unseen poses by reducing non-local spurious correlations.

We demonstrate the efficacy of our surface representation by
learning models of complex clothing from point clouds. The
clothing can change topology and deviate from the topology of the body. Once learned, we can animate previously
unseen motions, producing high-quality point clouds, from
which we generate realistic images with neural rendering.
We assess the importance of each technical contribution
and show that our approach outperforms the state-of-theart methods in terms of reconstruction accuracy and inference time. The code is available for research purposes at
https://qianlim.github.io/SCALE .

1. Introduction
While models of humans in clothing would be valuable
for many tasks in computer vision such as body pose and
shape estimation from images and videos [9, 15, 31, 32, 35,
36] and synthetic data generation [60, 61, 71, 83], most existing approaches are based on “minimally-clothed” human
body models [2, 30, 42, 49, 54, 75], which do not represent clothing. To date, statistical models for clothed humans remain lacking despite the broad range of potential
† Now at Facebook Reality Labs.

16082

