SUTD-TrafficQA: A Question Answering Benchmark and an Efficient Network
for Video Reasoning over Traffic Events
Li Xu
He Huang
Jun Liu∗
Information Systems Technology and Design
Singapore University of Technology and Design
{li xu, he huang}@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg

Abstract
Traffic event cognition and reasoning in videos is an important task that has a wide range of applications in intelligent transportation, assisted driving, and autonomous
vehicles. In this paper, we create a novel dataset, SUTDTrafficQA (Traffic Question Answering), which takes the
form of video QA based on the collected 10,080 in-the-wild
videos and annotated 62,535 QA pairs, for benchmarking
the cognitive capability of causal inference and event understanding models in complex traffic scenarios. Specifically,
we propose 6 challenging reasoning tasks corresponding to
various traffic scenarios, so as to evaluate the reasoning
capability over different kinds of complex yet practical traffic events. Moreover, we propose Eclipse, a novel Efficient
glimpse network via dynamic inference, in order to achieve
computation-efficient and reliable video reasoning. The experiments show that our method achieves superior performance while reducing the computation cost significantly.
The project page: https://github.com/SUTDCV/
SUTD-TrafficQA.

1. Introduction
Intelligent transportation [64] has been receiving increasing attention recently, and for the applications, such
as assisted driving, violation detection, and congestion
forecasting, accurate and efficient cognition and reasoning
over the traffic events captured by video cameras is extremely important. As shown by previous works [2, 18],
well-designed datasets are often crucial for the development, adaptation and evaluation of different data-driven approaches. This indicates the significance of creating comprehensive and challenging benchmarks for video causal
reasoning and cognitive development of models, that explore the underlying causal structures of various traffic
events. To this end, we introduce a novel dataset, SUTD∗ Corresponding Author.

TrafficQA (Traffic Question Answering), to facilitate the research of causal reasoning in complex traffic scenarios.
In our dataset, to help develop models for addressing
several major and concerning issues in intelligent transportation, we design 6 challenging reasoning tasks, which
require exploring the complex causal structures within the
inference process of the traffic events. As shown in Figure
1, these tasks correspond to various traffic scenarios involving both road-agents and surroundings, and the models are
required to forecast future events, infer past situations, explain accident causes, provide preventive advice, and so on.
To present these reasoning tasks, video question answering [66] is a natural and effective choice, and is used for our
dataset construction, since to accurately answer the given
questions, the models need to acquire strong capabilities of
performing various levels of logical reasoning and spatiotemporal cognition for the events.
Besides providing the challenging and useful reasoning
tasks, we adopt a combination scheme of online collection
and offline capturing to collect videos, such that the data
in our benchmark covers various traffic events, diversified
road-agents and surroundings, and different capturing perspectives in the wild. With the provided various tasks and
diverse videos, our dataset shall be able to serve as a comprehensive benchmark for video reasoning of traffic events.
In some application scenarios, (e.g., assisted driving),
the computational resource and energy budget can be constrained. Thus both the inference accuracy and the computation efficiency are important for video event reasoning in
these scenarios. Existing video QA methods [23, 10, 30]
mainly focus on strengthening the reasoning accuracy without emphasizing much efficiency, and most of these works
apply fixed computation pipelines to answer different questions, while ignoring to conduct adaptive and efficient computation resource allocation based on the logic structure behind reasoning over video events.
In this paper, to achieve reliable and efficient video reasoning, we propose Eclipse, an Efficient glimpse network.
Specifically, considering there is often large redundancy

9878

