Joint-DetNAS: Upgrade Your Detector with NAS, Pruning and Dynamic
Distillation
Lewei Yao1 * Renjie Pi1∗ Hang Xu2† Wei Zhang2 Zhenguo Li2 Tong Zhang1
1
Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 2 Huawei Noah’s Ark Lab
Search space

Abstract
We propose Joint-DetNAS, a unified NAS framework for
object detection, which integrates 3 key components: Neural Architecture Search, pruning, and Knowledge Distillation. Instead of naively pipelining these techniques, our
Joint-DetNAS optimizes them jointly. The algorithm consists of two core processes: student morphism optimizes
the student’s architecture and removes the redundant parameters, while dynamic distillation aims to find the optimal matching teacher. For student morphism, weight inheritance strategy is adopted, allowing the student to flexibly update its architecture while fully utilize the predecessor’s weights, which considerably accelerates the search;
To facilitate dynamic distillation, an elastic teacher pool is
trained via integrated progressive shrinking strategy, from
which teacher detectors can be sampled without additional
cost in subsequent searches. Given a base detector as the
input, our algorithm directly outputs the derived student
detector with high performance without additional training. Experiments demonstrate that our Joint-DetNAS outperforms the naive pipelining approach by a great margin. Given a classic R101-FPN as the base detector, JointDetNAS is able to boost its mAP from 41.4 to 43.9 on MS
COCO and reduce the latency by 47%, which is on par with
the SOTA EfficientDet while requiring less search cost. We
hope our proposed method can provide the community with
a new way of jointly optimizing NAS, KD and pruning.

1. Introduction
Finding the optimal tradeoff between model performance and complexity has always been a core problem
for the community. The mainstream approaches aiming
at addressing this issue are: Neural Architecture Search
(NAS) [13, 8, 40, 15] is proposed to automatically search
for promising model architectures; pruning [16, 18, 26]
removes redundant parameters from a model while maintaining its performance; and Knowledge Distillation (KD)
[14, 5, 17, 38, 9] aims to transfer the learnt knowledge from
* Equal contribution
† Corresponding author: xbjxh@live.com

NAS

Structure
Search

Optimal arch

Retrain

…

(Parameter-agnostic)

𝐴%

𝐴"#$

𝐴!

A pretrained network
with given structure Prune
weights

Pruning

Finetune

(Structure-agnostic)

𝑃!
A fixed teacher
Imitation

Distillation
(Fixed teacherstudent pair)

A fixed student
𝑃"

Figure 1: Limitation of NAS, pruning and KD. NAS is
parameter-agnostic: The model search and training processes are decoupled, the searched architecture is retrained
from scratch; Pruning is structure-agnostic: the pre-trained
model has a fixed architecture; KD transfers knowledge
between a fixed student-teacher pair while neglecting the
structural dependence between the student and the teacher.
Our work aims to jointly optimize all three methods.
a cumbersome teacher model to a more compact student
model. These methods share the same ultimate goal: boosting the model’s performance while making it more compact. However, jointly optimizing them is a challenging
task, especially for detection, which is much more complex
than classification. In this paper, we propose Joint-DetNAS,
a unified framework for detection which jointly optimizes
NAS, pruning and KD.
The aforementioned methods each have some limitations, as illustrated in Figure 1. NAS and pruning only focus on one aspect while neglecting the other: The current
de facto paradigm of NAS considers the architecture to be
the sole factor that impacts the model’s performance, while
pruning only takes parameters into account and is structureagnostic. A recent work [11] has observed an interesting
phenomenon: the pruned model’s final performance highly
depends on its retraining initialization. This observation indicates that the architecture and parameters are closely cou-

10175

