Globally Optimal Relative Pose Estimation with Gravity Prior
Yaqing Ding1 , Daniel Barath2,3,4 , Jian Yang1 , Hui Kong1 , Zuzana Kukelova2
1
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanjing University of Science and Technology
2
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
3
MPLab, SZTAKI, Budapest, 4 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
dingyaqing@njust.edu.cn

X1

Abstract
Smartphones, tablets and camera systems used, e.g., in
cars and UAVs, are typically equipped with IMUs (inertial
measurement units) that can measure the gravity vector accurately. Using this additional information, the y-axes of
the cameras can be aligned, reducing their relative orientation to a single degree-of-freedom. With this assumption,
we propose a novel globally optimal solver, minimizing the
algebraic error in the least squares sense, to estimate the
relative pose in the over-determined case. Based on the
epipolar constraint, we convert the optimization problem
into solving two polynomials with only two unknowns. Also,
a fast solver is proposed using the first-order approximation
of the rotation. The proposed solvers are compared with the
state-of-the-art ones on four real-world datasets with approx. 50000 image pairs in total. Moreover, we collected a
dataset, by a smartphone, consisting of 10933 image pairs,
gravity directions and ground truth 3D reconstructions.
The source code and dataset are available at https:
//github.com/yaqding/opt_pose_gravity

1. Introduction
Finding the relative pose between two cameras is one of
the fundamental geometric vision problems with many applications, for example, in structure-from-motion [42, 40,
39, 2, 52, 44], visual localization [53, 48], and SLAM [34].
The robust relative pose estimation is usually done in a hypothesize and test framework, such as RANSAC [12].
Locally optimized (LO) RANSAC [7, 31] and its variants, such as Graph-Cut RANSAC [3], USAC [41], have
shown a significant improvement in terms of accuracy and
convergence compared to the standard RANSAC [12]. The
key idea of these RANSAC variants is to apply a local optimization step to refine each so-far-the-best model using
non-minimal samples. The main benefit of using a nonminimal sample is that it allows for averaging out observational noise in the measurements. Besides improving the

X2
X...
C1

Xn
g1

C2
g2

Figure 1: Two cameras C1 and C2 with known gravity directions g1 , g2 observing n ≥ 4 points X1 , ..., Xn . The
objective is to find the relative pose of the cameras.

accuracy, this often speeds up the robust estimation via finding an accurate model early and, thus, triggering the termination criterion. Both minimal and non-minimal solvers
play important roles in the LO-RANSAC framework.
Minimal solutions to the relative pose estimation with
different camera configurations have been well-studied in
the literature. For instance, given two calibrated cameras, the relative pose can be efficiently recovered from five
point correspondences [38, 28, 21]. Recently, point plus
direction-based methods have shown benefits. The basic
idea of such methods is to align one axis (e.g., y-axis) of
the cameras with the common reference direction, e.g., the
gravity vector. The relative orientation reduces to 1-DoF,
and the relative pose can be estimated from only three point
correspondences [13, 37, 49, 43, 10, 9].
While the problem of estimating the absolute camera
pose from a non-minimal set of correspondences (the PnP
problem) has received a lot of attention and many efficient
and globally optimal solutions were published [24, 56, 25,
35, 36, 51, 57, 50], this does not hold for the relative pose
estimation problem, also known as the N-point problem.
The main reason is the fact that the N-point problem results
in a more complicated optimization than the PnP problem.

394

