(AF)2 -S3Net: Attentive Feature Fusion with Adaptive Feature Selection for
Sparse Semantic Segmentation Network

Ran Cheng, Ryan Razani, Ehsan Taghavi, Enxu Li and Bingbing Liu∗

Abstract

dicted from input images, giving a clear perspective of the
scene.

Autonomous robotic systems and self driving cars rely
on accurate perception of their surroundings as the safety
of the passengers and pedestrians is the top priority. Semantic segmentation is one of the essential components of
road scene perception that provides semantic information
of the surrounding environment. Recently, several methods
have been introduced for 3D LiDAR semantic segmentation.
While they can lead to improved performance, they are either afflicted by high computational complexity, therefore
are inefficient, or they lack fine details of smaller object instances. To alleviate these problems, we propose (AF)2 S3Net, an end-to-end encoder-decoder CNN network for 3D
LiDAR semantic segmentation. We present a novel multibranch attentive feature fusion module in the encoder and
a unique adaptive feature selection module with feature
map re-weighting in the decoder. Our (AF)2 -S3Net fuses
the voxel-based learning and point-based learning methods into a unified framework to effectively process the potentially large 3D scene. Our experimental results show
that the proposed method outperforms the state-of-the-art
approaches on the large-scale nuScenes-lidarseg and SemanticKITTI benchmark, ranking 1st on both competitive
public leaderboard competitions upon publication.

1. Introduction
Understanding of the surrounding environment has been
one of the most fundamental tasks in autonomous robotic
systems. With the challenges introduced with recent technologies such as self-driving cars, a detailed and accurate
understanding of the road scene has become a main part
of any outdoor autonomous robotic system in the past few
years. To achieve an acceptable level of road scene understanding, many frameworks benefit from image semantic segmentation, where specific pixel-wise classes are pre∗ All

authors
at the

are
time

with
Huawei
of writing.

Noah’s

Ark

Lab,

{ran.cheng1,
ryan.razani, ehsan.taghavi, thomas.enxu.li,
liu.bingbing}@huawei.com
Canada

SalsaNext

MinkNet42

Ours

Ground Truth

Figure 1: Comparison of our proposed method with SalsaNext [11] and MinkNet42 [10] on SemanticKITTI benchmark [3].
Although image semantic segmentation is an important
step in realizing self driving cars, the limitations of a vision
sensor such as the inability to record data in poor lighting
conditions, variable sensor sensitivity, lack of depth information and limited field-of-view (FOV) makes it difficult
for vision sensors to be the sole primary source for scene understanding and semantic segmentation. In contrast, Light
Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) sensors can record accurate depth information regardless of the lighting conditions
with high density and frame rate, making it a reliable source
of information for critical tasks such as self driving.
LiDAR sensor generates point cloud by scanning the
environment and calculating time-of-flight for the emitted
laser beams. In doing so, LiDARs can collect valuable information, such as range (e.g., in Cartesian coordinates) and
intensity (a measure of reflection from the surface of the objects). Recent advancement in LiDAR technology makes it
possible to generate high quality, low noise and dense scans

12547

