Long-Tailed Multi-Label Visual Recognition by Collaborative Training on
Uniform and Re-balanced Samplings
Hao Guo, Song Wang
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29201, US
hguo@email.sc.edu; songwang@cec.sc.edu

Abstract
Long-tailed data distribution is common in many multilabel visual recognition tasks and the direct use of these
data for training usually leads to relatively low performance on tail classes. While re-balanced data sampling can
improve the performance on tail classes, it may also hurt
the performance on head classes in training due to label
co-occurrence. In this paper, we propose a new approach
to train on both uniform and re-balanced samplings in a
collaborative way, resulting in performance improvement
on both head and tail classes. More specifically, we design
a visual recognition network with two branches: one takes
the uniform sampling as input while the other takes the rebalanced sampling as the input. For each branch, we conduct visual recognition using a binary-cross-entropy-based
classification loss with learnable logit compensation. We
further define a new cross-branch loss to enforce the consistency when the same input image goes through the two
branches. We conduct extensive experiments on VOC-LT
and COCO-LT datasets. The results show that the proposed
method significantly outperforms previous state-of-the-art
methods on long-tailed multi-label visual recognition.

1. Introduction
By classifying an image into multiple classes, multilabel visual recognition is an important task in computer
vision and the state-of-the-art approaches [45, 54, 44, 2, 20,
21, 12, 40, 52, 5] are to train deep networks on a set of
training data with ground-truth labels. However, as in many
single-label recognition tasks [25, 3, 6, 41, 24, 15, 16, 53],
the training data of multi-label recognition may exhibit a
long-tailed distribution [39] in terms of class labels – head
classes have many samples while tail classes have very few
samples. Direct training on such data (with uniform sampling) usually produces relatively low performance on the
tail classes. In this paper, we focus on solving the problem
of long-tailed multi-label visual recognition (LTML).

Re-balanced data sampling [4, 32, 1, 10] is a proven effective approach for addressing the long-tailed visual recognition. It achieves class-wise balance by either downsampling the head-class data or up-sampling the tail-class
data. However, repeating/dropping a tail-class/head-class
image may also duplicate/remove head-class/tail-class samples due to label co-occurrence in multi-label recognition [47]. Thus, while re-balanced sampling can improve
the recognition performance of tail classes, it may simultaneously decrease the performance of some head classes for
LTML. Since performance of different classes, either head
or tail ones, is usually considered to be equally important in
multi-label visual recognition, in this paper, we develop a
new method that can combine different data samplings for
improving the performance of both head and tail classes.
We consider the uniform and re-balanced samplings.
Given a long-tailed training set for multi-label recognition,
the uniform sampling leads to the original long-tailed distribution, while the re-balanced sampling expects to achieve
a balanced distribution, but yields another biased distribution due to label-occurrence. Our basic idea is to use
each of them to train a branch of a two-branch network,
where two branches follow the same architecture. We further define a loss that enforces the consistency across the
two branches for the same input to achieve a collaborative
training, inspired by the previous mutual learning [51] and
co-regularization [27]. The cross-branch consistency compromises two distributions to achieve an effect equivalent to
learning the proposed network from a balanced implicit distribution somewhere between two biased distributions from
different samplings.
More specifically, as shown in Fig. 1(b), the two
branches have the same architecture but different parameters to reflect the different distributions of their respective inputs. For each branch, a binary-cross-entropy-based
multi-label classification loss with learnable logit compensation is defined for LTML. For combining two branches,
we introduce another loss to collaboratively enforce the prediction consistency across the two branches when the same
input image is fed to the two branches. Finally, this two-

15089

