Semi-Supervised Semantic Segmentation with Cross Pseudo Supervision
Xiaokang Chen1 * Yuhui Yuan2 Gang Zeng1 Jingdong Wang2
1
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), Peking University
Microsoft Research Asia

Abstract
In this paper, we study the semi-supervised semantic segmentation problem via exploring both labeled data and extra unlabeled data. We propose a novel consistency regularization approach, called cross pseudo supervision (CPS).
Our approach imposes the consistency on two segmentation networks perturbed with different initialization for the
same input image. The pseudo one-hot label map, output
from one perturbed segmentation network, is used to supervise the other segmentation network with the standard
cross-entropy loss, and vice versa. The CPS consistency has
two roles: encourage high similarity between the predictions of two perturbed networks for the same input image,
and expand training data by using the unlabeled data with
pseudo labels. Experiment results show that our approach
achieves the state-of-the-art semi-supervised segmentation
performance on Cityscapes and PASCAL VOC 2012.

1. Introduction
Image semantic segmentation is a fundamental recognition task in computer vision. The semantic segmentation
training data requires pixel-level manual labeling, which is
much more expensive compared to the other vision tasks,
such as image classification and object detection. This
makes semi-supervised segmentation an important problem
to learn segmentation models by using the labeled data as
well as the additional unlabeled data.
Consistency regularization is widely studied in semisupervised semantic segmentation. It enforces the consistency of the predictions with various perturbations, e.g.,
input perturbation by augmenting input images [11, 19],
feature perturbation [27], and network perturbation [18].
Self-training is also studied for semi-supervised segmentation [6, 43, 42, 9, 13, 25]. It incorporates pseudo segmentation maps on the unlabeled images obtained from the segmentation model trained on the labeled images to expand
the training data, and retrains the segmentation model.
We present a novel and simple consistency regularization
* This work was done when Xiaokang Chen was an intern at Microsoft
Research, Beijing, P.R. China

approach with network perturbation, called cross pseudo supervision. The proposed approach feeds the labeled and unlabeled images into two segmentation networks that share
the same structure and are initialized differently. The outputs of the two networks on the labeled data are supervised
separately by the corresponding ground-truth segmentation
map. Our main point lies in the cross pseudo supervision
that enforces the consistency between the two segmentation
networks. Each segmentation network for an input image
estimates a segmentation result, called pseudo segmentation
map. The pseudo segmentation map is used as an additional
signal to supervise the other segmentation network.
The benefits from the cross pseudo supervision scheme
lie in two-fold. On the one hand, like previous consistency
regularization, the proposed approach encourages that the
predictions across differently initialized networks for the
same input image are consistent and that the prediction decision boundary lies in low-density regions. On the other
hand, during the later optimization stage the pseudo segmentation becomes stable and more accurate than the result
from normal supervised training only on the labeled data.
The pseudo labeled data behaves like expanding the training data, thus improving the segmentation network training
quality.
Experimental results with various settings on two benchmarks, Cityscapes and PASCAL VOC 2012, show that the
proposed cross pseudo supervision approach is superior to
existing consistency schemes for semi-supervised segmentation. Our approach achieves the state-of-the-art semisupervised segmentation performance on both benchmarks.

2. Related work
Semantic segmentation. Modern deep learning methods for semantic segmentation are mostly based on fullyconvolutional network (FCN) [23]. The subsequent developments studies the models from three main aspects:
resolution, context, and edge. The works on resolution
enlargement include mediating the spatial loss caused in
the classification network, e.g., using the encoder-decoder
scheme [5] or dilated convolutions [36, 4], and maintaining
high resolution, such as HRNet [34, 30].
The works on exploiting contexts include spatial context,
e.g., PSPNet [41] and ASPP [4], object context [38, 37], and

2613

