Interventional Video Grounding with Dual Contrastive Learning
Guoshun Nan1,∗
1

Rui Qiao1, * Yao Xiao2,† Jun Liu 3,‡ Sicong Leng1

Hao Zhang4,5

Wei Lu1,‡

StatNLP Research Group, Singapore University of Technology and Design, 2 Shanghai Jiao Tong University, China
3
Information Systems Technology and Design, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore
4
School of Computer Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore
5
Institute of High Performance Computing, A*STAR, Singapore
{guoshun nan,rui qiao}@sutd.edu.sg, 119033910058@sjtu.edu.cn, jun liu@sutd.edu.sg
sicong leng@mymail.sutd.edu.sg, zhang hao@ihpc.a-star.edu.sg, luwei@sutd.edu.sg

1. Introduction
Video grounding [3, 24], which aims to automatically locate the temporal boundaries of the target video span for a
given textual description, is a challenging multimedia information retrieval task due to the flexibility and complexity of
text descriptions and video content. It has been widely used
* Equally contributed
† Work done during internship at StatNLP group, SUTD
‡ Corresponding Authors

6WDUW7LPHV

(QG7LPHV

D

4XHU\3HRSOHDUHKROGLQJDYDFXXP
+ROG9DFXXP
FRUUHODWLRQ

Video grounding aims to localize a moment from an
untrimmed video for a given textual query. Existing approaches focus more on the alignment of visual and language stimuli with various likelihood-based matching or
regression strategies, i.e., P (Y |X). Consequently, these
models may suffer from spurious correlations between the
language and video features due to the selection bias of
the dataset. 1) To uncover the causality behind the model
and data, we first propose a novel paradigm from the perspective of the causal inference, i.e., interventional video
grounding (IVG) that leverages backdoor adjustment to
deconfound the selection bias based on structured causal
model (SCM) and do-calculus P (Y |do(X)). Then, we
present a simple yet effective method to approximate the
unobserved confounder as it cannot be directly sampled
from the dataset. 2) Meanwhile, we introduce a dual contrastive learning approach (DCL) to better align the text
and video by maximizing the mutual information (MI) between query and video clips, and the MI between start/end
frames of a target moment and the others within a video to
learn more informative visual representations. Experiments
on three standard benchmarks show the effectiveness of our
approaches.

4XHU\3HRSOHDUHVKRZQWKURZLQJSLQJSRQJEDOOVLQWREHHUILOOHGFXSV

«

)L[9DFXXP
FRUUHODWLRQ

Abstract

4XHU\3HRSOHDUHIL[LQJDYDFXXP

+LJK&RUUHODWLRQ

7UDLQ

/RZ&RUUHODWLRQ

7UDLQ

E

Figure 1: (a) Illustration of video grounding. (b) Spurious correlations between object “people” and “vacuum” and
the activity “people are holding a vacuum” in the CharadesTA [24] dataset.
in many applications, such as video question answering [40]
and video summarization [74]. As shown in Figure 1 (a),
the query “People are shown throwing ping pong balls into
beer-filled cups” involves two actions “shown” and “throwing”, one role “people”, and three objects “ping pong balls”,
“beer” and “cups”, which will be located in the video with
a start time (61.4s) and an end time (64.5s). To retrieve the
most relevant segment, a model needs to well understand
the complex interactions among these actions and objects
from both language and video context, and then properly
align the two sides semantic information for a prediction.
Extensive works have been proposed for the aforementioned challenging video grounding task, which can be
mainly categorized into three groups: 1) ranking methods that typically count on a two-stage propose-and-rank
pipeline [24, 3, 87], or attention-based localization approach [82] to find out the target video span among candidates with the best matching score. 2) regression meth-

2765

