Structured Scene Memory for Vision-Language Navigation
Hanqing Wang1 , Wenguan Wang2 * , Wei Liang1∗ , Caiming Xiong3 , Jianbing Shen1,4
1

Beijing Institute of Technology

2

ETH Zurich

3

Salesforce Research

4

Inception Institute of Artificial Intelligence

https://github.com/HanqingWangAI/SSM-VLN

Abstract
Recently, numerous algorithms have been developed to
tackle the problem of vision-language navigation (VLN),
i.e., entailing an agent to navigate 3D environments through
following linguistic instructions. However, current VLN
agents simply store their past experiences/observations as
latent states in recurrent networks, failing to capture environment layouts and make long-term planning. To address
these limitations, we propose a crucial architecture, called
Structured Scene Memory (SSM). It is compartmentalized
enough to accurately memorize the percepts during navigation. It also serves as a structured scene representation,
which captures and disentangles visual and geometric cues
in the environment. SSM has a collect-read controller that
adaptively collects information for supporting current decision making and mimics iterative algorithms for long-range
reasoning. As SSM provides a complete action space, i.e.,
all the navigable places on the map, a frontier-exploration
based navigation decision making strategy is introduced to
enable efficient and global planning. Experiment results on
two VLN datasets (i.e., R2R and R4R) show that our method
achieves state-of-the-art performance on several metrics.

1. Introduction
As a crucial step towards building intelligent embodied agents, autonomous navigation has long been studied in
robotics. Since Anderson et al. [3] extended prior efforts[9,
37] in instruction based navigation into photo-realistic simulated scenes [6], vision-language navigation (VLN) has
recently attracted increasing attention in computer vision
community. Towards the goal of enabling an agent to execute navigation instructions in 3D environments, current
representative VLN methods made great advances in: i) developing more powerful learning paradigms[50, 48]; ii) exploring extra supervision signals from synthesized data[13,
45, 14] or auxiliary tasks [48, 25, 33, 55]; iii) designing
more efficient multi-modal embedding schemes[24, 40, 49];
and iv) making more intelligent path planning [28, 34, 47].
* Corresponding author: Wenguan Wang.

Figure 1: In the partially observed environment (b), our agent
builds SSM (c) for persistent memorization and topological scene
representation. SSM supports long-range planning over the global
action space, thus our agent can easily change its navigation direction (i.e., P1) by directly ‘jumping’ to any previously visited
position (e.g., P2), resulting in robust navigation.

Despite these progresses, current VLN models typically
follow[3] to tackle the task through a sequence-to-sequence
(Seq2Seq) framework, which maps instructions and online
observations to navigation actions. With such a design, the
perceived information are embedded and mixed in the internal recurrent units. This prohibits the agent from directly accessing to its past observations and understanding
the environment layout. Taking Fig. 1 as an example. VLN
agents execute instructions in a partially observed environment (Fig. 1(b)). As current VLN agents simply encode
past perceptions (blue area in Fig. 1(b)) as hidden network
states, their decision-making is only limited within a local action space (i.e., currently navigable directions – green
area in Fig.1(b)). Thus they tend to make sub-optimal navigation decisions, failing to perform path planning over the
explored environment (i.e., global action space in Fig.1(b)).
In robotics, map-building is long studied for facilitating
path planning [46, 15]. Inspired by classic simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) models [46, 19], recent efforts make use of deep learning techniques for constructing
more efficient space representations [17, 12, 7, 8]. On the
other hand, making path planning in VLN, in essence, requires efficiently modeling long-term dependencies within

8455

