Pose-Guided Human Animation from a Single Image in the Wild
Jae Shin Yoon†
†

Lingjie Liu♯ Vladislav Golyanik♯ Kripasindhu Sarkar♯
Hyun Soo Park†
Christian Theobalt♯

University of Minnesota

Input

♯

Max Planck Institute for Informatics, SIC

Animated person in various poses from a single image

Figure 1. We present a new method to synthesize a sequence of animated human images from a single image. The synthesized images
are controlled by the poses as shown in the inset image. It is capable of generating full appearance of the person at diverse poses, reflecting
the input foreground and background in the presence of occlusion and 3D shape deformation, e.g., the occluded texture of the back.

Abstract
We present a new pose transfer method for synthesizing
a human animation from a single image of a person controlled by a sequence of body poses. Existing pose transfer
methods exhibit significant visual artifacts when applying to
a novel scene, resulting in temporal inconsistency and failures in preserving the identity and textures of the person. To
address these limitations, we design a compositional neural network that predicts the silhouette, garment labels, and
textures. Each modular network is explicitly dedicated to a
subtask that can be learned from the synthetic data. At the
inference time, we utilize the trained network to produce a
unified representation of appearance and its labels in UV
coordinates, which remains constant across poses. The unified representation provides an incomplete yet strong guidance to generating the appearance in response to the pose
change. We use the trained network to complete the appearance and render it with the background. With these strategies, we are able to synthesize human animations that can
preserve the identity and appearance of the person in a temporally coherent way without any fine-tuning of the network
on the testing scene. Experiments show that our method outperforms the state-of-the-arts in terms of synthesis quality,
temporal coherence, and generalization ability.

1. Introduction
Being able to animate a human in everyday apparel with
an arbitrary pose sequence from just a single still image
opens the door to many creative applications. For example,

animated photographs can be much more memorable than
static images. Furthermore, such techniques not only simplify and democratize computer animation for non-experts,
they can also expedite pre-visualization and content creation for more professional animators who may use single
image animations as basis for further refinement.
Tackling this problem using classical computer graphics
techniques is highly complex and time consuming. A highquality 3D textured human model needs to be reconstructed
from a single image and then sophisticated rigging methods
are required to obtain an animatable character. An alternative is to apply 2D character animation methods [17, 19] to
animate the person in the image. However, this approach
cannot visualize the occluded parts of the character.
In this paper, we approach this problem using a pose
transfer algorithm that synthesizes the appearance of a person at arbitrary pose by transforming the appearance from
an input image without requiring a 3D animatable textured
human model. Existing works on pose transfer have demonstrated promising results only when training and testing take
place on the same dataset (e.g., DeepFashion dataset [28]),
and some require even more restrictive conditions that testing is performed on the same person in the same environment as training. [8, 25, 26]. However, the domain difference between training and testing data in real applications
introduces substantial quality degradation.
A core challenge of pose transfer lies in lack of data that
span diverse poses, shapes, appearance, viewpoints, and
background. This leads to limited generalizability to a testing scene, resulting in noticeable visual artifacts as shown in

15039

