Flow-guided One-shot Talking Face Generation with a High-resolution
Audio-visual Dataset
Zhimeng Zhang
Lincheng Li
Yu Ding *
Changjie Fan
Virtual Human Group, Netease Fuxi AI Lab
{zhangzhimeng, lilincheng, dingyu01, fanchangjie }@corp.netease.com

Abstract
One-shot talking face generation should synthesize high
visual quality facial videos with reasonable animations of
expression and head pose, and just utilize arbitrary driving audio and arbitrary single face image as the source.
Current works fail to generate over 256×256 resolution
realistic-looking videos due to the lack of an appropriate
high-resolution audio-visual dataset, and the limitation of
the sparse facial landmarks in providing poor expression
details. To synthesize high-definition videos, we build a
large in-the-wild high-resolution audio-visual dataset and
propose a novel flow-guided talking face generation framework. The new dataset is collected from youtube and consists of about 16 hours 720P or 1080P videos. We leverage
the facial 3D morphable model (3DMM) to split the framework into two cascaded modules instead of learning a direct mapping from audio to video. In the first module, we
propose a novel animation generator to produce the movements of mouth, eyebrow and head pose simultaneously. In
the second module, we transform animation into dense flow
to provide more expression details and carefully design a
novel flow-guided video generator to synthesize videos. Our
method is able to produce high-definition videos and outperforms state-of-the-art works in objective and subjective
comparisons* .

1. Introduction
Given one reference facial image and one driving audio,
one-shot talking face generation aims at synthesizing a talking avatar video with reasonable facial animations corresponding to the driving audio. Talking face generation is of
importance for many applications, including virtual assistants, mixed realities, animation movies, and so forth. Due
to its wide applications, talking face generation draws con* Yu Ding is the corresponding author.
* The HDTF dataset etc. for research purpose are at https://
github.com/MRzzm/HDTF

Driving audio

Reference images

Synthetic high-resolution videos

Figure 1. Our method synthesizes high-resolution talking face
videos with one driving audio and one reference facial image.

siderable attention for a long time.
While many works[7, 6, 18, 13, 51, 5, 48, 29, 42, 49,
4] make great efforts to synthesize realistic-looking videos,
the generation of high-resolution videos is still a challenge.
Current best work[49] just generate videos with 256×256
resolution(see Figure10(e) for example), however, directly
employing their model on 512×512 image will get blurry
results (see Figure10(f) for example). Several factors result
in this challenge.
The first reason is that there are no appropriate datasets
for high-resolution talking face generation. Table 1 illustrates some common audio-visual datasets (all available
datasets are listed in [3]). As shown in Table 1, current audio-visual datasets consist of in-the-wild datasets
and in-the-lab datasets. In-the-wild datasets contain larger
scale and more subjects, but they all lack video resolution. There are two main reasons: On one hand, their
videos are collected from the internet published in the past
2∼5 years, and at that time the internet videos generally
have low resolution. On the other hand, most in-the-wild
datasets do not focus on the task of talking face generation,
e.g., Voxceleb[26, 8] is built for speaker identification and
LRW[9] is built for word recognition, so they do not pay
attention to the video resolution. For in-the-lab datasets,
while they record high resolution face videos, the number
of subjects and sentences is limited because of the expensive labor costs. The largest MEAD[43] only records 159
sentences with 60 actors.
The second reason is that previous works are not de-

3661

