CodedStereo: Learned Phase Masks for Large Depth-of-field Stereo
Shiyu Tan1,*

Yicheng Wu1,*
1
Rice University

Shoou-I Yu2
Ashok Veeraraghavan1,†
2
Facebook Reality Labs

{shytan, yicheng.wu, vashok}@rice.edu

Shoou-I.Yu@fb.com

Abstract
Conventional stereo suffers from a fundamental trade-off
between imaging volume and signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) –
due to the conflicting impact of aperture size on both these
variables. Inspired by the extended depth of field cameras,
we propose a novel end-to-end learning-based technique to
overcome this limitation, by introducing a phase mask at
the aperture plane of the cameras in a stereo imaging system. The phase mask creates a depth-dependent yet numerically invertible point spread function, allowing us to recover sharp image texture and stereo correspondence over
a significantly extended depth of field (EDOF) than conventional stereo. The phase mask pattern, the EDOF image
reconstruction, and the stereo disparity estimation are all
trained together using an end-to-end learned deep neural
network. We perform theoretical analysis and characterization of the proposed approach and show a 6× increase
in volume that can be imaged in simulation. We also build
an experimental prototype and validate the approach using
real-world results acquired using this prototype system.

1. Introduction
Stereo-based 3D reconstruction, while extremely popular, suffers from a fundamental trade-off between volume
of imaging and noise. If you want to retain a large volume
of imaging, then in order to get sharp texture features for
correspondence, you need to ensure that the depth of field
(DOF) of the cameras covers the entire volume. This necessitates a narrow aperture, rapidly reducing the total light
level reaching the sensor (since SNR is quadratically related
to aperture size). As a consequence, it is challenging to get
large volume, high quality, and high resolution stereo-based
3D reconstruction in light-limited environments.
In light-limited environments, typically either the exposure duration or the aperture size of a camera is increased to
increase light throughput. But for scenarios where there is
either scene motion (eg., motion capture) or camera motion
(eg., robotics, autonomous navigation), increasing exposure
∗ These two authors contributed equally. † Corresponding author.

Figure 1. Tradeoff between depth of field and aperture size on
simulated data. We propose a CodedStereo system that can provide an 6× increase in DOF (blue dashed curve, with stars for particular observations). In the curves, the x-axis is linearly sampled
in exposure time, and the corresponding f-numbers are converted
to maintain the same SNR level of 50dB. Both our system and the
conventional lens are focused at 1m, with a 50mm focal length.

duration results in motion blur. On the other hand, increasing the aperture size will result in a smaller depth of field,
thereby reducing the volume that can be reconstructed.
Inspired by the extended depth of field (EDOF) imaging techniques [10], we present CodedStereo, a technique
in which we add optimized phase masks to the aperture of
each of the two stereo cameras. These phase masks allow
each camera to maintain a large aperture size, increasing
the light throughput of the cameras. Meanwhile, the phase
masks are specially designed to produce a depth-dependent
focal blur that allows back-end stereo algorithms to continue to retain high resolution and quality. In addition, our
learned phase mask not only enables more accurate depth
estimation, but also encourages sharper extended depth of
field RGB images that can be used for downstream applications such as point cloud colorization. The reconstruction
algorithms and the phase masks are simultaneously optimized using an end-to-end learning framework. The main
technical contributions of this paper are:
I. We propose CodedStereo, a technique to recover large-

7170

