High-Quality Stereo Image Restoration from Double Refraction
Hakyeong Kim

Andreas Meuleman

Daniel S. Jeon

Min H. Kim

KAIST

Abstract
Single-shot monocular birefractive stereo methods have
been used for estimating sparse depth from double refraction over edges. They also obtain an ordinary-ray (oray) image concurrently or subsequently through additional
post-processing of depth densification and deconvolution.
However, when an extraordinary-ray (e-ray) image is restored to acquire stereo images, the existing methods suffer
from very severe restoration artifacts due to a low signal-tonoise ratio of input e-ray image or depth/deconvolution errors. In this work, we present a novel stereo image restoration network that can restore stereo images directly from a
double-refraction image. First, we built a physically faithful
birefractive stereo imaging dataset by simulating the double refraction phenomenon with existing RGB-D datasets.
Second, we formulated a joint stereo restoration problem
that accounts for not only geometric relation between o/e-ray images but also joint optimization of restoring both
stereo images. We trained our model with our birefractive image dataset in an end-to-end manner. Our model
restores high-quality stereo images directly from double refraction in real-time, enabling high-quality stereo video using a monocular camera. Our method also allows us to estimate dense depth maps from stereo images using a conventional stereo method. We evaluate the performance of our
method experimentally and synthetically with the ground
truth. Results validate that our stereo image restoration
network outperforms the existing methods with high accuracy. We demonstrate several image-editing applications
using our high-quality stereo images and dense depth maps.

1. Introduction
Double refraction occurs by birefringence, an optical
property of anisotropic, transmissive materials, where an
incident ray is split into two rays: ordinary ray (o-ray) and
extraordinary ray (e-ray). A double-refraction image is a superimposed image caused by the refracted o-ray and e-ray
placed on the same image with displacement (see Figure 1

(b) O-ray image closeup

(c) E-ray image closeup

(a) Double-refraction
input image

(PSNR: 40.80 dB, SSIM: 0.99)

(PSNR: 36.90 dB, SSIM: 0.98)

(d) Dense depth result

O-ray image result

E-ray image result

Figure 1: (a) an input double-refraction image, (b) an oray image result, (c) an e-ray result, (d) a dense disparity
map estimated from our stereo images. Compared to ground
truth, PSNRs and SSIMs of the entire o-/e-ray images are
40.80/36.90 dB, SSIM: 0.9854/0.9799, respectively.
for an example). Displacement in a double-refraction image contains additional information related to depth, similar
to a disparity in traditional stereo, i.e., it is inversely proportional to depth. Based on this phenomenon, single-shot
monocular birefractive stereo methods [1, 12] have been
developed to estimate sparse depth from double refraction
over edges, achieving passive monocular 3D imaging with
a small form factor.
To obtain two stereo images from double refraction,
there are two different ways in the existing methods. One
way is to densify the sparse depth map with a diffusion method [10] and then deconvolve the input doublerefraction image with different point spread functions
(PSFs) for each depth [1]. The resulting quality depends
on the accuracy of per-pixel depth. Ringing artifacts of deconvolution often occur, degrading the image quality of the
restored images. Another way is to subtract the restored oray image from the input double-refraction image and then
recover its scale [12]. This approach restores an e-ray image from uneven double refraction. Still, the signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR) of the input e-ray image is inherently low in an
uneven double refraction image [12]. Even though the restored o-ray image is sharp, the e-ray image suffers from

11987

