P REDATOR: Registration of 3D Point Clouds with Low Overlap
Shengyu Huang∗

Zan Gojcic∗

Mikhail Usvyatsov

Andreas Wieser

Konrad Schindler

ETH Zurich
overlappredator.github.io

Abstract
We introduce P REDATOR, a model for pairwise pointcloud registration with deep attention to the overlap region.
Different from previous work, our model is specifically designed to handle (also) point-cloud pairs with low overlap.
Its key novelty is an overlap-attention block for early information exchange between the latent encodings of the two
point clouds. In this way the subsequent decoding of the
latent representations into per-point features is conditioned
on the respective other point cloud, and thus can predict
which points are not only salient, but also lie in the overlap
region between the two point clouds. The ability to focus
on points that are relevant for matching greatly improves
performance: P REDATOR raises the rate of successful registrations by more than 20% in the low-overlap scenario,
and also sets a new state of the art for the 3DMatch benchmark with 89% registration recall. [Code release]

1. Introduction
Recent work has made substantial progress in fully automatic, 3D feature-based point cloud registration. At first
glance, benchmarks like 3DMatch [49] appear to be saturated, with multiple state-of-the-art (SoTA) methods [16,
8, 3] reaching nearly 95% feature matching recall and successfully registering >80% of all scan pairs. One may get
the impression that the registration problem is solved—but
this is actually not the case. We argue that the high success
rates are a consequence of lenient evaluation protocols. We
have been making our task too easy: existing literature and
benchmarks [5, 49, 20] consider only pairs of point clouds
with ≥30% overlap to measure performance. Yet, the lowoverlap regime is very relevant for practical applications.
On the one hand, it may be difficult to ensure high overlap,
for instance when moving along narrow corridors, or when
closing loops in the presence of occlusions (densely builtup areas, forest, etc.). On the other hand, data acquisition is
∗ First two authors contributed equally to this work.

a) Input point clouds

b) Inferred overlap region

c) Estimated registration

Figure 1: P REDATOR is designed to focus attention on the
overlap region, and to prefer salient points in that region, so
as to enable robust registration in spite of low overlap.

often costly, so practitioners aim for a low number of scans
with only the necessary overlap [45, 46].
Driven by the evaluation protocol, the high-overlap
scenario became the focus of research, whereas the
more challenging low-overlap examples were largely neglected (cf . Fig. 1). Consequently, the registration performance of even the best known methods deteriorates rapidly
when the overlap between the two point clouds falls below
30%, see Fig. 2. Human operators, in contrast, can still register such low overlap point clouds without much effort.
This discrepancy is the starting point of the present work.
To study its reasons, we have constructed a low-overlap
dataset 3DLoMatch from scans of the popular 3DMatch
benchmark, and have analysed the individual modules/steps
of the registration pipeline (Fig. 2). It turns out that the effective receptive field of fully convolutional feature point
descriptors [8, 3] is local enough and the descriptors are
hardly corrupted by non-overlapping parts of the scans.
Rather than coming up with yet another way to learn better
descriptors, the key to registering low overlap point clouds
is learning where to sample feature points. A large performance boost can be achieved if the feature points are predominantly sampled from the overlapping portions of the
scans (Fig. 2, right).
We follow this path and introduce P REDATOR, a neural architecture for pairwise 3D point cloud registration that
learns to detect the overlap region between two unregistered
scans, and to focus on that region when sampling feature
14267

