Robust Reflection Removal with Reflection-free Flash-only Cues
Chenyang Lei
Qifeng Chen
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

Abstract
We propose a simple yet effective reflection-free cue for
robust reflection removal from a pair of flash and ambient (no-flash) images. The reflection-free cue exploits a
flash-only image obtained by subtracting the ambient image from the corresponding flash image in raw data space.
The flash-only image is equivalent to an image taken in a
dark environment with only a flash on. We observe that
this flash-only image is visually reflection-free, and thus it
can provide robust cues to infer the reflection in the ambient image. Since the flash-only image usually has artifacts, we further propose a dedicated model that not only
utilizes the reflection-free cue but also avoids introducing
artifacts, which helps accurately estimate reflection and
transmission. Our experiments on real-world images with
various types of reflection demonstrate the effectiveness of
our model with reflection-free flash-only cues: our model
outperforms state-of-the-art reflection removal approaches
by more than 5.23dB in PSNR, 0.04 in SSIM, and 0.068 in
LPIPS. Our source code and dataset are publicly available
at github.com/ChenyangLEI/flash-reflection-removal.

1. Introduction
An image taken by a camera in front of a glass often
contains undesirable reflection. In the process of image formation with reflection, the irradiance received by a camera
can be approximately modeled as the sum of transmission
and reflection. In this paper, we are interested in recovering
a clear transmission image by removing reflection from the
ambient image (captured image). Reflection removal is an
important application in computational photography, which
can highly improve image quality and pleasantness. Furthermore, computer vision algorithms can be more robust
to images with reflection, as the reflection can be largely
erased by a reflection removal method.
Reflection removal is challenging because the reflection
component is usually unknown. Since both reflection and
transmission are natural images, it is hard to distinguish
between reflection and transmission from an input image.
Therefore, many methods adopt various assumptions on the

Ambient image

Our transmission

Flash image

Flash-only image

Our reflection

Figure 1. A reflection-free flash-only image is computed from a
pair of ambient/flash images to help remove reflection. Our transmission image does not absorb the artifacts in the flash-only image.

appearance of reflection for reflection removal. For example, some single image-based methods [3, 42] assume
that the reflection is not in-focus and blurry. The ghosting
cue [32] is another assumption that holds when the glass is
thick. However, reflection in real-world images is diverse,
and these assumptions do not necessarily hold [19, 35]. As a
result, existing methods cannot perfectly remove reflection
with diverse appearance from real-world images [19].
We propose a novel reflection-free flash-only cue that facilitates inferring the reflection in an ambient image. This
cue is robust since it is independent of the appearance and
strength of reflection, unlike assumptions adopted in previous single image reflection removal methods [32, 42] or
flash-based methods [5]. The reflection-free cue is based
on a physics-based phenomenon of an image obtained by
subtracting an ambient image from the corresponding flash
image (in raw data space). This flash-only image is equivalent to an image captured under the flash-only illumination:
the environment is completely dark, and a single flash is the
sole light source. A key observation is that the reflection is

14811

