Multi-attentional Deepfake Detection
Hanqing Zhao1
Wenbo Zhou1,†
Dongdong Chen2
Tianyi Wei1
Weiming Zhang1,†
Nenghai Yu1
1
University of Science and Technology of China
Microsoft Cloud AI2
{zhq2015@mail, welbeckz@, bestwty@mail, zhangwm@, ynh@}.ustc.edu.cn
cddlyf@gmail.com

Abstract
Face forgery by deepfake is widely spread over the internet and has raised severe societal concerns. Recently,
how to detect such forgery contents has become a hot research topic and many deepfake detection methods have
been proposed. Most of them model deepfake detection
as a vanilla binary classification problem, i.e, first use a
backbone network to extract a global feature and then feed
it into a binary classifier (real/fake). But since the difference between the real and fake images in this task is often
subtle and local, we argue this vanilla solution is not optimal. In this paper, we instead formulate deepfake detection as a fine-grained classification problem and propose a
new multi-attentional deepfake detection network. Specifically, it consists of three key components: 1) multiple spatial attention heads to make the network attend to different local parts; 2) textural feature enhancement block to
zoom in the subtle artifacts in shallow features; 3) aggregate the low-level textural feature and high-level semantic
features guided by the attention maps. Moreover, to address
the learning difficulty of this network, we further introduce
a new regional independence loss and an attention guided
data augmentation strategy. Through extensive experiments
on different datasets, we demonstrate the superiority of our
method over the vanilla binary classifier counterparts, and
achieve state-of-the-art performance. The models will be
released recently at https://github.com/yoctta/
multiple-attention.

1. Introduction
Benefiting from the great progress in generative models, deepfake techniques have achieved significant success
recently and various face forgery methods [19, 41, 21, 31,
32, 44, 28, 38] have been proposed. As such techniques
can generate high-quality fake videos that are even indistinguishable for human eyes, they can easily be abused by ma† Corresponding Author.

Figure 1: Example of the multiple attentional regions obtained by our method. The attention regions are separated
and respond to different discriminative features.

licious users to cause severe societal problems or political
threats. To mitigate such risks,many deepfake detection approaches [27, 34, 22, 33, 26, 45] have been proposed. Most
of them model deepfake detection as a vanilla binary classification problem (real/fake). Basically, they often first use
a backbone network to extract global features of the suspect
image and then feed them into a binary classifier to discriminate the real and fake ones.
However, as the counterfeits become more and more realistic, the differences between real and fake ones will become more subtle and local, thus making such global feature based vanilla solutions work not well. But actually,
such subtle and local property shares a similar spirit as the
fine-grained classification problem. For example, in the
fine-grained bird classification task, some species look very
similar and only differentiate from each other by some small
and local differences, such as the shape and color of the
beak. Based on this observation, we propose to model deepfake detection as a special fine-grained classification problem with two categories.
Inspired by the success of parts based model in the

2185

