Deformed Implicit Field: Modeling 3D Shapes with Learned Dense Correspondence
Yu Deng*1,2 Jiaolong Yang2 Xin Tong2
1
Tsinghua University 2 Microsoft Research Asia
{t-yudeng,jiaoyan,xtong}@microsoft.com

Original

Embedded Shape

Transferred

Texture Transfer

Shape Editing

Figure 1. Our DIF-Net can produce 3D shapes with dense correspondences for object categories containing complex geometry variation and
structure differences. It enables high-quality texture transfer shown in the middle four columns, where the two smaller figures after each
transfer result show the color-coded correspondences (top) and their uncertainty (bottom; blue and red indicates low and high uncertainty
respectively). With our learned shape space and correspondence, shapes can be freely edited by simply moving one or a sparse set of
points, as shown in the last two columns.

Abstract
We propose a novel Deformed Implicit Field (DIF) representation for modeling 3D shapes of a category and generating dense correspondences among shapes. With DIF, a
3D shape is represented by a template implicit field shared
across the category, together with a 3D deformation field
and a correction field dedicated for each shape instance.
Shape correspondences can be easily established using
their deformation fields. Our neural network, dubbed DIFNet, jointly learns a shape latent space and these fields for
3D objects belonging to a category without using any correspondence or part label. The learned DIF-Net can also provides reliable correspondence uncertainty measurement reflecting shape structure discrepancy. Experiments show that
DIF-Net not only produces high-fidelity 3D shapes but also
builds high-quality dense correspondences across different
shapes. We also demonstrate several applications such
as texture transfer and shape editing, where our method
achieves compelling results that cannot be achieved by previous methods. 1
* This work was done when Yu Deng was an intern at MSRA.
1 Code URL: https://github.com/microsoft/DIF-Net.

1. Introduction
3D objects in a same class share some common shape
features and semantic correspondences, which can be used
to construct a deformable shape model beneficial for a diverse array of downstream tasks in 3D and 2D domains such
as shape understanding [35, 2], reconstruction [56, 10, 70],
manipulation [8, 28], and image synthesis [57, 62, 55].
Learning a 3D shape model with dense correspondences
is a longstanding task in computer vision and graphics.
However, existing works mostly focus on object classes
with consistent geometric topologies such as human face
and body [8, 61, 36, 40, 71]. Shapes in these object categories can be pre-aligned for 3D model construction. Recent deep learning based approaches directly learn a latent
space of 3D objects [63, 53, 1, 44]. Although these methods can model complex objects, they do not deal with dense
correspondences between 3D shapes.
In this paper, we investigate learning model of 3D shapes
and their dense correspondences for more generic objects
such as cars and chairs. Compared to human face and
body, these object classes exhibit much larger shape variations and structure changes, rendering correspondence con-

10286

