Generic Perceptual Loss for Modeling Structured Output Dependencies
Yifan Liu1 ,
1

Hao Chen1 ,

The University of Adelaide

Yu Chen2 ,
2

Automind

Abstract
The perceptual loss has been widely used as an effective
loss term in image synthesis tasks including image superresolution [16], and style transfer [14]. It was believed that
the success lies in the high-level perceptual feature representations extracted from CNNs pretrained with a large set
of images. Here we reveal that, what matters is the network structure instead of the trained weights. Without any
learning, the structure of a deep network is sufficient to
capture the dependencies between multiple levels of variable statistics using multiple layers of CNNs. This insight
removes the requirements of pre-training and a particular
network structure (commonly, VGG) that are previously assumed for the perceptual loss, thus enabling a significantly
wider range of applications. To this end, we demonstrate
that a randomly-weighted deep CNN can be used to model
the structured dependencies of outputs. On a few dense perpixel prediction tasks such as semantic segmentation, depth
estimation and instance segmentation, we show improved
results of using the extended randomized perceptual loss,
compared to the baselines using pixel-wise loss alone. We
hope that this simple, extended perceptual loss may serve as
a generic structured-output loss that is applicable to most
structured output learning tasks.

1. Introduction
Dense pixel-wise prediction tasks represent the most
important category of computer vision problems, ranging
from low-level image processing such as denoising, superresolution, through mid-level tasks such as stereo matching, to high-level understanding such as semantic/instance
segmentation. These tasks are naturally structured output
learning problems since the prediction variables often depend on each other. The pixel-wise loss serves as the unary
term for these tasks. Besides, the perceptual loss [14] was
introduced to capture perceptual information by measuring
discrepancy in high-level convolutional features extracted
from CNNs. It has been successfully used in various low* C. Shen is the corresponding author.

Wei Yin1 ,
3

Chunhua Shen1,3 *

Monash University, Australia

level image processing tasks, such as style transfer, and
super-resolution [14].
Previous works assume that the perceptual loss beneﬁts from the high-level perceptual features extracted from
CNNs pretrained with a large set of images (e.g., VGG
[23] pretrained on the ImageNet dataset. Relying on this
assumption, the perceptual loss is limited to a specific network structure (commonly, VGG) with pre-trained weights,
which is not able to take arbitrary signals as the input. In
this work, we reveal that, contrary to this belief, the success
of the perceptual loss is not necessarily dependent on the
ability of a pretrained CNN in extracting high-level perceptual features. Instead, without any learning, the structure of
a multi-layered CNN is sufﬁcient to capture a large amount
of interaction statistics for various output forms. We argue that what matters is the deep network architecture rather
than the pretrained weights.
To verify the statement, we conduct a pilot experiment
on image super-resolution. Apart from using the pretrained
VGG net for perceptual loss, we use a randomly-weighted
network. The results with the randomly-weighted network
are on par with that of the pretrained VGG, which are
both visually improved than using the per-pixel loss alone
(see Figure 1). This indicates that the pretrained weights—
previously assumed for the perceptual loss—is not essential
to the success of the perceptual loss. We may conclude from
this experiment that it is the deep network structure, rather
than learnt weights, plays the core role.
Given a target y or a prediction ŷ as an input, a randomlyweighted network f (·) can work as a function to explore hierarchical dependencies between variable statistics through
the convolution operations in multiple layers. Thus, a
generic perceptual loss for structured output learning can
be computed by comparing the discrepancy between f j (y)
and f j (ŷ). Here j indexes a particular layer of the network
f (·). Thus, this enables the perceptual loss1 to be applied to
a wider range of structured output learning tasks.
Structured information is important in dense per-pixel
prediction problems, such as semantic segmentation [17],
1 Here we still use the notion of ‘perceptual’ as it was ﬁrstly introduced in [14] even though broadly this loss is more about capturing interdependencies in variables, instead of extracting perceptual features.

5424

