Composing Photos Like a Photographer
Chaoyi Hong† Shuaiyuan Du† Ke Xian† Hao Lu† Zhiguo Cao†, * Weicai Zhong‡
†
Key Laboratory of Image Processing and Intelligent Control, Ministry of Education
School of Artificial Intelligence and Automation, Huazhong University of Science and Technology
‡
Huawei CBG Consumer Cloud Service Search Product & Big Data Platform Department
{cyhong, zgcao}@hust.edu.cn

Abstract

Professional photography is expensive, because a wellcaptured photo needs to take many factors into account.
One of the most important factors is composition. Composition by definition refers to “the nature of something’s
ingredients or constituents; the way in which a whole or
mixture is made up”.1 In photography, not only do those
visual constituents of interest matter, but they compose following an aesthetic standard. Aesthetic composition, however, requires expert knowledge and extensive training. Can
ordinary people compose photos like a photographer? The
desire to popularize such knowledge and experience in everyday life has driven enthusiasm for an interesting research
* Corresponding author.
1 Definition by Oxford dictionary.

…

1. Introduction

1.03
Worst

Scoring & Ranking

Candidates-Presetting

Cropping Result

(a) Prior Arts: Cropping by Ranking
0.80

Clues for Diagonal

…

We show that explicit modeling of composition rules
benefits image cropping. Image cropping is considered a
promising way to automate aesthetic composition in professional photography. Existing efforts, however, only model
such professional knowledge implicitly, e.g., by ranking
from comparative candidates. Inspired by the observation
that natural composition traits always follow a specific rule,
we propose to learn such rules in a discriminative manner,
and more importantly, to incorporate learned composition
clues explicitly in the model. To this end, we introduce
the concept of the key composition map (KCM) to encode
the composition rules. The KCM can reveal the common
laws hidden behind different composition rules and can inform the cropping model of what is important in composition. With the KCM, we present a novel cropping-bycomposition paradigm and instantiate a network to implement composition-aware image cropping. Extensive experiments on two benchmarks justify that our approach enables
effective, interpretable, and fast image cropping.

4.58
Best

0.05

Merging

0.15

Key Composition Map

Cropping Result

Clues for Horizontal
Composition
Distribution

0.80
Diagonal

0.15
Horizontal

0.05
Others

(b) Ours: Cropping by Composition

Figure 1. High-level ideas between prior arts and ours.
(a) Prior image cropping methods follow a cropping-by-ranking
paradigm, where no composition clue is modeled explicitly; (b)
Our idea is to guide image cropping by composition. Our approach achieves this by discovering the key composition map and
the composition distribution of the image, which can produce wellcomposed, interpretable cropping results.

topic in computer vision—image cropping.
Given an arbitrarily captured image, image cropping
aims to remove extraneous areas and to find a region in
which visual constituents conform to aesthetic composition [38]. Aesthetic composition is an art. As the humanist
photographer Henri Cartier-Bresson said, “In a photograph,
composition is the result of a simultaneous coalition, the organic coordination of elements seen by the eye.” However,
it is not immediately clear how such organic coordination
can be achieved by image cropping.
Aesthetics-inspired approaches consider that good image
cropping should be able to extract the most ‘attractive’ area,
expecting that such an area obeys photographic composition
rules and aesthetic attributes [6, 10]. However, these approaches typically follow a cropping-by-ranking paradigm,
without explicit modeling of the composition rules. As

7057

