DAT: Training Deep Networks Robust to Label-Noise by Matching the Feature
Distributions
Yuntao Qu1 *, Shasha Mo1†, Jianwei Niu2,3,4
1

2

School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang University
State Key Laboratory of Virtual Reality Technology and Systems, School of Computer Science and Engineering, Beihang University
3
Hangzhou Innovation Institute of Beihang University
4
Zhengzhou University Research Institute of Industrial Technology, Zhengzhou University
{tyqnn, moshasha, niujianwei}@buaa.edu.cn

Abstract
In real application scenarios, the performance of deep
networks may be degraded when the dataset contains noisy
labels. Existing methods for learning with noisy labels are
limited by two aspects. Firstly, methods based on the noise
probability modeling can only be applied to class-level
noisy labels. Secondly, others based on the memorization
effect outperform in synthetic noise but get weak promotion
in real-world noisy datasets. To solve these problems, this
paper proposes a novel label-noise robust method named
Discrepant Adversarial Training (DAT). The DAT method
has ability of enforcing prominent feature extraction by
matching feature distribution between clean and noisy data.
Therefore, under the noise-free feature representation, the
deep network can simply output the correct result. To better
capture the divergence between the noisy and clean distribution, a new metric is designed to change the distribution
divergence into computable. By minimizing the proposed
metric with a min-max training of discrepancy on classifiers and generators, DAT can match noisy data to clean
data in the feature space. To the best of our knowledge,
DAT is the first to address the noisy label problem from the
perspective of the feature distribution. Experiments on synthetic and real-world noisy datasets demonstrate that DAT
can consistently outperform other state-of-the-art methods.
Codes are available at https://github.com/Tyqnn0323/DAT.

1. Introduction
Benefitting from the support of large-scale annotation datasets like ImageNet, deep networks have achieved
eyeball-popping performance on various vision problems
* The first two authors contributed equally.
† corresponding author.

such as image classification, object detection and semantic segmentation, etc. However, annotating data is an expensive and time-consuming task, especially in manual execution. Collecting labels from crowdsourcing or crawling
websites is a substitutable scheme to make annotation faster
and cheaper. Inevitably, noisy labels will be introduced
in the process of these low-quality-annotations. As more
complicated network structures are designed for obtaining
stronger fitting ability, the deep network has higher capacity to overfit noisy labels. It raises an urgent demand on
investigating robust learning methods against noisy labels.
Existing methods focus on modeling noise probability
or obtaining clean labels by the memorization effect. Noise
modeling methods require a precondition, named the conditional independent assumption (i.e., noisy labels are only
related to ground-true labels, but not to the data samples)
[1, 2, 3, 4]. This conditional independent assumption leads
such methods to only apply to class-level noisy labels. The
memorization effect means that deep networks learn clean
samples in a simple pattern first and then gradually learn
other noisy samples [5]. Based on this fact, such methods
filter noisy samples or correct noisy labels with outputs of
network [6, 7, 8, 9]. Nevertheless, Jiang et al. found that the
memorization effect will lose efficacy on real-world noisy
dataset, for the reason that the real-world noisy distribution
is close to the original distribution [10]. Research efforts in
training with real-world noisy data based on the memorization effect achieve only marginally effective.
This paper provides a distinctive perspective that noisy
labels are processed in the feature distribution instead of label distribution. To achieve this promising methodology,
a novel method, named the Discrepant Adversarial Training
(DAT), is proposed in this paper. DAT stands out from existing approaches in two aspects. Firstly, DAT avoids the conditional independent assumption and focuses on the feature
distribution rather than the label distribution. As a result,

6821

