Primitive Representation Learning for Scene Text Recognition
Ruijie Yan
Liangrui Peng
Shanyu Xiao
Gang Yao
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology
Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{yrj17, xiaosy19, yg19}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, penglr@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Scene text recognition is a challenging task due to diverse variations of text instances in natural scene images. Conventional methods based on CNN-RNN-CTC or
encoder-decoder with attention mechanism may not fully
investigate stable and efficient feature representations for
multi-oriented scene texts. In this paper, we propose a primitive representation learning method that aims to exploit
intrinsic representations of scene text images. We model
elements in feature maps as the nodes of an undirected
graph. A pooling aggregator and a weighted aggregator
are proposed to learn primitive representations, which are
transformed into high-level visual text representations by
graph convolutional networks. A Primitive REpresentation
learning Network (PREN) is constructed to use the visual
text representations for parallel decoding. Furthermore,
by integrating visual text representations into an encoderdecoder model with the 2D attention mechanism, we propose a framework called PREN2D to alleviate the misalignment problem in attention-based methods. Experimental results on both English and Chinese scene text recognition
tasks demonstrate that PREN keeps a balance between accuracy and efficiency, while PREN2D achieves state-of-theart performance.

1. Introduction
In recent years, there have been increasing demands for
scene text recognition in various real-world applications,
such as image search, instant translation, and robot navigation. With the emergence of deep learning, there are two
main scene text recognition frameworks. One is the CRNN
framework [48, 14, 15, 44, 31, 17] that encodes images into
hidden representations by CNNs and RNNs, and uses the
connectionist temporal classification (CTC) [10] for decoding, as shown in Fig. 1 (a). The other is the attention-based
encoder-decoder framework [2, 44, 24, 7, 3, 32, 43, 54, 60,
29, 40] that can learn to align output texts with feature maps,
as shown in Fig. 1 (b).

Figure 1. Illustrations of different scene text recognition frameworks. (a) CTC-based methods, where “ ” denotes the blank symbol; (b) attention-based methods; (c) the proposed PREN.

However, the above methods still have room for improvement. On the one hand, for CTC-based methods, the
extracted feature sequences contain redundant information
that may degrade the performance on irregular text images.
On the other hand, attention-based encoder-decoder methods usually suffer from the misalignment problem [7, 54],
because the alignment between feature maps and texts is
highly sensitive to previous decoded results, which lack
global visual information. Therefore, to handle the diversity
of texts in natural scenes, it is important to exploit intrinsic
representations of scene text images.
In this paper, we propose a novel scene text recognition framework that learns primitive representations of
scene text images. Inspired by graph representation learning methods [22, 12, 38], we model the elements in feature
maps as nodes of an undirected graph. Primitive representations are learned by globally aggregating features over the
coordinate space and are then projected into the visual text
representation space, as shown in Fig. 1 (c).
The “primitive” representations refer to a set of base
vectors that can be transformed into character-by-character
vector representations in the so-called visual text representation space. The visual text representations are generated

284

