Strengthen Learning Tolerance for Weakly Supervised Object Localization
Guangyu Guo1 , Junwei Han1 , Fang Wan2 , Dingwen Zhang1∗
1

The Brain and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an, China
2
University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
https://nwpu-brainlab.gitee.io/index_en

1. Introduction
Object detection [22, 18] has made great progress in recent years due to the success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [27, 30, 9, 15, 17]. However, the conventional methods would still suffer from the heavy labor costs
for providing the bounding box annotations, which makes
researchers start paying more attention on the weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) problem [16, 53, 28,
48, 6, 19, 5]. Different from the fully supervised methods,
∗ Corresponding author.

Common Raven White-necked Raven

epoch4

epoch20
…

(b) Sensitive to
visual stimulus

Weakly supervised object localization (WSOL) aims at
learning to localize objects of interest by only using the
image-level labels as the supervision. While numerous efforts have been made in this field, recent approaches still
suffer from two challenges: one is the part domination issue while the other is the learning robustness issue. Specifically, the former makes the localizer prone to the local discriminative object regions rather than the desired whole object, and the latter makes the localizer over-sensitive to the
variations of the input images so that one can hardly obtain localization results robust to the arbitrary visual stimulus. To solve these issues, we propose a novel framework
to strengthen the learning tolerance, referred to as SLT-Net,
for WSOL. Specifically, we consider two-fold learning tolerance strengthening mechanisms. One is the semantic tolerance strengthening mechanism, which allows the localizer
to make mistakes for classifying similar semantics so that
it will not concentrate too much on the discriminative local
regions. The other is the visual stimuli tolerance strengthening mechanism, which enforces the localizer to be robust to
different image transformations so that the prediction quality will not be sensitive to each specific input image. Finally, we implement comprehensive experimental comparisons on two widely-used datasets CUB and ILSVRC2012,
which demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed approach.

(a) Part
domination

Abstract

…

Training Procedure

Figure 1. Example of typical WSOL issues. (a) Part domination:
focusing on most discriminative parts of the object. (b) Sensitive
to visual stimulus: the localization accuracy of different instances
show the different convergence trend. The IOU values are shown
in white text; the predicted and ground-truth boxes are shown in
green and red, respectively.

WSOL methods only require the image-level annotations
and thus can save a lot of time and labor costs.
Previous WSOL methods can be divided into two main
categories, i.e., the unified localization-classification framework and the separated localization-classification framework. The former framework predicts the localization map
and classification results in the same network which has
been exhaustively studied in the prior works [53, 25, 28,
48, 49, 6, 40, 20]. While the latter framework is appeared
in two of the most recent works [42, 19]. These methods
achieve localization and classification in two separate networks, where off-the-shelf CNN models are directly used
as the classifiers. Specifically, in GC-Net [19], the authors
first generate a geometry constrained mask to split foreground and background. Then, they optimize the obtained
mask under the guidance of a trained classifier. Different
form GC-Net, PSOL [42] directly uses an co-localization
methods DDT [53] to generate pseudo bounding boxes
for the localization branch. Since the unified localizationclassification framework has to change the network architecture to obtain better localization performance, the sepa17403

