Rethinking Text Segmentation:
A Novel Dataset and A Text-Specific Refinement Approach
Xingqian Xu1 , Zhifei Zhang2 , Zhaowen Wang2 , Brian Price2 , Zhonghao Wang1 , Humphrey Shi3,1
1

UIUC, 2 Adobe Research, 3 University of Oregon

Abstract
Text segmentation is a prerequisite in many real-world
text-related tasks, e.g., text style transfer, and scene text removal. However, facing the lack of high-quality datasets
and dedicated investigations, this critical prerequisite has
been left as an assumption in many works, and has been
largely overlooked by current research. To bridge this
gap, we proposed TextSeg, a large-scale fine-annotated
text dataset with six types of annotations: word- and
character-wise bounding polygons, masks, and transcriptions. We also introduce Text Refinement Network (TexRNet), a novel text segmentation approach that adapts to
the unique properties of text, e.g. non-convex boundary, diverse texture, etc., which often impose burdens on traditional segmentation models. In our TexRNet, we propose
text-specific network designs to address such challenges,
including key features pooling and attention-based similarity checking. We also introduce trimap and discriminator
losses that show significant improvement in text segmentation. Extensive experiments are carried out on both our
TextSeg dataset and other existing datasets. We demonstrate that TexRNet consistently improves text segmentation performance by nearly 2% compared to other state-ofthe-art segmentation methods. Our dataset and code can
be found at https://github.com/SHI-Labs/Rethinking-TextSegmentation.

1. Introduction
Text segmentation is the foundation of many text-related
computer vision tasks. It has been studied for decades as
one of the major research directions in computer vision,
and it continuously plays an important role in many applications [2, 55, 56, 47, 9]. Meanwhile, the rapid advances of deep neural nets in recent years promoted all sorts
of new text-related research topics, as well as new vision
challenges on text. Smart applications, such as font style
transfer, scene text removal, and interactive text image editing, require effective text segmentation approaches to parse

Figure 1: Example images and annotations from the proposed TextSeg dataset. From left to right are images, word
and character bounding polygons, pixel-level word (dark
gray) and word-effect (light gray) masks, and pixel-level
character masks.
text accurately from complex scenes. Without any doubt,
text segmentation is critical for industrial usages because
it could upgrade the traditional text processing tools to be
more intelligent and automatic, relaxing tedious efforts on
manually specifying text regions.
However, modern text segmentation has been left behind
in both datasets and methods. The latest public text segmentation challenge was in 2013-2015, hosted by ICDAR [26].
Since then, three datasets: Total-Text [10], COCO TS [5],
and MLT S [6], were introduced. However, Total-Text is
limited in scale, and the labeling quality in COCO TS and
MLT S needs further improvement (Figure 5). Moreover,
all the three datasets contain only common scene text, discouraging text in other visual conditions, e.g., artistic design and text effects. As a result, these datasets do not
meet modern research standards, such as large-scale and
fine-annotated. Thus, we propose a new text segmentation
dataset: TextSeg, that collects images from a wider range
of sources, including both scene and design text, and with a
richer set of accurate annotations. This dataset would lead
to further advancements in text segmentation research.
Additionally, text segmentation algorithms and methods

12045

