Dual-stream Multiple Instance Learning Network
for Whole Slide Image Classification with Self-supervised Contrastive Learning
Bin Li1,2 , Yin Li3,4* , Kevin W. Eliceiri1,2,5*
Department of Biomedical Engineering, University of Wisconsin-Madison
2
Morgridge Institute for Research, Madison, WI USA
3
Department of Biostatistics and Medical Informatics, University of Wisconsin-Madison
4
Department of Computer Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison
5
Department of Medical Physics, University of Wisconsin-Madison
1

{bli346, yin.li, eliceiri}@wisc.edu

Abstract
We address the challenging problem of whole slide image
(WSI) classification. WSIs have very high resolutions and
usually lack localized annotations. WSI classification can
be cast as a multiple instance learning (MIL) problem when
only slide-level labels are available. We propose a MILbased method for WSI classification and tumor detection
that does not require localized annotations. Our method
has three major components. First, we introduce a novel
MIL aggregator that models the relations of the instances in
a dual-stream architecture with trainable distance measurement. Second, since WSIs can produce large or unbalanced
bags that hinder the training of MIL models, we propose to
use self-supervised contrastive learning to extract good representations for MIL and alleviate the issue of prohibitive
memory cost for large bags. Third, we adopt a pyramidal
fusion mechanism for multiscale WSI features, and further
improve the accuracy of classification and localization. Our
model is evaluated on two representative WSI datasets. The
classification accuracy of our model compares favorably to
fully-supervised methods, with less than 2% accuracy gap
across datasets. Our results also outperform all previous
MIL-based methods. Additional benchmark results on standard MIL datasets further demonstrate the superior performance of our MIL aggregator on general MIL problems.

1. Introduction
Whole slide scanning is a powerful and widely used tool
to visualize tissue sections in disease diagnosis, medical education, and pathological research [10, 38]. The scanning
* Co-corresponding authors.

Figure 1. Decision boundary learned in MIL. Left: Max pooling
delineates the decision boundary according to the highest-score
instances in each bag. Right: DSMIL measures the distance between each instance and the highest-score instance.

converts tissues on glass slides into digital whole slide images (WSIs) for assessment, sharing, and analysis. Automated disease detection in WSIs has been a long-standing
challenge for computer aided diagnostic systems. We have
begun to see some recent success from computer vision and
medical image analysis communities [6, 44, 3, 24, 27, 29],
fueled by the advances in deep learning.
WSIs have extremely high resolutions — a typical
pathology image has a size of 40, 000 × 40, 000. Consequently, the most widely used paradigm for WSI classification is patch-based processing — a WSI is divided into
thousands of small patches and further examined by a classifier e.g., a convolutional neural network (CNN) [21, 53,
35, 11, 33]. In clinics, a disease-positive tissue section
might only take a small portion (e.g., less than 20%) of the
whole tissue, leading to a large number of disease-negative
patches. Unfortunately, with gigapixel resolution, patchlevel labeling by expert pathologists is very time consuming and difficult to scale. To address this challenge, several
recent studies [21, 3, 18] have demonstrated the promise
of weakly supervised WSI classification, where only slidelevel labels are used to train a patch-based classifier.

14318

