Learning a Self-Expressive Network for Subspace Clustering
Shangzhi Zhang† , Chong You‡ , René Vidal§ and Chun-Guang Li†
†
School of Artificial Intelligence, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications
‡
Department of EECS, University of California, Berkeley, CA
§
Mathematical Institute for Data Science, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD

Abstract
State-of-the-art subspace clustering methods are based
on the self-expressive model, which represents each data
point as a linear combination of other data points. However, such methods are designed for a finite sample dataset
and lack the ability to generalize to out-of-sample data.
Moreover, since the number of self-expressive coefficients
grows quadratically with the number of data points, their
ability to handle large-scale datasets is often limited. In
this paper, we propose a novel framework for subspace clustering, termed Self-Expressive Network (SENet), which employs a properly designed neural network to learn a selfexpressive representation of the data. We show that our
SENet can not only learn the self-expressive coefficients
with desired properties on the training data, but also handle out-of-sample data. Besides, we show that SENet can
also be leveraged to perform subspace clustering on largescale datasets. Extensive experiments conducted on synthetic data and real world benchmark data validate the effectiveness of the proposed method. In particular, SENet
yields highly competitive performance on MNIST, Fashion
MNIST and Extended MNIST and state-of-the-art performance on CIFAR-10.

1. Introduction
With technological advances in data acquisition, storage
and processing, there is a surge in the availability of largescale databases in computer vision. While the development
of modern machine learning techniques, such as deep learning, has led to great success in analyzing big data, such
methods require a large amount of annotated data which is
often costly to obtain. Extracting patterns and clusters from
unlabeled big data has become an important open problem.
We consider the problem of clustering large-scale unlabeled data under the assumption that each cluster is approximated by a low-dimensional subspace of the highdimensional ambient space, a.k.a. subspace clustering [62,
63]. This problem has wide applications in image clustering

[23, 17], motion segmentation [12, 9], hybrid system identification [61, 5], cancer subtype clustering [44, 32], hyperspectral image segmentation [86] and so on.
Self-expressive model [16] is one of the most popular
and successful methods for subspace clustering. Given a
data matrix X = [x1 , · · · , xN ] ∈ IRD×N whose columns
are drawn from a union of n subspaces, the self-expressive
model expresses each data point xj ∈ IRD as a linear combination of other data points, i.e.,
X
xj =
cij xi ,
(1)
i6=j

where {cij }i6=j are self-expressive coefficients. A remarkable property of the self-expressive model is that solutions to (1) that minimize certain regularization function on
the coefficients have the subspace-preserving property, i.e.,
nonzero coefficients cij occur only between xi and xj lying
in the same subspace [16, 17, 37, 41, 56, 68, 83, 79, 76, 40].
Consequently, correct clustering can be obtained by defining an affinity between any pair of data points xi and xj
as, e.g., |cij | + |cji |, and applying spectral clustering to the
affinity. Recent developments further extend the applicability of self-expressive models to the case where the data are
corrupted by noise [66, 57, 67] and outliers [56, 82], are imbalanced over classes [77], or possess missing entries [59].
Despite its great empirical performance and broad theoretical guarantees for correctness, the self-expressive model
suffers from the limitation that it requires solving for a selfexpressive matrix of size N × N , which is computationally
prohibitive for large-scale data. Although scalable subspace
clustering methods based on subsampling [51], sketching
[58] or learning a compact dictionary [3, 54] already exist,
they do not have broad theoretical guarantees for correctness and sacrifice accuracy for scalability. In addition, the
self-expressive coefficients computed for a set of data cannot be used to produce self-expressive coefficients for previously unseen data, posing challenges for learning in an
online setting and for out-of-sample data.
In this work, we introduce the self-expressive network
(SENet) to learn a self-expressive model for subspace clus-

12393

