Learning Triadic Belief Dynamics in Nonverbal Communication from Videos
Lifeng Fan*, Shuwen Qiu˚ , Zilong Zheng, Tao Gao, Song-Chun Zhu, Yixin Zhu
UCLA Center for Vision, Cognition, Learning, and Autonomy
{lfan, s.qiu, z.zheng}@ucla.edu, {tao.gao, sczhu}@stat.ucla.edu, yixin.zhu@ucla.edu
https://github.com/LifengFan/Triadic-Belief-Dynamics

Abstract
Humans possess a unique social cognition capability [43, 20]; nonverbal communication can convey rich social information among agents. In contrast, such crucial social characteristics are mostly missing in the existing scene
understanding literature. In this paper, we incorporate different nonverbal communication cues (e.g., gaze, human
poses, and gestures) to represent, model, learn, and infer
agents’ mental states from pure visual inputs. Crucially,
such a mental representation takes the agent’s belief into
account so that it represents what the true world state is and
infers the beliefs in each agent’s mental state, which may
differ from the true world states. By aggregating different
beliefs and true world states, our model essentially forms
“ﬁve minds” during the interactions between two agents.
This “ﬁve minds” model differs from prior works that infer beliefs in an inﬁnite recursion; instead, agents’ beliefs
are converged into a “common mind” [31, 47]. Based on
this representation, we further devise a hierarchical energybased model that jointly tracks and predicts all ﬁve minds.
From this new perspective, a social event is interpreted by
a series of nonverbal communication and belief dynamics, which transcends the classic keyframe video summary.
In the experiments, we demonstrate that using such a social account provides a better video summary on videos
with rich social interactions compared with state-of-the-art
keyframe video summary methods.

1. Introduction
“The human body is the best picture of the human soul.”
— Ludwig Wittgenstein [32]

We live in a world with a plethora of animate and goaldirected agents [60], or at least it is how humans perceive
and construct [49] the world in our mental state [24]. The
iconic Heider-Simmel display [19] is a quintessential stimulus, wherein human participants are given videos of simple shapes roaming around the space. In this experiment,
* Lifeng Fan and Shuwen Qiu contributed equally.

humans have a strong inclination to interpret the observed
featureless motions composed of simple shapes as a storytelling description, such as a hero saving a victim from
a bully. This social cognition account of human vision is
largely missing in the computational literature of scene understanding or, more broadly, the ﬁeld of computer vision.
In the ﬁeld of social cognition, researchers have identiﬁed two unique components that distinguish human adults
from infants and other primates [43]. The ﬁrst component
is “representational Theory of Mind (ToM),” the ability
to attribute mental states to oneself and others, to understand that others have perspectives and mental states different from one’s own, as well as using these abilities to recognize false belief [39]. In the theoretical construct of mental
states, mainstream psychology and related disciplines have
traditionally treated belief as one simplest form, and therefore one of the building blocks of conscious thought [23].
Belief can be constructed as mental objects with semantic attributes; cognitive states and processes are constituted by the occurrence, transformation, and storage of such
information-bearing structure [38]. The second component
is the triadic relations: You, and Me, collaboratively looking at, working on, or talking about This [47]. Much power
of human social cognition depends on the ability to form
representations with a triadic structure [43].
To promote social cognition in computer vision, we focus on belief dynamics in nonverbal communication. Here,
belief is deﬁned as an entity and its attributes (e.g., location), and belief dynamics (i.e., the change of belief) are
naturally and completely summarized using four categories:
occur indicates an agent becomes aware of an object at a
certain location, update means an agent knows the object’s
attribute was updated, disappear denotes that an agent loses
track of the object’s attribute, and null is no change. We emphasize on triadic relations emerged during nonverbal communication, including No Communication, Attention Following, and Joint Attention [12, 1]: No Communication indicates no social interaction between the two agents, Attention Following is a one-way observation, and Joint Attention
means that two agents have the same intention to share attention on a common stimulus and both know that they are
sharing the attention [47]; see an illustration in Fig. 1.

7312

