Non-Salient Region Object Mining for Weakly Supervised Semantic
Segmentation
Yazhou Yao1∗, Tao Chen1∗ , Guo-Sen Xie2†, Chuanyi Zhang1 ,
Fumin Shen3 , Qi Wu4 , Zhenmin Tang1 , Jian Zhang5
1
Nanjing University of Science and Technology; 2 Mohamed bin Zayed University of AI
3
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China; 4 University of Adelaide;
5
University of Technology Sydney

Abstract
Semantic segmentation aims to classify every pixel of an
input image. Considering the difficulty of acquiring dense
labels, researchers have recently been resorting to weak
labels to alleviate the annotation burden of segmentation.
However, existing works mainly concentrate on expanding
the seed of pseudo labels within the image’s salient region.
In this work, we propose a non-salient region object mining
approach for weakly supervised semantic segmentation. We
introduce a graph-based global reasoning unit to strengthen
the classification network’s ability to capture global relations among disjoint and distant regions. This helps the
network activate the object features outside the salient area.
To further mine the non-salient region objects, we propose
to exert the segmentation network’s self-correction ability.
Specifically, a potential object mining module is proposed
to reduce the false-negative rate in pseudo labels. Moreover, we propose a non-salient region masking module for
complex images to generate masked pseudo labels. Our
non-salient region masking module helps further discover
the objects in the non-salient region. Extensive experiments on the PASCAL VOC dataset demonstrate state-ofthe-art results compared to current methods. The source
codes are available at https://github.com/NUSTMachine-Intelligence-Laboratory/nsrom.

1. Introduction
Semantic segmentation is the task of classifying every
pixel of an input image. It plays a vital role in many computer vision tasks, such as image editing and medical image analysis [32, 47]. Benefiting from the recent advances
of deep learning, semantic segmentation has achieved remarkable progress. However, the training of deep convolu∗ Equal contribution.
† Corresponding author.

(a) Image

(b) Saliency Map

(c) Traditional Methods

(d) Ours

Figure 1. Comparison between the traditional methods and ours.
(a) Input image. (b) The saliency map. (c) Results of the traditional methods. They mainly focus on expanding the seed of
pseudo labels within the salient region of the image. They only
obtain good segmentation results in conspicuous regions. (d) Our
results. Our method also mines the object in the non-salient region
and can get better results both in and outside the salient region.
Best viewed in color.

tional neural networks (CNNs) usually requires large-scale
datasets [56, 55, 59, 57, 58]. Moreover, obtaining precise
pixel-wise annotations for semantic segmentation demands
intensive labor efforts and is quite time-consuming. One
promising approach to address the annotation problem for
semantic segmentation is to learn from weak labels, such as
image-level annotations [29, 51, 21, 8, 23, 2, 52, 24], bounding boxes [14, 26, 43], points [4], and scribbles [33, 46].
Among these weak supervisions, image-level labels are the
easiest format to annotate and have been widely studied
in various weakly supervised methods. However, semantic segmentation supervised with image-level labels remains
a challenging task. Therefore, this paper follows the current trend and focuses on leveraging image-level labels to
achieve weakly supervised semantic segmentation (WSSS).
To tackle the task of WSSS with only image-level labels, visualization-based approaches [63] have been widely

2623

