Deep Lesion Tracker: Monitoring Lesions in 4D Longitudinal Imaging Studies
Jinzheng Cai1 Youbao Tang1 Ke Yan1 Adam P. Harrison1 Jing Xiao2 Gigin Lin3 Le Lu1
1

PAII Inc. 2 Ping An Technology 3 Chang Gung Memorial Hospital

Abstract
Monitoring treatment response in longitudinal studies
plays an important role in clinical practice. Accurately
identifying lesions across serial imaging follow-up is the
core to the monitoring procedure. Typically this incorporates both image and anatomical considerations. However, matching lesions manually is labor-intensive and
time-consuming. In this work, we present deep lesion
tracker (DLT), a deep learning approach that uses both
appearance- and anatomical-based signals. To incorporate
anatomical constraints, we propose an anatomical signal
encoder, which prevents lesions being matched with visually similar but spurious regions. In addition, we present
a new formulation for Siamese networks that avoids the
heavy computational loads of 3D cross-correlation. To
present our network with greater varieties of images, we
also propose a self-supervised learning (SSL) strategy to
train trackers with unpaired images, overcoming barriers
to data collection. To train and evaluate our tracker, we
introduce and release the first lesion tracking benchmark,
consisting of 3891 lesion pairs from the public DeepLesion
database. The proposed method, DLT, locates lesion centers with a mean error distance of 7mm. This is 5% better than a leading registration algorithm while running 14
times faster on whole CT volumes. We demonstrate even
greater improvements over detector or similarity-learning
alternatives. DLT also generalizes well on an external clinical test set of 100 longitudinal studies, achieving 88% accuracy. Finally, we plug DLT into an automatic tumor monitoring workflow where it leads to an accuracy of 85% in
assessing lesion treatment responses, which is only 0.46%
lower than the accuracy of manual inputs.

1. Introduction
Monitoring treatment response by identifying and measuring corresponding lesions is critical in radiological workflows [20, 40, 1, 47]. Manually conducting these procedures
is labor-intensive, as expert clinicians must review multiple images and go back and forth between these images for
comparison. This is usually subject to considerable inter-

Figure 1. Comparison of our approach with two state-of-the-art
approaches for 3D tracking. The proposed DLT can predict lesion
centers more precisely than SiamRPN++ [29] and DEEDS [22].

observer variability [48]. Therefore, computer aided tools
have the opportunity to lower costs, increase turnaround
speeds, and improve reliability.
Automatic image-based lesion monitoring can be decomposed into several sub-procedures: (1) detect lesions of
interest; (2) then track instances of the same lesion across
different time points; and (3) measure changes among the
identified instances. The first step of detecting lesions of interest can be formulated as object detection. In general, the
computer vision field has made progress toward this problem [21, 31, 65]. However, medical imaging has its distinct
challenges as the data is often in 3D format, e.g., computed
tomography (CT), and usually the required annotations are
unavailable. Therefore, there are efforts to improve object
detection with medical images [27, 45, 55, 12, 58, 49, 44].
Similarly step (3) also has many viable solutions because
it can be formulated as (3D) object segmentation, which
is a fundamental topic that attracts attentions from both
computer vision [34, 56, 15] and medical image analysis
[42, 38, 17, 43, 11, 50]. In contrast, step (2), tracking the
same lesion across different time points, is not as well developed as lesion detection and segmentation. Part of the
lack of development can be attributed to the lack of good
benchmark datasets to evaluate performance. In this work,
we address this by both introducing a public benchmark and
also formulating a powerful lesion tracking solution, called
DLT, that can accurately match instances of the same lesion

15159

