Optimal Gradient Checkpoint Search for Arbitrary Computation Graphs
Jianwei Feng and Dong Huang
Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
jfeng1@andrew.cmu.edu, donghuang@cmu.edu

Abstract
Deep Neural Networks(DNNs) require huge GPU memory when training on modern image/video databases. Unfortunately, the GPU memory is physically finite, which limits the image resolutions and batch sizes that could be used
in training for better DNN performance. Unlike solutions
that require physically upgrade GPUs, the Gradient CheckPointing(GCP) training trades computation for more memory beyond existing GPU hardware. GCP only stores a
subset of intermediate tensors, called Gradient Checkpoints
(GCs), during forward. Then during backward, extra local
forwards are conducted to compute the missing tensors. The
total training memory cost becomes the sum of (1) the memory cost of the gradient checkpoints and (2) the maximum
memory cost of local forwards. To achieve maximal memory cut-offs, one needs optimal algorithms to select GCs.
Existing GCP approaches rely on either manual input of
GCs or heuristics-based GC search on Linear Computation
Graphs (LCGs), and cannot apply to Arbitrary Computation Graphs(ACGs). In this paper, we present theories and
optimal algorithms on GC selection that, for the first time,
are applicable to ACGs and achieve the maximal memory
cut-offs. Extensive experiments show that our approach not
only outperforms existing approaches (only applicable on
LCGs), and is applicable to a vast family of LCG and ACG
networks, such as Alexnet, VGG, ResNet, Densenet, Inception Net and highly complicated DNNs by Network Architecture Search. Our work enables GCP training on ACGs,
and cuts off up-to 80% of training memory1 with a moderate
time overhead (∼ 30%-50%). Codes are available2 .

1. Introduction
Deep Neural Networks(DNNs) require huge GPU memory when training on modern image/video databases.
For popular backbone DNNs used for image fea1 Cutting off 80% of training memory means one can double the input
image size or quadruple the batch size on the same GPUs.
2 https://github.com/lordfjw/OptimalGradCheckpointing

Figure 1: Regular Training vs. Gradient CheckPointing(GCP) Training. (a) The regular training stores all tensors during forward, and uses these tensors to compute gradients during backward. (b) GCP stores a subset of tensors during the first forward, and conducts extra local reforwards to compute tensors and gradients during backward. Our approach automatically searches the optimal
set of Gradient Checkpoints (GCs) for memory cut-off.
Such that on the same physical GPU memory (e.g., in 4
RTX2080Ti GPUs), GCP training can accommodate models that require 2+ times extra GPU memory.

ture extraction, such as AlexNet [17], VGG [29]
and ResNet [14], the memory cost increases quadratically with the input image resolution and network
depth. For example, given a median size input tensor of [BatchSize × Channel × W idth × Height] =
[32, 3, 224, 224], ResNet101 requires around 4 GB memory
only to store feature tensors and gradients in training (software overheads not included). In more challenging tasks,
DNNs that detect small objects and large number of ob111433

