SimPLE: Similar Pseudo Label Exploitation for Semi-Supervised Classification
Zijian Hu∗ Zhengyu Yang∗ Xuefeng Hu Ram Nevatia
University of Southern California
{zijianhu,yang765,xuefengh,nevatia}@usc.edu

Abstract
A common classification task situation is where one has
a large amount of data available for training, but only a
small portion is annotated with class labels. The goal of
semi-supervised training, in this context, is to improve classification accuracy by leverage information not only from
labeled data but also from a large amount of unlabeled data.
Recent works [2, 1, 26] have developed significant improvements by exploring the consistency constrain between differently augmented labeled and unlabeled data. Following
this path, we propose a novel unsupervised objective that
focuses on the less studied relationship between the high
confidence unlabeled data that are similar to each other.
The new proposed Pair Loss minimizes the statistical distance between high confidence pseudo labels with similarity above a certain threshold. Combining the Pair Loss with
the techniques developed by the MixMatch family [2, 1, 26],
our proposed SimPLE algorithm shows significant performance gains over previous algorithms on CIFAR-100 and
Mini-ImageNet [31], and is on par with the state-of-the-art
methods on CIFAR-10 and SVHN. Furthermore, SimPLE
also outperforms the state-of-the-art methods in the transfer
learning setting, where models are initialized by the weights
pre-trained on ImageNet[15] or DomainNet-Real[23]. The
code is available at github.com/zijian-hu/SimPLE.

1. Introduction
Deep learning has recently achieved state-of-the-art performance on many computer vision tasks. One major factor
in the success of deep learning is the large labeled datasets.
However, labeling large datasets is very expensive and often not feasible, especially in domains that require expertise to provide labels. Semi-Supervised Learning (SSL), on
the other hand, can take advantage of partially labeled data,
which is much more readily available, as shown in figure 1.
A critical problem in semi-supervised learning is how to
generalize the information learned from limited label data
∗ Equal contributions; names ordered alphabetically.

Labeled
Data
Unlabeled
Data

Figure 1: Illustration of an image set with a limited amount
of labeled images among a large number of unlabeled images. Unlike unsupervised learning methods that only exploit the structure from unlabeled data, and supervised
learning methods that only look at the limited amount of
labeled data, semi-supervised learning utilizes information
from both labeled and unlabeled data.

to unlabeled data. Following the continuity assumption that
close data have a higher probability of sharing the same label [4], many approaches have been developed [27, 37, 8],
including the recently proposed Label Propagation [14].
Another critical problem in semi-supervised learning is
how to directly learn from the large amount of unlabeled
data. Maintaining consistency between differently augmented unlabeled data has been recently studied and proved
to be an effective way to learn from unlabeled data in both
self-supervised learning [5, 11] and semi-supervised learning [16, 25, 2, 1, 26, 22, 28, 36, 32]. Other than consistency
regularization, a few other techniques have also been developed for the semi-supervised learning to leverage the unlabeled data, such as entropy minimization [21, 17, 10] and
generic regularization [13, 19, 35, 34, 30].
The recently proposed MixMatch[2] combined the above
techniques and designed a unified loss function to let the
model learn from differently augmented labeled and unlabeled data, together with the mix-up [35] technique, which
encourages convex behavior between samples to increase
models’ generalization ability. ReMixMatch [1] further improves the MixMatch by introducing the Distribution Alignment and Augmentation Anchoring techniques, which al-

15099

