S2R-DepthNet: Learning a Generalizable Depth-specific Structural
Representation
Xiaotian Chen1 *
1

Yuwang Wang2†

Xuejin Chen1

University of Science and Technology of China

2

Wenjun Zeng2

Microsoft Research Asia

ustcxt@mail.ustc.edu.cn {yuwwan,wezeng}@microsoft.com xjchen99@ustc.edu.cn

1. Introduction
Monocular depth estimation is a long-standing challenging task, which aims to predict the continuous depth value
of each pixel from a single color image. This task has
a wide range of application in various fields, such as autonomous driving [11, 14], 3D scene reconstruction [49, 21]
and robot navigation [44], etc. Recently, a wide variety of algorithms based on deep convolutional neural net* This work was done when Xiaotian Chen was an intern at Microsoft
Research Asia.
† Corresponding author.

Real-world

Human can infer the 3D geometry of a scene from a
sketch instead of a realistic image, which indicates that the
spatial structure plays a fundamental role in understanding the depth of scenes. We are the first to explore the
learning of a depth-specific structural representation, which
captures the essential feature for depth estimation and ignores irrelevant style information. Our S2R-DepthNet (Synthetic to Real DepthNet) can be well generalized to unseen real-world data directly even though it is only trained
on synthetic data. S2R-DepthNet consists of: a) a Structure Extraction (STE) module which extracts a domaininvariant structural representation from an image by disentangling the image into domain-invariant structure and
domain-specific style components, b) a Depth-specific Attention (DSA) module, which learns task-specific knowledge
to suppress depth-irrelevant structures for better depth estimation and generalization, and c) a depth prediction module (DP) to predict depth from the depth-specific representation. Without access of any real-world images, our method
even outperforms the state-of-the-art unsupervised domain
adaptation methods which use real-world images of the target domain for training. In addition, when using a small
amount of labeled real-world data, we achieve the state-ofthe-art performance under the semi-supervised setting.

Synthetic

Abstract

Image

Structure Map

Depth-specific Structure Map

Figure 1. Visualization of our learnt structural representations. It
can be seen that even though the input color images from synthetic
dataset and real-world dataset are very different in appearance, our
structural representations share many similarities, such as layout
and object shapes, etc. Furthermore, our depth-specific structure
map suppresses the depth-irrelevant structures on the smooth surface, e.g., lanes on the road and photos on the wall.

works (DCNNs) have achieved good performance with sufficient amounts of annotated data [17, 3, 46, 8, 27, 7, 6].
However, obtaining depth annotations is costly and timeconsuming [11, 14, 1]. Some recent methods have investigated self-supervised depth estimation from stereo images
pairs [11, 14] or video sequence [58, 15, 56] by view reconstruction. But stereo pairs or video sequences may not always be available in existing datasets. Besides, these models are often limited to the training dataset domain, having
difficulty in scaling to various application scenes.
Some researchers switched to use synthetic images [9,
40] for training where depth annotations can be acquired
directly. However, there is usually a domain gap between
synthetic data and real-world data, which is caused by style
discrepancies across different domains. To address this
issue, some domain adaptation methods [55, 1, 25, 53]
try to align the feature space of synthetic and real-world
images [55, 25] or translate synthetic images to realisticlooking ones [55, 1, 53]. However, these methods all require access to the real-world images of the target domain
during the training process, but it is impractical to collect
real-world images of various scenes.

3034

