Understanding the Behaviour of Contrastive Loss
Feng Wang, Huaping Liu †
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology(BNRist),
Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
wang-f20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, hpliu@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract
Unsupervised contrastive learning has achieved outstanding success, while the mechanism of contrastive loss
has been less studied. In this paper, we concentrate on
the understanding of the behaviours of unsupervised contrastive loss. We will show that the contrastive loss is a
hardness-aware loss function, and the temperature τ controls the strength of penalties on hard negative samples. The
previous study has shown that uniformity is a key property
of contrastive learning. We build relations between the uniformity and the temperature τ . We will show that uniformity
helps the contrastive learning to learn separable features,
however excessive pursuit to the uniformity makes the contrastive loss not tolerant to semantically similar samples,
which may break the underlying semantic structure and be
harmful to the formation of features useful for downstream
tasks. This is caused by the inherent defect of the instance
discrimination objective. Specifically, instance discrimination objective tries to push all different instances apart, ignoring the underlying relations between samples. Pushing
semantically consistent samples apart has no positive effect
for acquiring a prior informative to general downstream
tasks. A well-designed contrastive loss should have some
extents of tolerance to the closeness of semantically similar samples. Therefore, we find that the contrastive loss
meets a uniformity-tolerance dilemma, and a good choice
of temperature can compromise these two properties properly to both learn separable features and tolerant to semantically similar samples, improving the feature qualities and
the downstream performances.

1. Introduction
Deep neural networks have undergone dramatic progress
since the large scale human-annotated datasets such as ImageNet [6] and Places [36]. Such progress is heavily dependent on manual labelling, which is costly and time† Corresponding author.

Ex

ch
a

xj

xk

ng

e

Hypersphere

Hypersphere

xi

xl
(a)

xk

xi

xl

xj

(b)

Figure 1. We display two embedding distributions with four instances on a hypersphere. From the figure, we observe that exchanging xj and xk , as well as their corresponding augmentations,
will not change the value of contrastive loss. However, the embedding distribution of (a) is much more useful for downstream tasks
because it captures the semantical relations between instances.

consuming. Unsupervised learning gives us the promise to
learn transferable representations without human supervision. Recently, unsupervised learning methods based on the
contrastive loss [33, 20, 1, 10, 5, 4, 14, 37] have achieved
outstanding success and received increasing attention. Contrastive learning methods aim to learn a general feature
function which maps the raw pixel into features residing
on a hypersphere space. They try to learn representations
invariant to different views of the same instance by making
positive pairs attracted and negative pairs separated. With
the help of heavy augmentations and strong abstraction ability of convolutional neural networks [16, 26, 12], the unsupervised contrastive models can learn some extents of semantic structures. For example, in Fig 1, a good contrastive
learning model tends to produce the embedding distribution
likes Fig 1 (a) instead of the situation of Fig 1 (b), though
the losses of Fig 1 (a) and Fig 1 (b) are the same.
Contrastive learning methods share a common design of
the loss function which is a softmax function of the feature
similarities with a temperature τ to help discriminate positive and negative samples. The contrastive loss is significant to the success of unsupervised contrastive learning. In
this paper, we focus on analyzing the properties of the con-

2495

