Virtual Fully-Connected Layer: Training a Large-Scale Face Recognition
Dataset with Limited Computational Resources
Pengyu Li1 , BiaoWang1 , Lei Zhang1,2
Artificial Intelligence Center, DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group
2
Department of Computing, Hong Kong Polytechnic University

1

lipengyu007@gmail.com, wangbiao225@foxmail.com, cslzhang@comp.polyu.edu.hk

Abstract
Recently, deep face recognition has achieved significant progress because of Convolutional Neural Networks
(CNNs) and large-scale datasets. However, training CNNs
on a large-scale face recognition dataset with limited computational resources is still a challenge. This is because
the classification paradigm needs to train a fully-connected
layer as the category classifier, and its parameters will
be in the hundreds of millions if the training dataset contains millions of identities. This requires many computational resources, such as GPU memory. The metric learning paradigm is an economical computation method, but its
performance is greatly inferior to that of the classification
paradigm. To address this challenge, we propose a simple
but effective CNN layer called the Virtual fully-connected
(Virtual FC) layer to reduce the computational consumption of the classification paradigm. Without bells and whistles, the proposed Virtual FC reduces the parameters by
more than 100 times with respect to the fully-connected
layer and achieves competitive performance on mainstream
face recognition evaluation datasets. Moreover, the performance of our Virtual FC layer on the evaluation datasets
is superior to that of the metric learning paradigm by a
significant margin. Our code will be released in hopes of
disseminating our idea to other domains1 .

1. Introduction
Recently, deep face recognition with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) has achieved remarkable progress because of the explosion of large-scale training datasets. Guo
et al. [3] released a dataset with almost 100 thousand identities in the academic field. In the industrial field, there are
millions of identities used to train face recognition models. For instance, the face dataset produced by Google in
2015 had 200 million images consisting of 8 million dif1 https://github.com/pengyuLPY/Virtual-Fully-Connected-Layer.git

Figure 1. Comparison between FC (a), Model Parallel (b), Partial
FC (c), and our Virtual FC (d). D is the dimension of features, N
is the number of identities (categories), S is the number of GPUs,
and M is a hyperparameter that can be set freely based on the
balance between performance and computational resources. M =
1% × N in this paper.

ferent identities [15]. A large-scale training dataset helps a
model obtain excellent performance, but it also challenges
face recognition training paradigms.
There are two elemental deep face recognition learning
paradigms based on Convolutional Neural Networks [19].
One is learning with a classification loss function (e.g.,
the softmax loss function or ArcFace loss function) to
optimize the similarity between samples and weight vectors [20, 1, 11, 22]. This classification paradigm has
achieved state-of-the-art performance in face recognition
fields. However, it needs to train a fully-connected (FC)
layer as the category classifier, which leads to the following drawbacks: The FC layer is not necessary in inference,
but it requires many computational resources in the training
phase. Figure 2 shows that training on millions of identities
requires the classification FC layer to include hundreds of
4321
13315

