Visually Informed Binaural Audio Generation without Binaural Audios
Xudong Xu1 * Hang Zhou1 * Ziwei Liu2 Bo Dai2 Xiaogang Wang1 Dahua Lin1
1
CUHK - SenseTime Joint Lab, The Chinese University of Hong Kong
2
S-Lab, Nanyang Technological University
{xx018@ie,zhouhang@link,xgwang@ee,dhlin@ie}.cuhk.edu.hk, {ziwei.liu,bo.dai}@ntu.edu.sg

Abstract
Stereophonic audio, especially binaural audio, plays an
essential role in immersive viewing environments. Recent
research has explored generating visually guided stereophonic audios supervised by multi-channel audio collections.
However, due to the requirement of professional recording
devices, existing datasets are limited in scale and variety,
which impedes the generalization of supervised methods
in real-world scenarios. In this work, we propose PseudoBinaural, an effective pipeline that is free of binaural
recordings. The key insight is to carefully build pseudo
visual-stereo pairs with mono data for training. Specifically, we leverage spherical harmonic decomposition and
head-related impulse response (HRIR) to identify the relationship between spatial locations and received binaural
audios. Then in the visual modality, corresponding visual
cues of the mono data are manually placed at sound source
positions to form the pairs. Compared to fully-supervised
paradigms, our binaural-recording-free pipeline shows great
stability in cross-dataset evaluation and achieves comparable performance under subjective preference. Moreover,
combined with binaural recordings, our method is able to
further boost the performance of binaural audio generation
under supervised settings1 .

1. Introduction
Auditory and visual experiences are implicitly but
strongly connected. In immersive environments, the perception of sound is impacted by visual scenes [44]. Therefore,
researchers have explored ways to generate stereophonic
audios with visual guidance, in order to improve the user
experience in multimedia products. Specifically, supervised
learning methods [22, 14, 20, 45] have been considered for
this purpose.
* Equal contribution.
1 Code, models and

demo videos are available at https : / /
sheldontsui.github.io/projects/PseudoBinaural.

However, it is noteworthy that fully-supervised learning
methods, despite the positive results that they achieve under
constrained settings, would face significant difficulties in
real-world applications. 1) They rely on videos associated
with stereophonic recordings, which we refer to as “visualstereo” pairs [22, 14]. Obtaining a high-quality collection of
real stereo data requires complicated and professional recording systems (e.g. microphone arrays or dummy heads), thus
is both resource-demanding and time-consuming. 2) The
models trained on datasets collected under controlled environments may overfit to the layout of the rooms, rather than
capturing the general associations between sound effects
and the visual locations of the sound sources. The resultant
models would also have poor generalization capability.
The privilege of learning representations from unlabeled
data has been well discussed in different fields of deep
learning [40, 18, 3, 23, 25]. This inspires us to explore
an alternative approach, namely, to use only mono audios
which can be acquired much more easily compared to binaural audios. We note that mono audios have been successfully applied in learning visually informed sound separation [9, 1, 13, 43, 42, 15]. Zhou et al. [45] recently leverage
mono audios for stereo generation. However, their stereophonic learning procedure still depends on stereo data.
In this work, we propose PseudoBinaural, a novel
pipeline that generates visually coherent binaural audios
without accessing any recorded binaural data. Our key insight is to carefully build pseudo visual-stereo pairs from
mono data. Two questions need to be identified in order to
achieve our goal. Given a spatial location, 1) what is the
relationship between a mono audio and its binaural counterpart sourcing from that location? 2) How should visual cues
be organized to represent the source visually? Our solution
is to utilize two mappings. A Mono-Binaural-Mapping to
reproduce binaural audios of a single source positioned at
any spatial location, and a Visual-Coordinate-Mapping that
associates visual modality with spatial locations. Specifically, the Mono-Binaural-Mapping is achieved by adopting
spherical harmonic decomposition [8]. A head-related impulse response (HRIR) [6] is then used to render binaural

15485

