Binary Graph Neural Networks
Mehdi Bahri1
Gaétan Bahl2,3
Stefanos Zafeiriou1
1
Imperial College London, UK 2 Université Côte d’Azur - Inria 3 IRT Saint-Exupéry
{m.bahri, s.zafeiriou}@imperial.ac.uk, gaetan.bahl@inria.fr

1. Introduction
Standard CNNs assume their input to have a regular grid
structure, and are therefore suitable for data that can be wellrepresented in an Euclidean space, such as images, sound, or
videos. However, many increasingly relevant types of data
do not fit this framework [5]. Graph theory offers a broad
mathematical formalism for modeling interactions, and is
therefore commonly used in fields such as network sciences
[12], bioinformatics [24, 40], and recommender systems
1 https://github.com/mbahri/binary gnn

baseline
stage 1
stage 2
stage 3

Sign

Max

BN

PReLU

Rescale

BF1 k-NN H BF1 k-NN l2 BF2 k-NN H BF2 k-NN l2 RF k-NN l2

BinConv

...

100
95
90
85
80
75

k-NN

Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have emerged as a powerful and flexible framework for representation learning on
irregular data. As they generalize the operations of classical CNNs on grids to arbitrary topologies, GNNs also
bring much of the implementation challenges of their Euclidean counterparts. Model size, memory footprint, and
energy consumption are common concerns for many realworld applications. Network binarization allocates a single bit to parameters and activations, thus dramatically reducing the memory requirements (up to 32x compared to
single-precision floating-point numbers) and maximizing the
benefits of fast SIMD instructions on modern hardware for
measurable speedups. However, in spite of the large body
of work on binarization for classical CNNs, this area remains largely unexplored in geometric deep learning. In this
paper, we present and evaluate different strategies for the
binarization of graph neural networks. We show that through
careful design of the models, and control of the training process, binary graph neural networks can be trained at only a
moderate cost in accuracy on challenging benchmarks. In
particular, we present the first dynamic graph neural network in Hamming space, able to leverage efficient k-NN
search on binary vectors to speed-up the construction of
the dynamic graph. We further verify that the binary models
offer significant savings on embedded devices. Our code is
publicly available on Github1 .

Accuracy (%)

Abstract

...

Figure 1. Top: Test accuracy of different binarization schemes at
all stages of our cascaded distillation protocol (baseline: 92.89%).
Bottom: The ”BF2” variant of our XorEdgeConv operator.

[37], as well as for studying discretisations of continuous
mathematical structures such as in computer graphics [4].
This motivates the development of machine learning methods able to deal with graph-supported data. Among them,
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) generalize the operations of
CNNs to arbitrary topologies by extending the basic building
blocks of CNNs such as convolutions and pooling to graphs.
Similarly to CNNs, GNNs learn deep representations of
graphs or graph elements, and have emerged as the best performing models for learning on graphs as well as on 3D
meshes with the development of advanced and increasingly
deep architectures [33, 18].
As the computational complexity of the networks and the
scale of graph datasets increase, so does the need for faster
and smaller models. The motivations for resource-efficient
deep learning are numerous and also apply to deep learning
on graphs and 3D shapes. Computer vision models are routinely deployed on embedded devices, such as mobile phones
or satellites [2, 32], where energy and storage constraints
are important. The development of smart devices and IoT
may bring about the need for power-efficient graph learning
models [27, 61, 9]. Finally, models that require GPUs for
inference can be expensive to serve, whereas CPUs are typically more affordable. This latter point is especially relevant

9492

