Semantic Image Matting
Yanan Sun
HKUST

Chi-Keung Tang
HKUST

Yu-Wing Tai
Kuaishou Technology

now.syn@gmail.com

cktang@cs.ust.hk

yuwing@gmail.com

Abstract
Natural image matting separates the foreground from
background in fractional occupancy which can be caused
by highly transparent objects, complex foreground (e.g., net
or tree), and/or objects containing very fine details (e.g.,
hairs). Although conventional matting formulation can be
applied to all of the above cases, no previous work has attempted to reason the underlying causes of matting due to
various foreground semantics.
We show how to obtain better alpha mattes by incorporating into our framework semantic classification of matting regions. Specifically, we consider and learn 20 classes
of matting patterns, and propose to extend the conventional trimap to semantic trimap. The proposed semantic
trimap can be obtained automatically through patch structure analysis within trimap regions. Meanwhile, we learn
a multi-class discriminator to regularize the alpha prediction at semantic level, and content-sensitive weights to balance different regularization losses. Experiments on multiple benchmarks show that our method outperforms other
methods and has achieved the most competitive state-of-theart performance. Finally, we contribute a large-scale Semantic Image Matting Dataset with careful consideration of
data balancing across different semantic classes. Code and
dataset are available at https://github.com/nowsyn/
SIM .

1. Introduction
The matting equation models an image I as a linear combination of a foreground image F and a background image
B modulated by an alpha matte α:
I = αF + (1 − α)B.

(1)

The natural image matting problem is to extract the alpha
matte α from a given image, which has a wide range of applications in image/video editing. Typical foreground objects can belong to a great variety of categories, such as
This work was done when Yanan Sun was a student intern at Kuaishou
Technology. This work was supported by Kuaishou Technology and the
Research Grant Council of the Hong Kong SAR under grant no. 16201420.

Figure 1. Alpha mattes can have different local shapes and patterns depending on the underlying foreground. Left shows a human matte with both soft hair and sharp body boundaries. Right
shows a complex matte where the foreground exhibits different
degrees of transparency. Deep reasoning of object semantics in
natural image matting can advance the state-of-the-art results.

humans, furry animals, glass objects with transparent/semitransparent regions, or objects with complex shapes such as
net or tree, thus making this research problem still challenging, see Figure 1.
Natural image matting is an ill-posed problem, so most
existing methods take both image and user-supplied clues
(scribbles, trimaps, etc.) as input to solve the problem. Class-agnostic trimap comprising of foreground, background, and unknown regions is the most common choice
among traditional and deep learning-based methods.
Traditional methods [12, 14, 16, 18, 36, 3, 5, 10, 17, 24,
25] mainly rely on low-level features related to image colors or structures. As traditional methods do not take into
consideration any semantic information of foreground objects or background scenes, they fail easily in images where
foreground pixels mingle deeply with background pixels.
This issue has been addressed to a considerable extent with
the introduction of deep neural networks. In [2] images are
segmented into soft transitional regions based on semantics. However, this method can easily fail in images with
entangled colors or large transitional regions. To extract
alpha mattes for general objects, deep learning-based methods [11, 43, 31, 6, 20, 26] have contributed various convolution network designs to greatly improve performance
benefiting from high-level semantic representations. Recent works such as human matting and transparent object
matting [38, 49, 29, 7] have focused on solving specific
instances of the matting problem, leveraging prior domain
knowledge, and contributing to excellent performance for
111120

