ACTION-Net: Multipath Excitation for Action Recognition
Zhengwei Wang1
Qi She2
Aljosa Smolic1
1
V-SENSE, Trinity College Dublin, Ireland 2 ByteDance AI Lab, China
{zhengwei.wang,SMOLICA}@tcd.ie, sheqi1991@gmail.com

Abstract
Spatial-temporal, channel-wise, and motion patterns are
three complementary and crucial types of information for
video action recognition. Conventional 2D CNNs are computationally cheap but cannot catch temporal relationships;
3D CNNs can achieve good performance but are computationally intensive. In this work, we tackle this dilemma by
designing a generic and effective module that can be embedded into 2D CNNs. To this end, we propose a spAtiotemporal, Channel and moTion excitatION (ACTION)
module consisting of three paths: Spatio-Temporal Excitation (STE) path, Channel Excitation (CE) path, and Motion
Excitation (ME) path. The STE path employs one channel 3D convolution to characterize spatio-temporal representation. The CE path adaptively recalibrates channelwise feature responses by explicitly modeling interdependencies between channels in terms of the temporal aspect.
The ME path calculates feature-level temporal differences,
which is then utilized to excite motion-sensitive channels.
We equip 2D CNNs with the proposed ACTION module to
form a simple yet effective ACTION-Net with very limited
extra computational cost. ACTION-Net is demonstrated by
consistently outperforming 2D CNN counterparts on three
backbones (i.e., ResNet-50, MobileNet V2 and BNInception) employing three datasets (i.e., Something-Something
V2, Jester, and EgoGesture). Code is provided at https:
//github.com/V-Sense/ACTION-Net.

1. Introduction
Video understanding has attracted an increasing amount
of interest, since it is a crucial step towards real-world
applications, such as Virtual Reality/Augmented Reality
(VR/AR) and video-sharing social networking services.
For instance, millions of videos are uploaded to TikTok, Douyin, and Xigua Video to be processed everyday,
wherein video understanding acts a pivotal part. However,
This work is financially supported by Science Foundation Ireland
(SFI) under the Grant Number 15/RP/2776. We gratefully acknowledge
the support of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation of the NVIDIA
DGX station used for this research.

the explosive growth in this video streaming gives rise to
challenges on performing video understanding at high accuracy and low computation cost.
Action recognition, a fundamental problem in video understanding, has been a growing demand in video-related
applications, such as content moderation (i.e., recognize
content in videos that break terms of service) and content
recommendations (i.e., videos are ranked by most liked and
recommended to similar customers). The complex actions
in videos are normally temporal-dependent, which do not
only contain spatial information within each frame but also
include temporal information over a duration. For example,
symmetric action pairs (‘opening a box’, ‘closing a box’),
(‘rotate fists clockwise’, ‘rotate fists counterclockwise’)
contain similar features in spatial domains, but the temporal information is completely reversed. Traditional human action recognition is more scene-related [36, 18, 15],
wherein actions are not as temporal-dependent e.g., ‘apply
eye makeup’, ‘walking’, ‘running’. With how rapid technology is developing, like VR, which requires employing gestures to interact with environments, temporal-related action
recognition has recently become a focus for research.
The mainstreams of existing methods are 3D CNNbased frameworks and 2D CNN-based frameworks. 3D
CNNs have been shown to be effective in terms of spatiotemporal modeling [39, 4, 37], but spatio-temporal modeling is unable to capture adequate information contained
in videos. The two-stream architecture was proposed to
take spatio-temporal information and optical flow into account [35, 3, 33], which boosted performance significantly
compared to the one-stream architecture. However, computation on optical flow is very expensive, which poses challenges on real-world applications. 3D CNNs suffer from
problems including overfitting and slow convergence [8].
With more large-scale datasets being released, such as Kinetics [3], Moments in Time [29] and ActivityNet [2], optimizing 3D CNNs becomes much easier and more popular.
However, heavy computations inherent in 3D CNN-based
frameworks contribute to slow inferences, which would
limit their deployment on real-world applications, such as
VR that relies on online video recognition. Current 2D

13214

