HDMapGen: A Hierarchical Graph Generative Model of High Definition Maps
Lu Mi1,2,†,∗ , Hang Zhao1,∗ , Charlie Nash3 , Xiaohan Jin1 , Jiyang Gao1 , Chen Sun4 ,
Cordelia Schmid4 , Nir Shavit2 , Yuning Chai1 , Dragomir Anguelov1
1
Waymo, 2 MIT, 3 DeepMind, 4 Google

Abstract
High Definition (HD) maps are maps with precise definitions of road lanes with rich semantics of the traffic
rules. They are critical for several key stages in an autonomous driving system, including motion forecasting and
planning. However, there are only a small amount of realworld road topologies and geometries, which significantly
limits our ability to test out the self-driving stack to generalize onto new unseen scenarios. To address this issue,
we introduce a new challenging task to generate HD maps.
In this work, we explore several autoregressive models using different data representations, including sequence, plain
graph, and hierarchical graph. We propose HDMapGen, a
hierarchical graph generation model capable of producing
high-quality and diverse HD maps through a coarse-to-fine
approach. Experiments on the Argoverse dataset and an inhouse dataset show that HDMapGen significantly outperforms baseline methods. Additionally, we demonstrate that
HDMapGen achieves high scalability and efficiency.

1. Introduction
High Definition maps (HD maps) are electronic maps
with precise depictions of the physical roads, usually with
an accuracy of centimeters, together with rich semantics of
traffic rules, such as one-way-street, stop, yield, etc. HD
maps sit at the core of autonomous driving applications
as they provide a strong prior for the self-driving robots
to localize themselves in the 3D space [4, 34], predict
other vehicles’ motions [6, 40] and maneuver themselves
around [8, 20]. Furthermore, HD maps are critical building blocks of city modeling and simulation. Simulating
novel city environments finds a wide range of applications
in game design and urban planning.
Practically, HD maps are constructed according to a
strict mapping procedure: first, a fleet of vehicles with mapping sensor suites (containing LiDAR, Radar, and camera)
†Work done during internship at Waymo.
∗ Corresponding to: lumi@mit.edu, zhaohang0124@gmail.com

Figure 1: Left: a hierarchical map graph generated from HDMapGen. One traffic light controlled lane is shown as an example;
Right: a map with corresponding intersections and lanes rendered
from the hierarchical map graph.

are sent to capture the scene; then, the sensor data are processed and stitched together to obtain map imagery; finally,
human specialists annotate on top of the imagery to provide
vectorized representations of the world geometry with semantic attributes. On the other hand, we aim to produce
synthetic HD maps in a data-driven way, mainly due to two
reasons: (1) building HD maps from the real world is prohibitively expensive; (2) the small number of real-world
maps prevent us from testing the generalization capability
of self-driving stacks in simulation, such as motion forecasting and motion planning.
Existing methods in modeling cities and maps are mostly
relying on procedural modeling, and hand-crafted generation rules [30], and are therefore not flexible and adaptable
to new scenarios. There is no previous attempt to generate
HD maps using modern deep generative models to the best
of our knowledge. The most related works are those which
generate city layouts [10]. Compared to HD maps, city layouts are not suitable for autonomous driving applications
since they only contain coarse locations of the roads (with
a resolution of roughly 10 meters) and lack details such as
lanes of the roads or traffic lights.

4227

