DyCo3D: Robust Instance Segmentation of 3D Point Clouds
through Dynamic Convolution
Tong He,

Chunhua Shen*,

Anton van den Hengel

The University of Adelaide, Australia

Previous top-performing approaches for point cloud instance segmentation involve a bottom-up strategy, which
often includes inefficient operations or complex pipelines,
such as grouping over-segmented components, introducing
additional steps for refining, or designing complicated loss
functions. The inevitable variation in the instance scales
can lead bottom-up methods to become particularly sensitive to hyper-parameter values. To this end, we propose instead a dynamic, proposal-free, data-driven approach that
generates the appropriate convolution kernels to apply in
response to the nature of the instances. To make the kernels discriminative, we explore a large context by gathering homogeneous points that share identical semantic categories and have close votes for the geometric centroids.
Instances are then decoded by several simple convolutional
layers. Due to the limited receptive field introduced by
the sparse convolution, a small light-weight transformer is
also devised to capture the long-range dependencies and
high-level interactions among point samples. The proposed
method achieves promising results on both ScanetNetV2
and S3DIS, and this performance is robust to the particular
hyper-parameter values chosen. It also improves inference
speed by more than 25% over the current state-of-the-art.
Code is available at: https://git.io/DyCo3D

1. Introduction
Instance segmentation is significantly more challenging
than semantic segmentation because it requires identifying
every individual instance of a class of objects, and the visible extent of each. The information recovered has proven
invaluable for scene understanding, however. With the increasing applications of 3D sensors (such as LiDAR and
laser scanners), point clouds have become an important
modality in scene understanding. Although significant advances have been made in instance segmentation in the image domain [15, 4, 3, 36], instance segmentation with the
* Corresponding author (e-mail: chunhua@icloud.com).

PoingGroup

Ours

Abstract

R = 1cm

R = 2cm

R = 3cm

Figure 1 – A comparison of the instance segmentation results
achieved using DyCo3D, and PointGroup [20]. Our method
shows better robustness and generalization to the varying hyperparameter values. Different instances are shown with random
colors, and red ellipses highlight specific over-segmentation errors. Best viewed in color.

3D point clouds has proven far more challenging. This is
partly due to the inherent irregularity and sparsity of the
data, but also due to the diversity of the scene. By way of
example, Mask R-CNN [15], which has shown great success when applied to 2D images, performs poorly when applied in 3D [19].
Many previous top-performing approaches for point
cloud instance segmentation adopt a bottom-up strategy,
involving heuristic grouping algorithms or complex postprocessing steps. 3D-MPA [11], for example, extracts proposals from the predicted instance centroids. Instances are
then generated by aggregating proposal-wise embeddings.
PointGroup [20] generates instances proposals by gradually merging neighbouring points that share the same category label. Both original and centroid-shifted points are
explored with a manually specified search radius. A separate model (labelled ScoreNet) is used to estimate the objectness of the proposals. Both methods achieved promising
performance on ScanNetV2 [7] and S3DIS [1] benchmarks.
However, these bottom-up methods often suffer from several drawbacks: (1) the performance is sensitive to values
of the pre-defined hyper-parameters, which require manual
tuning. In PointGroup [20], modifying the clustering radius

354

