Unpaired Image-to-Image Translation via Latent Energy Transport
Yang Zhao Changyou Chen
University at Buffalo, SUNY
{yzhao63, changyou}@buffalo.edu

Abstract
Image-to-image translation aims to preserve source contents while translating to discriminative target styles between two visual domains. Most works apply adversarial
learning in the ambient image space, which could be computationally expensive and challenging to train. In this paper, we propose to deploy an energy-based model (EBM)
in the latent space of a pretrained autoencoder for this
task. The pretrained autoencoder serves as both a latent
code extractor and an image reconstruction worker. Our
model, LETIT1 , is based on the assumption that two domains share the same latent space, where latent representation is implicitly decomposed as a content code and a
domain-specific style code. Instead of explicitly extracting
the two codes and applying adaptive instance normalization to combine them, our latent EBM can implicitly learn
to transport the source style code to the target style code
while preserving the content code, an advantage over existing image translation methods. This simplified solution is
also more efficient in the one-sided unpaired image translation setting. Qualitative and quantitative comparisons
demonstrate superior translation quality and faithfulness
for content preservation. Our model is the first to be applicable to 1024×1024-resolution unpaired image translation to the best of our knowledge. Code is available
at https://github.com/YangNaruto/latentenergy-transport.

1. Introduction
The unpaired image-to-image translation aims to learn
pairwise domain mappings without being aware of any
paired-image information. Suppose a task of translating
between two domains of male and female, denoted as X
and Y and illustrated in Figure 1. Ideally, one should be
able to retain the shared contents, e.g., the irrelevant background and the rough facial skeleton, and only focus on
transferring discriminative styles, e.g., hair and beard. Most
1 Latent Energy Transport for Image Translation

existing models adopt generative adversarial nets (GANs)
[12, 17] to enforce the translated style of source instances to
be indistinguishable from that of the target domain, which
typically relies on an explicit cycle consistency regularizer
[42, 46, 22] to maintain the content. However, the enforced
cycle consistency is often restrictive, and the learning of
two roughly invertible mappings, to some extent, can hinder model optimization efficiency. CUT [31] resorts to contrastive learning as an alternative in the one-sided translation setting. Still, GAN-based approaches need to learn at
least one set of an encoder-decoder structured generator and
an encoder-based discriminator, which is usually computationally expensive to train [45].
Apart from GAN-based solutions, CF-EBM [45], one
of the most recent works, applies the energy-based model
(EBM) to realize implicit image translation by direct maximum likelihood estimation (MLE). However, EBM learning
leverages the Langevin dynamics for Markov Chian Monte
Carlo (MCMC) sampling in the ambient data space, which
usually distorts image pixels and is challenging to scale up.
Besides, it is unclear whether EBM can learn a disentangled representation of the content and style for better image
translation [25].
To overcome the above issues, we propose a plug-andplay EBM-based model in the latent space. Specifically, we
first pretrain an autoencoder (or use an existing one) and
then plug the EBM into the latent space to manipulate the
extracted latent code to realize image translation. Our latent
EBM models an explicit density distribution of latent variables by training a bottom-up latent energy function, which
always assigns lower energy to latent variables of the target domain data and higher energy to those of the source
domain data. Hence, when sampling from the EBM via
Langevin dynamics, the energy gradient (score function)
describes a path to transport the latent codes from source
to target domains. Most interestingly, we demonstrate that
the score function can implicitly and automatically separate both the content and style codes from the whole latent
embedding. Thus image translation corresponds to simply
evolving the style code. As can be seen in Figure 1, only the
style appearance is translated while the content information

16418

