Digital Gimbal: End-to-end Deep Image Stabilization with Learnable Exposure
Times
Omer Dahary1 , Matan Jacoby1 , and Alex M. Bronstein1
1

Technion - Israel Institute of Technology

{omerd,matanj,bron}@cs.technion.ac.il

Abstract
Mechanical image stabilization using actuated gimbals
enables capturing long-exposure shots without suffering
from blur due to camera motion. These devices, however,
are often physically cumbersome and expensive, limiting
their widespread use. In this work, we propose to digitally emulate a mechanically stabilized system from the input of a fast unstabilized camera. To exploit the trade-off
between motion blur at long exposures and low SNR at short
exposures, we train a CNN that estimates a sharp highSNR image by aggregating a burst of noisy short-exposure
frames, related by unknown motion. We further suggest
learning the burst’s exposure times in an end-to-end manner, thus balancing the noise and blur across the frames. We
demonstrate this method’s advantage over the traditional
approach of deblurring a single image or denoising a fixedexposure burst on both synthetic and real data.

1. Introduction
Through advances in imaging technology, optical systems have become lighter and more portable than ever.
These improvements, however, are sometimes negated by
the need for stabilization. Due to the natural tremor of
handheld cameras, or the movement of mounted vehicles,
camera motion is often unavoidable. As a result, images
captured this way may suffer from motion blur, which is
especially evident during long exposures or with long focal lengths. Image stabilization, the task of mitigating this
phenomenon, has been mostly explored in the optical and
mechanical domains. In the optical regime, stabilization
emerges from using high-cost, uniquely tailored lenses or
cheaper but less effective shift sensors. On the other hand,
mechanical stabilization devices, such as actuated gimbals,
can be attached to any camera with no need for complicated
optical equipment. Such systems are highly popular but

(a) Full-exposure image

(b) DeblurGAN-v2 [17]

(c) KPN [19]

(d) Ours

Figure 1. A qualitative evaluation of our approach on images captured by a vibrating camera with a long focal length. (See the supplement for a description of our setup.) The fully-exposed image
(a) suffers from considerable motion blur, which is hard to mitigate using image deblurring methods (b). Employing the same
time budget to capture a fixed-exposure burst and merging it via a
burst denoising algorithm (c) results in over-smoothing and ghosting artifacts. Our approach (d) of learning a non-uniform exposure
regime enables utilizing the sharpness of short-exposed frames and
the high SNR of long-exposed ones to yield a superior reconstruction.

limited in their ability to compensate for blur due to scene
motion or atmospheric turbulence. However, the most severe limitation of mechanical image stabilization is its cost,
form factor, weight, and power requirements, which might
be prohibitive in many scenarios.

11936

