Rotation-Only Bundle Adjustment
Seong Hun Lee∗
Javier Civera
I3A, University of Zaragoza, Spain
{seonghunlee, jcivera}@unizar.es

Abstract
We propose a novel method for estimating the global rotations of the cameras independently of their positions and
the scene structure. When two calibrated cameras observe
five or more of the same points, their relative rotation can be
recovered independently of the translation. We extend this
idea to multiple views, thereby decoupling the rotation estimation from the translation and structure estimation. Our
approach provides several benefits such as complete immunity to inaccurate translations and structure, and the accuracy improvement when used with rotation averaging. We
perform extensive evaluations on both synthetic and real
datasets, demonstrating consistent and significant gains in
accuracy when used with the state-of-the-art rotation averaging method.

1. Introduction
Bundle adjustment is the problem of reconstructing the
camera poses (i.e., rotations and translations) and the 3D
scene structure from the image measurements. It plays a
crucial role in many areas of 3D vision, such as structure
from motion [26], visual odometry [53], and simultaneous
localization and mapping [8]. For this reason, significant research endeavors have been devoted to this problem, which
led to tremendous progress over the past two decades.
Bundle adjustment aims to obtain jointly optimal structure and camera poses by minimizing the image reprojection errors [57]. Being a nonlinear optimization problem,
it requires a good initialization to ensure the convergence
to the statistically optimal solution [26]. A common strategy involves the following steps: (1) Estimate the pairwise
motions. (2) Estimate the global rotations through rotation
averaging (e.g., [5, 10]). (3) Estimate the global translations
(e.g., [24, 59]). (4) Triangulate the points (e.g., [32, 43]).
In such a pipeline, it is important to make an accurate initial guess of the rotations, as the subsequent steps directly
depend on it. To this end, one could try to improve the rotation averaging method or its input (i.e., the relative pairwise
∗ This work was partially supported by the Spanish govt. (PGC2018096367-B-I00) and the Aragón regional govt. (DGA-T45 17R/FSE).

motion estimates). Recent examples of the former include
[5, 10, 16, 19, 51] and the latter include [6, 7, 23, 63].
These two types of approaches are certainly useful for
initializing the rotations. However, relative pose estimation
is limited to two views only, while rotation averaging does
not directly leverage the image measurements. That is, it
treats all relative rotations equally even if they were estimated from different numbers of points with different noise
statistics and distributions. To our knowledge, no previous
work has addressed this limitation for rotation estimation.
In this work, we present a novel method that, given the
initial estimates of the rotations, performs rotation-only optimization using the image measurements as direct input.
Our work is based on [34], where it was proposed to optimize the rotation between two views independently of the
translation. We extend this idea to multiple views. We
call our approach rotation-only bundle adjustment because
it can be seen as the decoupling of the rotation estimation
from the translation and structure estimation in bundle adjustment. This provides the following advantages:
• The rotations are estimated without requiring the
knowledge of the translations and structure. This
greatly simplifies the optimization problem.
• The rotations are immune to inaccurate estimation of
the translations and structure.
• Both pure and non-pure rotations are treated in a unified manner, as we do not need to triangulate and discard the low-parallax points.
• It can be used after rotation averaging to improve the
accuracy of the rotation estimates.
Table 1 summarizes the differences between our method
and the related methods.
The paper is organized as follows: In the next two sections, we review the related work and the preliminaries.
Section 4 reviews the two-view rotation-only method by
Kneip and Lynen [34]. We describe our method in Section
5 and show the experimental results in Section 6. Finally,
Section 7 and 8 present discussions and conclusions.
To download our code and the supplementary material,
go to https://seonghun-lee.github.io.
1424

