DeFlow: Learning Complex Image Degradations from Unpaired Data
with Conditional Flows
Valentin Wolf

Andreas Lugmayr

vawolf@ethz.ch

{andreas.lugmayr, martin.danelljan, vangool, radu.timofte}@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Martin Danelljan

Luc Van Gool

Radu Timofte

Computer Vision Lab, ETH Zurich, Switzerland

The difficulty of obtaining paired data remains a major bottleneck for learning image restoration and enhancement models for real-world applications. Current strategies aim to synthesize realistic training data by modeling
noise and degradations that appear in real-world settings.
We propose DeFlow, a method for learning stochastic image degradations from unpaired data. Our approach is
based on a novel unpaired learning formulation for conditional normalizing flows. We model the degradation process in the latent space of a shared flow encoder-decoder
network. This allows us to learn the conditional distribution of a noisy image given the clean input by solely minimizing the negative log-likelihood of the marginal distributions. We validate our DeFlow formulation on the task
of joint image restoration and super-resolution. The models trained with the synthetic data generated by DeFlow
outperform previous learnable approaches on three recent
datasets. Code and trained models will be made available
at: https://github.com/volflow/DeFlow

1. Introduction
Deep learning based methods have demonstrated astonishing performance for image restoration and enhancement when large quantities of paired training data are available. However, for many real-world applications, obtaining
paired data remains a major bottleneck. For instance, in
real-world super-resolution [23, 8, 9] and denoising [2, 3],
collecting paired data is cumbersome and expensive, requiring careful setups and procedures that are difficult to
scale. Moreover, such data is often limited to certain scenes
and contains substantial misalignment issues. In many
settings, including enhancement of existing image collections or restoration of historic photographs, the collection
of paired data is even impossible.
To tackle this fundamental problem, one promising direction is to generate paired training data by applying syn-

Noisy Data

Abstract

DeFlow

DeFlow

Clean Data
Different Degraded Samples
Figure 1. DeFlow is able to learn complex image degradation processes from unpaired training data. Our approach can sample different degraded versions of a clean input image (bottom) that faithfully resemble the noise of the real data (top).

thesized degradations and noise to high-quality images. The
degraded image then has a high-quality ground-truth, allowing effective supervised learning techniques to be applied
directly to the synthesized pairs. However, in most practical applications the degradation process is unknown. It generally constitutes a complex combination of sensor noise,
compression, and post-processing artifacts. Modeling the
degradation process by hand is therefore a highly challenging problem, calling for learnable alternatives.
Since paired data is unavailable, learning the degradation
process requires unpaired or unsupervised techniques. Several approaches resort to hand-crafted strategies tailored to
specific types of degradations [17]. Existing learnable solutions mostly adopt generative adversarial networks (GANs)
with cycle-consistency constraints [39, 23, 7] or domainaware adversarial objectives [12, 34, 6] for unpaired training. However, these approaches require careful tuning of
several losses. Moreover, cycle-consistency is a weak constraint that easily leads to changes in color and content [10].
Importantly, the aforementioned works rely on fully deterministic mappings, completely ignoring the fundamental stochasticity of natural degradations and noise. In this

94

