Probabilistic Embeddings for Cross-Modal Retrieval
Sanghyuk Chun1 Seong Joon Oh1 Rafael Sampaio de Rezende2 Yannis Kalantidis2 Diane Larlus2
1

NAVER AI Lab

2

NAVER LABS Europe

Abstract
Cross-modal retrieval methods build a common representation space for samples from multiple modalities, typically from the vision and the language domains. For images and their captions, the multiplicity of the correspondences makes the task particularly challenging. Given an
image (respectively a caption), there are multiple captions
(respectively images) that equally make sense. In this paper,
we argue that deterministic functions are not sufficiently
powerful to capture such one-to-many correspondences. Instead, we propose to use Probabilistic Cross-Modal Embedding (PCME), where samples from the different modalities
are represented as probabilistic distributions in the common embedding space. Since common benchmarks such as
COCO suffer from non-exhaustive annotations for crossmodal matches, we propose to additionally evaluate retrieval on the CUB dataset, a smaller yet clean database
where all possible image-caption pairs are annotated. We
extensively ablate PCME and demonstrate that it not only
improves the retrieval performance over its deterministic
counterpart but also provides uncertainty estimates that
render the embeddings more interpretable. Code is available at https://github.com/naver-ai/pcme.

1. Introduction
Given a query and a database from different modalities,
cross-modal retrieval is the task of retrieving the database
items which are most relevant to the query. Most research
on this topic has focused on the image and text modalities [5, 9, 25, 51, 58]. Typically, methods estimate embedding functions that map visual and textual inputs into a common embedding space, such that the cross-modal retrieval
task boils down to the familiar nearest neighbour retrieval
task in a Euclidean space [9, 51].
Building a common representation space for multiple
modalities is challenging. Consider an image with a group
of people on a platform preparing to board a train (Figure 1).
There is more than one possible caption describing this image. “People waiting to board a train in a train platform”

Figure 1. We propose to use probabilistic embeddings to represent images and their captions as probability distributions in a
common embedding space suited for cross-modal retrieval. These
distributions gracefully model the uncertainty which results from
the multiplicity of concepts appearing in a visual scene and implicitly perform many-to-many matching between those concepts.

and “The metro train has pulled into a large station” were
two of the choices from the COCO [5] annotators. Thus,
the common representation has to deal with the fact that an
image potentially matches with a number of different captions. Conversely, given a caption, there may be multiple
manifestations of the caption in visual forms. The multiplicity of correspondences across image-text pairs stems in part
from the different natures of the modalities. All the different
components of a visual scene are thoroughly and passively
captured in a photograph, while language descriptions are
the product of conscious choices of the key relevant concepts to report from a scene. All in all, a common representation space for image and text modalities is required to
model the one-to-many mappings in both directions.
Standard approaches which rely on vanilla functions do
not meet this necessary condition: they can only quantify one-to-one relationships [9, 51]. There have been attempts to introduce multiplicity. For example, Song and Soleymani [45] have introduced Polysemous Visual-Semantic
18415

