Video Prediction Recalling Long-term Motion Context
via Memory Alignment Learning
Sangmin Lee1
1

Hak Gu Kim2 Dae Hwi Choi1 Hyung-Il Kim1,3 Yong Man Ro1∗
Image and Video Systems Lab, KAIST, South Korea
2
EPFL, Switzerland 3 ETRI, South Korea

{sangmin.lee,sinjh1796,ymro}@kaist.ac.kr

Abstract
Our work addresses long-term motion context issues for
predicting future frames. To predict the future precisely,
it is required to capture which long-term motion context
(e.g., walking or running) the input motion (e.g., leg movement) belongs to. The bottlenecks arising when dealing
with the long-term motion context are: (i) how to predict
the long-term motion context naturally matching input sequences with limited dynamics, (ii) how to predict the longterm motion context with high-dimensionality (e.g., complex motion). To address the issues, we propose novel motion context-aware video prediction. To solve the bottleneck (i), we introduce a long-term motion context memory
(LMC-Memory) with memory alignment learning. The proposed memory alignment learning enables to store longterm motion contexts into the memory and to match them
with sequences including limited dynamics. As a result,
the long-term context can be recalled from the limited input sequence. In addition, to resolve the bottleneck (ii), we
propose memory query decomposition to store local motion
context (i.e., low-dimensional dynamics) and recall the suitable local context for each local part of the input individually. It enables to boost the alignment effects of the memory. Experimental results show that the proposed method
outperforms other sophisticated RNN-based methods, especially in long-term condition. Further, we validate the effectiveness of the proposed network designs by conducting
ablation studies and memory feature analysis. The source
code of this work is available† .

1. Introduction
Video prediction in computer vision is to estimate upcoming future frames at pixel-level from given previous
frames. Since predicting the future is an important base∗ Corresponding author
† https://github.com/sangmin-git/LMC-Memory

hakgu.kim@epfl.ch

hikim@etri.re.kr

ment for intelligent decision-making systems, the video prediction has attracted increasing attention in industry and
research fields. It has the potential to be applied to various tasks such as weather forecasting [40], traffic situation prediction [5], and autonomous driving [4]. However,
the pixel-level video prediction is still challenging mainly
due to the difficulties of capturing high-dimensionality and
long-term motion dynamics [11, 33, 34, 36].
Recently, several studies with deep neural networks
(DNNs) have been proposed to capture the highdimensionality and the long-term dynamics of video data
in the video prediction field [7, 11, 29, 33–36]. The models
considering the high-dimensionality of videos tried to simplify the problem by constraining motion and disentangling
components [7, 11, 33]. However, these methods did not
consider the long-term frame dynamics, which leads to predicting blurry frames or wrong motion trajectories. Recurrent neural networks (RNNs) have been developed to capture the long-term dynamics with consideration for longterm dependencies in the video prediction [34–36]. The
long-term dependencies in the RNNs is about remembering past step inputs. The RNN-based methods exploited the
memory cell states in the RNN unit. The cell states are recurrently changed according to the current input sequence
to remember the previous steps of the sequence. However, it
is difficult to capture the long-term motion dynamics for the
input sequence with limited dynamics (i.e., short-term motion) because such cell states mainly depend on revealing
relations within the current input sequence. For example,
given short-length input frames for a walking motion, the
leg movement from the input is limited itself. Therefore, it
is difficult to grasp what will happen to the leg in the future through the cell states of the RNNs. In this case, the
long-term motion context of the partial action may not be
properly captured by the RNN-based methods.
Our work addresses long-term motion context issues for
predicting future frames, which have not been properly
dealt with in previous video prediction works. To predict
the future precisely, it is required to capture which long-

3054

