Extreme Rotation Estimation using Dense Correlation Volumes
Ruojin Cai1

Bharath Hariharan1
1

Noah Snavely1,2

Cornell University

2

Hadar Averbuch-Elor1,2

Cornell Tech

Abstract
We present a technique for estimating the relative 3D rotation of an RGB image pair in an extreme setting, where the
images have little or no overlap. We observe that, even when
images do not overlap, there may be rich hidden cues as to
their geometric relationship, such as light source directions,
vanishing points, and symmetries present in the scene. We
propose a network design that can automatically learn such
implicit cues by comparing all pairs of points between the
two input images. Our method therefore constructs dense
feature correlation volumes and processes these to predict
relative 3D rotations. Our predictions are formed over a
fine-grained discretization of rotations, bypassing difficulties
associated with regressing 3D rotations. We demonstrate our
approach on a large variety of extreme RGB image pairs,
including indoor and outdoor images captured under different lighting conditions and geographic locations. Our
evaluation shows that our model can successfully estimate
relative rotations among non-overlapping images without
compromising performance over overlapping image pairs.1

1. Introduction
Estimating the relative pose between a pair of RGB images is a fundamental task in computer vision with applications including 3D reconstruction [39, 34], camera localization [3, 40, 42], simultaneous localization and mapping [8, 32] and novel view synthesis [29, 38]. Standard
methods for computing relative pose are highly dependent
on accurate correspondence. But what if the poses are so different that there is no overlap and hence no correspondence?
Our work takes a step towards this seemingly impossible
goal of estimating relative pose for pairs of RGB images that
have little or no overlap. In particular, we present a technique
for estimating relative 3D rotation for a pair of images with
(possibly) extreme relative motion. There are many applications where dense imagery is difficult to obtain that can
benefit from rotation estimation from non-overlapping views
1 https://ruojincai.github.io/ExtremeRotation/

Figure 1: How can we estimate relative rotation between images
in extreme non-overlapping cases? Above we show two nonoverlapping image pairs capturing an urban street scene (top) and a
church (bottom). Possible cues to their relationship include sunlight
and direction of shadows in outdoor scenes (highlighted in red) and
lines parallel in 3D in indoor scenes (marked with yellow and blue
line segments), from which vanishing points can be derived.

[25, 1]. For example, when advertising homes on online
real estate sites, users may only provide a small number of
images—too sparse for current 3D reconstruction methods.
Rotation estimation can simplify downstream tasks, such as
3D reconstruction from sparse views.
How can we reason about relative rotation in extreme nonoverlapping settings? As humans, there are a number of cues
we might leverage. Consider the two image pairs in Fig. 1.
For the outdoor pair, we can infer relative orientation using
illumination cues, e.g., by analyzing which buildings are lit
or the directions of cast shadows. Geometric cues are also
useful. For example, from the pair of indoor images we can
infer a change in camera pitch from the set of parallel vertical

14566

