LAU-Net: Latitude Adaptive Upscaling Network for Omnidirectional Image
Super-resolution
Xin Deng1, * , Hao Wang2, ∗ , Mai Xu2, † , Yichen Guo2 , Yuhang Song3 , Li Yang2
1
School of Cyber Science and Technology, Beihang University, Beijing, China
2
School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing, China
3
Department of Computer Science, University of Oxford, UK
{cindydeng, wang hao, MaiXu, ycguo, LiYang2018}@buaa.edu.cn,
Yuhang.Song@some.ox.ac.uk

Abstract
The omnidirectional images (ODIs) are usually at lowresolution, due to the constraints of collection, storage and
transmission. The traditional two-dimensional (2D) image super-resolution methods are not effective for spherical ODIs, because ODIs tend to have non-uniformly distributed pixel density and varying texture complexity across
latitudes. In this work, we propose a novel latitude adaptive upscaling network (LAU-Net) for ODI super-resolution,
which allows pixels at different latitudes to adopt distinct
upscaling factors. Specifically, we introduce a Laplacian
multi-level separation architecture to split an ODI into different latitude bands, and hierarchically upscale them with
different factors. In addition, we propose a deep reinforcement learning scheme with a latitude adaptive reward, in
order to automatically select optimal upscaling factors for
different latitude bands. To the best of our knowledge,
LAU-Net is the first attempt to consider the latitude difference for ODI super-resolution. Extensive results demonstrate that our LAU-Net significantly advances the superresolution performance for ODIs. Codes are available at
https://github.com/wangh- allen/LAU- Net.

1. Introduction
With the rapid development of virtual reality (VR), omnidirectional images (ODIs) are playing increasingly important roles in human’s life. When viewing ODIs, people can
obtain immersive and interactive experience via changing
their viewports in the range of 360 × 180◦ . Typically, people watch ODIs through head-mounted displays (HMD), in
which only the viewport with a limited range is visible. To
* Authors contributed equally.
† Corresponding author.

make this small viewport in high-resolution (HR), the whole
ODI requires extremely high resolution [11]. However, due
to the constraints of capture, storage and transmission , the
resolution of ODIs cannot be sufﬁciently high.
Super-resolution (SR) is a common technique to address
the aforementioned issue, which aims to restore an HR image
from a single or a sequence of low-resolution (LR) images
[12]. As a challenging ill-posed inverse problem, SR has
received extensive study for decades [33, 45, 4, 36, 1]. However, the existing SR methods target at two-dimensional (2D)
planar images, which are not appropriate for ODIs. For
storage convenience, the spherical ODIs are usually projected into 2D planes. The widely used projection method
is equirectangular projection (ERP), which leads to nonuniform pixel density across latitudes, in particular geometric distortion in high-latitude areas. As shown in Fig. 1, the
density of pixels after ERP is in negative correlation to latitudes, i.e., the pixel distribution in higher latitudes tends to
be more sparse than those in lower latitudes. In addition, the
image patches at high-latitude areas usually have signiﬁcant
stretch distortion. Since the 2D SR methods do not consider
these characteristics of ODIs, as veriﬁed in Finding 2, they
often result in unsatisfactory SR results for ODIs.
For ODI SR, the existing methods primarily rely on assembling a sequence of LR ODIs to form an HR ODI. The
representative works include Nagahara et al. [27], Arican et
al.[2], and Bagnato et al. [3]. All these methods have the
same disadvantage, i.e., their performance heavily depends
on the number of LR images and the registration accuracy
among them. Recently, Ozcinar et al. [28] proposed a generative adversarial network (GAN) to perceptually superresolve the ODIs, and remove the artifacts in the spherical
space. However, they merely treat the ERP projected ODI
as a normal 2D image, without considering the varying pixel
density across latitudes.
In this paper, we propose a novel latitude adaptive upscal-

9189

