Temporally-Weighted Hierarchical Clustering for Unsupervised Action
Segmentation
M. Saquib Sarfraz1,7 , Naila Murray2 , Vivek Sharma1,3,4 , Ali Diba5 , Luc Van Gool5,6 , Rainer Stiefelhagen1
1
3

Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 2 Facebook AI Research,

MIT, 4 Harvard Medical School, 5 KU Leuven, 6 ETH Zurich 7 Daimler TSS

Abstract
Action segmentation refers to inferring boundaries of semantically consistent visual concepts in videos and is an
important requirement for many video understanding tasks.
For this and other video understanding tasks, supervised
approaches have achieved encouraging performance but require a high volume of detailed frame-level annotations.
We present a fully automatic and unsupervised approach
for segmenting actions in a video that does not require any
training. Our proposal is an effective temporally-weighted
hierarchical clustering algorithm that can group semantically consistent frames of the video. Our main finding is
that representing a video with a 1-nearest neighbor graph
by taking into account the time progression is sufficient
to form semantically and temporally consistent clusters of
frames where each cluster may represent some action in the
video. Additionally, we establish strong unsupervised baselines for action segmentation and show significant performance improvements over published unsupervised methods
on five challenging action segmentation datasets. Our code
is available.1

1. Introduction
Human behaviour understanding in videos has traditionally been addressed by inferring high-level semantics
such as activity recognition [12, 3]. Such works are often limited to tightly clipped video sequences to reduce
the level of labelling ambiguity and thus make the problem more tractable. However, a more fine-grained understanding of video content, including for un-curated content
that may be untrimmed and therefore contain a lot of material unrelated to human activities, would be beneficial for
many downstream video understanding applications. Consequently, the less-constrained problem of action segmentation in untrimmed videos has received increasing attention. Action segmentation refers to labelling each frame of
1 https://github.com/ssarfraz/FINCH-Clustering/tree/master/TW-FINCH

a video with an action, where the sequence of actions is
usually performed by a human engaged in a high-level activity such as making coffee (illustrated in Figure 1). Action
segmentation is more challenging than activity recognition
of trimmed videos for several reasons, including the presence of background frames that don’t depict actions of relevance to the high-level activity. A major challenge is the
need for significantly more detailed annotations for supervising learning-based approaches. For this reason, weaklyand unsupervised approaches to action segmentation have
gained popularity [34, 27, 18, 32]. Some approaches have
relied on natural language text extracted from accompanying audio to provide frame-based action labels for training
action segmentation models [2]. This of course makes the
strong assumption that audio and video frames are wellaligned. Other approaches assume some a priori knowledge of the actions, such as the high-level activity label or
the list of actions depicted, in each video [11, 34]. Even
this level of annotation however, requires significant annotation effort for each training video as not all activities are
performed using the same constituent actions.
Most weakly- and unsupervised methods, whatever their
degree of a priori knowledge, focus on acquiring pseudolabels that can be used to supervise training of task-specific
feature embeddings [22, 32, 9, 26, 28, 34]. As pseudolabels are often quite noisy, their use may hamper the efficacy of the learned embeddings. In this work, we adopt the
view that action segmentation is fundamentally a grouping
problem, and instead focus on developing clustering methods that effectively delineate the temporal boundaries between actions. This approach leads to an illuminating finding: for action segmentation, a simple clustering (e.g., with
Kmeans) of appearance-based frame features achieves performance on par with, and in some cases superior to, SoTA
weakly-supervised and unsupervised methods that require
training on the target video data (please refer to section 3 for
details). This finding indicates that a sufficiently discriminative visual representation of video frames can be used to
group frames into visually coherent clusters. However, for
action segmentation, temporal coherence is also critically

11225

