Deep Implicit Moving Least-Squares Functions for 3D Reconstruction
Shi-Lin Liu1,3
1

Hao-Xiang Guo2,3

Hao Pan3

University of Science and Technology of China

Peng-Shuai Wang3
2

Tsinghua University

3

Xin Tong3

Yang Liu3

Microsoft Research Asia

freelin@mail.ustc.edu.cn ghx17@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn
{haopan,penwan,xtong,yangliu}@microsoft.com

Abstract
Point set is a flexible and lightweight representation
widely used for 3D deep learning. However, their discrete
nature prevents them from representing continuous and fine
geometry, posing a major issue for learning-based shape
generation. In this work, we turn the discrete point sets
into smooth surfaces by introducing the well-known implicit
moving least-squares (IMLS) surface formulation, which naturally defines locally implicit functions on point sets. We
incorporate IMLS surface generation into deep neural networks for inheriting both the flexibility of point sets and
the high quality of implicit surfaces. Our IMLSNet predicts an octree structure as a scaffold for generating MLS
points where needed and characterizes shape geometry with
learned local priors. Furthermore, our implicit function evaluation is independent of the neural network once the MLS
points are predicted, thus enabling fast runtime evaluation.
Our experiments on 3D object reconstruction demonstrate
that IMLSNets outperform state-of-the-art learning-based
methods in terms of reconstruction quality and computational efficiency. Extensive ablation tests also validate our
network design and loss functions.

1. Introduction
Point set is probably the most widely used representation
for 3D deep learning. Compared with other 3D representations like polygonal meshes and volumetric grids, point
sets are naturally embedded as neurons in DNNs, easy to
acquire, have minimal extra structure to maintain, capture
complex geometry and topology dynamically, and induce
no wasted computation for free-space regions. Indeed, point
sets have been used in the deep learning-based 3D analysis
for diverse tasks [20,39,40]. However, when using point sets
for the generation of 3D data by deep learning, we have the
flexibility to model changing topology and complex surfaces
on one hand, but also suffer from the discrete and rough
geometry on the other hand.

Recent works have focused on generating shapes in the
forms of meshes and polygonal patches, but their shape
representation abilities are still restricted by their discrete
and non-smooth nature. The deep implicit function approaches [9, 32, 36], instead, define smooth functions on
entire 3D domains to guarantee result continuity, and have
shown to be promising for high-quality 3D reconstruction.
However, the implicit surface generation is inefficient, because for each point in the 3D domain the network has to be
evaluated individually before the surface can be extracted.
In this paper, we combine the advantages of both the implicit
function approaches and the point set methods, by extending
the point set representation to model implicit surfaces for
high-quality 3D generation, while preserving the inherent
flexibility and computational efficiency of explicit point sets.
For modeling smooth surfaces via point sets, we adopt
point set surfaces [2] and use moving least-squares (MLS)
interpolation of the points to define locally implicit functions
over a narrow band region of the point set. Specifically
for the implicit MLS formulation [27] used in this paper,
for any spatial point inside the narrow region, the implicit
MLS function maps it to a signed distance value to the zero
level set surface, defined by the weighted blending of signed
distances to oriented planes supported at the nearby points;
the zero level set surface can then be extracted as a smooth
and continuous surface for shape representation.
While MLS surfaces have been well studied in 3D reconstruction and rendering [10], to incorporate the representation into a deep learning framework poses novel challenges and opportunities unseen in existing point-set-based
or implicit-representation-based methods. First, the points
define implicit MLS surfaces most effectively when they
are dense enough and distributed evenly over the shapes to
reconstruct. While most point generation approaches fix
the number of points and consume many resources for the
straightforward prediction of dense points that are hard to
generalize, we introduce an octree-based scaffolding for generating variable numbers of MLS points only where needed
according to the target shape (cf. Fig. 1), and further regularize the point distribution via tailored loss functions. Second,
11788

