Towards Good Practices for Efficiently Annotating Large-Scale Image
Classification Datasets
Yuan-Hong Liao1,2 , Amlan Kar1,2,3 , Sanja Fidler1,2,3
1

University of Toronto, 2 Vector Institute, 3 NVIDIA
{andrew, amlan, fidler}@cs.toronto.edu

Abstract

Efﬁciently Annotating Multi-Class Labels
Images to Label

Large Image Collection

100

1. Introduction
Data, the basic unit of machine learning, has tremendous
impact on the success of learning-based applications. Much
of the recent A.I. revolution can be attributed to the creation of the ImageNet dataset [12], which showed that image classification with deep learning at scale [25] can result
in learning strong feature extractors that transfer to domains
and tasks beyond the original dataset. Using citations as
a proxy, ImageNet has supported at least 40,000 research
projects to date. It has been unmatched as a pre-training
dataset to downstream tasks, due to its size, diversity and the
1 Code at: https://github.com/fidler-lab/efficient-annotation-cookbook

90
80

Label Accuracy

Data is the engine of modern computer vision, which
necessitates collecting large-scale datasets. This is expensive, and guaranteeing the quality of the labels is a major challenge. In this paper, we investigate efficient annotation strategies for collecting multi-class classification labels for a large collection of images. While methods that exploit learnt models for labeling exist, a surprisingly prevalent approach is to query humans for a fixed number of
labels per datum and aggregate them, which is expensive.
Building on prior work on online joint probabilistic modeling of human annotations and machine-generated beliefs,
we propose modifications and best practices aimed at minimizing human labeling effort. Specifically, we make use
of advances in self-supervised learning, view annotation as
a semi-supervised learning problem, identify and mitigate
pitfalls and ablate several key design choices to propose effective guidelines for labeling. Our analysis is done in a
more realistic simulation that involves querying human labelers, which uncovers issues with evaluation using existing worker simulation methods. Simulated experiments on
a 125k image subset of the ImageNet100 show that it can be
annotated to 80% top-1 accuracy with 0.35 annotations per
image on average, a 2.7x and 6.7x improvement over prior
work and manual annotation, respectively. 1

High Label Conﬁdence
Low Label Conﬁdence

+

Human Labelers w/ Estimated Skill

Machine Labeler

70
60
50
40
30
20
10

w/ machine
w/o machine

0
0.1 0.3 0.5 0.7 0.9 1.1 1.3

#Annotations per image

Figure 1: We tackle efficient model-assisted annotation of multiclass labels at scale. We propose improvements to prior work by
incorporating self- and semi-supervised learning and address associated challenges. Extensive ablation of common design choices in
realistically simulated experiments leads us to provide best practice recommendations to minimize human annotation effort.

quality of labels. Since its conception, interest in creating
large datasets serving diverse tasks and domains has skyrocketed. Examples include object detection [47], actionrecognition- [10], and 3D reconstruction [32, 6], in domains
such as self-driving [15, 3], and medical imaging [44].
ImageNet and its successors such as OpenImages [26]
collected their data using search engines on the web, followed by human verification of either the search query term
or automatically generated labels. Thus, their labeling is
formulated as a verification task, i.e., does this image really
belong to the class, allowing efficient annotation at scale.
In contrast to ImageNet labeling, in many practical use
cases, the data and labels of interest are often known apriori.
This departs from the case above where arbitrary images
could be used by querying keywords online. A common
approach used in practice is to query humans to get a fixed
number of labels per datum and aggregate them [29, 22],
presumably because of its simplicity and reliability. This
can be prohibitively expensive and inefficient in human resource utilization for large datasets, as it assumes equal effort needed per datum. We build on prior work and investigate integration of modern learning methods to improve

4350

