Memory Oriented Transfer Learning for Semi-Supervised Image Deraining
Huaibo Huang
Aijing Yu
Ran He∗
National Laboratory of Pattern Recognition, CASIA
Center for Excellence in Brain Science and Intelligence Technology, CAS
Center for Research on Intelligent Perception and Computing, CASIA
School of Artificial Intelligence, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China
{huaibo.huang, aijing.yu}@cripac.ia.ac.cn, rhe@nlpr.ia.ac.cn

Figure 1: Image rain removal in the real world. PReNet [23] and Syn2Real [34] are among the state-of-the-art supervised
and semi-supervised methods, respectively. All the methods are trained on DDN-SIRR [29]. The top and bottom rows show
that MOSS can remove more rain streaks while preserving better background textures (Note that the missing traffic markings
may cause serious accidents in autonomous driving).

Abstract
Deep learning based methods have shown dramatic improvements in image rain removal by using large-scale
paired data of synthetic datasets. However, due to the various appearances of real rain streaks that may differ from
those in the synthetic training data, it is challenging to directly extend existing methods to the real-world scenes. To
address this issue, we propose a memory-oriented semisupervised (MOSS) method which enables the network to
explore and exploit the properties of rain streaks from both
synthetic and real data. The key aspect of our method
is designing an encoder-decoder neural network that is
augmented with a self-supervised memory module, where
items in the memory record the prototypical patterns of
rain degradations and are updated in a self-supervised way.
Consequently, the rainy styles can be comprehensively derived from synthetic or real-world degraded images with∗ Corresponding Author

out the need for clean labels. Furthermore, we present a
self-training mechanism that attempts to transfer deraining knowledge from supervised rain removal to unsupervised cases. An additional target network, which is updated
with an exponential moving average of the online deraining
network, is utilized to produce pseudo-labels for unlabeled
rainy images. Meanwhile, the deraining network is optimized with supervised objectives on both synthetic paired
data and pseudo-paired noisy data. Extensive experiments
show that the proposed method achieves more appealing results not only on limited labeled data but also on unlabeled
real-world images than recent state-of-the-art methods.

1. Introduction
Single image deraining (SID), also known as image rain
removal, refers to restoring clean and rain-free background
scenes from a single rainy image. It is significant for a
wide range of outdoor computer-vision tasks, such as au-

7732

