Towards Improving the Consistency, Efficiency, and Flexibility of
Differentiable Neural Architecture Search

1

Yibo Yang1,2 , Shan You3 , Hongyang Li2 , Fei Wang3 , Chen Qian3 , Zhouchen Lin2,∗
Center for Data Science, Academy for Advanced Interdisciplinary Studies, Peking University
2
Key Laboratory of Machine Perception (MOE), School of EECS, Peking University
3
SenseTime
{ibo, lhy ustb, zlin}@pku.edu.cn, {youshan, wangfei, qianchen}@sensetime.com
Abstract

Most differentiable neural architecture search methods
construct a super-net for search and derive a target-net as
its sub-graph for evaluation. There exists a significant gap
between the architectures in search and evaluation. As a
result, current methods suffer from an inconsistent, inefficient, and inflexible search process. In this paper, we introduce EnTranNAS that is composed of Engine-cells and
Transit-cells. The Engine-cell is differentiable for architecture search, while the Transit-cell only transits a sub-graph
by architecture derivation. Consequently, the gap between
the architectures in search and evaluation is significantly
reduced. Our method also spares much memory and computation cost, which speeds up the search process. A feature
sharing strategy is introduced for more balanced optimization and more efficient search. Furthermore, we develop
an architecture derivation method to replace the traditional
one that is based on a hand-crafted rule. Our method enables differentiable sparsification, and keeps the derived architecture equivalent to that of Engine-cell, which further
improves the consistency between search and evaluation.
More importantly, it supports the search for topology where
a node can be connected to prior nodes with any number
of connections, so that the searched architectures could be
more flexible. Our search on CIFAR-10 has an error rate of
2.22% with only 0.07 GPU-day. We can also directly perform the search on ImageNet with topology learnable and
achieve a top-1 error rate of 23.8% in 2.1 GPU-day.

1. Introduction
Current neural architecture search (NAS) methods
mainly include reinforcement learning-based NAS [1, 57],
evolution-based NAS [41, 31], Bayesian optimizationbased NAS [25, 56], and gradient-based NAS [33, 32],
some of which have successfully been applied to related
∗ Corresponding author.

tasks for better architectures, such as semantic segmentation [9, 29] and object detection [38, 12, 16, 45].
Among the NAS methods, gradient-based algorithms
gain much attention because of the simplicity. Liu et al. first
propose the differentiable search framework, DARTS [32],
based on continuous relaxation and weight sharing [39], and
inspire the follow-up studies [48, 7, 8, 49, 11]. In DARTS,
different architectures share their weights as sub-graphs of
a super-net. The super-net is trained for search, after which
a target-net is derived for evaluation by manually keeping
the important paths according to their softmax activations.
Despite the simplicity, the architecture for evaluation only
covers a small subset of the one for search, which causes a
significant gap of architectural difference. We point out that
the gap causes the following problems:
• inconsistent: The super-net trained in the search phase
is a summation among all candidate connections with
a trainable distribution induced by softmax. It essentially optimizes a feature combination, instead of feature selection, which is the real goal of architecture
search. As noted by [8, 52], operations may be highly
correlated. Even if the weight of some connection is
small, the corresponding path may be indispensable for
the performance. So the target-net derived from a highperformance super-net is not ensured to be a good one
[42, 50]. The search process is inconsistent.
• inefficient: Because the super-net is a combination
among all candidate connections, the whole graph
needs to be stored in both forward and backward
stages, which requires much memory and computational consumption. As a result, the search can be performed only on a very limited number of candidate operations, and the super-net is inefficient to train.
• inflexible: The gap between the architectures in search
and evaluation does not allow the search for topology
in a differentiable way. In current methods [32, 48,
7, 49, 11], the target-net is derived based on a handcrafted rule where each intermediate node keeps the

6667

