Mask Guided Matting via Progressive Refinement Network
Qihang Yu1∗ Jianming Zhang2 He Zhang2 Yilin Wang2
Zhe Lin2 Ning Xu2 Yutong Bai1 Alan Yuille1
1
2
The Johns Hopkins University
Adobe

Input

MG (ours)

CA [18]

GCA [24]

BSHM [27]

Photoshop

Figure 1: A visual comparison of MG and other matting methods including the commercial matting method in Photoshop.
The guidance input (see Sec. 5 for details.) is located at the bottom-left of each image. Note that BSHM [27] has an internal
segmentation prediction network thus does not take external mask. Best viewed zoomed in.

Abstract
We propose Mask Guided (MG) Matting, a robust matting framework that takes a general coarse mask as guidance. MG Matting leverages a network (PRN) design which
encourages the matting model to provide self-guidance to
progressively refine the uncertain regions through the decoding process. A series of guidance mask perturbation operations are also introduced in the training to further enhance its robustness to external guidance. We show that
PRN can generalize to unseen types of guidance masks
such as trimap and low-quality alpha matte, making it suitable for various application pipelines. In addition, we revisit the foreground color prediction problem for matting
and propose a surprisingly simple improvement to address
the dataset issue. Evaluation on real and synthetic benchmarks shows that MG Matting achieves state-of-the-art performance using various types of guidance inputs. Code
and models are available at https://github.com/
yucornetto/MGMatting.

1. Introduction
Image matting is a fundamental computer vision problem which aims to predict an alpha matte to precisely cut
∗ Work done during an internship at Adobe.

out an image region. It has many applications in image and
video editing [39, 41, 21]. Most previous matting methods
require a well-annotated trimap as an auxiliary guidance input [39], which explicitly defines the regions of foreground
and background as well as the unknown part for the matting methods to solve. Although such annotation makes
the problem more tractable, it can be quite burdensome for
users and limits the usefulness of these methods in many
non-interactive applications.
Recently, researchers start to study the matting problem
in a trimap-free setting. One direction is to get rid of any external guidance, and hope that the matting model can capture both semantics and details by end-to-end training on
large-scale datasets [45, 31]. Nevertheless, these methods
are faced with the generalization challenge due to the lack
of semantic guidance when tested on complex real-world
images. Another line of works investigate alternatives to
the trimap guidance, easing the requirement for human input [27, 32, 19, 13]. For example, [19, 13] proposed techniques for automatic trimap generation, while [32] takes
background images instead as extra inputs. However, these
methods often require a very specific type of guidance they
are trained with and thus become less appealing when the
guidance inputs may have varied characteristics or forms.
In this work, we introduce a Mask Guided (MG) Matting method which takes a general coarse mask as guidance.
MG Matting is very robust to the guidance input and can

1154

