Learning Continuous Image Representation with Local Implicit Image Function
Yinbo Chen
UC San Diego

Sifei Liu
NVIDIA

Xiaolong Wang
UC San Diego

Abstract
How to represent an image? While the visual world is
presented in a continuous manner, machines store and see
the images in a discrete way with 2D arrays of pixels. In
this paper, we seek to learn a continuous representation for
images. Inspired by the recent progress in 3D reconstruction with implicit neural representation, we propose Local
Implicit Image Function (LIIF), which takes an image coordinate and the 2D deep features around the coordinate as
inputs, predicts the RGB value at a given coordinate as an
output. Since the coordinates are continuous, LIIF can be
presented in arbitrary resolution. To generate the continuous representation for images, we train an encoder with
LIIF representation via a self-supervised task with superresolution. The learned continuous representation can be
presented in arbitrary resolution even extrapolate to ⇥30
higher resolution, where the training tasks are not provided.
We further show that LIIF representation builds a bridge
between discrete and continuous representation in 2D, it
naturally supports the learning tasks with size-varied image ground-truths and significantly outperforms the method
with resizing the ground-truths. Our project page with code
is at https://yinboc.github.io/liif/.

1. Introduction
Our visual world is continuous. However, when a machine tries to process a scene, it will usually need to first
store and represent the images as 2D arrays of pixels, where
the trade-off between complexity and precision is controlled
by resolution. While the pixel-based representation has
been successfully applied in various computer vision tasks,
they are also constrained by the resolution. For example, a
dataset is often presented by images with different resolutions. If we want to train a convolutional neural network,
we will usually need to resize the images to the same size,
which may sacrifice fidelity. Instead of representing an image with a fixed resolution, we propose to study a continuous representation for images. By modeling an image as
a function defined in a continuous domain, we can restore
and generate the image in arbitrary resolution if needed.

LIIF

=
48px

…

×5.3

…

×13.7

…

×32.8

Figure 1: Local Implicit Image Function (LIIF) represents
an image in continuous domain, which can be presented in
arbitrary high resolution.
How do we represent an image as a continuous function?
Our work is inspired by the recent progress in implicit neural representation [34, 27, 6, 38, 18, 41] for 3D shape reconstruction. The key idea of implicit neural representation
is to represent an object as a function that maps coordinates
to the corresponding signal (e.g. signed distance to a 3D
object surface, RGB value in an image), where the function
is parameterized by a deep neural network. To share knowledge across instances instead of fitting individual functions
for each object, encoder-based methods [27, 6, 41] are proposed to predict latent codes for different objects, then a decoding function is shared by all the objects while it takes
the latent code as an additional input to the coordinates.
Despite its success in 3D tasks [38, 39], previous encoderbased methods of implicit neural representation only succeeded in representing simple images such as digits [6], but
failed to represent natural images with high fidelity [41].
In this paper, we propose the Local Implicit Image Function (LIIF) for representing natural and complex images in
a continuous manner. In LIIF, an image is represented as a
set of latent codes distributed in spatial dimensions. Given
a coordinate, the decoding function takes the coordinate information and queries the local latent codes around the coordinate as inputs, then predicts the RGB value at the given

8628

