Self-Aligned Video Deraining with Transmission-Depth Consistency
Wending Yan1 , Robby T. Tan1,2 , Wenhan Yang3 and Dengxin Dai4
1
National University of Singapore, 2 Yale-NUS College, 3 City University of Hong Kong ,4 ETH Zurich
eleyanw@nus.edu.sg, robby.tan@{nus,yale-nus}.edu.sg, wyang34@cityu.edu.hk, dai@vision.ee.ethz.ch

Abstract
In this paper, we address the problem of rain streaks
and rain accumulation removal in video, by developing
a self-alignment network with transmission-depth consistency. Existing video based deraining methods focus only
on rain streak removal, and commonly use optical flow to
align the rain video frames. However, besides rain streaks,
rain accummulation can considerably degrade visibility;
and, optical flow estimation in a rain video is still erroneous, making the deraining performance tend to be inaccurate. Our method employs deformable convolution layers in our encoder to achieve feature-level frame alignment,
and hence avoids using optical flow. For rain streaks, our
method predicts the current frame from its adjacent frames,
such that rain streaks that appear randomly in the temporal domain can be removed. For rain accumulation, our
method employs a transmission-depth consistency loss to
resolve the ambiguity between the depth and water-droplet
density. Our network estimates the depth from consecutive rain-accumulation-removal outputs, and calculates the
transmission map using a commonly used physics model.
To ensure photometric-temporal and depth-temporal consistencies, our method estimates the camera poses, so that
it can warp one frame to its adjacent frames. Experimental
results show that our method is effective in removing both
rain streaks and rain accumulation, outperforming those of
state-of-the-art methods quantitatively and qualitatively.

1. Introduction
Rain is a common outdoor weather condition, and degrades visibility in video. The degradation are mainly
caused by: rain streaks and rain accumulation (or rain veiling effect). Rain streaks partially occlude a background
scene, change image appearance, cause the scene to look
blurred. Rain accumulation, which is like fog or mist,
washes out the scene colors, reduces the overall contrast
and generates a veiling effect. Both rain streaks and accu† This work is supported by MOE2019-T2-1-130.

Rain Image

Our Result

Li et al.

Yang et al.

Figure 1: Top left: Input image. Top right: Our result. Bottom left: Li et al.’s result [30]. Bottom right: Yang et al.’s
result [51]. Zoom-in for better visualization.

mulation are visibly present and thus degrades the visibility
of a scene. Hence, to obtain better background scene visual
information, we need to remove both rain streaks and rain
accumulation in videos.
A series of rain removal methods for videos have been
proposed [45, 39, 52, 53, 49, 18, 30, 33, 48, 51]. Most
of them focus on rain streaks alone, and thus cannot deal
with rain accumulation, which is unfortunately commonly
present in any rainy situations, particularly in heavy rain.
Many of these methods, e.g., [25, 33, 48, 51] rely on optical flow for aligning adjacent frames. Yet, optical flow
estimation in rainy conditions is still unstable and challenging, since its main constraint (the brightness constancy con-

11966

