Real-Time Selfie Video Stabilization
1

Jiyang Yu1,3 Ravi Ramamoorthi1 Keli Cheng2 Michel Sarkis2 Ning Bi2
University of California, San Diego 2 Qualcomm Technologies Inc. 3 JD AI Research, Mountain View
jiy173@eng.ucsd.edu

{kelic,msarkis,nbi}@qti.qualcomm.com

ravir@cs.ucsd.edu

Figure 1. Our method stabilizes selfie videos using A background feature points and foreground face vertices in each frame. B The twobranch stabilization network infers C the moving least squares (MLS) warping for each frame. D We show the face and background motion
of the input vs. our stabilized result. For visualization only, the background tracks are computed from the translation component of the
homography between consecutive frames. The face tracks are computed from the centroid of the fitted face vertices in each frame.

Abstract
We propose a novel real-time selfie video stabilization
method. Our method is completely automatic and runs at
26 fps. We use a 1D linear convolutional network to directly infer the rigid moving least squares warping which
implicitly balances between the global rigidity and local
flexibility. Our network structure is specifically designed
to stabilize the background and foreground at the same
time, while providing optional control of stabilization focus (relative importance of foreground vs. background) to
the users. To train our network, we collect a selfie video
dataset with 1005 videos, which is significantly larger than
previous selfie video datasets. We also propose a grid approximation to the rigid moving least squares that enables
the real-time frame warping. Our method is fully automatic and produces visually and quantitatively better results
than previous real-time general video stabilization methods. Compared to previous offline selfie video methods,
our approach produces comparable quality with a speed
improvement of orders of magnitude. Our code and selfie
video dataset is available at https://github.com/
jiy173/selfievideostabilization.

1. Introduction
Selfie videos are pervasive in daily communications.
However, capturing high quality selfie video is challenging
without specialized stabilization devices like gimbals, which
is not convenient, and may not even be allowed in some
cases. On the other hand, from the perspective of algorithms,
selfie video stabilization is also challenging. In general, there
are three major steps in video stabilization algorithms. The
first step is to detect the motion in the input video. Selfie
videos have a significant foreground occlusion imposed by
human, which is a common limitation of video stabiliza-

tion algorithms since tracking the frame motion is difficult
in the presence of large occlusion. The second step is to
replan/stabilize the motion. In selfie videos, the motions in
foreground/background are usually very different. Existing
selfie video stabilization methods like [19] aim to stabilize
the face. However, stabilizing according to only foreground
results in significant shake in the background, and vice versa.
The third step is the warping of the frames. For selfie videos,
the users are sensitive to distortion on the human face. This
requires high rigidity in the foreground warping while maintaining the flexibility in the background warping.
Critically, consumer applications like selfie video stabilization require a significantly fast or even real-time online
algorithm to be practical. This rules out most video stabilization algorithms requiring high overhead pre-processing like
SFM [10], optical flow [15, 25, 4] and future motion information [6, 11]. A previous selfie video stabilization method [24]
is an optimization based method and cannot achieve realtime performance. Although another selfie video stabilization work Steadiface [19] achieves real-time performance, it
only estimates global homography for stabilization and cannot handle non-linear local motions, e.g. rolling shutter. Additionally, their work also requires gyroscope information.
In this paper, we propose a novel learning based real-time
selfie video stabilization method. Our method is fully automatic and requires no preprocessing and user assistance. The
method is designed to tackle the challenges discussed above.
An overview of our method is shown in Fig. 1. To achieve
real-time performance, our method is purely 2D video stabilization, meaning that our method only depends on the motion of sparse 2D points detected from input video (Fig. 1 A ).
This makes our method significantly faster than the offline
selfie video stabilization [24]. In the first step, we avoid the
occlusion problem by training a segmentation network to infer the foreground regions and remove the feature points in

12036

