clDice - a Novel Topology-Preserving Loss Function for Tubular Structure
Segmentation
Suprosanna Shit * 1
Johannes C. Paetzold ∗ 1 Anjany Sekuboyina1 Ivan Ezhov1
1
Alexander Unger
Andrey Zhylka2 Josien P. W. Pluim2 Ulrich Bauer1 Bjoern H. Menze1
1
Technical University of Munich 2 Eindhoven University of Technology

Abstract
Accurate segmentation of tubular, network-like structures, such as vessels, neurons, or roads, is relevant to
many fields of research. For such structures, the topology
is their most important characteristic; particularly preserving connectedness: in the case of vascular networks, missing a connected vessel entirely alters the blood-flow dynamics. We introduce a novel similarity measure termed centerlineDice (short clDice), which is calculated on the intersection of the segmentation masks and their (morphological) skeleta. We theoretically prove that clDice guarantees topology preservation up to homotopy equivalence for
binary 2D and 3D segmentation. Extending this, we propose a computationally efficient, differentiable loss function (soft-clDice) for training arbitrary neural segmentation networks. We benchmark the soft-clDice loss on five
public datasets, including vessels, roads and neurons (2D
and 3D). Training on soft-clDice leads to segmentation with
more accurate connectivity information, higher graph similarity, and better volumetric scores.

1. Introduction
Segmentation of tubular and curvilinear structures is an
essential problem in numerous domains, such as clinical
and biological applications (blood vessel and neuron segmentation from microscopic, optoacoustic, or radiology images), remote sensing applications (road network segmentation from satellite images) and industrial quality control,
etc. In the aforementioned domains, a topologically accurate segmentation is necessary to guarantee error-free downstream tasks, such as computational hemodynamics, route
planning, Alzheimer’s disease prediction [18], or stroke
modeling [20]. When optimizing computational algorithms
for segmenting curvilinear structures, the two most commonly used categories of quantitative performance measures for evaluating segmentation accuracy of tubular struc* The authors contributed equally to the work

Figure 1. Motivation: The figure shows a 3D rendering of a complex, whole brain vascular dataset [48], where an exemplary 2D
slice of the data is chosen and segmented by two different models,
see purple (middle) and red (right), respectively. The two segmentation results achieve identical quality in terms of the traditional
Dice score. Note that the purple segmentation does not capture the
small vessels while segmenting the large vessel very accurately;
on the other side, the red segmentation captures all vessels in the
image while being less accurate on the radius of the large vessel.
Skeleta are drawn in yellow. From a topology or network perspective, the red segmentation is evidently preferred.

tures, are 1) overlap based measures such as Dice, precision, recall, and Jaccard index; and 2) volumetric distance
measures such as the Hausdorff and Mahalanobis distance
[21, 40, 36, 16].
However, in most segmentation problems, where the
object of interest is 1) locally a tubular structure and 2)
globally forms a network, the most important characteristic is the connectivity of the global network topology. Note
that network in this context implies a physically connected
structure, such as a vessel network, a road network, etc.,
which is also the primary structure of interest for the given

16560

