Neural Surface Maps
Luca Morreale1
1

Noam Aigerman2

Vladimir Kim2
2

University College London

Niloy J. Mitra1,2

Adobe Research

Abstract
Maps are arguably one of the most fundamental concepts used to define and operate on manifold surfaces in
differentiable geometry. Accordingly, in geometry processing, maps are ubiquitous and are used in many core applications, such as paramterization, shape analysis, remeshing, and deformation. Unfortunately, most computational
representations of surface maps do not lend themselves to
manipulation and optimization, usually entailing hard, discrete problems. While algorithms exist to solve these problems, they are problem-specific, and a general framework
for surface maps is still in need.
In this paper, we advocate considering neural networks
as encoding surface maps. Since neural networks can be
composed on one another and are differentiable, we show it
is easy to use them to define surfaces via atlases, compose
them for surface-to-surface mappings, and optimize differentiable objectives relating to them, such as any notion of
distortion, in a trivial manner. In our experiments, we represent surfaces by generating a neural map that approximates
a UV parameterization of a 3D model. Then, we compose
this map with other neural maps which we optimize with respect to distortion measures. We show that our formulation
enables trivial optimization of rather elusive mapping tasks,
such as maps between a collection of surfaces.

1. Introduction
Maps are one of the most fundamental concepts in surface geometry: in differential geometry, a surface, i.e., a
2-manifold, is usually (locally) defined as the image of a
(non-degenerate) map
f : R2 → Rn .
Not surprisingly, maps are also used to define correspondences between different parts of surfaces in an atlas, to
evaluate similarity between surface pairs, or across surface
collections.
Accordingly, computing maps is central in most geometry processing tasks operating on surfaces. The ubiquitous

f
φ

ψ
h

Figure 1. Two surfaces are respectively represented by two neural maps, φ and ψ, each mapping the unit square to 3D. A
distortion-minimizing surface-to-surface map f is visualized by
texture transfer. This surface map is achieved by a third neural map
h between the square to itself, which yields the surface map by an
implicit composition of the three neural maps. The distortion of
the composed map f is trivially optimized by defining it as a loss
in pytorch and optimizing with respect to h. Inset shows the initial
random map of the hippo to the cow is a poor initialization, covering only a very tiny region of the cow model. Optimization results
in a final map that covers the whole target surface, and reducing
isometric distortion, resulting in an average Symmetric Dirichlet
energy of 11 between these highly-nonisometric surfaces. As input, 4 keypoint constraints were used, each on one leg.

concept of a UV map [54], mapping a surface into the plane,
provides a local coordinate system on surfaces, and hence
enables downstream tasks such as texturing, surface correspondence, remeshing, quad-meshing [11] to name only a
few. Similarly, surface-to-surface maps [53] enable defining
correspondences between surfaces, which are at the heart
of shape analysis, transfer of properties, deformations, or
defining morph sequences. Indeed, almost all shape processing tasks, including parameterization, surface correspondence, remeshing, and deep learning on surfaces, heavily rely on access to such surface maps.
14639

