RangeIoUDet: Range Image based Real-Time 3D Object Detector
Optimized by Intersection over Union
Zhidong Liang

Zehan Zhang
Ming Zhang
Xian Zhao
Hikvision Research Institute

Shiliang Pu∗

{liangzhidong, zhangzehan, zhangming15, zhaoxian, pushiliang.hri}@hikvision.com

Abstract
Real-time and high-performance 3D object detection is
an attractive research direction in autonomous driving. Recent studies prefer point based or voxel based convolution
for achieving high performance. However, these methods
suffer from the unsatisfied efficiency or complex customized
convolution, making them unsuitable for applications with
real-time requirements. In this paper, we present an efficient and effective 3D object detection framework, named
RangeIoUDet that uses the range image as input. Benefiting from the dense representation of the range image,
RangeIoUDet is entirely constructed based on 2D convolution, making it possible to have a fast inference speed.
This model learns pointwise features from the range image, which is then passed to a region proposal network for
predicting 3D bounding boxes. We optimize the pointwise
feature and the 3D box via the point-based IoU and boxbased IoU supervision, respectively. The point-based IoU
supervision is proposed to make the network better learn
the implicit 3D information encoded in the range image.
The 3D Hybrid GIoU loss is introduced to generate highquality boxes while providing an accurate quality evaluation. Through the point-based IoU and the box-based IoU,
RangeIoUDet outperforms all single-stage models on the
KITTI dataset, while running at 45 FPS for inference. Experiments on the self-built dataset further prove its effectiveness on different LIDAR sensors and object categories.

1. Introduction
As the vital component of autonomous driving systems,
3D object detection from point clouds has attracted more
and more attention. Many methods have been proposed
for processing point clouds and achieved excellent performance. However, most of these methods are difficult to apply in practice, due to the complex framework, high mem∗ Corresponding author. This work is supported by National Key R&D
Program of China (Grant No.2020AAA010400X).

Figure 1. Speed (Hz) versus accuracy (AP) on the test set of KITTI
3D car detection. The single-stage methods are drawn as circles
and the two-stage methods are drawn as squares. RangeIoUDet
outperforms all methods except the top two-stage method PVRCNN [24], and is much faster than PV-RCNN.

ory complexity, and slow inference time (Fig. 1). The methods preferred by practical applications generally meet the
following characteristics: simple framework for easy deployment, fast inference time, and 2D convolution based
model without extra customized operations.
In terms of the input representations of point clouds,
most existing methods can be divided into three types:
voxel based, point based, and range image based methods. Voxel based [38, 32, 8, 26, 24] and point based methods [20, 31, 25, 27, 33] are currently the popular methods,
but they are difficult to apply in practice due to the memory
and time complexity issue. Range image based methods
have been explored in early deep learning based 3D object
detection [4]. As the raw data format of the LIDAR sensor,
the range image is dense and compact, and retains almost
all original information with minor loss. Operating on the
range image enjoys the benefit of applying mature 2D convolution and does not suffer from the sparsity issue of point
clouds, but this representation has been ignored for a long
time for its unsatisfied performance [18]. Recently, several
methods [18, 2, 29] rethink the advantages of this representation and propose effective frameworks based on the range

7140

