Using Shape to Categorize: Low-Shot Learning with an Explicit Shape Bias
Stefan Stojanov, Anh Thai, James M. Rehg
Georgia Institute of Technology
{sstojanov, athai6, rehg}@gatech.edu

Abstract
It is widely accepted that reasoning about object shape is
important for object recognition. However, the most powerful object recognition methods today do not explicitly make
use of object shape during learning. In this work, motivated
by recent developments in low-shot learning, findings in developmental psychology, and the increased use of synthetic
data in computer vision research, we investigate how reasoning about 3D shape can be used to improve low-shot
learning methods’ generalization performance. We propose a new way to improve existing low-shot learning approaches by learning a discriminative embedding space using 3D object shape, and using this embedding by learning
how to map images into it. Our new approach improves the
performance of image-only low-shot learning approaches
on multiple datasets. We also introduce Toys4K, a 3D object
dataset with the largest number of object categories currently available, which supports low-shot learning. 1

1. Introduction
Understanding the role of 3D object shape in categorizing objects from images is a classical topic in computer
vision [29, 9, 51], and the early history of object recognition was dominated by considerations of object shape.
For example, David Marr’s influential theory [27] posits
that image-based recognition should be formulated as a sequence of information extraction steps culminating in a 3D
representation to be used for recognition. The difficulty
of reliably extracting 3D shape from images, combined
with the availability of large-scale image datasets [6, 22],
motivated the modern development of purely appearancebased approaches to recognition and categorization. This
has culminated in current approaches such as CNNs that
learn feature representations directly from images. Moreover, a study by Geirhos et al. [14] of the inductive biases
of CNNs trained on ImageNet suggests that categorization
performance is driven primarily by a bias towards image
1 The code and data for this paper are available at our project page

https://rehg-lab.github.io/publication-pages/lowshot-shapebias/

texture rather than object shape.2
However, studies of infant learning [24, 7, 23, 15] suggest that shape does play a significant role in the ability
to rapidly learn object categories from a small number of
examples, a task which is analogous to few-shot learning.
Both young children and adults who are forced to categorize novel objects based on a few examples display a shape
bias, meaning that shape cues seem to play a dominant role
in comparison to color and texture when inferring category
membership. These studies beg the question of whether information about 3D object shape could be useful in learning to perform few-shot categorization from images. While
prior work has demonstrated effective approaches to object
categorization using 3D shapes as input [34, 36, 55, 56, 4],
and there is a large literature on few-shot learning from images alone [44, 53, 18, 38, 59, 49, 11], the question of how
shape cues could be used to learn effective representations
for image-based low-shot categorization has not been investigated previously.
The goal of this paper is to explore the incorporation of
a shape bias in SOTA approaches to few-shot object categorization and thereby investigate the utility of shape information in category learning. We leverage the recent availability
of datasets of 3D object models with category labels, such
as ModelNet40 [56] and ShapeNet [2]. By sampling surface
point clouds and rendering images of these models, we can
construct datasets that combine 3D shape and image cues.
Unfortunately, however, ShapeNet and ModelNet contain a
relatively small number of object categories (55 and 40 respectively), making it difficult to test categorization at a sufficient scale. To resolve this limitation, we introduce a new
3D object dataset, Toys4K consisting of 4,179 3D objects
from 105 object categories, designed to contain categories
of objects that are commonly encountered by infants and
children during their development.
We report on two sets of investigations. First, we examine the relative effectiveness of purely image-based and
purely shape-based approaches to few-shot categorization.
2 This study does not speak to the possibility of whether shape could be
used more effectively, and it is unclear how much of the bias stems from
the composition of the ImageNet dataset itself.

1798

