FBNetV3: Joint Architecture-Recipe Search using Predictor Pretraining
Xiaoliang Dai1∗ , Alvin Wan2 *, Peizhao Zhang1∗ , Bichen Wu1 , Zijian He1 , Zhen Wei3 ,
Kan Chen1 , Yuandong Tian1 , Matthew Yu1 , Peter Vajda1 , and Joseph E. Gonzalez2
1

Facebook Inc., 2 UC Berkeley, 3 UNC Chapel Hill

{xiaoliangdai,stzpz,wbc,zijian,kanchen18,yuandong,mattcyu,vajdap}@fb.com
{alvinwan,jegonzal}@berkeley.edu, zhenni@cs.unc.edu

Abstract

1. Introduction
Designing efficient computer vision models is a challenging but important problem: A myriad of applications from
autonomous vehicles to augmented reality require compact
models that must be highly accurate – even under constraints
* Equal contribution

Accuracy (%, Top-1 ImageNet)

Neural Architecture Search (NAS) yields state-of-theart neural networks that outperform their best manuallydesigned counterparts. However, previous NAS methods
search for architectures under one set of training hyperparameters (i.e., a training recipe), overlooking superior
architecture-recipe combinations. To address this, we
present Neural Architecture-Recipe Search (NARS) to search
both (a) architectures and (b) their corresponding training
recipes, simultaneously. NARS utilizes an accuracy predictor that scores architecture and training recipes jointly,
guiding both sample selection and ranking. Furthermore,
to compensate for the enlarged search space, we leverage
“free” architecture statistics (e.g., FLOP count) to pretrain
the predictor, significantly improving its sample efficiency
and prediction reliability. After training the predictor via
constrained iterative optimization, we run fast evolutionary searches in just CPU minutes to generate architecturerecipe pairs for a variety of resource constraints, called
FBNetV3. FBNetV3 makes up a family of state-of-the-art
compact neural networks that outperform both automatically and manually-designed competitors. For example, FBNetV3 matches both EfficientNet and ResNeSt accuracy on
ImageNet with up to 2.0× and 7.1× fewer FLOPs, respectively. Furthermore, FBNetV3 yields significant performance
gains for downstream object detection tasks, improving mAP
despite 18% fewer FLOPs and 34% fewer parameters than
EfficientNet-based equivalents.

82.8

81.3

81

MnasNet
MobileNetV3
ShuffleNetV2
ChamNet
ProxylessNAS
EfficientNet
FBNetV2
RegNetY
BigNAS
OnceForAll
Ours (FBNetV3)

80.5
79.1

79

77

75
500

1000

1500

2000
2500
FLOPs (M)

3000

3500

4000

Figure 1: ImageNet accuracy vs. model FLOPs comparison of
FBNetV3 with other efficient convolutional neural networks. FBNetV3 achieves 80.8% (82.8%) top-1 accuracy with 557M (2.1G)
FLOPs, setting a new SOTA for accuracy-efficiency trade-offs.

on power, computation, memory, and latency. The number of
possible constraint and architecture combinations is combinatorially large, making manual design a near impossibility.
In response, recent work employs neural architecture
search (NAS) to design state-of-the-art efficient deep neural networks. One category of NAS is differentiable neural
architecture search (DNAS). These path-finding algorithms
are efficient, often completing a search in the time it takes
to train one network. However, DNAS cannot search for
non-architecture hyperparameters, which are crucial to the
model’s performance. Furthermore, supernet-based NAS
methods suffer from a limited search space, as the entire
supergraph must fit into memory to avoid slow convergence
[5] or paging. Other methods include reinforcement learning (RL) [45], and evolutionary algorithms (ENAS) [41].
However, these methods share several drawbacks:
1. Ignore training hyperparameters: NAS, true to its
name, searches only for architectures but not the associated training hyperparameters (i.e., “training recipe”).
This ignores the fact that different training recipes may
116276

