Efficient Initial Pose-graph Generation for Global SfM
Daniel Barath1,2,3 , Dmytro Mishkin1 , Ivan Eichhardt2 , Ilia Shipachev1 , and Jiri Matas1
1
Visual Recognition Group, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague
2
MPLab, SZTAKI, Budapest 3 Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich

Abstract
We propose ways to speed up the initial pose-graph generation for global Structure-from-Motion algorithms. To
avoid forming tentative point correspondences by FLANN
and geometric verification by RANSAC, which are the most
time-consuming steps of the pose-graph creation, we propose two new methods – built on the fact that image pairs
usually are matched consecutively. Thus, candidate relative
poses can be recovered from paths in the partly-built posegraph. We propose a heuristic for the A∗ traversal, considering global similarity of images and the quality of the posegraph edges. Given a relative pose from a path, descriptorbased feature matching is made “light-weight” by exploiting the known epipolar geometry. To speed up PROSACbased sampling when RANSAC is applied, we propose a
third method to order the correspondences by their inlier
probabilities from previous estimations. The algorithms are
tested on 402 130 image pairs from the 1DSfM dataset and
they speed up the feature matching 17 times and pose estimation 5 times. Source code: https://github.com/
danini/pose-graph-initialization

1. Introduction
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) has been intensively researched in computer vision for decades. Most of the early
methods adopt an incremental strategy, where the reconstruction is built progressively and the images are carefully
added one-by-one in the procedure [42, 39, 38, 1, 57, 44].
Recent studies [17, 18, 8, 28, 4, 10, 20, 36, 13, 9, 58] show
that global approaches, considering all images simultaneously when reconstructing the scene, lead to comparable
or better accuracy than incremental techniques while being
significantly more efficient. Also, global methods are less
dependent on local decisions or image ordering.
Typically, SfM pipelines consist of the following steps,
see Fig. 2. First, features are extracted in all n images.
Such step is easily parallelizable and has O(n) time complexity. These features are then often used to order the
image pairs from the most probable to match to the most

Figure 1: Reconstruction by initializing Theia’s [52] global
SfM with the pose-graph from the proposed algorithms.

difficult ones, e.g., via bag-of-visual-words [47]. Next,
tentative correspondences are generated between all image
pairs by matching the often high-dimensional (e.g., 128
for SIFT [27]) descriptors of the detected features. Then,
the correspondences are filtered and relative poses are estimated between by applying RANSAC [15]. Usually, the
feature matching and geometric estimation steps are by
far the slowest parts, both having quadratic complexity in
the number of images. Moreover, feature matching has a
quadratic worst-case time complexity as it depends on the
product of the number of features in the respective images.
Finally, a global bundle adjustment obtains the accurate reconstruction from the pair-wise poses. Interestingly, this
step has negligible time demand, i.e., a few minutes in our
experiments, compared to the initial pose-graph generation.
This paper has three major contributions – three new
algorithms which allow removing the need of RANSACbased geometric estimation and, also, to make descriptorbased feature matching “light-weight”. First, a method
is proposed exploiting the partly-built pose-graph to avoid
the computationally demanding RANSAC-based robust estimation. To do so, we propose a heuristic for the A∗ [19]
algorithm which guides the path-finding even without having a metric distance between the views. The lack of such
a distance originates from the fact that the edges of a posegraph represent relative poses and, thus, neither the global
scale nor the length of any of the translations are known.
Second, we propose a technique to make the expensive

14546

