Rank-One Prior: Toward Real-Time Scene Recovery
Jun Liu1,2 , Ryan Wen Liu3 , Jianing Sun1,4 ,* Tieyong Zeng5
1
School of Mathematics and Statistics, Northeast Normal University, Changchun, China
2
Key Laboratory of Applied Statistics of MOE at Northeast Normal University
3
School of Navigation, Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China
4
Jilin National Applied Mathematics Center at Northeast Normal University
5
Department of Mathematics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, NT, Hong Kong
{liuj292,sunjn118}@nenu.edu.cn, wenliu@whut.edu.cn, zeng@math.cuhk.edu.hk
Abstract
Scene recovery is a fundamental imaging task for several practical applications, e.g., video surveillance and autonomous vehicles, etc. To improve visual quality under different weather/imaging conditions, we propose a real-time
light correction method to recover the degraded scenes in
the cases of sandstorms, underwater, and haze. The heart
of our work is that we propose an intensity projection strategy to estimate the transmission. This strategy is motivated
by a straightforward rank-one transmission prior. The complexity of transmission estimation is O(N ) where N is the
size of the single image. Then we can recover the scene
in real-time. Comprehensive experiments on different types
of weather/imaging conditions illustrate that our method
outperforms competitively several state-of-the-art imaging
methods in terms of efficiency and robustness.

(a) sandstorm image

(b) underwater image

(c) hazy image

Figure 1. Example of different imaging conditions. The upper triangles in (a)-(c) are degraded patterns and the corresponding patterns in the lower triangles are restored by our method.

1. Introduction
An image is worth one thousand words. However, an
image or a video captured in a turbid medium would not
provide sufficient and correct visual information. Figure 1
shows three images captured in turbid media, such as sandstorms, underwater, and haze. Such kind of images suffer from severe contrast and color alteration or degradation. These changes increase the difficulty in many computer vision tasks, including object tracking, marine celestial navigation, pattern recognition, and semantic segmentation. Hence, recovering the correct scene from the degraded observation is an essential and fundamental task in
computer vision.
For sandstorm images, underwater images, and hazy images, the degradation is generally due to light absorption
and scattering [23, 46, 14, 19, 32]. More specifically, 1) due
* Corresponding author.

to the physical properties of the environmental medium, it
will scatter the visible light formed by the relaxation of multiple spectra such that the scattered light source and the initial visible light source together constitute the environmental light source; 2) the environmental medium also absorbs
the visible light, and the imaging process is completed by
the imaging equipment to obtain the emitted light irradiation of the imaging scene. The acquired radiation intensity
will then be attenuated under the environmental mechanism,
and the attenuation degree depends on the distance between
the imaging scene and the imaging equipment. Usually,
there are conventional names for image restorations, such
as sand-dust/underwater image enhancement and image dehazing. Although the visual degradation appears differently,
they share similar features: color distortion, low contrast,
and low visibility.

14802

