RAFT-3D: Scene Flow using Rigid-Motion Embeddings
Zachary Teed and Jia Deng
Princeton University
{zteed,jiadeng}@cs.princeton.edu

Abstract
We address the problem of scene flow: given a pair of
stereo or RGB-D video frames, estimate pixelwise 3D motion. We introduce RAFT-3D, a new deep architecture for
scene flow. RAFT-3D is based on the RAFT model developed for optical flow but iteratively updates a dense field
of pixelwise SE3 motion instead of 2D motion. A key innovation of RAFT-3D is rigid-motion embeddings, which represent a soft grouping of pixels into rigid objects. Integral
to rigid-motion embeddings is Dense-SE3, a differentiable
layer that enforces geometric consistency of the embeddings. Experiments show that RAFT-3D achieves state-ofthe-art performance. On FlyingThings3D, under the twoview evaluation, we improved the best published accuracy
(δ < 0.05) from 34.3% to 83.7%. On KITTI, we achieve
an error of 5.77, outperforming the best published method
(6.31), despite using no object instance supervision.

1. Introduction
Scene flow is the task of estimating pixelwise 3D motion between a pair of video frames[43]. Detailed 3D motion is requisite for many downstream applications including path planning, collision avoidance, virtual reality, and
motion modeling. In this paper, we focus on stereo scene
flow and RGB-D scene flow, which address stereo video
and RGB-D video respectively.
Many scenes can be well approximated as a collection
of rigidly moving objects. The motion of driving scenes,
for example, can be modeled as a variable number of cars,
buses, and trucks. The most successful scene flow approaches have exploited this structure by decomposing a
scene into its rigidly moving components[32, 45, 45, 47, 30,
1, 20, 19, 23]. This introduces a powerful prior which can
be used to guide inference. While optical flow approaches
typically assume piecewise smooth motion, a scene containing rigid objects will exhibit piecewise constant 3D motion
fields (Fig. 1).
Recently, many works have proposed integrating deep
learning into scene flow estimation pipelines. A common

approach has been to use object detection[1, 3] or segmentation [1, 30, 29, 37] networks to decompose the scene into
a collection of potentially rigidly moving objects. Once the
scene has been segmented into its rigidly moving components, more traditional optimization can be used to fit a motion model to each of the objects. One limitation of this
approach is that the networks require instance segmentations to be trained and cannot recover the motion of new unknown objects. Object detection and instance segmentation
introduce non-differentiable components into the network,
making end-to-end training difficult without bounding box
or instance level supervision.
We introduce RAFT-3D, an end-to-end differentiable architecture which estimates pixelwise 3D motion from stereo
or RGB-D video. RAFT-3D is built on top of RAFT [41], a
state-of-the-art optical flow architecture that builds all-pairs
correlation volumes and uses a recurrent unit to iteratively
refine a 2D flow field. We retain the basic iterative structure
of RAFT but introduce a number of novel designs.
The main innovation we introduce is rigid-motion embeddings, which are per-pixel vectors that represent a soft
grouping of pixels into rigid objects. During inference,
RAFT-3D iteratively updates the rigid-motion embeddings
such that pixels with similar embeddings belong to the same
rigid object and follow the same SE3 motion.
Integral to rigid-motion embeddings is Dense-SE3, a differentiable layer that seeks to ensure that the embeddings
are geometrically meaningful. Dense-SE3 iteratively updates a dense field of per-pixel SE3 motion by performing unrolled Gauss-Newton iterations such that the per-pixel
SE3 motion is geometrically consistent with the current estimates of rigid-motion embeddings and pixel correspondence. Because of Dense-SE3, the rigid-motion embeddings can be indirectly supervised from only ground truth
3D scene flow, and our approach does not need any supervision of object boxes or masks.
Fig. 1 provides an overview of our approach. RAFT-3D
take a pair of RGB-D images as input. It extracts features
from the input images and builds a 4D correlation volume
by computing the visual similarity between all pairs of pixels. RAFT-3D maintains and updates a dense field of pix-

8375

