How Transferable are Reasoning Patterns in VQA?
Corentin Kervadec1,2 * Théo Jaunet2∗ Grigory Antipov1
Moez Baccouche1 Romain Vuillemot2 Christian Wolf2
1
Orange, Cesson-Sévigné, France 2 LIRIS, INSA - École Centrale, Lyon, UMR CNRS 5205, France
corentinkervadec.github.io theo-jaunet.github.io christian.wolf@insa-lyon.fr
{grigory.antipov, moez.baccouche}@orange.com romain.vuillemot@gmail.com

Appearance shift + presence shift

Abstract
Since its inception, Visual Question Answering (VQA) is notoriously known as a task, where models are prone to exploit
biases in datasets to find shortcuts instead of performing
high-level reasoning. Classical methods address this by removing biases from training data, or adding branches to
models to detect and remove biases. In this paper, we argue
that uncertainty in vision is a dominating factor preventing
the successful learning of reasoning in vision and language
problems. We train a visual oracle and in a large scale study
provide experimental evidence that it is much less prone
to exploiting spurious dataset biases compared to standard
models. We propose to study the attention mechanisms at
work in the visual oracle and compare them with a SOTA
Transformer-based model. We provide an in-depth analysis and visualizations of reasoning patterns obtained with
an online visualization tool which we make publicly available1 . We exploit these insights by transferring reasoning
patterns from the oracle to a SOTA Transformer-based VQA
model taking standard noisy visual inputs via fine-tuning.
In experiments we report higher overall accuracy, as well
as accuracy on infrequent answers for each question type,
which provides evidence for improved generalization and a
decrease of the dependency on dataset biases.

1. Introduction
The high prediction performance obtained by high-capacity
deep networks trained on large-scale data has led to questions concerning the nature of these improvements. Visual Question Answering (VQA) in particular has become
a testbed for the evaluation of the reasoning and generalization capabilities of trained models, as it combines multiple
modalities of heterogeneous nature (images and language)
with open questions and large varieties. It has been shown,
* Both authors contributed equally.
1 https://reasoningpatterns.github.io

GQA data

GQA/Vis. Gen./COCO/VQAv2

GT objects
GT classes

R-CNN objects
R-CNN embed.

Classif. loss

Training

Oracle
model

Classif. loss
+BERT losses

Finetuning

Model

GQA data
R-CNN objects
R-CNN embed.
Classif. loss

Finetuning

Adapted
Model

Attention
modes

Figure 1. We argue that noise and uncertainties in visual inputs
are the main bottleneck in VQA preventing successful learning
of reasoning capacities. In a deep analysis, we show that oracle
models with perfect sight, trained on noiseless visual data, tend to
depend significantly less on bias exploitation. We exploit this by
training models on data without visual noise, and then transfer the
learned reasoning patterns to real data. We illustrate successful
transfer by an analysis and visualization of attention modes.

that current models are prone to exploiting harmful biases in
the data, which can provide unwanted shortcuts to learning
in the form of “Clever Hans” effects [36, 22].
In this work we study the capabilities of VQA models to
“reason”. An exact definition of this term is difficult, we
refer to [7, 22] and define it as “algebraically manipulating
words and visual objects to answer a new question”. In particular, we interpret reasoning as the opposite of exploiting
spurious biases in training data. We argue, and in Section 3
will provide evidence for this, that learning to algebraically
manipulate words and objects is difficult when visual input
is noisy and uncertain compared to learning from perfect information about a scene. When objects are frequently missing, detected multiple times or recognized with ambiguous
visual embeddings wrongly overlapping with different categories, relying on statistical shortcuts may be an easy short14207

