Magic Layouts: Structural Prior for Component Detection
in User Interface Designs
Dipu Manandhar1 , Hailin Jin2 , John Collomosse1,2
1
CVSSP, University of Surrey, — Guildford, UK
2
Adobe Research, Creative Intelligence Lab — San Jose, CA.
d.manandhar@surrey.ac.uk, {hljin, collomos}@adobe.com

Abstract
We present Magic Layouts; a method for parsing screenshots or hand-drawn sketches of user interface (UI) layouts.
Our core contribution is to extend existing detectors to exploit a learned structural prior for UI designs, enabling robust detection of UI components; buttons, text boxes and
similar. Specifically we learn a prior over mobile UI layouts, encoding common spatial co-occurrence relationships
between different UI components. Conditioning region proposals using this prior leads to performance gains on UI
layout parsing for both hand-drawn UIs and app screenshots, which we demonstrate within the context an interactive application for rapidly acquiring digital prototypes of
user experience (UX) designs.

1. Introduction
User interface (UI) layout is a critical component in user
experience (UX) design. UI Layouts are commonly ideated
and developed through sketched (‘wireframe’) designs, or
by mocking up screenshots. Digital prototypes are then
built using sequences of such layouts, to evaluate the UX
and rapidly iterate on layout design. The ability to quickly
move from such prototypes ( sketches or screenshots) to
digital prototypes in which components may be modified
or rearranged, is valuable in expediting the design process.
This paper presents Magic Layouts; a technique for parsing existing UI layouts (for example wireframe sketches,
or UI screenshots) into their UI components. Our technical contribution is a deep learning method for detecting UI
components within UI layouts that exploits common spatial
relationships of components as a learned prior knowledge
to improve detection accuracy.
For example, UI elements often occur together and have
a meaning underpinning that co-occurrence relationship. A
‘text input field’ and a ‘button’ occuring side-by-side in a
UI is often a query-text and a response-button. We propose
to explore the use of such co-occurrence information as an
external knowledge graph to learn these component rela-

Figure 1. Magic Layouts parses UI layouts from sketched designs
or app screenshots, exploiting learned prior knowledge of common
component arrangements to improve recognition accuracy. In this
parsed example, colour indicates different component classes.

tionships, and incorporate this learning knowledge to boost
the performance of state of the art detection algorithms.
We conduct experiments on two publicly available
datasets of UI layouts; the RICO dataset of mobile app
UX designs, and the DrawnUI dataset comprising handsketched UX wireframes. Our proposed approach yields
improvements in detection for modalities, demonstrating
that co-occurrences of UI components is a useful prior
upon which to condition component detection and recognition when parsing UI layouts. We incorporate our detection model into an interactive tool dubbed ‘Magic Layouts’ capable of parsing UI layouts from mobile camera
photographs of sketches (Fig. 1), or screenshots from mobile app stores. Additionally, Magic Layouts incorporates
sketch based image search to replace sketched graphics with
higher fidelity artwork.

2. Related Work
Detection and recognition of objects within images is a
long-standing computer vision problem. Classical detectors
include sliding-window approaches [39], super-pixel grouping [2, 32] and object proposal methods [1] often combined
with sparse gradient features and dictionary learning for the
recognition step. With the advent of deep learning, simul115809

