FCPose: Fully Convolutional Multi-Person Pose Estimation
with Dynamic Instance-Aware Convolutions
Weian Mao1 ,
1

Zhi Tian1 ,

Xinlong Wang1 ,
2

The University of Adelaide, Australia

Chunhua Shen1,2 *

Monash University, Australia

Figure 1 – Qualitative results of FCPose. The results are obtained using the ResNet-101 based FCPose, achieving 65.6% APkp on
the MS-COCO test-dev split.

Abstract
We propose a fully convolutional multi-person pose estimation framework using dynamic instance-aware convolutions, termed FCPose. Different from existing methods,
which often require ROI (Region of Interest) operations
and/or grouping post-processing, FCPose eliminates the
ROIs and grouping post-processing with dynamic instanceaware keypoint estimation heads. The dynamic keypoint
heads are conditioned on each instance (person), and can
encode the instance concept in the dynamically-generated
weights of their filters. Moreover, with the strong representation capacity of dynamic convolutions, the keypoint heads
in FCPose are designed to be very compact, resulting in
fast inference and making FCPose have almost constant inference time regardless of the number of persons in the image. For example, on the COCO dataset, a real-time version
of FCPose using the DLA-34 backbone infers about 4.5×
* Corresponding author (email: chunhua@icloud.com).

faster than Mask R-CNN (ResNet-101) (41.67 FPS vs. 9.26
FPS) while achieving improved performance (64.8% APkp
vs. 64.3% APkp ). FCPose also offers better speed/accuracy
trade-off than other state-of-the-art methods. Our experiment results show that FCPose is a simple yet effective
multi-person pose estimation framework. Code is available
at: https://git.io/AdelaiDet

1. Introduction
Multi-person pose estimation (a.k.a., keypoint detection)
aims to obtain the keypoint locations of the persons in an
image, which is one of the fundamental computer vision
tasks with many downstream applications.
The key challenge in multi-person keypoint detection is
how to obtain the instance-level keypoints. In other words,
the detected keypoints need to be grouped according to the
instance that they belong to. Currently, the mainstream
methods tackle this challenge with bottom-up or top-down

9034

