View Generalization for Single Image Textured 3D Models
Anand Bhattad1∗
1

Aysegul Dundar2,3

Guilin Liu3

Andrew Tao3
2

University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign

Bilkent University

Bryan Catanzaro3
3

NVIDIA

Figure 1: Given a single 2D image input, we infer high quality textured 3D models – a triangular mesh and a texture map,
which can then be used to render novel views. Our inferred models compare well with the source image when rendered from
that view. More important, our method displays good view generalization – new views of an inferred model look like real
pictures of that object.

Abstract
Humans can easily infer the underlying 3D geometry and
texture of an object only from a single 2D image. Current
computer vision methods can do this, too, but suffer from
view generalization problems – the models inferred tend to
make poor predictions of appearance in novel views. As
for generalization problems in machine learning, the difficulty is balancing single-view accuracy (cf. training error;
bias) with novel view accuracy (cf. test error; variance).
We describe a class of models whose geometric rigidity
is easily controlled to manage this tradeoff. We describe
a cycle consistency loss that improves view generalization
(roughly, a model from a generated view should predict the
original view well). View generalization of textures requires
that models share texture information, so a car seen from
the back still has headlights because other cars have headlights. We describe a cycle consistency loss that encourages
∗ work done while interning with NVIDIA

model textures to be aligned, so as to encourage sharing.
We compare our method against the state-of-the-art method
and show both qualitative and quantitative improvements.

1. Introduction
People can easily infer the 3D geometry and texture of
an object from a single 2D image. Likely, we can reason
about the shape and the appearance of an object seen from
only a single view because we have seen many objects from
many views. Experience enables us to infer a reasonable
estimate of shape and appearance of a novel object from a
familiar category, even though there is within category variation. Current algorithms can recover 3D shape and texture
from a single image, but suffer from severe view generalization problems: the recovered representation, viewed in a
new camera, tends to look unrealistic. Either the inferred
3D mesh is squashed when viewed from other viewpoints
[16, 4] or the inferred texture are muddled [16], and also
not sharp enough with missing details [4]. For a faithful re16081

