Leveraging Line-point Consistence to Preserve Structures for Wide Parallax
Image Stitching
Qi Jia1 , ZhengJun Li1 , Xin Fan1 , Haotian Zhao1 , Shiyu Teng1 , Xinchen Ye1 , Longin Jan Latecki2
1
International School of Information Science & Engineering,Dalian University of Technology
2
Computer & Information Sciences,Temple University

Abstract
Generating high-quality stitched images with natural
structures is a challenging task in computer vision. In this
paper, we succeed in preserving both local and global geometric structures for wide parallax images, while reducing
artifacts and distortions. A projective invariant, Characteristic Number, is used to match co-planar local sub-regions
for input images. The homography between these wellmatched sub-regions produces consistent line and point
pairs, suppressing artifacts in overlapping areas. We explore and introduce global collinear structures into an objective function to specify and balance the desired characters for image warping, which can preserve both local and
global structures while alleviating distortions. We also develop comprehensive measures for stitching quality to quantify the collinearity of points and the discrepancy of matched
line pairs by considering the sensitivity to linear structures for human vision. Extensive experiments demonstrate
the superior performance of the proposed method over the
state-of-the-art by presenting sharp textures and preserving prominent natural structures in stitched images. Especially, our method not only exhibits lower errors but also the
least divergence across all test images. Code is available at
https://github.com/dut-media-lab/ImageStitching.

1. Introduction
Image stitching, that combines multiple images into a
larger image with a wider field of view [25], is widely used
in photogrammetry [24], robot navigation [6] and panorama
on smart phones [29]. It is still challenging to produce high
quality stitched images for the state-of-the-art as they suffer
from severely unpleasant effects such as artifacts and distortions, especially for wide parallax images.
Feature matching is the key to aligning multiple images
for producing artifact-free stitching as the matched features
act as anchors in alignment. The SIFT features [23] are

Figure 1: Comparisons of stitching methods. Evident artifacts and distortions appear in the results of the existing
methods shown in the zoomed-in rectangles, but ours is free
of these unpleasant effects.
widely used in many traditional methods for feature points
detection and matching [4, 5, 30]. Some recent works also
introduce line features to obtain robust matching in the
cases of large parallax and/or low textures where points
are prone to mismatched [11]. Lin et al. exploit both
point and line features by different weights in an objective function [16]. Unfortunately, these methods separately
match points and lines, and thus the local surrounding areas may be inconsistently and non-uniformly stretched or
compressed when mismatches inevitably occur, presenting
artifacts in the stitched images. Liao et al. employ the
RANSAC strategy to refine point and line pairs by using
the homography between images [17]. It is worth noting

12186

