Crossing cuts polygonal puzzles: Models and Solvers
Peleg Harel
pelegh@post.bgu.ac.il

Ohad Ben-Shahar
ben-shahar@cs.bgu.ac.il

Abstract

shape, either pictorial (e.g., [17, 22]) or apictorial (e.g.,
[14, 20, 32]), were researched considerably less.

Jigsaw puzzle solving, the problem of constructing
a coherent whole from a set of non-overlapping unordered fragments, is fundamental to numerous applications, and yet most of the literature has focused thus
far on less realistic puzzles whose pieces are identical
squares. Here we formalize a new type of jigsaw puzzle where the pieces are general convex polygons generated by cutting through a global polygonal shape with
an arbitrary number of straight cuts. We analyze the
theoretical properties of such puzzles, including the inherent challenges in solving them once pieces are contaminated with geometrical noise. To cope with such
difficulties and obtain tractable solutions, we abstract
the problem as a multi-body spring-mass dynamical system endowed with hierarchical loop constraints and a
layered reconstruction process that is guided by the pictorial content of the pieces. We define evaluation metrics and present experimental results on both apictorial
and pictorial puzzles to indicate that they are solvable
completely automatically.

Since the problem of puzzle-solving was proved NPcomplete [11], much of the literature on the topic has
focused on devising heuristics that facilitate solutions
in many (though not necessarily all) cases, including
large scale puzzles of various types. Broadly speaking, the types of puzzles addressed in the prior art can
be categorized into four classes based on the geometric properties of their pieces: Commercial toy puzzles [5,8,10,16,21,29,44,45,47], Square jigsaw puzzles [1–4, 7, 13, 15, 27, 28, 30, 31, 33, 36–40, 42, 46, 48, 50],
Partially constrained modelled puzzles [17], and
Unrestricted puzzles [14, 20, 22, 24, 25, 32, 34, 43, 49].
This classification also implies that matching puzzle
pieces next to each other during puzzle reconstruction
may be done differently in each class. In particular,
square jigsaw puzzles must be pictorial in order to escape trivial setting. For sake of space we next discuss
briefly only those puzzle types that are more relevant
to our own work in this paper.

1. Introduction and related work
Originally a children’s game, the jigsaw puzzle problem aims to reconstruct a coherent whole from unordered fragments by matching their shape and/or
their visual content. With countless real-world applications in various domains (e.g., [19, 23, 26]), it was first
introduced as a computational task in 1964 by Freeman and Garder [14] and later evolved into a flourishing field. The focus in the computational literature
has however shifted from puzzles of arbitrarily shaped
pieces to puzzles of square pieces where geometry plays
no role and the pictorial data is the only source of information used for the reconstruction. While starting
modestly, the suggested solvers evolved over time and
although no guarantees can be provided, contemporary
methods can solve square jigsaw puzzles of virtually
any practical size (e.g., [37]). At the same time, puzzles of fragments of unconstrained (or less constrained)

Partially constrained modelled puzzles are
puzzles with formal yet looser geometric properties
than the square jigsaw and the commercial toy puzzles.
To our best knowledge, the only prior work introducing this type of puzzles is the ”brick wall” model [17]
that extends square jigsaw puzzles to rectangular pieces
of different lengths. The reconstructed puzzle may
thus have multiple neighbors for each piece, and the
solver must allow for arbitrary offsets between neighbors, thus greatly increasing the (already exponentially
large) search space. While solving apictorial brick wall
puzzles may be possible, it is clearly NP-hard. Pictorial brick walls thus leverage the pictorial information
to evaluate only a subset of offsets between possible
neighbors. Gur and Ben-Shahar [17] thus proposed a
greedy algorithm by endowing previous greedy techniques with shifting of pieces based on various compatibility measures and avoiding overlaps due to nonoptimal offsets determination.
Unrestricted puzzles are puzzles that do not have
formal constraints or generation model and thus their
13084

