Can We Characterize Tasks Without Labels or Features?
Bram Wallace∗
Cornell University

Ziyang Wu∗
Cornell University

Bharath Hariharan
Cornell University

bw462@cornell.edu

zw287@cornell.edu

bharathh@cs.cornell.edu

2. The output, characterizing which requires labels for
the dataset.

Abstract
The problem of expert model selection deals with choosing the appropriate pretrained network (“expert”) to transfer to a target task. Methods, however, generally depend on
two separate assumptions: the presence of labeled images
and access to powerful “probe” networks that yield useful
features. In this work, we demonstrate the current reliance
on both of these aspects and develop algorithms to operate
when either of these assumptions fail. In the unlabeled case,
we show that pseudolabels from the probe network provide
discriminative enough gradients to perform nearly-equal
task selection even when the probe network is trained on
imagery unrelated to the tasks. To compute the embedding
with no probe network at all, we introduce the Task Tangent
Kernel (TTK) which uses a kernelized distance across multiple random networks to achieve performance over double that of other methods with randomly initialized models.
Code is available at https://github.com/BramSW/
task_characterization_cvpr_2021/.

1. Introduction
Transfer learning is key to the success and popularity of
computer vision. The features from a convolutional neural
network (CNN) trained on one task can be incredibly useful
across a broad variety of tasks[36, 32, 34, 24]. Even larger
performance gains can be obtained by selecting a pretrained
model more specially suited to the task at hand. This behavior has been studied in past work[6], but only recently
has attention turned to how to determine which specialized
model is appropriate for a given task[2].
The key to such model selection is characterizing tasks
and their relationships. What does one need to characterize
a task? A priori, it seems that we need to characterize two
things:
1. The input, characterizing which requires a dataset of
images, and features to represent them, and
∗ The first two authors contributed equally to this work.

Current approaches to characterizing tasks synthesize
both sources of information. Task2Vec[2], for example,
trains a linear head on top of a pretrained feature extractor
and uses the Fisher information associated with the resulting model to generate a vectorized embedding. Decisions
such as choosing the best pretraining task for a target task
can then effectively be made using retrieval-like techniques
with this embedding.
But how much of these accurate decisions come from
characterizing the input domain alone, and how much
comes from knowledge of the precise task? This question
has important practical considerations. For example, suppose we want to choose a pretrained representation for analyzing x-ray images. We may not yet know what we want
to recognize in x-ray images. In fact, we may want a pretrained representation suitable for any kind of x-ray image
analysis, even those we haven’t conceived yet. In such cases
we are interested in characterizing only the general problem
domain, and do not have particular labels (yet) that we are
interested in. This raises the question: Can we characterize tasks without labels?
As our first contribution, we answer this question in the
affirmative. To address this problem, we introduce PseudoTask: a modification of the Task2Vec algorithm that replaces labels with pseudolabels output by an image classifier trained in a generic source domain. While these pseudolabels are definitely incorrect due to domain misalignment, they prove discriminative enough to be quite useful in
characterizing tasks. Empirically, we find that PseudoTask
embeddings are as accurate as supervised Task2Vec embeddings, indicating that one can characterize tasks effectively
even without labels.
Key to this performance, as also to the performance of
Task2Vec, is the inductive bias provided by the pre-trained
feature representation. However, this inductive bias may
prove harmful as the task domains move farther away from
the domain where the feature extractor is pretrained [36],
making it risky to rely so heavily on such feature representations. This raises a second question: can we characterize
11245

