Exploring Heterogeneous Clues for Weakly-Supervised
Audio-Visual Video Parsing

1

Baidu Research

2

Yu Wu1,2 , Yi Yang2 *
ReLER, University of Technology Sydney

yu.wu-3@student.uts.edu.au; yi.yang@uts.edu.au

Abstract
We investigate the weakly-supervised audio-visual video
parsing task, which aims to parse a video into temporal
event segments and predict the audible or visible event
categories. The task is challenging since there only exist
video-level event labels for training, without indicating the
temporal boundaries and modalities. Previous works take
the overall event labels to supervise both audio and visual
model predictions. However, we argue that such overall labels harm the model training due to the audio-visual asynchrony. For example, commentators speak in a basketball
video, but we cannot visually find the speakers. In this paper, we tackle this issue by leveraging the cross-modal correspondence of audio and visual signals. We generate reliable event labels individually for each modality by swapping audio and visual tracks with other unrelated videos. If
the original visual/audio data contain event clues, the event
prediction from the newly assembled data would still be
highly confident. In this way, we could protect our models
from being misled by ambiguous event labels. In addition,
we propose the cross-modal audio-visual contrastive learning to induce temporal difference on attention models within
videos, i.e., urging the model to pick the current temporal
segment from all context candidates. Experiments show we
outperform state-of-the-art methods by a large margin.

1. Introduction
We humans explore and perceive the sounding environments with sensory streams, including visual, auditory, tactile, etc. Among these simultaneous sensory streams, vision
and audio are two fundamental streams that widely convey
massive information in our daily life.
Audio-visual comprehension [23, 40, 9, 39, 50] is more
robust in identifying the ongoing events compared to those
vision models [45, 34]. For example, occlusions and blind
* This work was done when Yu Wu interned at Baidu Research. Yi Yang
is the corresponding author.

Speech

Basketball
0s

2s

Basketball

4s

6s

8s

10s

Cheering

Speech

Speech

(from the commentator)

(from the player)

Figure 1. Examples of the audio-visual video parsing task. Colored rectangles indicate the ground truth events. Taking the visual
and audio data as input, we aim at identifying the audible and visible events and their temporal location. Note that the visual and
audio events might be asynchronous.

spots are common in egocentric videos and web videos,
where the object of interest is outside of the field-of-view
(FoV). In such situations, auditory signals could provide reliable clues for video understanding.
Existing audio-visual research works [1, 5, 7, 10, 12, 19,
6, 21, 27, 31, 53, 54, 57] usually assume audio and visual
data are always correlated and temporally aligned. However, this alignment might not always hold in practice. We
may find lots of videos whose sound originates outside of
the scene view. Despite the nonalignment, audio signals are
still important in understanding the events, such as out-ofscreen motorcycle racing. In this paper, we focus on the
audio-visual video parsing (AVVP) task [39], which aims at
providing a detailed analysis of auditory, visual, and audiovisual events in videos without such alignment assumptions.
As shown in Fig. 1, the target of AVVP is to recognize event
categories in each sensory modality and localize them temporally in videos.
Due to exhausting labeling cost, Tian et al. [39] proposed
the weakly-supervised learning for the AVVP task, which
only requires sparse labeling on the presence or absence of

1326

