HLA-Face: Joint High-Low Adaptation for Low Light Face Detection
Wenjing Wang, Wenhan Yang, Jiaying Liu∗
Wangxuan Institute of Computer Technology, Peking University, Beijing, China

Abstract
Face detection in low light scenarios is challenging
but vital to many practical applications, e.g., surveillance
video, autonomous driving at night. Most existing face
detectors heavily rely on extensive annotations, while collecting data is time-consuming and laborious. To reduce
the burden of building new datasets for low light conditions, we make full use of existing normal light data and
explore how to adapt face detectors from normal light to
low light. The challenge of this task is that the gap between
normal and low light is too huge and complex for both
pixel-level and object-level. Therefore, most existing lowlight enhancement and adaptation methods do not achieve
desirable performance. To address the issue, we propose
a joint High-Low Adaptation (HLA) framework. Through
a bidirectional low-level adaptation and multi-task highlevel adaptation scheme, our HLA-Face outperforms stateof-the-art methods even without using dark face labels for
training. Our project is publicly available at: https:
//daooshee.github.io/HLA-Face-Website/.

1. Introduction
Face detection is fundamental for many vision tasks, and
has been widely used in a variety of practical applications,
such as intelligent surveillance for smart city, face unlock,
and beauty filters in mobile phones. Over the past decades,
extensive researches have made great progress in face detection. However, face detection under adverse illumination
conditions is still challenging. Images captured without insufficient illumination suffer from a series of degradations,
e.g., low visibility, intensive noise, and color cast. These
degradations can not only affect the human visual quality,
but also worsen the performance of machine vision tasks,
which may cause potential risks in surveillance video analysis and nighttime autonomous driving. In Fig. 1 (a), the
∗ Corresponding author. This work was supported by the National
Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No.
2018AAA0102702, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under
Contract No. 61772043. This is a research achievement of Key Laboratory
of Science, Techonology and Standard in Press Industry (Key Laboratory
of Intelligent Press Media Technology).

(a) DSFD

(b) LIME + DSFD

(c) Ours

Low-level: illumination,
noise pattern, and color transfer

Labeled
Normal Light

Joint High-Low Adaptation
High-level: semantic feature
adjustment of diﬀerent scenes

Unlabeled
Low Light

(d) Our learning paradigm for dark face detection

Figure 1. Dark face detection visual results and our learning
paradigm. Compared with the result of DSFD [26] on original low
light images and the enhanced version by LIME [16], our method
can better recognize the faces in dark scenarios.

state-of-the-art face detector DSFD [26] can hardly detect
faces under insufficient illumination, in direct contrast to its
over 90% precision on WIDER FACE [49].
To promote the research of low light face detection, a
large scale benchmark DARK FACE [50] is constructed.
The emergence of dark face data gives birth to a number
of dark face detection researches [27]. However, existing
methods are dependent on extensive annotations, therefore
have poor robustness and scalability.
In this paper, based on the benchmarking platform provided by DARK FACE, we explore how to adapt normal
light face detection models to low light scenarios without
the requirement of dark face annotations. We find that there
are two levels of gaps between normal light and low light.
One is the gap in pixel-level appearance, such as the insufficient illumination, camera noise, and color bias. The other
is the object-level semantic differences between normal and
low light scenes, including but not limited to the existence of street lights, vehicle headlights, and advertisement
boards. Traditional low light enhancement methods [16, 52]
are designed for improving visual quality, therefore cannot
fill the semantic gap, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). Typical adapta-

16195

