PointDSC: Robust Point Cloud Registration using Deep Spatial Consistency
Xuyang Bai1 Zixin Luo1 Lei Zhou1 Hongkai Chen1 Lei Li1,2 Zeyu Hu1 Hongbo Fu3 Chiew-Lan Tai1
1

Hong Kong University of Science and Technology

2

École Polytechnique

{xbaiad,zluoag,lzhouai,hchencf,llibb,zhuam,taicl}@cse.ust.hk

3

City University of Hong Kong
hongbofu@cityu.edu.hk

Abstract
Removing outlier correspondences is one of the critical
steps for successful feature-based point cloud registration.
Despite the increasing popularity of introducing deep learning techniques in this ﬁeld, spatial consistency, which is
essentially established by a Euclidean transformation between point clouds, has received almost no individual attention in existing learning frameworks. In this paper, we
present PointDSC, a novel deep neural network that explicitly incorporates spatial consistency for pruning outlier correspondences. First, we propose a nonlocal feature aggregation module, weighted by both feature and spatial coherence, for feature embedding of the input correspondences. Second, we formulate a differentiable spectral
matching module, supervised by pairwise spatial compatibility, to estimate the inlier conﬁdence of each correspondence from the embedded features. With modest computation cost, our method outperforms the state-of-the-art handcrafted and learning-based outlier rejection approaches on
several real-world datasets by a signiﬁcant margin. We also
show its wide applicability by combining PointDSC with
different 3D local descriptors. [code release]

1. Introduction
The state-of-the-art feature-based point cloud registration pipelines commonly start from local feature extraction
and matching, followed by an outlier rejection for robust
alignment. Although 3D local features [4, 39, 18, 27, 32]
have evolved rapidly, correspondences produced by feature
matching are still prone to outliers, especially when the
overlap of scene fragments is small. In this paper, we focus
on developing a robust outlier rejection method to mitigate
this issue.
Traditional outlier ﬁltering strategies can be broadly
classiﬁed into two categories, namely the individual-based
and group-based [67]. The individual-based approaches,
such as ratio test [40] and reciprocal check [10], identify
inlier correspondences solely based on the descriptor similarity, without considering their spatial coherence. In con-

Figure 1: Taking advantage of both the superiority of traditional (e.g. SM [36]) and learning methods (e.g. DGR [16]),
our approach integrates important geometric cues into deep
neural networks and efﬁciently identiﬁes inlier correspondences even under high outlier ratios.
trast, the group-based methods usually leverage the underlying 2D or 3D scene geometry and identify inlier correspondences through the analysis of spatial consistency.
Speciﬁcally, in a 2D domain, the spatial consistency only
provides a weak relation between points and epipolar lines
[13, 9, 73]. Instead, in a 3D domain, the spatial consistency
is rigorously deﬁned between every pair of points by rigid
transformations, serving as one of the most important geometric properties that inlier correspondences should follow.
In this paper, we focus on leveraging the spatial consistency
in outlier rejection for robust 3D point cloud registration.
Spectral matching (SM) [36] is a well-known traditional
algorithm that heavily relies on 3D spatial consistency for
ﬁnding inlier correspondences. It starts with constructing a
compatibility graph using the length consistency, i.e., preserving the distance between point pairs under rigid transformations, then obtains an inlier set by ﬁnding the main
cluster of the graph through eigen analysis. However, this
algorithm has two main drawbacks. First, solely relying on
length consistency is intuitive but inadequate because it suffers from the ambiguity problem [54] (Fig. 4a). Second, as
explained in [68, 67], spectral matching cannot effectively
handle the case of high outlier ratio (Fig. 1, left), where the
main inlier clusters become less dominant and thus are difﬁcult to be identiﬁed through spectral analysis.
Recently, learning-based 3D outlier rejection methods,

15859

