Detecting Human-Object Interaction via Fabricated Compositional Learning
Zhi Hou1 , Baosheng Yu1 , Yu Qiao2,3 , Xiaojiang Peng4 , Dacheng Tao1
1
School of Computer Science, Faculty of Engineering, The University of Sydney, Australia
2
Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
3
Shanghai AI Laboratory
4
Shenzhen Technology University
zhou9878@uni.sydney.edu.au, baosheng.yu@sydney.edu.au, yu.qiao@siat.ac.cn,
pengxiaojiang@sztu.edu.cn, dacheng.tao@sydney.edu.au

Abstract

Imbalanced Detection
Zero-Shot Detection

Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection, inferring
the relationships between human and objects from images/videos, is a fundamental task for high-level scene understanding. However, HOI detection usually suffers from
the open long-tailed nature of interactions with objects,
while human has extremely powerful compositional perception ability to cognize rare or unseen HOI samples. Inspired by this, we devise a novel HOI compositional learning framework, termed as Fabricated Compositional Learning (FCL), to address the problem of open long-tailed HOI
detection. Specifically, we introduce an object fabricator
to generate effective object representations, and then combine verbs and fabricated objects to compose new HOI samples. With the proposed object fabricator, we are able to
generate large-scale HOI samples for rare and unseen categories to alleviate the open long-tailed issues in HOI detection. Extensive experiments on the most popular HOI
detection dataset, HICO-DET, demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method for imbalanced HOI detection
and significantly improve the state-of-the-art performance
on rare and unseen HOI categories. Code is available at
https://github.com/zhihou7/HOI-CL.

1. Introduction
Human-Object Interaction (HOI) detection, which aims
to localize and infer relationships between human and objects in images/videos, hhuman, verb, objecti, is an essential step towards deeper scene and action understanding [7, 13]. In real-world scenarios, long-tailed distributions are common for the data perceived by human vision
system, e.g., actions/verbs and objects [39]. The combinatorial nature of HOI further highlights the issues of longtailed distributions in HOI detection, while human can effi-

Few-Shot Detection

Head Classes

Tail Classes

ride bear

Unseen Classes

Figure 1. Open long-tailed HOI detection addresses the problem of
imbalanced learning and zero-shot learning in a unified way. We
propose to compose new HOIs for open long-tailed HOI detection.
Specifically, the blurred HOIs, e.g., “ride bear”, are composite.
See more examples in supplementary materials.

ciently learn to recognize seen and even unseen HOIs from
limited samples. An intuitive example of open long-tailed
HOI detection is shown in Figure 1, in which one can easily recognize the unseen action “ride bear”, nevertheless it
never even happened. However, existing HOI detection approaches usually focus on either the head [13, 36, 57], the
tail [62] or unseen categories [48, 43], leaving the problem
of open long-tailed HOI detection poorly investigated.
Open long-tailed HOI detection falls into the category
of the long-tailed zero-shot learning problem, which is
usually referred into several isolated problems, including
long-tailed learning [26, 22], few-shot learning [10, 52],
zero-shot learning [33]. To address the problem of imbalanced training data, existing methods mainly focus on
three strategies: 1) re-sampling [9, 19, 27]; 2) re-weighted
loss functions [8, 5, 21]; and 3) knowledge transfer [58, 39,
10, 33, 47, 11]. Specifically, re-sampling and re-weighted
loss functions are usually designed for imbalance problem, while knowledge transfer is introduced to relieve all
the long-tailed [58], few-shot [49], and zero-shot problem [61, 11]. Recently, two popular knowledge transfer
methods have received increasing attention from the com-

14646

