Privacy Preserving Localization and Mapping from Uncalibrated Cameras
Marcel Geppert1

Viktor Larsson1 Pablo Speciale2 Johannes L. Schönberger2 Marc Pollefeys1,2
1
2
Department of Computer Science, ETH Zurich
Microsoft

Abstract
Recent works on localization and mapping from privacy
preserving line features have made significant progress towards addressing the privacy concerns arising from cloudbased solutions in mixed reality and robotics. The requirement for calibrated cameras is a fundamental limitation for
these approaches, which prevents their application in many
crowd-sourced mapping scenarios. In this paper, we propose a solution to the uncalibrated privacy preserving localization and mapping problem. Our approach simultaneously recovers the intrinsic and extrinsic calibration of a
camera from line-features only. This enables uncalibrated
devices to both localize themselves within an existing map
as well as contribute to the map, while preserving the privacy of the image contents. Furthermore, we also derive a
solution to bootstrapping maps from scratch using only uncalibrated devices. Our approach provides comparable performance to the calibrated scenario and the privacy compromising alternatives based on traditional point features.

1. Introduction
The recent trend towards cloud-based localization
and mapping systems for mixed reality and robotics
(e.g., Microsoft Azure Spatial Anchors [25], Facebook
LiveMaps [1], or Google VPS [48]) is largely driven by
the need for scalable solutions to enable multi-device experiences and crowd-sourced mapping. However, as these
systems primarily rely on acquiring imagery of the environment, this development has raised significant privacy concerns by the public [27, 44, 49, 62]. Existing works on privacy preserving localization and mapping are based on the
concept of lifting traditional point-based features to lines to
conceal the appearance of images [10, 13, 55, 57, 58].
The fundamental limitation of these existing works is
that they assume calibrated cameras, which prevents their
applicability in a wide range of scenarios. In practice, the
intrinsic calibration of cameras used in mixed reality devices and robots continuously changes over time due to environmental impact such as temperature change or dropping

𝒇

Figure 1: Our method jointly estimates absolute pose and focal
length of uncalibrated cameras from privacy preserving line features. We also present a solution for bootstrapping maps from
scratch using four views.

the device. Re-calibration of devices by the manufacturer is
typically very costly or technically very challenging using
automatic techniques. Sometimes, it can even be desirable
to hide the exact calibration parameters of a camera to protect the identity of the device from fingerprinting attacks.
Due to these issues, the resulting changes to the calibration parameters can be quite dramatic and negatively influence the accuracy of camera localization and mapping, or
even prevent the successful use of the data entirely. Furthermore, in crowd-sourced mapping scenarios from mobile
cameras [2, 53, 54, 56], prior focal length estimates are typically quite inaccurate (e.g., due to auto-focus) or completely
incorrect due to manual editing of the imagery by the user.
Recent interest in crowd-sourced mapping for autonomous
driving from dashboard cameras [63] is another application
that suffers from challenges to calibrate the cameras. The
windshield acts as an additional lens and drastically impacts
the effective calibration parameters of the acquired imagery.
In this paper, we propose a principled solution to privacy
preserving localization from uncalibrated cameras. Our approach self-calibrates the focal length and jointly estimates
the absolute pose of a camera from only privacy preserving
line features. Successfully localized cameras can contribute
to existing maps in an incremental fashion without any further assumptions. In addition, we present a solution to initializing maps from scratch from only uncalibrated cameras.
Our boostrapping approach requires a subset of consistently
aligned lines similar to the work presented by Geppert et
al. [13]. This assumption does not impact the amount of

1809

