Unsupervised Feature Learning by Cross-Level Instance-Group Discrimination
Xudong Wang
UC Berkeley / ICSI

Ziwei Liu
S-Lab, NTU

Stella X. Yu
UC Berkeley / ICSI

xdwang@eecs.berkeley.edu

ziwei.liu@ntu.edu.sg

stellayu@berkeley.edu

Abstract
Unsupervised feature learning has made great strides
with contrastive learning based on instance discrimination and invariant mapping, as benchmarked on curated
class-balanced datasets. However, natural data could be
highly correlated and long-tail distributed. Natural betweeninstance similarity conflicts with the presumed instance distinction, causing unstable training and poor performance.
Our idea is to discover and integrate between-instance
similarity into contrastive learning, not directly by instance
grouping, but by cross-level discrimination (CLD) between
instances and local instance groups. While invariant mapping of each instance is imposed by attraction within its
augmented views, between-instance similarity could emerge
from common repulsion against instance groups.
Our batch-wise and cross-view comparisons also greatly
improve the positive/negative sample ratio of contrastive
learning and achieve better invariant mapping. To effect both
grouping and discrimination objectives, we impose them on
features separately derived from a shared representation.
In addition, we propose normalized projection heads and
unsupervised hyper-parameter tuning for the first time.
Our extensive experimentation demonstrates that CLD
is a lean and powerful add-on to existing methods such
as NPID, MoCo, InfoMin, and BYOL on highly correlated,
long-tail, or balanced datasets. It not only achieves new
state-of-the-art on self-supervision, semi-supervision, and
transfer learning benchmarks, but also beats MoCo v2 and
SimCLR on every reported performance attained with a
much larger compute. CLD effectively brings unsupervised
learning closer to natural data and real-world applications.
Our code is publicly available at: https://github.com/frankxwang/CLD-UnsupervisedLearning.

1. Introduction
Representation learning aims to extract latent or semantic
information from raw data. Typically, a model is first trained
on a large-scale annotated dataset [34] and then tuned on
a small-scale dataset for a downstream task [25]. As the

model gets bigger and deeper [26, 29], more annotated data
are needed; supervised pre-training is no longer viable.
Self-supervised learning [13, 44, 63, 41, 14, 39] gets
around labeling with a pre-text task which does not require
annotations and yet would be better accomplished with semantics. For example, to predict the color of an object from
its grayscale image does not require labeling; however, doing it well would require a sense of what the object is. The
biggest drawback is that pre-text tasks are domain-specific
and hand-designed, and they are not directly related to downstream semantic classification.
Unsupervised contrastive learning has emerged as a direct
winning alternative [53, 64, 58, 6, 24]. The training objective and the downstream classification are aligned on discrimination, albeit at different levels of granularities: training is
to discriminate known individual instances, whereas testing
is to discriminate unknown groups of instances.
Contrastive learning approaches have made great strides
with two ideas: invariant mapping [23] and instance discrimination [53]. That is, the learned representation should be 1)
stable for certain transformed versions of an instance, and
2) distinctive for different instances. Both aspects can be
formulated without labels, and the feature learned appears to
automatically capture semantic similarity, as benchmarked
by downstream classification on standard datasets such as CIFAR100 and ImageNet [6]. However, these datasets are curated with distinctive and class-balanced instances, whereas
natural data could be highly correlated within the class (e.g.,
repeats) and long-tail distributed across classes.
Natural between-instance similarity demands instance
grouping not instance discrimination, where all the instances
are presumed different. Consequently, feature learning by
instance discrimination is unstable and under-performing
without instance grouping, whereas instance grouping based
on the feature learned without instance discrimination is easily trapped into degeneracy. Ad-hoc tricks [3, 4] and mutual
information maximization with a uniform class distribution
prior [32] have been used to prevent feature degeneracy.
We propose to discover and integrate between-instance
similarity into contrastive learning, not directly by instance
grouping, e.g., by imposing group-level discrimination as

12586

