Localizing Visual Sounds the Hard Way
Honglie Chen, Weidi Xie, Triantafyllos Afouras, Arsha Nagrani, Andrea Vedaldi, Andrew Zisserman
VGG, Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, UK
{hchen, weidi, afourast, arsha, vedaldi, az}@robots.ox.ac.uk

Figure 1: Visual Sound Source Localisation: We localise sound sources in videos without manual annotation. Our key
contribution is an automatic negative mining technique through differentiable thresholding of a cross-modal correspondence
score map into a Tri-map. We use background regions with low correlation to the given sound as ‘hard negatives’ in a
contrastive learning framework.

Abstract
The objective of this work is to localize sound sources
that are visible in a video without using manual annotations. Our key technical contribution is to show that, by
training the network to explicitly discriminate challenging
image fragments, even for images that do contain the object emitting the sound, we can significantly boost the localization performance. We do so elegantly by introducing
a mechanism to mine hard samples and add them to a contrastive learning formulation automatically. We show that
our algorithm achieves state-of-the-art performance on the
popular Flickr SoundNet dataset. Furthermore, we introduce the VGG-Sound Source (VGG-SS) benchmark, a new
set of annotations for the recently-introduced VGG-Sound
dataset, where the sound sources visible in each video clip
are explicitly marked with bounding box annotations. This
dataset is 20 times larger than analogous existing ones,
contains 5K videos spanning over 200 categories, and, differently from Flickr SoundNet, is video-based. On VGG-SS,
we also show that our algorithm achieves state-of-the-art
performance against several baselines. Code and datasets
can be found at http://www.robots.ox.ac.uk/
˜vgg/research/lvs/.

1. Introduction
While research in computer vision largely focuses on the
visual aspects of perception, natural objects are characterized by much more than just appearance. Most objects,

in particular, emit sounds, either in their own right, or in
their interaction with the environment — think of the bark
of a dog, or the characteristic sound of a hammer striking
a nail. A full understanding of natural objects should not
ignore their acoustic characteristics. Instead, modelling appearance and acoustics jointly can often help us understand
them better and more efficiently. For example, several authors have shown that it is possible to use sound to discover
and localize objects automatically in videos, without the use
of any manual supervision [1, 2, 14, 17, 24, 30].
In this paper, we consider the problem of localizing ‘visual sounds’, i.e. visual objects that emit characteristics
sounds in videos. Inspired by prior works [2, 14, 30], we
formulate this as finding the correlation between the visual
and audio streams in videos. These papers have shown that
not only can this correlation be learned successfully, but
that, once this is done, the resulting convolutional neural
networks can be ‘dissected’ to localize the sound source
spatially, thus imputing it to a specific object. However,
other than in the design of the architecture itself, there is little in this prior work meant to improve the localization capabilities of the resulting models. In particular, while several
models [1, 2, 30] do incorporate a form of spatial attention
which should also help to localize the sounding object as a
byproduct, these may still fail to provide a good coverage
of the object, often detecting too little or too much of it.
In order to address this issue, we propose a new training
scheme that explicitly seeks to spatially localize sounds in

16867

