One-Shot Free-View Neural Talking-Head Synthesis for Video Conferencing
Ting-Chun Wang

Arun Mallya

Ming-Yu Liu

NVIDIA Corporation

(a) Original video

(b) Compressed videos at the same bit-rate

(c) Our re-rendered novel-view results

Figure 1: Our method can re-create a talking-head video using only a single source image (e.g., the first frame) and a sequence
of unsupervisedly-learned 3D keypoints, representing motions in the video. Our novel keypoint representation provides a
compact representation of the video that is 10ˆ more efficient than the H.264 baseline can provide. A novel 3D keypoint
decomposition scheme allows re-rendering the talking-head video under different poses, simulating often missed face-to-face
video conferencing experiences. Video versions of the paper figures and additional results are available at our project page,
https://nvlabs.github.io/face-vid2vid.

Abstract
We propose a neural talking-head video synthesis model
and demonstrate its application to video conferencing. Our
model learns to synthesize a talking-head video using a
source image containing the target person’s appearance and
a driving video that dictates the motion in the output. Our
motion is encoded based on a novel keypoint representation, where the identity-specific and motion-related information is decomposed unsupervisedly. Extensive experimental
validation shows that our model outperforms competing
methods on benchmark datasets. Moreover, our compact
keypoint representation enables a video conferencing system that achieves the same visual quality as the commercial
H.264 standard while only using one-tenth of the bandwidth.
Besides, we show our keypoint representation allows the
user to rotate the head during synthesis, which is useful for
simulating face-to-face video conferencing experiences.

1. Introduction
We study the task of generating a realistic talking-head
video of a person using one source image of that person and
a driving video, possibly derived from another person. The
source image encodes the target person’s appearance, and
the driving video dictates motions in the output video.
We propose a pure neural rendering approach, where we

render a talking-head video using a deep network in the
one-shot setting without using a graphics model of the 3D
human head. Compared to 3D graphics-based models, 2Dbased methods enjoy several advantages. First, it avoids 3D
model acquisition, which is often laborious and expensive.
Second, 2D-based methods can better handle the synthesis
of hair, beard, etc., while acquiring detailed 3D geometries
of these regions is challenging. Finally, they can directly
synthesize accessories present in the source image, including
eyeglasses, hats, and scarves, without their 3D models.
However, existing 2D-based one-shot talking-head methods [62, 75, 86] come with their own set of limitations. Due
to the absence of 3D graphics models, they can only synthesize the talking-head from the original viewpoint. They
cannot render the talking-head from a novel view.
Our approach addresses the fixed viewpoint limitation and
achieves local free-view synthesis. One can freely change
the viewpoint of the talking-head within a large neighborhood of the original viewpoint, as shown in Fig. 1(c). Our
model achieves this capability by representing a video using
a novel 3D keypoint representation, where person-specific
and motion-related information is decomposed. Both the keypoints and their decomposition are learned unsupervisedly.
Using the decomposition, we can apply 3D transformations
to the person-specific representation to simulate head pose

10039

